 Milligan with the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program.  Today   s date is December 3, 2015. I am here talking with Dr. JoAnn Clark  for the Cowboy in Every County Oral History Project. We are going to talk  about, a little bit about her life and her degree program from OSU and her  time in Langston. Just to start really broadly, just tell me a little bit about  yourself, like where you   re from and who your parents are and all that good  stuff.  Clark Well, I   m JoAnn Richardson Clark. I was born in a little community outside  of Ada  Oklahoma , about twenty miles outside of Ada called Red  Spring s . It was a combination multicultural community, farming  community with Native Americans, a few African Americans, and of course  Caucasians. My mother was, her name was Dealy Townsend Gillispie, and  that was her last marriage. My father was Stephen Richardson, Sr., a  Chickasaw, Choctaw Native American. He died when I was eleven, but I  still grew up, I had brothers that were old enough to be my father. When he  passed, I stayed with a brother, Stephen Richardson, Jr., until I was going to  tenth grade. What that did for me was great because I went to a one-room  school in Red Spring s  in the winter, which was in the Lula  Oklahoma   school district, and then in the, September to May, I went, I rode the bus  with the high school students to town. I went to school year-round, which I  loved. I loved that one-room schoolhouse. The teacher was Wheeler Mae  English, and she was great. In fact, we were friends until she passed about  eight years ago.  Milligan Wow. What did you like about her?  Clark She could manage. I was fascinated at a young age with   and that one-room  schoolhouse was also our church. (Laughter) I was fascinated that she could  control first through eighth grades, and everybody was busy. Nobody was  acting up. She was an avid motivator for reading, and she taught me to love  reading and to love crafts. I just admired her. She was one of my favorite  teachers.  5  Milligan How did that work, going year-round?  Clark It was wonderful because when I went with my brother, in fact, I would go  to school in Ada from August to September, I mean, September to May, as I  said, and then I would go spend the summers with him until December  because my mother had better Christmases. (Laughs) The children in that  community would go to that one-room schoolhouse year-round until they  went to ninth grade, and then they would come to town to Napier School,  which was the segregated school at that time. I would ride the bus in the  months I was there when Napier was in session with the high school  students and then in the summers, and their school went through May  because it was out for peanut and cotton harvest for a month. We went to  school June and July and part of August, and then it was out part of August  and, it seems now, all of September. I can   t remember.  Milligan Was that the Napier, or that was the one     Clark No, that was the school in the country, and it, I loved it. Sometimes we  would ride a horse to school, and my grandchildren now think that I   m a 150  years old because I told them,    When I rode a horse to school sometimes  and to church and in a wagon, and I went to town only on Saturdays.     (Laughter) They think I   m a 150 years old, but I loved the country because  of that experience. It was just wonderful.  Milligan Help me understand. Your father died. Were your mother and your father  together at that point?  Clark No, no. No, they weren   t. In fact, he was remarried, and she was, too.  (Laughs) As I tell my children, I never remember going to bed without him.  He would always make sure he put me to bed. I was either in the bed with  him and his wife or he was at my house putting me to bed, and his position  was that the pleasures of the parents should not impact the child negatively  because I asked my mother,    How did this work?    She said,    That was his  philosophy,    and it was a good one.  Milligan Well, it sounds like there was definitely love.  Clark Oh yes. In fact, my mother, I teased her as she got older, especially when  she got dementia and couldn   t remember that I was teasing. I said,    Your  husbands were old men, and when we needed them in puberty, they died  from old age,    but he was a lot older than she was. In fact, she was thirty  when I was born, and he was almost sixty     Milligan That   s a big difference.  6  Clark    yes, fifty-something.  Milligan Your brother that helped take care of you and your other brothers were from  a previous marriage then.  Clark Oh yes, yes, from his first marriage, yes, and that wife, there was a cholera  epidemic in the    20s. My mother and his younger daughter were best friends  as children. She was a child when he had children. That   s just how much  older he was.  Milligan Right, yeah. No, that happens. When were you born, then?  Clark I was born August 11, 1941, on a Friday at nine o   clock p.m., and she used  to keep my presents until nine o   clock at night. That always aggravated me.  Milligan No.  Clark Yes.  Milligan That is not nice. (Laughter) Is that a tradition you kept in your family?  Clark No, no. My children probably don   t even know what time they were born.  (Laughter)  Milligan Your mother was African-American then?  Clark Yeah. She was one-fourth Creek. Her dad was one-half Creek, and her  mother was African-American.  Milligan It seems like a really interesting community to grow up in that it is so  multicultural.  Clark Oh, it was, and I don   t remember any conflicts. Maybe I   m looking through  rose-colored glasses at this age, but I don   t remember any. Her philosophy  always was that when she got dementia and pre-Alzheimer   s that    If I don   t  remember it, it didn   t happen.    (Laughs)  Milligan I hope that I can have that philosophy someday.  Clark I don   t have it yet. (Laughter)  Milligan We were talking about the makeup of the small community that you were in  and the fact that you think, you remember everybody getting along really  well, but also the point that you, when you went to, had to go into Napier,  right? That was the name of the school?  7  Clark Yes.  Milligan After the ninth grade that you went to   .  Clark Well, no. I went to Napier from first grade through ninth grade, but I also  went to the school in the country.  Milligan The one-room school, right.  Clark Yes, the one-room school, and then when I went to tenth grade because in  1956 the schools closed. I went to Ada High.  Milligan Okay. Now was Napier segregated then?  Clark Yes. Well, yes, but when Napier closed, just the high school closed. It still  had first through eighth grade until    60-something, but in    56, the high  school closed, high school and junior high because my husband was the first  graduating class at Ada High with African-Americans in    57, May of    57. I  graduated in    59.  Milligan You all have known each other for a while.  Clark Oh yes, yes. One of my older brothers from my daddy   s first marriage was a  friend of Lester   s, and he was the paper boy. My brother lived behind my  father   s house, and he would throw the paper to Doris (her name was Doris)  and put a dime in there for her to meet him at the movies, at the picture  show, as we called it. I thought that was   I was probably six. (Laughs) I  thought that was so romantic. I had a little brother that was born when I was  eight. It   s eight years between me and that brother, and  my mother  let me  name him. I told her, I said,    Well, I want to name him after my boyfriend.     She said,    You have a boyfriend?    I said,    Yes.    Now he didn   t know I  existed, but I named him Lester. He hates that story to this day. (Laughter)  Milligan Your brother or your husband?  Clark The brother. Now they   re good friends, but he doesn   t like for me to tell that  story. Of course  my mother  put her youngest brother   s name as his middle  name, but  Lester Clark  didn   t know I existed until I was eighth grade.  Milligan (Laughs) You liked him because he put a   he was creative enough to put a  dime in the paper?  Clark He rode a new bicycle, and he was cute. Even jumping rope, I would stop on  L, and they would name Leon, Lamont. I said,    No, Lester,    and he had a  twin. His twin is deceased. His twin and I had been friends from elementary  school, but  Lester  was the businessman; he was a businessman as a child  8  even. His job was the paper, throwing newspapers. He bought his own  bicycle. He was the only one in the neighborhood with a new bicycle. I just  thought he was something else, and he was. He is. (Laughter) When we had  our fiftieth wedding anniversary, a friend of mine, I told the story, and he  gave me a book (I   ll give you a book) of that story.  Milligan Great. (Laughs) When did you all start actually dating then?  Clark Well, back then, it was very, very Victorian. He noticed me in the eighth  grade and started saving me a seat on the bus, but I was so something until I  wouldn   t know whether it was for me or what. Half the time I would pass  him and wouldn   t sit with him, and then I guess about tenth grade, my  mother let me get phone calls from him. Then going into my senior year, we  got engaged, and when we got engaged, I could go to the movies on Sunday  with him, providing I went to Sunday school, church, and got back in time  for BYPU (Baptist Young Peoples Union). I couldn   t go with him. I could  just meet him there, but I had to take my two little brothers with me.  (Laughter) Believe it or not, we still got engaged when I was going into my  senior year, but she told me,    No way are you going to get married.    Of  course, with Ada High, a lot of the girls got married their senior, going into  their senior year. I was behind, but she said,    No.    When she said,    No,    it  was no.  Milligan Did she tell you why she said,    No?     Clark Well, she wanted me to go to college, and then my, I called them my, call  these people my grandparents because my grandparents died very early, but  it was my brother   s in-laws that I stayed with. It was George and Mary  Johnson that lived down on Leader, and my grandfather had, on his death  bed, he made, I was so excited to show him my engagement ring. He said,     Well, no, you can   t get married. You have to promise me you can   t get  married because you   re the one who   s supposed to go to college.    I  promised him because I knew I would keep my promise, and I did.  Milligan To go to college?  Clark He died a month later after I made that promise, but I went to college  straight out of high school. I got married January 1, 1960, which was the  beginning of my second semester, but I graduated on time, as I had  promised.  Milligan Do you have any insight into why he identified you as the one that was going  to go to college?  Clark Well, he said that of the Indians down there, I was the first one to go to  college and that everybody had   no flaunting intended, I was smart as a  9  child, very smart. My brothers, my grandfather (we called him Pa), and  Granny, they all insisted,    Well, you have to go to college, you have to go to  college, you have to go to college,    and even my dad before he died, he  would tell me, he said,    Now what are you going to be when you go to  college?    Because he told me that he thought he went to third or fourth  grade. College was in my blood from   I can   t remember when it was not.  Milligan What do you feel like the opportunity for you to go to college, do you think  that it was easy for you to go to college compared to maybe some of your  siblings?  Clark Well, my mother   s oldest son, who   s eighty-seven now, he went to college.  When I was third grade, he came to Langston. He graduated, but there were  two other children of hers before me who did not go to college. None of my  dad   s children went to college. I don   t know if it were easier. It was just a  natural progression for me because it had been instilled from   I can  remember discussing it when I went to the first grade. Everybody said I had  to go to college.  Milligan You were going.  Clark Yes.  Milligan Was it an issue with cost or getting in or anything like that?  Clark No, no. When I graduated from Ada High, I applied to East Central   University . My English Lit erature  teacher called me in and told me that I  was so smart that she was looking for great things from me. Her name was  Ms. Britt. I can   t remember what her first name was. She wore sandals year-round,  but she was a wonderful teacher. Even all of the teachers at Ada High  believed in me. I didn   t have any at Ada High that   I think they all really  tried to make integration work. I remember there was only one, and that was  my American History teacher, Ms. Drain, Maude Drain. She had purple hair.  Milligan On purpose?  Clark Yes. It was white, but she had a little purple tint to it. She was a great  teacher, too, but she, it was, when she was on Reconstruction and slavery,  when she   d get to that period, she was just, she   d just get so tickled. A guy,  a classmate because at that time, there were four or five eleventh graders,  black eleventh graders, and two of us decided that we wanted to teach Ms.  Drain a lesson. We stayed after school. Now that meant that we missed our  ride. It was six miles to our community. Sometimes I had to walk home if I  couldn   t catch a ride, or I headed, at least walked from where Ada High was  at that time to the black part of town to catch a ride on to where I lived.  Anyway, we stayed with Ms. Drain, and we became very good friends with  10  her. We   d help her grade papers. His name was Jesse Pickens. Jesse Pickens  and I would stay, and we   d help her grade papers. We   d talk to her and just  get to know her. Then we told her that it hurt our feelings when she would  make fun of the slaves and the time of slavery, and I think she accepted it.  Now we went on to twelfth grade. We don   t know what she did with the  then tenth graders, but it appeared that she accepted it.  Milligan That   s a pretty mature reaction to a situation that was hurtful to you.  Clark Well, the other part of it was that the   her first black students were eleventh  graders in    56, and they all made Ds. We had met, and we said,    Now we  are going to show her that we don   t make Ds.    Of course, we did. We did.  We didn   t make Ds. We made As and Bs. Jesse and I both made As, and  there was another guy, Lamont, and another guy, Sidney. I know Lamont  made a B. Sidney, he left his junior year, but at least the first, the second  semester. His family moved away, but he made a C that first semester. We  didn   t make Ds.  Milligan Do you feel like, that that was a direct result of you getting to know her on a  personal level?  Clark No, not especially because we were determined to show her that we were  smart, and Jesse was very, very smart, very smart, smarter than I was.  (Laughter)  Milligan Let   s not get carried away. (Laughter)  Clark Ada High was a good experience for us. All four of the black seniors who  came made the football team. The girls, most of us joined the Contnahomas,  which was the pep squad. We were very participatory in school, and the  students were very amenable to our being there, it seemed. It just seemed  that those years they, everybody tried to make it work. I don   t know how it  was after that, but those years were good. In fact, we still have friends from  those days. My husband still goes to the football reunion and all of that. We  missed it this year. It   s usually in October. He missed it this year because he  had a hip replacement.  Milligan Were you a freshman the first year that high school integrated in Ada?  Clark Sophomore.  Milligan You were a sophomore, and you said that the teachers really tried to make it  work. Did you have any black teachers? Did they integrate the teachers as  well?  11  Clark No, no, no, no. It was a while before they move   in fact, I don   t know when  Ada High got its first black teacher. They had a black teacher at the junior  high a few years later, but not at first, not at first. In fact, when I graduated  from East Central as an education major, I just knew I was going to Ada  High to do my student teaching, and the person over education told me,     Well, no.    Because East Central was known for having handicapped  students, he said,    No, you have a car. You   re not handicapped. We   re only  sending the handicapped people to Ada High.    Well, when the list came out,  (then they put, they posted lists by name), everyone who graduated from  Ada High and was in education was going to Ada High except me.  Milligan Were they all white?  Clark Yes, because when I went to East Central, there were only three full-time  blacks at East Central at that time. I know we   re jumping around, but     Milligan No, that   s okay.  Clark    I was the first black honors student at East Central based on ACT scores.  Milligan How did that go for you?  Clark It was good and it was bad because the first, the honors teacher   can I call  his name?  Milligan Yeah.  Clark His name was Dr. Ray, William Ray. He ended up teaching at OSU and was  on my dissertation committee, but he taught the honors classes. He gave me  a B every time. I was an English major, well, a double major, English and  business, and I couldn   t understand how I could make a B. The first  semester we had, and I still remember this. It still bothers me. We had  twenty-nine essays. We didn   t have any tests. We had twenty-nine essays,  and he graded    superior,       excellent,       good,       fair,    and    poor   . I made     superior    on twenty-eight and    excellent    on one, and he gave me a B.  Every course, he gave me a B, and after I got married, we lived in the garage  apartment of the person, of the dentist that I had been working for after  school anyway. Dr. Ray lived just on the other side of the garage  apartments.  I would go to his house because his son, Chip, would, I   d babysit with him  with Dr. Hall   s little boy. They were good friends, and he said,    Well, I left  my gradebook at school.    I   d go to his office. He said,    I left it at home.    He  never would show me how I made Bs. My last English course was  Shakespeare, one of my favorite courses, and I said,    Okay. If he   s going to  give me a B, I   ll just let him give me a B. I won   t do anything.    He knew  12  that if he asked a question and no one knew the answer, I would know the  answer. He   d look at me, and I   d turn my head. He gave me a C, but I  actually made an F, I know, because I did nothing that I didn   t already  know. I regret that because that was one of my favorite courses. Of course,  when I started teaching English, I taught myself. I went back and did a lot of  research with these plays and stuff like that.  Milligan Do you think that it made any impact on his perspective?  Clark I don   t know, but when I had to choose a committee at OSU and they  insisted that I had to have someone who had taught me the English part, I  said,    Well, there   s no one here but Dr. Ray who has taught me English.     Dr. Tom Karman, who was my chair, said,    Put Dr. Ray on that.    When I  told my husband, he said,    Jo, you won   t ever graduate if you put Dr. Ray  on there. You know how he did you at East Central.    The first meeting we  had or one of the meetings we had, the people on my committee were  talking about how I could write, what a great writer I was. I had prayed over  it. I said,    Well, if I can write, it   s all because of Dr. Ray,    and I had no  problems. (Laughter)  Milligan How much time was there from the time you had him in class to the time you  had him on your dissertation committee?  Clark Well, oh, a lot of years because I graduated with my bachelor   s from East  Central in    63. This was    78 or    79.  Milligan At least a good decade and maybe a decade and a half.  Clark Yes, yes.  Milligan Did he remember you?  Clark Oh yes. Yes, he did.  Milligan Did you ever have an opportunity to really gain any inkling into what was  going on?  Clark Well, I think at the time I was so adamant in class about what I knew. I was  a good student, but I was arrogant at the same time because I worked hard to  make good grades. East Central was very good academically, but it was not  good socially because I remember my first biology course, I made a C. As I  said earlier, then they posted the names and the grades outside the  classroom, and I had an older guy and a younger girl, well, she was the same  age I was. We studied together. They made Bs, and I made a C. When I  went and asked the teacher,    Why did I make a C?    he said,    Well, that   s  what black people make,    and I didn   t know I had due process at the time. I  13  had several teachers, even on my master   s, who did that to me at East  Central. As I said, I was a double major. In my first accounting course, and  East Central was strict on grading, 93 to 100, A, and 85 to 92, a B. I was one  point from a B, and I asked the teacher,    Could I look at my papers?    to see  if maybe he had made a mistake. He said,    Sure.    I said,    Well, am I the  only one like this?    He said,    No.    I said,    Someone else had 84 points, and  they got a B.    He said,    Yes, but you know you have a B.    I said,    It   s a C  on my transcript.    He said,    You and I know it   s a B.    His name was Mr.  Kennedy. (Laughs) Of course, he was there only a semester, and then I had a  lady for   I was always interested in grammar and composition much more  than I was literature.  When I took my English Usage, what it was called at East Central, I made  the possible on every test because at Napier my English teacher was named  Robert Johnson, and I learned one principle in that course that I didn   t  already know. That was that T-H-E-R-E was never the subject, it was just a  place-setter, and that the subject would be after the verb. That   s all I learned  in that course at East Central. I knew everything else, and she gave me a B.  She told me, she said,    Well, black people can   t make As.    I said,    You  know that   s not true. I   m standing right here, and I   m black. I didn   t make a  ninety-two A. I made a ninety-eight A,    but I had the same thing happen to  me on my master   s. I helped the lady teach the course because on my  master   s, I couldn   t find a job. They wanted to send me all the way to an  Indian reservation, and I had two little children. The lady from Ada who was  there, she said,    No, don   t come. You have small children, and the  babysitting is not regular. Your nearest hospital is ninety miles away from  where they were wanting to send me. Don   t come.    The dean of student  affairs was Ben Tillman, great guy at East Central, and he had told me, he  said,    Now Jo, all you have to do is do everything, you   re an honors student  and everything, and we guarantee you a job.     Well, my guaranteed job was on an Indian reservation in Arizona, I think,  now. I can   t remember where it was, but it was   . When I didn   t have a job,  I knew he got to work on time. I would sit out by his office. Every morning,  I was there when he showed up. I said,    Dr. Tillman, I   m JoAnn Clark.     He   d say,    I know who you are.    (Laughs) I said,    I   m an honors graduate  from East Central, and I don   t have a job.    I did that every day. I can   t think  of the vice president for academic affairs. (I had cleaned house for him.) He  said,    Well, Jo, why don   t you just work on your master   s but go in math  and science, and that way you can improve your possibilities for a job.     Well, I knew I wasn   t good in math because I had to take only one math  course at East Central, and I made, eighty-five was the lowest B. I had  eighty-six points, and I worked hard for that. In high school, I took only one  math course, and I was happy for that C on my transcript. It was geometry. I  did go math and science, but with Dr. Tillman, I was there every day for  three weeks, three weeks straight. Then one night, the president of East  14  Central called me about eight-thirty that night. His name was Dr. Charles  Spencer, and he called me at home. He said,    Well, Jo, I have a job if you  want it,    and I had two babies at the time. I would go to sleep early. I was  half-asleep, and I said,    Well, no, thank you    and hung up. My husband  said,    Well, who was that?    I said,    I think it was President Spencer.     He said,    Well, what did he want?       He said he had a job for me.    He said,     Well, what did you say?    I said,    No, thank you.    He said,    Go call him  back.    I called him back and apologized for being asleep, and he said,     Well, come see me tomorrow.    I went to see him, and it wasn   t too late for  me to enroll for my master   s. He offered me a job as his personal secretary,  but the kicker was they   d make me an office suite in his house, not on  campus, not in his office on campus. Well, his house was on campus, but I  was on the second floor. I had a beautiful suite, and I was his personal typist.  He started me off at fifty cents a page. Well, I was the best typist in the,  anywhere at that time. He would check, and I   d have no errors. I worked  from one to five, but in a couple of weeks, because everything was perfect,  he raised me to a dollar a page. Well, I could do my homework, take a nap  in my suite, and still do seventy-five pages a week. That was my goal. When  I wanted to, I   d do a hundred pages. I could do everything, and he could find  no errors. At that time, my husband was working at Montgomery Ward six  days a week, and his take home was thirty-seven dollars and fifty cents. I  was bringing home seventy-five dollars a week at least. He could quit work,  and he went to school full time after that. I worked for Dr. Spencer as his  personal secretary until I finished with my master   s.  Milligan That leads me to ask a couple of questions. One, how did he know about  you? Do you know?  Clark I know they discussed me. They all discussed me because as I said, I was  just that type of person. I made sure that I knew all the teachers. I was very  good with the students, and I was interested in certain things. They didn   t  have sororities or anything like that for black people. We had a great drama  department. I can   t think of the teacher   s name, but I took her class. She  wanted me to be in the play. Well, I was always acting when I got pregnant  and had her class. We had to write our own plays, and everyone would write  plays for me to, as the person in the emergency room having the baby. I  wouldn   t play the part because I could wear all the costumes. I only gained  ten pounds with the first baby. I did stagecraft with her, costume and then  stagecraft, but she gave me a C or a B, too, because black people couldn   t  make higher grades. I had several students that would see my name, and  they   d say,    Jo, have you looked at the list?    I said,    No.       Well, what do  you think you made in so-and-so class?    I said,    Well, I   m sure I made a B  if I thought I made a B on that.    They said,    No.    It was always a grade  lower.  15  Milligan Did the other black students, you said there were three black students when  you went there. Did the other ones have the same experience?  Clark I don   t know because they were not outgoing. They were very standoffish.  Milligan Did they interact with the white students?  Clark No, no. I did, and it wasn   t until I was probably a junior that we got more  black students because they recruited a lot of basketball and football players.  Then I could go to the Student Union and play Dirty Hearts. (Laughs)  Milligan You couldn   t before then?  Clark Not with three black students. One was a transfer, and the other was one of  my best friends. We both were married. We didn   t stay on campus that  much. We definitely didn   t play Dirty Hearts, but then by the time I was a  junior, then her name was Parilee. No, there were four. There was a  Clarence. I can   t think of Clarence   s last name now, but anyway, and then  Clara White was an English major as well. Parilee Lewis was in business.  There were four of us rather than three. Clarence was in science, and he was  older. He didn   t mingle with us, either.  Milligan Dirty Hearts, explain to me why that   s significant.  Clark I had a real college social life. One of my white friends in my, oh, I can   t  remember what business class it was, but Maude Drain from my high  school, her twin sister was one of the business teachers at East Central.  When she   d call the role, oh, I can   t think of this girl   s name, but she   d say,     Well, Ms. Drain       neither one of them had ever married       well, Clark is  probably home with the babies. They must be sick.    She said,    I knew you  were not home with the babies. I knew you were in the Student Union  playing Dirty Hearts.    (Laughs) I said,    Well, you didn   t tell her, did you?     She said,    No.    (Laughter)  Milligan The fact that you were playing Dirty Hearts, which I   m assuming is a card  game     Clark Yes.  Milligan    is that something that white students just didn   t know, or was it something  that you couldn   t play with them?  Clark I don   t know. I don   t know because I was playing with other blacks,  primarily the football players. I don   t remember any girls at that time, any  black girls there, but I do remember about three of the basketball and  football players. They were always there, and when I   d come in, they were  16  shooting pool. Well, I didn   t like to shoot pool. We   d play cards. I   m not a  fan of card games now, but it was just, I was in the Student Union as other  students. I had a real college life. I   d skip class every now and then if they  wanted to play.  Milligan I   m trying to get a handle on whether before you had more black students in  college you didn   t go to the Student Union because you didn   t feel welcome  or you didn   t feel kinship.  Clark I didn   t feel the kinship because the students would speak, smile. It wasn   t  like they were   I don   t remember any bad incident between me or any of  the other black students and white students.  Milligan Okay. That makes more sense to me. I wonder this, too, because you have  quite a bit of Native American also within your background. Were there  other Native American students that went to school there, and were there  issues with, were there similar issues with that as people of color as well?  Clark I don   t remember any at East Central, at Ada High because there were a  couple of Native American students at Ada High that we had the same  relatives, and there were quite a few Native Americans at Ada High. They  were all friendly, but some of them, I guess, didn   t want to be too close to  us, even those that we had similar relatives. We would speak at other places  and talk more at other places, but not, they were not negative or anything.  Milligan It sounds like they weren   t going to go out of their way maybe to make  friends or be open friends.  Clark No, no, but they weren   t antagonistic, either.  Milligan Did they have similar issues, for example, with grading or issues with  teachers that the black students did?  Clark I don   t know. I don   t know. No one ever shared it with me. In fact, not even  the other black students shared it with me.  Milligan Did you ever try and talk to them about it?  Clark I probably talked to Parilee, and I remember talking to Clara, Clara White,  and telling her because when she graduated, she didn   t have a job, either. I  said,    We need to go together.    She says,    No, I   m not going to beg for a  job.    I said,    I   m begging for a job. They owe me a job,    but she wouldn   t  go. Of course Parilee had transferred at that time, and I don   t know what had  happened to Clarence. Either he graduated or   I don   t know. I don   t  remember what happened to him.  17  Milligan That   s interesting.  Clark I don   t remember that the football and basketball players had that problem.  They never discussed it, and one of them, we still know each other. I know  about him. I just remember those three. I know they were all basketball  players or one football player. Maybe they were football and basketball.  Milligan I did have a question following up on the, whenever you mentioned that they  put you in the president   s house, did you feel that it was a good thing, or  was that a strange thing?  Clark It was a strange thing. I think it was a strange thing, but I was so happy to  have an income and to be able to work on my master   s. I didn   t take it  negatively. It   s just that when Mrs. Spencer would have activities, she had a  maid. It was a black maid, but neither one of them ever asked me to help  them do anything. Sometimes when I would get bored up there in that suite  by myself, I   d go down. If she were having a party or something, I   d say,     Well, I   m really good at decorating. Can I help?    and Mrs. Spencer would  say,    Yes, well, you can help me.    I   d make a centerpiece or something like  that, but it wasn   t very often. She didn   t treat me like another maid at all. In  fact, she and Dr. Spencer were great.  Milligan That   s good. Did he have other assistants that were in the college then that  were in his building in the university?  Clark Yes. He had a full staff, secretaries and all. I don   t know that they ever knew  that I was over there because I remember only going to his office to take  him something once. Most of everything I did, what he did, I think, I don   t  think it was university business that I did for him. He did city codes because  he was a sociologist. He did city codes for various municipalities, including  one in Alaska. That was what I was doing is typing the city codes for him.  Milligan Personal research probably?  Clark Yes.  Milligan I understand. I also want to go back to something you mentioned about, at  that time, you didn   t know that you had due process. At what point did you  realize that was an option for you?  Clark Once I came to Langston and they had due process with the students.  (Laughs)  Milligan Really? Do you think if you would have had due process, if, you think if you  would have gone through that process, it would have been taken seriously?  Do you have any inclination?  18  Clark Probably not. The reason I say probably not, the registrar, I   m not saying we  were friends, but we were very friendly, as I was with most of the teachers. I  took the Oklahoma History test because I knew I was smart enough and I  liked history, that I could pass it, but I failed it. He called me. He said,    Jo,  come to my office, come to my office. You   ve made history again. You  failed the Oklahoma History test. Do you know you   re the first person in the  county to fail the Oklahoma History test?    I said,    How could that be? I  know a couple of my classmates, and if I had written their names  backwards, they wouldn   t recognize them. How did they pass?    He said,     Jo, everybody had the test but you.    East Central had a, oh, it wasn   t an  epidemic, but it was known that a lot of classes had students getting ahold of  tests. I refused.  I had one guy, in fact, it was a relative of Senator Boren   s wife because his  last name was Shy, and we were in Tests and Measurements. He said,     Well, Jo, I have the test. You want it?    I said,    No. I can make it without  it,    and I made a B in that class because the curve was so high. I had over  ninety-three points, but the teacher graded on the curve. I made a B with  ninety-six because the high was ninety-eight or something like that, but I  refused to take a test. I don   t know that I was so moral or anything. It was  just that I had a big head. I thought I was smart enough that I didn   t need the  test, but I ended up getting a B in that course based on the curve because I  guess a lot of people in the class had the test. It was a known fact, and folks  would brag about it because they had students doing janitorial work at night.  They would pass the tests around, but I think they finally, the school finally  realized that and did something about it.  Milligan Did you honestly fail the history test?  Clark Yes. I had to take the course. Mr. Foust was the registrar at that time. He  called me in his office. He said,    Jo, you   ve made history again,    and I was  getting ready to be all pumped up. He said,    You failed it.    (Laughter) I  said,    How could I have failed?    He said,    I guess you didn   t have the test,     and I named the   a couple of the football players that I had gone to high  school with and who had taken the test at the same day and time and passed  it. I said,    I could have written their names backwards, and they wouldn   t  have known that, what their name was.    He said,    Well, you didn   t have the  test.     Milligan If he knew that, then it was widely known.  Clark It was widely known. The same student, a young white lady that I had had  the biology course with, we were in a lot of business courses together. She  took the test at the time. She had the test, or she must have had the test. She  passed, but I refused to take the test, I mean, take the   .  19  Milligan Yeah, cheat. You ended up doing your master   s in math and science. That   s  what you said     Clark Yes, yes.  Milligan    and you weren   t anticipating that that was going to be easy for you.  Clark No, but I did take some English classes. I remember I took a course with a  professor. His name was Dr. Altmiller, and I was also known for being late  to class. When they had seven thirty or so classes in the summer, they had,  they started the classes before eight o   clock, or it seems now they did.  Anyway, I would nod, and then I told him, he said,    Well, Jo, you   ve been  such a good student. Why are you not doing well in this class?    I said,     Because you   re not a good teacher.    That man gave me a D on my master   s  level, a D. I did not make a D. Now I think, well, I said,    What was wrong  with me? That was disrespectful,    everything, but he couldn   t. The course  was language arts for the elementary school, but he was into handwriting. It  was all about handwriting, and I told him he couldn   t teach. (Laughter)  Milligan Well, that may have been truth, but maybe a little bit too truth.  Clark Yeah, it was. It was the wrong thing to do. I would never advise it. To this  day, I regret that I said it to him because it was not nice, and as arrogant as I  thought I was, I still had my mother that made sure that I went by my  Christian principles. I did then, and I still do try to live by those. It was just  not the right thing to say to him. Plus, it was not him, but when I did my  student teaching at Byng  Oklahoma , which was a great experience,  someone who worked at East Central, I can   t remember what his name was  at the time. He was caught in an uncompromising position and was fired. He  came to Byng to meet with me to tell me why they had put me at Byng. He  said they had a meeting with Dr. Selph, who was over student teaching and  others, and they had decided that Ada High didn   t want any black student  teachers. It was okay with Byng. They were going to put me in Byng.  He said,    They put you in Byng because you were black,    but he came all  the way to Byng to tell me that. It hurt my feelings, but I already knew that  when I saw the list, that it wasn   t what Dr. Selph had told me, that only  handicapped people were going to Ada High because I knew the people  who, some of them, who were going to Ada High. They were definitely not  handicapped, but Byng was great. I wouldn   t have traded it for Ada High in  retrospect. I can   t think of the lady   s name that I had. I had two teachers,  eleventh grade literature and then seventh grade grammar, and they both  were excellent. The experience was good, and then I had always loved  basketball. I was able to meet the lady that was in the Oklahoma Hall of  Fame. I can   t think of her   her husband was the superintendent. She was the  20  first grade teacher. I made sure I got to meet her, and when she had to be  out, I would take her first grade class. (Laughs) I really enjoyed Byng.  Milligan How long did you spend there?  Clark At that time, student teaching was eight weeks, I think. I enjoyed the whole  experience of student teaching there.  Milligan That   s good. You got your master   s then, and you had how many kids at this  point?  Clark Two, just two at the time.  Milligan You still had just two. When were they born, and what are their names?  Clark Tony was born a year and five days after we got married, and Tamara was  born about thirteen months later. In fact, I did not get my second major in  business because she was born the summer I was taking my last   .  Milligan You had an interview with Langston  University , and you were worried  because the president   s reputation proceeded him     Clark Yes, but     Milligan    as the leader. I would understand that.  Clark    he would, yeah, he was nice. During his stay at Langston because he was  fired before I left Langston   .  Milligan For inappropriate behavior, or was there something else?  Clark I don   t remember what he was fired for. I don   t remember     Milligan It doesn   t really matter. I was just curious.  Clark    but it wasn   t that. He just had the reputation. I don   t know that it was just  the reputation. (Laughter)  Milligan Starting in Langston, you came to Langston, and then you were teaching in  the English department?  Clark Yes. I came in the fall of 1967, and I stayed at Langston until 1974. I taught  English, and I was a drama coach. In fact, I was the drama coach because  the person over drama, I   ve forgotten what year he passed away. Then I took  it over, but I was the drama coach for the seventy-fifth anniversary of  Langston.  21  Milligan Did you all do some theatrics?  Clark Oh yes, and of course I did, I was the first one since Tolson, the one I told  you I was impressed by who had done sets, stagecraft sets. As the students  said,    Oh, she had us flying sets,    but that   s what the lady at East Central  did and costuming. Of course it was really interesting. My children were  elementary school at the time. They were all interested in the plays, too. In  fact, one play I did one summer was The Odd Couple, and those college  students didn   t know how to play poker. My daughter, who was second  grade, taught them how to play poker because she played Nosey Poker     (Laughs)  Milligan Nice.  Clark    because we did the play in what we called the little theatre. The audience  was from here to that chair. They could tell if they didn   t know what they  were doing. She taught them how to play poker. (Laughs)  Milligan Real smart.  Clark The college students, they had no mercy on her because Nosey Poker, I just  told them they couldn   t hit her on the nose with the card. Her hands would  just be red where they   d, if she   d lose, they   d, but they would do that to her  because that was their way of getting back at her because when they   d miss  their lines, she   d give them their lines. She was second grade. She knew  everybody   s lines. Then in    74, we went to Paul Quinn College in Waco,  Texas. My husband had gotten his doctorate then, and he had an offer to be  a   he first started as the registrar and then the vice president for academic  affairs at Paul Quinn. We went there.  Milligan Wow. That   s a pretty big step up.  Clark Yes, it is.  Milligan How long did you stay in Waco?  Clark From    74 to, well, I left in    77 and came back. That   s when I started full  time on my doctorate. I had been taking classes at OSU, and the way I  would do it, still with my arrogant self, I would make a deal with the teacher  that because I lived in Texas but I wanted my degree to come from an  Oklahoma school, then could I just fly in to take the test and make whatever  grade that I made on the test? Well, I made all As except one. I made a B in  History of Education. (Laughs)  Milligan Did you do that throughout the entire time, the entire   all of those Phd  courses?  22  Clark I could have, I could have, but as I told you, there were little ugly parts.  When I first applied at OSU, I applied for the PhD program in English, and  the chair at the time, I can   t remember what his name was. His last name  was a poet, Shelley. He told me that my grades weren   t high enough, but I  almost fell out of the chair, for the PhD program. He said,    Oh, don   t get me  wrong. Don   t get me a wrong. A 3.7 is good.    No, no, I had a 3.5. He said,     A 3.5 is good, but we require a 3.7.    Well, we had a white guy in the  English department at the time who was in the PhD program in English. I  asked him, I said,    I need to ask you a personal question. What was your  grade point average when you were admitted to PhD program at OSU?    He  said,    Oh, I barely had 3.1.    I said,    Well, they turned me down with my  3.5.    He said,    Wow. Well, mine was just barely a 3.1.    I said,    Okay. I   m  not going to go through that again.    I went on, and I went to education. Dr.  Thomas Karman was the chair of higher education at that time, great guy,  strange, but great guy. (Laughs) I started taking classes, and I was into, at  that time, when I first started, OSU had a program in linguistics. I had taken  so many of the linguistics courses that when I came back full time, they let  me go ahead and go through even though they didn   t offer the degree  anymore.  Milligan You   d taken linguistics at OSU when you were starting your PhD work?  Clark Yes, yes.  Milligan When did you start to go through the application and start classes?  Clark It was before we went to Waco.  Milligan Sometime in maybe the early    70s?  Clark Yes, because my husband and I both went to OSU at the same time. He  received a study grant to go full time, and I would just take a couple of  courses every   .  Milligan Did he get his PhD from OSU?  Clark Yes. He has an EdD, too, as well   in educable mental retardation or  whatever that is.  Milligan Did he have problems getting in?  Clark No, because he was a social butterfly. He studied with everybody. Even in  Edmond  Oklahoma , at that time, it was segregated when he got his  master   s in special education, but he would still go to the bars with the white  students. The people would look funny at him. They never put him out.  23  Milligan When he went to get his master   s, that would have been the mid    60s.  Clark Yes. He got his master   s in    67 or    68, somewhere in there because he got  his doctorate in    72.  Milligan While you were teaching at Douglass, he was getting his master   s, correct?  Clark Yes, yes.  Milligan He just went wherever he wanted?  Clark Yes, yes, he did, and he   d tell me, he said,    Jo, you have to study with them.  You have to do this with them. You have to do       I said,    No.    Even Dr.  Karman, he said,    Well, Jo,    a course I had with him, he said,    Well, can I  use you as an example?    We were doing the Miller Analogies Test and all of  that, and I said,    Yes.    He said,    Well, I   m going to use your results. It  doesn   t matter what I do. I can   t get you to come to lunch with me. You   re  friendly, but you have this shield in front of you. You only let certain people  behind that shield. Do you realize you   re my only candidate that calls me  Dr. Karman? Everybody else calls me Tom.    I said,    Well, that   s everybody  else. You   re Dr. Karman to me.    (Laughs)  Milligan Why do you think it was like that? Was it intentional?  Clark It was my upbringing. If you were older than I am, you were, you had a  handle on your name, or you had a name that we gave you like Auntie or  Uncle or something like that, even though you might not have been related. I  just couldn   t bring myself to call him Tom, the same with Dr. Brown, who  was over in sociolinguistics who was very supportive in, when my person in  English would treat me real awful   I dismissed him. I can   t remember his  name, but he was chair of the English department after Shelley. Every time  I   d go to enroll, he would tell me,    Well, why don   t you transfer to  University of Texas? They have a program in comparative linguistics, which  you   re interested in.    I said,    I   m an Oklahoman. I want my degree to come  from Oklahoma.    I could have gone to Baylor. I took a course at East Texas   State University , but I didn   t want that.  Milligan Why did you want to go to OSU after you had the problem with the English  department?  Clark Well, it was closer, and then being the person I was, I thought the academics  at OSU was better than OU  University of Oklahoma . I still believe that.  (Laughter)  Milligan That   s good. We   ll just keep that.  24  Clark Yes. We might not print that, but   . (Laughter)  Milligan Well, your ten-year-old grandson doesn   t agree with you. (Laughs)  Clark No, he doesn   t. He   s always thinking about football. As I was saying, with  this person who was the then chair of the English department, when it was  time to enroll and I called, he wouldn   t be where I could find him. I can   t  remember the nun   s name, but there was a nun that was in the English  department. I never had classes with her, but she told me, she said,    He does  that on purpose for you when you can   t find him. I know I don   t have your  plan of study, but I   ll sign whatever you need.    She did.  Milligan Just to be able to     Clark    to get enrolled.  Milligan    put your application, to enroll, yeah.  Clark Yes, but he would always tell me,    Why don   t you transfer to University of  Texas?    When I had finished everything, and as I mentioned, Dr. Michael  Brown, who was in sociolinguistics, he   d tell me, he said,    Well, Jo, just  don   t give up. Just don   t give up. Just stay in there with him. He puts his  pants on the same way you do when you wear pants. Just stay in there.    He  was very supportive, and Dr. Karman was, too. When I got ready to  graduate, well, I did a project with his wife who taught   at that time, the  freshman courses separated at OSU the way the international students were  in English for international students and something like that, but it was like  the freshman and sophomore composition. I did a project with her, and she  was so impressed. In fact, I did two courses with her, and she couldn   t be on  my committee because she didn   t have a doctorate.  I had done everything she wanted me to do in those two courses, but she was  so impressed she wanted me to go further on something. I   ve forgotten what  it was now. She gave me an I  incomplete . Well, when I finished them, she  told me she turned in As for me. Well, when her husband was doing my  final evaluation, he told me, he said,    Well, Jo, it looks like you made all As  and one B.    I said,    Yes. I was trying to make all As just to see if I could  make all As in one of my educational pursuits, but that History of  Education, History of Higher Education, as a matter of fact, I made that B. I  was happy for it.    He said,    Well, no one is supposed to graduate from OSU  with all As and one B,    and he changed two As to Bs. I had thought that  man was so wrong until I said,    Okay.    He did.  Milligan Just arbitrarily?  25  Clark Arbitrarily because her changing the grades from Is to As had to come  through him, and he changed those two to Bs. My chair  at Langston  University , at the time, had gone through OSU before I did, and she would  always say she wanted to send him a Christmas card. I   d say,    If you do, I   m  not going to speak to you anymore.     Milligan (Laughs) I don   t blame you.  Clark I can   t think of his name. I think he would have probably beaten me down  and sent me to the University of Texas, but I had a vein to break in my leg  and I was on crutches. One day doing enrollment, I met with him, and he  was telling me to transfer to the University of Texas. I just threw the  crutches, and I started crying. I fell on the floor, and I was just kicking.  When I saw it was getting next to him, I put in my actress mode, and I just  went for it. He said,    Oh, please, please, please. I haven   t lost a candidate  yet, a doctoral candidate. I   m not going to lose you. You   ll be all right.  You   ll be all right,    but I scooted around on that floor. (Laughter) I put on  my best act. (Laughter)  Milligan Did you feel like that was your final straw?  Clark Yes, yes. Plus, I wanted to know if he was human. I   ve never had a class  with him, though.  Milligan Oh, really?  Clark No, he was just my chair. I had to have someone in, since I was getting it in,  they were letting me graduate in linguistics, which was in the English  department at the time I started. I had to have him over there, and then Dr.  Karman was in higher education. My degree actually reads college teaching,  I think, with an emphasis in comparative linguistics.  Milligan Oh. That   s what I was trying to figure it out. You went first to the English  department, and he said,    No. You don   t have a high enough GPA.    Then  you went to the higher ed school, and they said,    Come on in.     Clark Yes.  Milligan You went back and took English courses, courses under the English  department. Once you were enrolled through higher ed, was there anything  he could do to keep you out of the English program?  Clark I didn   t even try after that.  Milligan You were taking courses that were under the English program.  26  Clark Yes, yes, all the linguistics courses that OSU offered at the time. When I  was taking them, when we lived in Texas and I was just coming back, I  didn   t take that many higher ed courses, but I took what was required. Of  course I did those two projects in English because I was always interested in  grammar and composition, and then my research was on the grammatical  errors that certain groups of international students made in those first two  English courses.  Milligan Got it. You had to go and see this guy regularly.  Clark Yes, yes. In fact, he signed my enrollment, as opposed   now Dr. Karman  approved it as well, but I saw Dr. Karman, Dr. Michael Brown, and, oh,  whatever my   .  Milligan If he wouldn   t let you in because you didn   t have a high enough GPA   .  Clark Now it wasn   t him.  Milligan Oh, okay.  Clark It was that Dr. Shelley who didn   t let me in, but he was not the chair  anymore when I, after I went to   .  Milligan Got it.  Clark What I did, I started taking courses in linguistics as an adjunct just to prove  to them that I could do it, but then when I came back to go full time, then  Dr. Shelley wasn   t there anymore. I think I may have had, I had a course  with Dr. Karman and liked everything about him, and there was another  teacher. I can   t think of what his name is now. It was funny. I had some  good things at, most good things at OSU. One of them was, and I can   t think  of this, what this guy   s name was now. He was the editor for the  Educational Record. It was a white lady in his class with me, and we  checked those transcripts that came in for him. I was in some course. I can   t  remember now what the course was, but what I did was his editorial work. I  didn   t have to take statistics. Then when I did my dissertation and  everything was wrong on the statistical part, I went to, oh, whoever taught  5015. My husband took him. I can   t think of his   his first name was Bill  something. Dr. Karman told me go see him because my statistics were all  wrong. When I went in, he said,    Well, did you take me for 5015?    I said,     No, I didn   t take it,    and he started screaming, I mean really literally  screaming. I guess I turned all different colors or something because he  scared me. (Laughs) He said,    Okay. Don   t be afraid. Now that I   ve gotten  that out, I   ll help you.    (Laughter) I can   t think of what his last name was,  but it was Bill  Elsom .  27  Milligan It   s the person who replaced Dr. Shelley that gave you the grief about the  grades. It   s the department head for, that replaced Dr. Shelley that still   .  Clark Yes, yes, that told me that no one who graduates from OSU should make all  As and one B. I never questioned what he meant by that, but I had an idea,  either no woman or no black person. It was one or the other.  Milligan Were there many black students in the English Department at that time? Do  you know?  Clark I didn   t know any. I didn   t have any in any of my classes, none of my  linguistics classes. I was the only one.  Milligan That   s interesting.  Clark Not even in the higher education classes.  Milligan Not any that you remember?  Clark Now I remember, I remember some international students, but   .  Milligan It   s interesting that you had some professors that were cheering you on just  like they knew what was going on, I mean, obviously.  Clark Yes, and the main two were Dr. Karman and Dr. Brown.  Milligan After you got your grade changed, you had been to Langston by this point.  You knew that you could contest that grade. Did you think about it?  Clark Well, no. I thought about it, but my husband told me, he said,    Well, Jo, you  just need to go ahead and try to graduate and just forget about it.    I couldn   t  forget about it because even what happened at East Central. I had a niece  who went to East Central when she graduated from high school, and I  begged her, I said,    No, don   t go. They   re going to be mean to you. They   re  going to be different with you.    I still have a little part in the corner of my  heart that has a bad taste. Even though this chair changed two grades, two  As to Bs, and he would tell me I needed to go to University of Texas, it  wasn   t as bad as East Central. I still love OSU. I don   t love East Central.  They used to call me as an outstanding East Central graduate, and I   d say,     Well, no, you don   t want me    because my experiences were too painful at  East Central. I always give them credit because the academics were great.  Milligan You successfully got your  Ed. D. Let me clarify a little bit. You move to  Waco in 1974. You were already taking classes at OSU by that point, and  you arranged with your professors that while you were in Waco that you  would continue with classes. You would just basically come in and take your  28  test, do the coursework on your own, be doing independent. You did that  until, you said you came back in    77?  Clark I came back in    77. I thought I only had to do my residency, but it ended up  that I, it took me two years instead of one to finish.  Milligan You left Lester down in Waco?  Clark Yes.  Milligan Were your kids still in the house at that point?  Clark Yes. They fluctuated back and forth, and sometimes our, either our flight  bill or our  car  gas bill was higher than our check because either he would  come to Stillwater every weekend or I would go out. In    78, I think it was,  he took a job at Prairie View  A M University  in Houston. We moved to  Houston. I would fly to Houston maybe two weekends out of a month, and  then he and the kids would drive here. My baby son was sixth grade at the  time. He started in Stillwater, and then he wanted to be with his daddy. We  were just back and forth, back and forth.  Milligan For two years, it sounds like. From 1977 to 1979, you officially lived in  Stillwater even though you were split?  Clark Yes, yes.  Milligan Tell me a little bit about that time. What coursework were you working on,  and how was it living in the town?  Clark Well, I worked at Langston part time at that time, and by    79 because I  actually finished in August of, well, I finished in May. I didn   t march in  commencement. In fact, I didn   t pick up my degree until eleven years later.  Milligan Really? Why?  Clark I was still mad at the chair for changing my two grades, but anyway, it was  no problem because most of my activities were still in Langston. I still like  Stillwater. I still love the library. In fact, when I was doing my research, my  baby son was, in fact, of my three children, two are engineers, and he was  sixth grade then. When I was doing my research and when I was messing up  that statistics, I had to go to the computer lab, and I could never figure it out.  Well, he was sixth grade at the time. I   d take him with me, and when I  would get mixed up, he would go to one of the primarily international  students. He says,    Well, my mama   s mixed up, and this is what she has.  Can you help us straighten it out?    and because he was such an energetic,  cute, and very small for his age, they would always help him. He helped me  29  through that, and then when I   d go to the library, I would find the sources  that I needed and send him to Xerox them.  Everybody was fascinated with this little boy that was in there Xeroxing  articles, and then when I   d go to class, he would go with the international  students and play soccer outside. Then when he would find something for  me, he would hide the book or hide the article, and then when I   d get out of  class and come back, he   d say,    Well, I found one you might need.    He just  loved it because he had so many compliments because he was   they  thought he was about six when he was really about eleven, I guess, at the  time, something like that, eleven, yeah. He enjoyed that summer doing that  or anytime that he was in Stillwater with me because he couldn   t make up  his mind whether he wanted to be with me or with his daddy and the other  two, but they were high school. My daughter graduated from Stillwater High  School. She did her senior year there because we moved back to Oklahoma  because we both were, I was already part time at Langston, and then he  moved from Prairie View to Langston.  Milligan Was that     Clark That was in    79, I guess, somewhere in there.  Milligan When you finished your residency, you moved back to Oklahoma?  Clark Yes, because I went full time to Langston after I got my doctorate. He came  back the fall of    79.  Milligan What position did you take at Langston?  Clark Full time?  Milligan Yes.  Clark I worked in research while I was on my doctorate in agriculture research,  and then when I became full time, I worked in the communication  department. I was over the newspaper and the yearbook, and we printed the  Langston Gazette at OSU. When I went to whoever was the chair over there,  he said,    Well, Jo, you won   t ever be good in communication because  you   re too much of a grammarian. In journalism, we don   t agree to all of  those things.    I said,    Well, you should,    but he helped me a lot because I  didn   t know anything about putting a newspaper together.  Milligan It   s interesting because you worked at the, you originally worked for the  English Department teaching.  30  Clark They didn   t have an opening in the English department when I became full  time, and Dr. Joy Flash was over at Communication. She had been in the  English department when I first started, and she said,    Well, Jo, I know  you   ll have the yearbook out on time and the Gazette will have no errors in  it.    (Laughs) I told her I didn   t know anything about either one, but that my  best friend was in journalism. He helped me with both.  Milligan Got it. How long did you stay in that area?  Clark In the journalism department, I think I was there maybe three or four years,  but I was only over their yearbook until    78,    79. I claimed being over the  Gazette, but my friend Willard Pitts was at UCO  University of Central  Oklahoma . I would have him to come to Langston and do the paper, and he  tried to teach me all of those things that journalists do that grammarians  don   t do. I told him,    As long as I have you, I don   t need to learn those  things.    I never could figure out picas, to do a headline. I knew you had to  have a verb in the headline, but I couldn   t make it fit. I said,    Just do it.     Milligan What drew you all back to Langston?  Clark Honestly?  Milligan Yes.  Clark I told my husband,    I am not going to be a Texan ever. Now I   m going to  stay in Oklahoma. You and the children are welcome to come.    (Laughter)  If he had said no, I think I would have been a Texan, but he didn   t say no.  Thank the Lord. (Laughter) We all came back, and our oldest son graduated  from a Texas high school. He came to Langston his freshman year.  Milligan You could have gone a lot of places and still stayed in Oklahoma.  Clark Yes, but I didn   t want to.  Milligan Why Langston?  Clark I had fallen in love with it, at first, and then I thought I could make a  difference, a bigger difference with the students because my friend, Willard  Pitts, had a saying. When people would say,    Well, Langston   s no good. It   s  not as good as OU,    he   d say and I would copy,    Well, when they spell    cat     at OU, they spell it    cat,    and when they spell    cat    at Langston, it   s    cat.     It   s the same.    (Laughs) He had what we   d call    Pittsisms.    He   d make up  all kind of sayings, and I think that the reason I have so many adoptive  students is because I think I did make a difference. I would tell my mother  all the time, I said,    Well, I think the good Lord forgot about me and didn   t  31  give me a talent.    She said,    No, he gave you a talent. You could talk white  off rice.    (Laughter)  Milligan Sounds like you and Lester both can. (Laughs)  Clark We make a good team. We make a good team.  Milligan (Laughs) You brought it up and we talked a little bit about it off tape, but  you have how many adoptive student    kids   ?  Clark Yes. We call them    joined in.    We have    born in    and    joined in.    On  paper, there are seventy, but I   ve lost four who passed away. If they had  children, they   re still my grandchildren. Two of them did.  Milligan These were students who you either met in Langston or through other   .  Clark Most of them, most of them. I have three. In fact, Isaac   s mother is one of  them. She just passed away a couple of weeks ago, three weeks ago. His  grandmother, his maternal grandmother had three daughters, and her baby  daughter, no, her second daughter was my oldest son   s first wife. When she  got sick, she asked me, she said,    Would you make sure my girls are okay?     I said,    Well, yes. I   ll take all three of them.    Two of them have passed  away now. There   s still one who   s not doing well.  Milligan There   s lots of ways that you bring family into your life then.  Clark Yes, 99 percent of them were students at Langston. I can   t think of any of  the seventy, except those three girls, who were not students at Langston, and  we have   .  Milligan Were those three girls from here in Langston, in the town?  Clark No. The oldest girl married a guy from Langston, and Isaac   s mom, that just  passed, her longtime special friend was from Langston. My daughter-in-law,  she was in Kingfisher  Oklahoma . Well, she lived in Langston when she  and my son got together, but her mother and father, all of her people lived in  Kingfisher or El Reno  Oklahoma . They   re Cheyenne from that area, but all  the rest, all the rest were from Langston. We have two brothers, and it   s  really strange how this family gets designated because we have two  brothers. They have more than, they have other siblings, but we only have  two from the Bahamas. We have two from Africa. They have other siblings,  but they didn   t go to Langston. Two brothers went to Langston, and then we  have one from Kenya, a boy from Kenya and a girl from Ghana. The girl  from Ghana, she and her daughter came to the fiftieth.  Milligan Wow. That   s a long trip.  32  Clark Of course, the one from Kenya, he lives in Kansas City. He was there. Of  the seventy, some of them get to be so close until, in fact, one of the brothers  from the Bahamas, I would tease him because his mother brought him to me  when he was sixteen. He came to Langston at sixteen. Of course, when his  mother couldn   t find him, she   d call me to see if I had seen him. I said,     Well, yes, he   s right here.    (Laughs) I tease him now. His name is Michael  Storr. I say,    Michael, I can   t remember who gave birth to you, me or  Virginia.    (Laughter) He was good with my children. He was older. He was  a big brother to them, and he still is. He still is.  Milligan How long did you spend in and around that working in Langston overall?  Clark I worked at Langston from    67 to    74. Then I came back part-time in    77,  and I stayed until 2010 when I retired the first time.  Milligan You retired the first time     Clark    oh, in 2010, in May of 2010. Because I   d had a stroke in    09, I thought,     Well, I   ve done enough,    but then it was not a debilitating stroke. I missed  so much. I went back part-time, and I called myself the cheerleader for the  nurses. I went back just on a grant that the dean had because they had,  students had some negative, negative attitudes, and she called me and said,     Well, Jo, I know you can get them out of that.    I said,    I sure can     I met  with them every day, and I would edit their papers and call them and just  keep them pumped up, that    you can read seven chapters in one night.     (Laughter) They all passed their license exam. I would tell her,    I   m your  cheerleader for your nurses.    I had the juniors and seniors. Then that was  in     Milligan    2011?  Clark    2012, 2011, somewhere in there. I went fulltime when the new president  came in August of 2012, and I had been over the honors program since    96.  I told him,    I   m the oldest person here. I   ve been here longer than anyone.  Whatever you need, I can help you with it,    and he was very agreeable. I  still had the honors program, but I also helped with admission and that.  Milligan You had the honors programs from 1996     Clark    until 2010, well, even before that, well, in    96, I had just the honors  program, and then I kept dabbling with teaching a course every now and  then in the English department, especially advanced grammar and freshman  courses, until the president asked me to act as chair of the English  Department. That was    02 or    03, somewhere in there, but I still had the  honors program. I did that, and then when he retired and the new president  33  came, I still had both until 2010. Then when I went back, I didn   t go back to  the English Department, but I did, the now president did give me the honors  program. I still work with the honors program.  Milligan Are you still doing that some?  Clark Well, yes and no. Officially, no, but I still do their Welcome Back reception  and stuff. I have them all to come to the barn. Whenever I cook, I cook  enough, and the person that is the counselor for the honors program now, if  she has a problem with anyone, she just sends them down here. They all  know that this is their home and that the barn is their place of relaxation.  Milligan The barn is the building out back of your house?  Clark Yes. We call it the barn because it started out as a barn, but it has a  bathroom, a full kitchen. The kitchen seats seventy-five, and there   s a pool  table in there, hockey table and big screen TV, popcorn machine.  Milligan Oh my goodness. I wondered what that was when I pulled up. (Laughter)  Now it makes sense.  Clark It started out as a barn. We still call it the barn. The Greeks, they meet there,  a lot of them. The Sigmas are meeting there Saturday. The AKAs  Alpha  Kappa Alpha  and the Alphas meet there every now and then. The Kappas,  the Omegas, and honors students, when they need somewhere to stay in  between, the basement is theirs. (Laughs) We had an Omega staying there.  Then the Omegas would come all the time. He graduated in December, and  he was going to Peace Corps in August. He stayed with us from December  to   .  Milligan Who is that?  Clark His name was Terry Lewis. He   s with Peace Corps now in southern Africa. I  had two girls who lived there and who lived in the basement one summer,  and I have a rule that even if I give you a house key, if the porch light is not  on, you can   t use your key. You stayed out too late, and you can   t ring the  doorbell. Her name is Latoya Shumate. In fact, she is my last adopted  daughter, and she   s been a Clark   that   s what they call them. They say,     Well, I   m a Clark.    She   s been a Clark for about ten years, and she stayed  one summer. I walked on the porch, and I saw her all curled up in the car. I  called. I said,    Latoya, what are you doing in the car?    She said,    The porch  light was not on.    (Laughs) I said,    Oh, I forgot to turn the porch light on.     (Laughter) She still teases me about that. I hear from her. She   s in Virginia.  She has a job in Virginia, and she still calls me. She says,    Now you   re too  old to adopt any more students. Definitely don   t adopt anymore ladies. I am  your baby, and I   ll remain your baby.     34  We have one who is a manager of City National Bank at Walmart in Guthrie   Oklahoma . He stayed in the basement for two years. He was the baby boy  for a long time, and when we adopted another student, he was so mean to  that, I said,    Greg, you cannot be jealous like that.    He said,    Well, I was  supposed to be the baby boy.    I said,    You   re still the baby. You still act  like a baby,    but he stayed in the basement for two years. Then we own the  house across the street. I said,    You need to get in your own house. You   re  getting too old to be in the house with your mom and dad.    Now if he gets  sick, we   ll come in here and he   s in here in the chair or on the couch. When  I got sick in October, he was so upset. He said,    I   m your baby, but I   m the  last one to know what   s happening with you.    I said,    Greg, you   re the first  one. I don   t tell my biological son, Tony, because he gets too emotional. The  baby son, I definitely didn   t tell him because he lives in Florida. You were  the first son to know at all, not the last.    He is so helpful, though. He lives  over there. He comes over every morning to make sure we   re all right. He  calls a thousand times a day to make sure we   re all right.  Milligan Yeah, your phone rings quite a bit, yeah. (Laughs)  Clark Yeah, but it doesn   t ring this much during the day. I don   t know. Of course,  he   s manager of City National Bank now, but he taught fourth grade in  Texas. Actually, he  tutors  our great-grandson, that we have custody of. He  tutors him since he   s fourth grade, and he   s really good with them. I   m not  good in tutoring.  Milligan Well, you   re good in quite a few other things, so it   s okay.  Clark Yes, but I   m not good at tutoring.  Milligan Well, I have kept you a really long time, and I actually   .  Clark Remember now, I can talk white off rice. (Laughter)  Milligan I was about to say. I know we could sit here a lot longer, but I wonder if  there   s anything that you wanted to talk about that you didn   t get the chance  to talk about before we end it.  Clark I love students, especially college students. I had a group of guys here last  night. They come almost every night. They   ll call to see if I cooked, and as I  said, when I cook, I cook enough. If nobody comes, I   ll call somebody on  campus and say,    Well, tell them I cooked,    and they know that I cook a lot.  Then I have a lot of stuff for them in the barn, and as I said, with the Greeks,  I usually try to have them over every now and then and same with the  honors students. Then because two of my    born in    children live in Kansas  City and I recruited at my granddaughter   s high school, it   s a Kansas City  35  group that I recruited that are still here. I have the Kansas City students in  for dinner, and it   s about fifteen of them.  Milligan It seems like, that there   s, other than campus, there   s maybe not as much to  do for students around Langston.  Clark No, because they do it all in Stillwater. (Laughs) They   re a lot more mobile  now than when we first came to Langston in    67. They don   t miss it. They  don   t have a bowling alley here or anything like that, but they do all that in  Stillwater.  Milligan Well, it seems like this is a valuable place for them to have   to center  around.  Clark I have students who come here to wash or just say,    Well, can I come spend  the night?    I only had one student that I restricted her because she   d have  makeup from that bathroom all the way to the, my bedroom, but she was  smart. She was smart, and her name is Jamese Lewis. She   s in Dallas now.  Well, she   s from Dallas, and she   s one of my children. Jamese was hurt  when I beat her in Boggle. I said,    Jamese, I play Boggle every day, all  day.    She said,    I   m younger than you. I   m smarter than you.    I said,    Well,  yes, but I know Boggle.    (Laughter) She was hurt. She was literally hurt.  She won   t play me now.  Milligan It sounds like you   ve got some youth lessons that could be shared over to her  youth lessons that are needed. (Laughs)  Clark I   ll get in one, I keep, that   s what I use this tablet for. I have a tablet. I have  a handheld. I have one that makes a lot of noise.  Milligan Oh, that   s fun.  Clark I got that one because my husband said my other one made too much noise,  but I like the other one where you can actually touch the tiles.  Milligan For Boggle, yeah. That   s so funny.  Clark He plays Sudoku. I   m not good in math. I play Boggle, and my ten-year-old  is getting very good at it.  Milligan Oh, good. You   ve got some competition.  Clark Yes, he, because I have engaged   his dad brought him to us when we, he  was five, and he   s almost eleven now. I started him on two-letter words, and  now he can, he has some five-letter words. He loves when I   m wrong.  36  Milligan (Laughs) That   s most ten-year-olds.  Clark He   ll tell me, he says,    I know you   re smart. You tell me that all of the time,  but I   m a genius.    (Laughter) I said,    Okay, okay.     Milligan Well, after all your time here, you definitely have a place in Langston. That  is obvious.  Clark I love it. I love the town, and oh, I definitely love the school. I don   t think  that it   s the connection with the students that it was when I first started or  when I retired in 2010, but it seems that the people that are there now are  more mobile. They   re not so interested in doing what is now called  appreciative advising where you get to know the student. You become a part  of their lives. You know their likes and dislikes, their problems and their  strengths. I don   t think it   s as strong as when I was there     Milligan (Laughs) Fair enough.  Clark    but I still do what I can. I still have a few people that if they   re having  trouble with a student, they   ll call me. Then I   ll just have them to come  down because they can walk here, but most of them have cars now. We have  students here   I would guess out of seven days, we have some students here  four of those days. I don   t know what I would do if they stopped coming,  but the last group I recruited are seniors. They   ll graduate in May. Since I   m  an AKA and my husband is an Alpha, we still know those, but as I said, I  have all the Greeks because, all the Panhellenic Greeks because I have  adopted children who are in all of them. I even have a Sigma Gamma Rho  white    joined in    daughter, Mabel Watson.  Milligan Is she your only    joined in    daughter who   s white?  Clark No. Well, only  white  daughter maybe, but I have all colors and kinds. I  have, as I said, those three daughters who are Native American. Then I have  a couple, one son who didn   t go to Langston or college. He   s white, and  then another son who   s white, one who   s Vietnamese, and seven Native  Americans.  Milligan Do you identify with the Native American side of yourself, of your family  history?  Clark Yes, yes, probably as much, sometimes more so. I make sure that my  children and grandchildren respect and know that side of their heritage, and  I owe that to Dr. Michael Brown at OSU because he asked me, he said,     Well, Jo, why you don   t identify as Native American?    I said,    Well,  because I grew up in a time when if you had one drop, you were black.    He  said,    Well, your dad was Native American. You don   t love him?    I said,  37     Oh yes.    He said,    Your mother   s part, and grandparents were all Native  Americans. Why don   t you? You   re saying you don   t love them.    I said,    I  do.    He said,    Well, stop acting like you   re not part Native American.    It  was then, and of course the brother that I stayed in the country with, he was,  his mother was Native American. Those older brothers and one sister, my  father   s first wife was Native American, and I only knew the three brothers,  not   I didn   t know my sister, Martha. I met her in death. When she died,  they sent her body back to Ada.  That was the first time I   d seen  her    my mother had talked about her  because they were best friends, but I didn   t really know her. Dr. Brown kept  telling me,    You don   t have to disown one. It   s okay to be both,    and the  other thing that happened all the time, unless somebody didn   t ask me and  put down some other race, when you had to put down race, I put African  American. Well, when I turned, after fifty years, I said,    Okay. I was  African American for fifty years. Now I   ll be Native American since I   m  half.    (Laughter) I   ll do half because I   m going to live to be a hundred at  least, Lord   s willing. I said,    I   ll do half and half.    Of course, when my  children were small, I made sure that they knew their Native American  roots, and I didn   t let them forget their African roots, either. I still don   t, and  even with, I have four, Isaac and three others who are Cheyenne. I make  sure that they, they didn   t learn Cheyenne, but I make sure that they  participate in their Native American heritage. Of course, with Tristan,  because he   s part Cheyenne     Milligan Your ten-year-old?  Clark    yes, the ten-year-old. He   ll tease me about, he says,    Well, what color are  you?    I say,    We don   t do any colors. Just know that we   re black, African  American and Native American.    He says,    I   m Indian?    because his dad  just cut his hair. When he was very small, it was the fashion to wear a tail,  but as he grew older, he wore his hair in Native style. He just cut it two  weeks ago.  Milligan His dad?  Clark His dad, yes. I said,    Well, Calvin, why did you cut your hair?    He said,    I  knew you   d wonder, want me to keep my long hair,    but he just got married.  I think his wife wanted to see what he   d look like with short hair. He   s still  handsome. (Laughter)  Milligan Well, I think this is a good place to stop. I   m reluctant to do so because I do,  this has been really interesting, but I think I   m going to have to release you  back to the world.  Clark (Laughs) Okay.  38  Milligan I   m going to stop.  -------  -------   
