 Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University Library. Today is Friday, April 22, 2016, and I am in Arapaho, Oklahoma, in Custer County to speak with Clint and Pam Roush. Clint and Pam are here for our Cowboys in Every County Oral History project. Thank you so much for joining me today.  P. Roush Good to be here.  Nykolaiszyn Well, I   d like to learn a little bit more about you two. Could we start with where you were born and the year you were born, Clint?  C. Roush I was born in 1947 at the Clinton hospital here in Custer County. I grew up west of Arapaho, Oklahoma, with my parents, Harold and Essie Roush. I have two sisters. My parents farmed in Custer County, as well as my grandparents and my great-grandparents, so I   m a fourth-generation farmer here in Custer County.  Nykolaiszyn Okay, and Pam, the year you were born and where you were born.  P. Roush Well, I was born in 1947, also, in, coincidentally, Clinton, Oklahoma, but Weatherford   s my hometown. I guess the hospital must have been a preference in Clinton over Weatherford back then. My parents were also farmers. My dad was pure Swiss. His great-grandfather, Emil Nebel, bought a farm at Weatherford from Bill Weatherford, and my dad grew up farming that. Got it from his great-grandfather, no, from his grandfather, my great-grandfather. I grew up on a farm just like Clint, not too far away from him, about probably twenty minutes.  Nykolaiszyn Okay. Well, both of you growing up on the farm probably have fond memories of chores. Why don   t you share with me some of your chores? Clint, what do you remember growing up doing?  C. Roush Well, I mean, growing up in the late   40s, early   50s, most farmers had milk cows. They had some pigs, and they had cattle. Most farms, since they were 5  so labor intensive, were very small, like maybe a hundred and sixty acres to start with. I remember my parents working very hard, milking cows, carrying the feed to the hogs and the cattle. I guess my first   I was probably seven years old when I learned to drive the tractor with my dad while he was feeding cattle. I   d be driving the tractor, and he would be back in the wagon, scooping out the feed to the cattle. I can remember learning to drive. I ran into the feed bunk several times. I remember milking cows and feeding hogs, and just chores on the farm. Everybody worked hard.  Nykolaiszyn And Pam, what do you remember from your youth?  P. Roush I   m glad he has to go first because it helps me kind of compare the two stories. I got to have a half-Shetland, and I got to go after this black milk cow. Thank goodness, I didn   t have to learn to milk it. My grandmother warned me,    Don   t ever learn to milk a cow,    but my dad milked the cow. The next chore, I have one sister, and our job was also to gather the eggs. That was the scariest job because we had hens that wouldn   t let us have the eggs. We had to put on leather gloves and actually kind of use a board to make the chicken lay down so we could get the eggs from underneath them. Those were the two jobs that I remember on the farm mainly. I did chop a little cotton and peanuts, but I didn   t get to drive a tractor until I was a sophomore. I was legal age when I learned how. (Laughter)  Nykolaiszyn Well, it sounds like both of your families worked very hard with y   all growing up. Was education important in your families, Clint?  C. Roush Yes. My father graduated from high school here at Arapaho, just like I did several years later. My mother just has an eighth grade education, but she was very smart. She liked to read and spent a lot of time reading the Bible. I would think she was just as educated as my father but in her own way. In fact, I think she won the spelling bee in the eighth grade at the Womble School, which is out here between Arapaho and Butler. Education was stressed. I would be the first of my family to attend college, and they definitely wanted me to go on to college. They didn   t realize how long I would stay in college when they told me to go, but, yes, education was very important in our family.  Nykolaiszyn What about you, Pam?  P. Roush Well, my mom was a school teacher. Her story is kind of weird because she was at Southwestern  Oklahoma State University  getting her degree, but World War II broke out. They came and asked her if she would stop her college after two years and be a teacher. Then my dad was in World War II, was wounded but survived fine. Then he came home, and he and Mom got married after the war. Mother didn   t get her piece of paper until I was a sophomore in high school. I remember going back to college and studying 6  while she was stirring the food up for us. Then she taught for, maybe, fifteen, twenty years. Didn   t teach all that much longer. Didn   t teach to retire, kind of an early retirement.  Education, we were real blessed that   . Now, Dad started college but then was drafted. My grandmother, the best story is that my mother   s mother was a school teacher back in the day where they had a one-room school. She had to make the fire. She didn   t have to fix the lunches, but she was the janitor and with all ages in one room in kind of a very primitive classroom. I saw some of them. I got to watch her, when I was a kid, teach some around the Watonga area. They were western Oklahoma, too. Different but very blessed, both of us. Of course, I was expected to go to college, (never thought I would get out of it) and I   m glad I got to go to OSU   Nykolaiszyn Well, speaking of education, can you kind of talk to me about the schools you attended when you were younger in this area, Clint?  C. Roush Okay. Starting in first grade, I attended Arapaho High School, which is just two and a half miles south of here, where we live now, and finished all twelve grades at the Arapaho school.  Nykolaiszyn Well, could you describe the building for me?  C. Roush It was a fairly modern building at that time. Course, right now, this year, if you go down to the Arapaho school, there are only two structures left. They   ve rebuilt everything since then. The only structure left is one of the water towers and the old bus barn.     They had the brick school building, and then they had the cafeteria where the lunchroom, a separate building. On the end of the lunch room was actually a butchering facility where, during our vocational agriculture, we would be butchering hogs. Then soon as that class was over, we   d go to the lunchroom and eat lunch. It was a nice school building, but it   s no longer there now.  My favorite class in school was vocational agriculture. A man in the school that taught vocational agriculture is Tuffy Howell, and he was most influential in my life, especially on attending Oklahoma State University because every year during our high school, he would take the FFA class to the state convention, which was held at Oklahoma State University. That   s one reason that I wanted to continue my education there is because I   d been there every year for four years. My vocational ag teacher had graduated from there just a few years before he started teaching school. He still is in this area. He lives about three miles from us right now. He had a big influence on my life.  Nykolaiszyn What about you, Pam? Where did you go to school when you were growing up? 7  P. Roush Well, I did the same as Clint, but I started in kindergarten at Weatherford. I don   t think they had a kindergarten at Arapaho then.  C. Roush No, they didn   t.  P. Roush Graduated from Weatherford after twelve years. Didn   t get to go to OSU the first year. My dad didn   t think I was quite ready to go away from home, but I got to finally get to go to OSU after that. The main reason, I had two first-cousins that were over there. I   d never been like Clint, to see the campus. I didn   t know how great it was. I just knew they really loved it, and their dad was just like my dad. They were Swiss farmers, and I thought   . I was definitely looking for a farmer, and he didn   t have to be Swiss. I just thought I   d have a better chance at OSU than OU. I guess that   s why I went, and I   m glad I did because I ran into him over there. (Laughter)  Nykolaiszyn Clint, you mentioned that you would visit Stillwater with your FFA trips. So as you were growing up, what struck you about OSU when you would visit?  C. Roush Well, I guess one thing was the friendliness of the students. Even though we were high school students coming on campus, they were very receptive and welcomed us as students. We got to do things right there on campus at the different buildings. I guess one thing, our FFA teacher, he would drive us around and show us the whole campus. He said,    This is where I had this agriculture class. This is where   .    He made us well aware of everything that was going on, and it was a lot different then. It was, seemed like, more spread out. There was more room between buildings than there are now. The beauty of the campus was great, too, and of course he took us out to eat while we were there. The place that we ate at, he would take us to this place that had home-cooked meals, and they would pass the food around the table. I think this is the same place that Eskimo Joe   s is now.  Nykolaiszyn Huh   C. Roush That would have been, you know, back in the   60s before Eskimo Joe   s.  Nykolaiszyn Wow  Well, Clint you graduated from Arapaho; Pam, you graduated from Weatherford. So I   m going to kind of talk to you about how you got to campus. So Clint, you   re getting ready to go to OSU. How do you get there?  C. Roush Well, there was a guy named Jack Barr that came out during the summer, and he was the recruitment person for Alpha Gamma Rho fraternity. He came out to the farm and visited with me, and asked me if I would like to pledge and live at Alpha Gamma Rho. I had already made an application for a dormitory, but this really sounded intriguing because there were other people in our county that were in Alpha Gamma Rho or had graduated just 8  recently. I knew them, and sounded like a good deal to me. That   s how I kind of got there. There were actually three of us from my high school out of a class of sixteen that went to OSU for the first year. One of them stayed one week, one stayed one semester, and I stayed about eight years. (Laughter) Couldn   t get rid of me.  Nykolaiszyn Did you have a car when you drove to Stillwater?  C. Roush Yes, I had a 1965 Impala Chevrolet. It was almost new because I got it my senior year in high school, so I had a car. I was fortunate to have that.  Nykolaiszyn Now, Pam, you graduated from high school, and you went to college at Southwestern to start.  P. Roush Correct.  Nykolaiszyn So tell me how you got to  OSU .  P. Roush Well, my mom and dad finally   I was begging to get to go to OSU after a year, and they finally decided, yeah, I could go my sophomore year. My parents took me to campus, and I went right to Stout Hall and was in the dormitory and had a great roommate. We were dear friends. She was in my wedding, and I was in hers. We stayed friends for forever. My experience was, I didn   t want to pledge anything. I just kind of liked being independent. I didn   t have to. My cousins were Lambda Chis, and so I got to go to all the parties with some of their friends. I really didn   t need to go to meetings or be in a sorority at the time.  Then finally, my junior year, my dear roommate got engaged. She didn   t have time to do things with me, so I did pledge. Luckily, I pledged KD, and his sister was a pledge in the Kappa Delta house. She came up to me my junior year, and she said,    My brother would like to go out with you.    I looked at her, and I said, (she   s a pledge; you   re not supposed to be that nice to pledges)    Well, let me look at him in the annual. Look him up.    It was a cute picture  The first date was at the Student Union, and President  Robert  Kamm   . Clint would be at the head table, and I knew the meal was really good. He was president of the Farm   .  C. Roush Agricultural Student Council.  P. Roush Yeah, okay. I didn   t know him   a young, little boy up there with the president of the university. I was a nervous wreck for him, and he did fine. It was a neat first date. That   s how we met.  Nykolaiszyn Huh, very interesting.  9  C. Roush She called it the annual; I call it the herdbook.  Nykolaiszyn Ah  And you are both referring to The Redskin, right?  C. Roush Right  The Redskin, that   s right.  P. Roush Yeah, that   s right. That   s what it was called   Nykolaiszyn The herdbook  (Laughter)  P. Roush I call it an annual.  Nykolaiszyn Okay, Clint, so you   re a freshman in college. You   re living in the AGR house. How was that going for you?  C. Roush Oh, it was pretty rough. I mean, you know, at that time they had a pledge program, but I think there was twenty-some of us freshman boys. We had to clean the house and take care of the house. We bonded together, worked together, and   . Coming from a small school of sixteen, I needed some discipline as far as study habits, and they made sure that we knew and had priorities for the classroom, and to get ready for class. Plus, you attended class with other pledge brothers, and that helped you work together to study. I give a lot of credit to being able to make my grades that first year to the Alpha Gamma Rho fraternity.  Living in that house for four years, (we lived there four years) you lived with probably sixty people that you got to know very well, plus new people coming in over years. You might have met ninety to a hundred people over that four-year time. Many of those guys are lifelong friends that you might not see them that often, but you can call them up, and you can count on them for anything. I give a lot of credit to Alpha Gamma Rho for helping me not only to make my grades and study but also to get me involved in leadership and activities there on OSU campus.  Nykolaiszyn Now, Pam, you started out in Stout Hall.  P. Roush Yes, that   s correct.  Nykolaiszyn How was Stout for you?  P. Roush Well, I liked living in a dorm. Back in those days, the sad thing was that girls had to put a dress on to go down and eat a meal, and the food was, well, it had to be covered with ketchup to eat it. (Laughter)     It was different back then. Now you look at how the kids eat, it   s amazing. That didn   t seem very fair to me at the time, and then plus a campus, you know. My experience with the sorority, well, in the house   I liked the dorm fine 10  until my roommate, my dear friend, we moved from Stout to Drummond. We got to move to a new dorm. When she got engaged, like I said, I think I moved right into the KD house.  I don   t know if they had me pledge that late. I don   t remember having to do any meetings or anything. I lived in the house the second semester of my junior year, and then   one more semester I lived there. Then I got my degree early, so I took a job. I was hired over the phone to teach school in Michigan and went away as a single school teacher. They called me an old maid back then. All the girls were engaged by their sophomore year. Pinned, first they were pinned then when they were engaged. I just wasn   t into any of that back then, and so I got to teach school one semester. It was a good experience.  Nykolaiszyn In the house, tell me about your house mother.  P. Roush Well, she was nice. What I liked about the house is we   d get to have a formal meal and have little cups of tea, things that I hadn   t experienced as a farm girl. It was more proper, a lot different than the dorm. The food was a little better, and it was   more interesting for girls. I liked it better, that part.  Nykolaiszyn Were there rules you had to follow?  P. Roush Yes, well, there were meetings, too, and I got fined a lot because I did not like to attend meetings. (Laughter) They did have me be a representative, a Panhellenic representative, and I enjoyed that and got to know Dean  Zelma  Patchin, I believe was the dean of women. It made me kind of want to be a dean of women, but that didn   t last long. I   m glad I got my degree in elementary education because I got to teach the fourth grade in Michigan that semester. I   m a retired school teacher now. I got in about twenty-six years. Second grade was my favorite grade of all, but I taught them all. I liked them.  Nykolaiszyn What year did you graduate from OSU?  P. Roush Sixty-nine, in the middle of the year, January.  Nykolaiszyn Well, Clint, I   m sure AGR had a house mother you may remember.  C. Roush Oh, yeah, Mom Bea. She was very formal. We learned a lot of manners, and which side of the plate to put the fork and the knife, and how you should act at a dinner, and who gets served first, and these types of things. Mom Bea had it that every Sunday, the pledge class would take her to church every Sunday, and every meal, (except for breakfast) lunch and dinner, she would be escorted into the dining room and be seated there. We   d practice our manners. She taught us a lot about what ladies would expect from us if we 11  were going on a date or something. Mom Bea had a big influence. She was there the entire four years that I lived in AGR House. In fact, one of my fraternity brothers and I attended her funeral there, later on after we were alumni. She was a very nice lady.  Nykolaiszyn Well, let   s talk about some of your course work. Now, Clint, you have several degrees from OSU. Let   s focus on you undergraduate years. What are some classes or professors that really stick out in you mind?  C. Roush Okay, I started off in animal science. The main reason I started in animal science is my FFA adviser taught us meats judging, meat evaluation, carcass evaluation, so I wanted to go into animal science so I could try out for the meats judging team. Dr. Lowell Walters was head of animal evaluation, or meats evaluation, and he was the one that was in charge of the meats judging. We actually had a coach named Ronnie Edwards. I went out for the team, and made the team, and did all the animal science stuff, the Block and Bridle Club. In fact, our junior year, (I believe it was 1968) our meats judging team won the international livestock exposition in Chicago. I really enjoyed that.  My first year, my adviser was Dr. John Goodwin, and he was in agriculture economics. After the first year, I did change my major to agricultural economics, and he taught the introductory course. He was also the adviser to our fraternity, Alpha Gamma Rho. I took a lot of animal science and agricultural economics courses, and I do remember some of those other courses, like chemistry. Your freshman chemistry, you had to take two semesters, and they were taught there in, I believe, the physical science building   . When you finished the class in chemistry, you walked right out the west door, and you were right there by the Dairy Building. I   m sure you have heard of the Dairy Barn     Nykolaiszyn Yes.  C. Roush    which is no longer there. I think it   s now the Bellmon building.  Nykolaiszyn Yes.  C. Roush You could go in there and get your glass of milk and donuts, and then be prepared for the rest of the day. I enjoyed my undergraduate years, and, like I said, Alpha Gamma Rho got me involved in a lot of organizations, and got to serve on the Agriculture Student Council. When Pam talked about when we met, the night that our first date was when I   d been elected to the ag student council. At the end of the year, you have a banquet where they would announce the president. I was elected president, and when they announced the new officers, I didn   t have a date to go to the banquet. That   s when I looked Pam up in my sister   s sorority house. I looked at the 12  herdbook there and saw Pam, and I didn   t realize at that time she was from Weatherford, Oklahoma. Well, we grew up twenty miles apart, and so that was our first date, at the banquet of the Agricultural Student Council banquet. Anything else on undergraduates?  Nykolaiszyn No, I think you covered it. What year did you graduate with your undergrad?  C. Roush I graduated in 1969, the first time.  Nykolaiszyn Okay. Pam, looking back on your career in the College of Education, classes or professors that really stand out to you?  P. Roush You know, I was at Southwestern quite a bit. One of my favorite professors, I didn   t know what philosophy was, and Dr. James Sill was my philosophy teacher. I just was so amazed at learning something so new. Then he was also the speech teacher at Southwestern. Being a smaller college, I think I got to know the professors a lot differently, but at OSU I would be in classes with, seemed like, hundreds. Sometimes we were in an auditorium. I enjoyed it. I   m not saying I didn   t enjoy Oklahoma State University and the professors, but as far as remembering any names, like my husband, (he   s got a good memory) as far as the education teachers or anything, I don   t have any memories about certain ones, but I remember Southwestern.  I remember my freshman English teacher, Ms. Owen. Luckily, I had a really good high school English teacher that taught me what a thesis sentence was, and thank goodness, I could still remember to write the thesis sentence. Everybody got, like, Fs and Ds, and I lucked out and got a B because she taught me right in high school. I guess my memories are from the little college more than the big   . OSU was fun, but when I think about how many hours I did at Southwestern, (one full semester and then three summers), I was there a lot, too. Oklahoma State was really a wonderful experience, also, in every way, academically and socially. I thought it was so fun to be in the   it was like being in a big city, being in Stillwater back then. What was that road called where all the fun was?  C. Roush Washington Street? The Strip?  P. Roush The Strip  They called it the Strip, and the Coachman   . It was just something, a new experience for me being from Weatherford.     Southwestern was good, but OSU was fun   Nykolaiszyn Well, did you do any student teaching?  P. Roush Yes, I did my student teaching from Oklahoma State. I did it in Oklahoma City, a really good student teaching experience. I had a real good   . 13  C. Roush Belle Isle  School ?  P. Roush Yeah, I did it at Belle Isle. In fact, the students back then came in a limousine. It was a very ritzy part of town. This was a new experience for me. The children were a bit spoiled, but the parents were very caring. They were probably socioeconomic higher than what I was used to, but it turned out to be a good experience. My theme was farming. My dad helped me bring a bale of hay, and when I taught them math and everything, I made it all work with the farm. That was the theme. I really love teaching. I think it was something in my blood. With my great-grandmother and my mother and me, I don   t think I had any choice but be a teacher, but I wanted to be. I liked elementary. I didn   t go any higher than fifth or sixth grade.  Nykolaiszyn Well, you mentioned the Strip and the Coachman, so I was wondering what you guys would do for fun. So when you weren   t studying, where were you?  C. Roush Back then, we didn   t go home every weekend.  P. Roush No, it was too far.  C. Roush We were there. Course, there was lots of activities in the house, you know, retreats or different things that you might go somewhere on the weekend. I remember after we did house cleaning on Thursday nights, we would go down to Dewey   s Pizza. That later became Bill   s Pizza. I think it   s now the sporting goods store on Washington Street, about a block south of the AGR house, DuPree   s Sporting Goods, I think, now. That was Dewey   s Pizza when I was a freshman, and so we   d eat there. Then there was, like Pam said, the Coachman, the Patio, and then there was another new one came in just south of the AGR house, a little bit to the west of the Patio. We   d sit out on the lawn and watch for streakers. (Laughter)  That was back in the day of the streakers. Like Pam said, we met our junior year, and she was ahead of me because she did go to summer school. I   d come home in the summer times. She went to do her student teaching, so she wasn   t there the semester   . She graduated in January and took the job in Michigan, so I had to go all the way to Michigan to see if something might happen later on. We didn   t date very much in college because she wasn   t there. I think you did go to Pink Rose Formal and the Christmas programs   the time we were together her senior year.  P. Roush You came to the KD luau.  C. Roush Yeah.  P. Roush Yeah, I remember that. 14  C. Roush You were talking about undergraduate years there. One opportunity I did have that was while I was an undergraduate was because I had the background in meats judging and animal science. Dr. Walters called me the start of the summer of our junior year, right after Pam and I met. He called me and asked me if I wanted to do an internship. I was already out working on the farm with my dad, but he called me, if I wanted to go in on an internship in Chicago, Illinois, with Wilson and Company, which was a meat packing company. I accepted that, so I got to spend that summer, part of the time in Chicago and part of the time in the Oklahoma City plant, at Wilson and Company. That was a great experience I had because of the opportunity to do the meats judging.  Nykolaiszyn Interesting. Did either of you work while you were in school?  C. Roush I worked in the kitchen of the Alpha Gamma Rho house. You got your house bill cut in half. The house bill was ninety dollars a month. Can you believe that? That was for everything: food, living, everything. If you worked in the kitchen, which meant you had to get up early and cook breakfast and then help serve, I got my house bill to forty-five dollars a month.  P. Roush When I did my student teaching, I got a job over Christmas, wrapping presents to make me some Christmas money, but that was the only job I had. I was thankful my parents were able to pay for college, and I spent my time studying. He   s giving the AGRs credit for teaching him to study. I studied because my parents would   ve been very unhappy with me had I not made my good grades or at least Bs. I did get to spend my time studying, but I did have a lot of friends that worked. That was a challenge, and now I   m sure young people work, too, to work through college. That was a blessing to spend my time studying. Then before I met Clint, I got to go, my cousins that were Lambda Chis, I got to go to Lambda Chi parties, and that was always fun to get to go dance and have fun.  Nykolaiszyn Did you do anything else for fun around town?  P. Roush Well, I   m trying to think. What did we do? Well, I played sports. I loved to play tennis with my roommates. I didn   t play any   you played the college sports.  C. Roush Intramurals.  P. Roush Intramurals, I didn   t do that.  Nykolaiszyn Okay. Would you attend sporting events?  15  P. Roush Oh, yeah, we didn   t miss  We didn   t miss any. I didn   t miss any event that came. OSU had stars come to campus. Do you remember some of the singers and pianists, you know, what we all got to go to?  C. Roush Okay, yeah, the concerts.  P. Roush Yeah   Nykolaiszyn Allied Arts.  P. Roush The Everly Brothers     C. Roush The Everly Brothers.  P. Roush    and that great pianist   .  C. Roush Willie Nelson.  P. Roush We were married when we went to Willie Nelson.  C. Roush Okay. Sporting events, I   m sure we both, not together, we went to all the OSU football games, and I think then we wore a suit and tie to the football games.  P. Roush Well, I remember Homecoming. We dressed up, too, I remember, when you   d go to the parade. It was just such a different world.  Nykolaiszyn Well, even back then, Homecoming was a really big deal. What would y   all do to celebrate Homecoming? Would the AGRs do house decs?  P. Roush In fact, my sophomore year was the first house decoration of Alpha Gamma Rho. Ever since then, they   ve had great house decorations, but this was the very first one. Our sophomore year, we had a guy in the fraternity from Louisiana that his mother designed a Holstein cow, and we had Pistol Pete milking the cow. We didn   t have a lot of movement like the house decorations do now. Only thing was his arms were milking the cow, and that moved the whole cow. The theme was    We   re pulling for you, Pokes     (Laughter) That was the first house decoration. Then the next year at the house decoration, the Kappa Deltas and Pam and Alpha Gamma Rho built the house decoration together, so Pam and I got to work on the house decoration there. Homecoming has always been a great event. At that time, the Homecoming parade came down Washington Street and right in front of the house decorations. Our parents would come up there, and we   d stand on the lawn of the Alpha Gamma Rho fraternity and watch the parade during Homecoming. Homecoming   s always been a big deal for our family. Our children attend with us nearly every Homecoming at Oklahoma State. 16  P. Roush Yeah, they love the parade. They love the candy being thrown at them. We have fourteen grandchildren now, and the fifteenth   s on the way. Every one of them come (it   s been a family tradition) to the Homecoming, and we spend the night. We used to spend the night in Stillwater, and Clint would get hotels for all of us. I think we   re trying to get their blood turned orange, aren   t we?  C. Roush Yeah, mostly.  P. Roush Working on that, but they all seem pretty crazy about OSU right now.  Nykolaiszyn Did both of you go through a formal graduation exercise in 1969? I know you graduated early.  P. Roush I didn   t.  C. Roush Yeah, because Pam graduated in January, and at that time, they only had the one graduation ceremony. Yes, I wore the cap and gown in the end of the 1969 year there, and graduation was at Lewis Field. That   s what they called the football stadium then.  Nykolaiszyn Parents come up?  C. Roush Yes, they were there. They came up quite a bit, Homecoming, and graduations, and things like that.  P. Roush There was Dad   s Weekend, I remember, in the sorority, and Mom   s Day, and they all came. I remember taking my dad to the basketball game, and I fell asleep. (Laughter) He was a little surprised. Those were the good old days. It was a lot of fun to have our parents. I remember seeing pictures. His parents would dress up at the parade.  C. Roush Yeah, suit and tie.  P. Roush Yeah, it was really neat. You would buy your mother an orange piece of clothing. It was a cape or just   special event.  C. Roush Yeah, I was in charge of getting the Christmas present for our house mother, Mom Bea, when I was what they called Noble Ruler of the house or president of the house. They had these orange   what did they call them? They   re kind of like a coat. When me and Pam mentioned that, I bought one for my mother and Mama Bea at the same time. Got two Christmas presents taken care of.  P. Roush I didn   t know Mama Bea got one just like that. 17  C. Roush At Homecoming we bought the corsages for our parents, or for our mother.  Nykolaiszyn Well, you   re attending OSU in the late 1960s. What   s the climate on campus like?  P. Roush Vietnam protesters and things were going on. A lot of people were having the long hair; we called them hippies. I think it was before I ran into Clint, but I can remember on a date that we went to somebody   s house. Something was mentioned about marijuana being in the house, and I said,    No, I   ve got to go home. Take me home.    I loved the days back then where you had to be back at the dorm at ten o   clock or ten thirty, depending on what time   . Maybe on the weekends it was eleven thirty. I don   t remember exactly, but I loved it  You know, it was different than now. Now is not good, the way everything is run, in my opinion. I didn   t like the protests, and I didn   t like the hippie things. I didn   t really much like the music of the   60s, either.  C. Roush There were more liberal classes. Student Democrat Society, SDS, Students for Democratic Society, seemed to me a very protesting-type, liberal-type organization. One of the classes we needed to take in our curriculum was ag journalism, but the ag journalism was taught not in the ag school but over in the journalism department. One of the things that our instructor asked us to do was go out and to attend a Student Democratic Society meeting and write up a report or an article for that. There was a bunch of us ag students decided,    We   re just not going to do that.    The ones that went got an A, and the rest of us got Cs. (Laughs) One of the few Cs I made was in ag journalism. I think it was a time when more protests, more students thinking their own way, and,    We   re going to do it this way.    Streakers, we had streakers down Washington Street.  Nykolaiszyn Just to clarify, you both did not participate in streaking?  C. Roush No.  P. Roush Nor did I even see one, (Laughter) but I heard tell about it. KD house wasn   t located where yours was. You could have looked out the window, maybe. I know it was awfully exciting to be there if we beat OU.  C. Roush Oh, yeah   P. Roush I remember that  Wasn   t the street just covered with beer cans? I heard you couldn   t even drive a car down it or it would ruin the tires. Do you remember that?  C. Roush Yes. Our freshman year in 1965, the OSU-OU game was at Norman, and there was three or four of us freshman boys drove to the game. Went to the 18  OSU-OU football game at Norman, and we beat them in 1965, the fall of    65. They also played and beat OU at Stillwater the next year.  Nykolaiszyn Well, you didn   t notice anything odd being thrown in Theta Pond, did you?  P. Roush Did you?  C. Roush Yeah. Can   t remember the story, but it was something between Alpha Gamma Rho and Farmhouse that something got put in Theta Pond. I   ve heard of those stories, but I can   t remember witnessing any of them.  P. Roush Since you   re an AGR, you just don   t know about it, huh? (Laughter) I don   t know about it, either. I never heard the story, but I do love Theta Pond. I love to sit around it and walk around it.  Nykolaiszyn Well, are there any places on campus that hold special meaning for you?  P. Roush Well, I know you   re a librarian, but I did love the library. Back then, it really was a quiet place to study. I loved going by the fountain in front of it. The beauty of it and the size, I found it real special. I studied, and I had to study. I liked having that spot. It was comfortable and quiet. As far as, like, where to go, there was some neat clothing stores downtown in Stillwater. Bonnie   s, I remember that I liked to go down and shop downtown.     What do you remember? Stores or   .  C. Roush I enjoyed the walk from the AGR house to class. You headed towards the library, and then when you get to the library, you either got to go, if you   re going left, to the Agriculture, Ag Hall, where you had a lot of classes, or go right to the Classroom Building, or over to the business building. Always enjoyed that walk. It   s so beautiful there, Theta Pond on one side, the Student Union on the other side. It was a   I enjoyed that.  Nykolaiszyn Well, Pam, you went and graduated early and started teaching in Michigan. How did that come about?  P. Roush Well, I graduated early, and I wanted to get a job. Oklahoma paid four thousand dollars less than Michigan. How I got that, OSU, they put my name in that I was ready to have a teaching job, and I was called. I was hired over the telephone by, I believe it was the superintendent that I talked with. I accepted the job over the phone because you got so much more money than you did in Oklahoma, and I thought I would get rich. It was four thousand dollars more. I can   t remember what the whole salary was. When I went home and told my parents that,    I   ve a job in Michigan,    my mother said,    Oh, no, you can   t go by yourself. Your dad   s going to drive you.    He did drive me in my car, and he met my principal and helped me find an apartment. 19  Really, I really loved getting to do all that by myself, but I was kind of embarrassed. I thought,    Well, I might as well get married if they   re going to go with me every time I get a job.    It was special because Dad even found where I was supposed to take care of the car. He said,    Now, be sure and go in every month or so, and they   ll check the oil.    The principal, it was a female principal, and she was really special. I rode the school bus with her so that she wanted me to see where very child came from because it was probably a lower, socioeconomic farming group. They were just really nice people. Mainly, it was just a neat experience to get to know another part of the United States, and they were very friendly and helpful.  Nykolaiszyn Well, Pam   s off teaching in Michigan. You   re finishing up your degree, and you graduate in 1969. Tell me about what happens next. What do you do?  C. Roush Well, I might relate a little bit of the story that she was talking about. She was in Port Huron, Michigan. The spring break of my senior year, spring break, she wanted to know if I could come up to Michigan to see her. I flew to Detroit, and she picked me up at the Detroit airport. Then we drove north a little over an hour to Port Huron, Michigan, where she taught. I remember it was snowing on the way there. Over the weekend, we drove from Michigan across to Niagara Falls on the Canadian side and drove back. We did it all in one day. It didn   t seal the deal, but it got us a little bit better acquainted since we didn   t spend a whole lot of time together our senior year.  P. Roush Well, my roommate at our little apartment that my dad helped me find, she was a single girl from Colorado. We each had our own bedroom, so Clint got our divan. He was very thankful he didn   t have to have a motel room. I took a sick leave one day. You get three sick leaves, and I didn   t take any more. I did take one the whole semester, and that   s when we got to see Niagara Falls. It was a sight to see it partially frozen like that.  C. Roush From the Canadian side.  P. Roush Yeah, the Canadian side because weren   t we up high?     We saw it on the other side, too, didn   t we?  C. Roush Later on.  P. Roush Later on, a lot later on. It was just really funny, but I don   t remember inviting you. I remember you     C. Roush Oh, calling you? Okay  (Laughs)  20  P. Roush    wanting to invite   . My mother did not allow me to talk to boys on the phone or to initiate anything like that.  C. Roush So I called to see if I could come to Michigan?  P. Roush I don   t remember details, but I don   t remember it was my idea. It was good because it was good to see an Okie again.  Nykolaiszyn Oh, yeah   P. Roush We had a good time, and it made me think seriously about my future. I don   t remember that you proposed that weekend.  C. Roush No, we just talked. (Laughs)  P. Roush I did start thinking seriously that Michigan was really cold. (Laughter) I didn   t even have a garage to put my car in, and my door would get frozen. I   d have to get up next to the car and somehow get in, so it made me start thinking more about Oklahoma.  Nykolaiszyn How long did you stay in Michigan?  P. Roush Just one semester, and then I came back to graduate school. I forgot to tell that. I did get an opportunity to be a graduate assistant at OU. I really don   t like to tell people I have a piece of paper from there, but it was free. All I had to do was stay in a   can   t remember the name of the dorm. Do you remember, because we were dating? I stayed with two hundred freshman girls, and I had four graduate assistants under me. I don   t know how I got the top job. That was back in the day where the kids, the young freshman girls   they did a bed check. I didn   t have to do a bed check, but the four girls did with the two hundred girls in the dorm. The doors were locked at a certain time of the evening. My main job was just to check in to see that everybody was there, and then I did have to plan the social events, which was fun. I planned the parties for the dorm. One time, a girl overdosed. I had to ride in the ambulance with her, but everything worked out really good. She made it fine. Anyway, I got my master   s in guidance and counseling from OU in just one year, and that was the year you were in the Army. You were in the Reserves.  C. Roush Actually, before I graduated in 1969, I can remember me and two or three other guys for, seems like, every weekend of the last semester, we would drive around and try to find a Reserve unit, Army Reserve unit, or National Guard because when we graduated, our college deferment expired and we would be drafted. We were trying to figure out how we would serve the military, so we would drive around to different places. Actually, I think sometime in April, I found out at Clinton, right here locally, they were 21  needing some recruits to be in the Army Reserves, so I actually signed up for the Army Reserve before I graduated.  After I did graduate, I was called up to active duty at Fort Lewis, Washington, which is near Seattle, Washington. I served six months active duty in infantry, there in Fort Lewis, Washington. When I came back in November   let   s see. Pam was, you were already in graduate school when I came back. She picked me up at the airport in Oklahoma City, and we drove right to Stillwater to Homecoming. This is November and Homecoming. After the Army Reserve, then I took a job with Wilson and Company, the same company that I did an intern with between my junior and senior year. She was in Norman, and I was working there in Oklahoma City. When I got back from the Army, she had already arranged for our wedding. It was up to me to ask to marry her. (Laughter)  P. Roush Yeah, I remember that.  C. Roush She had the preacher and everything lined up, and I think   .  P. Roush It was Dr. James Sill. I told you about the professor of philosophy guy. I really liked him. I told him, I said,    You know, I was raised in the First Baptist Church, Weatherford.    I told him I would like for him to marry us, but you didn   t know you were going to marry me yet. (Laughs) He said,    Well, let me know when he knows.    He did the service with our pastor at the time, and so it really was really special. I don   t know how I connected with him. The interesting thing is his son is an attorney, and the valedictorian of  Clint   s  class married James Sill   s son. We are connected with them, and we have dinner with them in Edmond some. Of all things, for me to say,    Yeah, your dad married us     It was really great that it worked out that he did go ahead and ask me and figured it out.  C. Roush We were married in June of that   it was 1970.  P. Roush You mean May.  C. Roush I mean May, yeah, May 23, 1970, while I was working for Wilson and Company, and she was finishing up graduate school when we got married.  Nykolaiszyn Okay. So how do you get back to Stillwater for your master   s degree?  C. Roush Well, I was working for Wilson and Company. Wilson and Company headquarters was in Chicago. Right before I started working there full-time, they moved their headquarters to Oklahoma City. I was working at the beef department in the Oklahoma City plant, and there were twelve of us in the beef department. Well, they decided that Oklahoma City was not a very good place for beef because most of the feed lots and the access to the beef 22  animals were in Kansas, Southwest Kansas, Oklahoma Panhandle, so they cut back on the beef department. There were two young guys in that department, Charlie Bates and myself, who were both on meats judging team together at OSU. They decided to keep us and let go of some fifty-five- and sixty-year-old people, so I decided that I didn   t think I wanted to stay and work for that organization. Pam and I decided that maybe I should go back to graduate school in agricultural economics. We were on the job there for about a year, then went back that next August to Oklahoma State University. She got a job teaching in Pawnee, Oklahoma, and I commuted back and forth with some other people that lived in Pawnee to graduate school, so that brought us back.  Nykolaiszyn Pam, what grade did you teach in Pawnee?  P. Roush Pawnee, it was sixth grade. Again, it was a large classroom. There were thirty-five students, a lot of large minority groups. There were a large number of black and Indian students, not Spanish. I really had another good experience with them. The Indian boy was the president of the class, and he was a wonderful, straight-A student. His mother was head of the PTA at Pawnee, Oklahoma. This was just really a good experience, but it was a lot of kids in one room to have thirty-five sixth graders. We were really in there tight, close, but I thought Pawnee was a good school system. I taught there three years while Clint was driving back and forth. Then we started our family after three years. That was back in the day if you were expecting a baby, if you were pregnant, you had to go to your principal, and then he would send you to the superintendent.  You weren   t supposed to be pregnant and teaching school back then. That was against the rules, so when I realized I was pregnant and the baby was due June, I timed it so it would be a summer baby so I could finish the year. I didn   t look too pregnant in January, so I went and told the superintendent that I was expecting. He said,    I   ll pretend that you didn   t tell me, and you can finish the year.    (Laughter) I remember when we took the sixth graders to Oklahoma City, I was pretty big with child, and I didn   t get to ride the school bus. They told me to bring my own car. Anyway, it worked out real good. We had us a sweet baby girl and got to finish the year, keep my check.  Nykolaiszyn Clint, you   re working on your master   s degree, and what are you thinking your next steps are?  C. Roush Well, we had always wanted to raise our children on the farm. When I finished my master   s degree and did my thesis and everything, we came and interviewed at Southwestern, but at that time, it didn   t seem like it was a good move, and I had already been asked to go on and get my PhD. One of the people there who was very influential, besides my major advisers, was the head of the department, when it was Dr. James Plaxico, and he 23  encouraged me to go on and get my PhD. My adviser was Dr. Mike Boehlje, and he had been doing research, or he had done research, at Iowa State on transferring farms from one generation to the next or estate planning. He got me started doing research in that area. I finished up all the course work for a PhD in three years and had my master   s. Finished all the course work in three years and was working on the research, and this was back when we had a computer model.  It would be a big deck of cards, and we had to take them over to the Math Science building. Down in the basement they had the great big computer system, and you would run it. Something wrong, you   d go back and punch cards, and then go back and run it again and run it again. I had all the research done, and I was starting to write my dissertation. Then they came out with the Tax Reform Act of 1976, and that changed all the tax laws. I had to go back and decide how I was going to   . I mean, my research would be irrelevant, so we ended up looking at the impact of the change in the law. We had to reprogram everything, put the new law in there, new tax rules and everything in there. Also during that time, Dr. Plaxico asked me if I wanted to teach and do extension work in the ag econ department, teaching ag finance and farm financial management.  He said,    I   ll give you 90 percent of a full professor pay, and then you start teaching the class and doing extension work with farmers and ag lenders.    I really did enjoy that, and I kind of put off writing that dissertation. One day he called me in after I   d been on the job about a year, and he said,    Do you want to be a dead skunk in the middle of the road?    He kind of prompted me to go ahead and finish the dissertation, which we did. I really did enjoy teaching farm finance and agricultural finance because we got to meet a lot of agriculture lenders doing programs out in the country. Also, I knew a lot of students. The students weren   t too much younger than me, but, you know, a lot of those students I still visit with today. A lot of the students in the   70s took jobs in farm credit and became loan officers of farm credit and agriculture banks, and that   s been a lot of good contacts over the years there.  Nykolaiszyn Pam, you started teaching in Stillwater at some point, too?  P. Roush Yeah, when we moved, after the baby was born, (I think Clint was in graduate school) our first little girl, Cortney. I found a babysitter that kept Cortney and one other little neighbor girl, so just two little girls. She was a precious lady, and our friends across the street   . The little girl was just a year. Her friend was a year older; this is Christy. I dropped her off, and I got a job teaching fifth grade this time in Stillwater. The neat thing is the principal was a friend of my dad. That   s probably how I got the job, as I remember. He had a farm out there by our farm in Weatherford, and he was the principal at   . Argyle McLauchlin was his name, and Argyle, I   d known him forever. It was great to get to teach for Mr. McLauchlin, Argyle. It was 24  a real good school, Westwood. I guess it   s still there. I enjoy going by and seeing it again. Cortney, I picked her up, dropped her off on the way to school and picked her up right after school, and everything just worked out great. We did seem like, the way all that that changed on Clint, it took a long time for him to get his doctorate. Then another baby came along, another little girl. That was perfect, too, because then with that one I stayed home.  C. Roush I had a job then.  P. Roush A real job? (Laughter)  C. Roush She supported me for many years when I was in graduate school.  P. Roush I loved teaching, and it worked out just great.  C. Roush We lived on 1024 Brown Drive, which is the corner of Brown and Monroe, northern part of Stillwater, south of the airport. We actually rented the first house in Stillwater from a professor that went to Iran for two years. He was looking for someone to live in his house, so we rented that house. Then we bought the house across the street. Good neighbors, Pete and Zona Bell Williams, and the Goodwins, John Goodwin and Phoebe, and their children babysat for ours.  P. Roush He was one of your favorite professors. That worked out really neat that their daughter kept our daughter.  C. Roush We had some really good neighbors there in Stillwater. We enjoyed it. I remember my daughter Cortney, when she first learned to talk. She asked where Dad was.    He   s working on the   puter,    the computer. (Laughter)     When we left Oklahoma State University, I took a job at Southwestern, again, wanting to get back to raising our children on the farm. Pam got a job here at Arapaho school, and that was 1980 when we built this house. We moved back here in    79, and I taught at Southwestern Oklahoma State University. The interesting thing about computers is we bought our first desktop computer when we got out here, a TRS-80 Radio Shack Model III, which was one of the first desktop computers. I   d always been working with computers, and I kept the farm records on this desktop computer for her parents and my parents and did a lot of work with the computer. The technology has just advanced so much since then. We finally got moved back to western Oklahoma. That   s when we built the home we   re in now, in 1980.  Nykolaiszyn What year did you earn your PhD?  25  C. Roush Nineteen seventy-eight. I worked for six years while working on the, trying to finish my dissertation. I worked for six years there in the ag econ department, teaching extension work.  Nykolaiszyn Okay. So you moved back to Arapaho, and you   re teaching at Southwestern. What are you teaching?  C. Roush I taught in the school of business, management. I taught most of the quantitative management courses, the ones that had to deal with a lot of math, and I taught business stat. At Oklahoma State University, I taught the one class and did extension and research. Out here, it   s all teaching. We had to teach maybe four classes a day, every day, so it was different. It did allow me to get back home at the farm when we weren   t teaching. It was just twenty miles from Weatherford to here. Some of the things we did at Southwestern, which one of the things we did   back then, it was in the oil boom here in the late   70s, early   80s. One of the things that, with my background in extension, I kind of organized a lot of different, short courses, and we had them at Southwestern. One of the things we did was had a mineral owners short course, and we had a hundred people coming from all over the county coming because we had some outstanding speakers in this area here. That   s one thing I enjoyed doing at Southwestern. Also, I was the managing director of the Small Business Development Center, which we got to work with a lot of small businesses, startup businesses, here in western Oklahoma, doing that. That was kind of what I did at Southwestern.  Nykolaiszyn Pam, back here in Arapaho, what were you teaching? What grade?  P. Roush Went all the way down to second grade. Well, I did fifth one time, one year, sixth, and then back down to second. I stayed in second because they laughed at my jokes, and they liked me. You know, as they got older, they get a little not as much fun, and second graders were just a lot of fun. I loved reading to them, and I loved for them to write. They would write their books. I had parents come up and volunteer, and we   d go over and make sure the children had the period and their capital letters where they needed to, and if their sentence made sense. Then when the volunteer parents had gone over the work, then the children would come up in the author   s chair. They would sit up in front of the whole class and read their story as an author. That was a lot of fun to hear what they wrote. I liked teaching them to write, and reading aloud to them. Really, teaching has just always been a fun, special thing. Then having our kids go to Arapaho, that was really fun. I could make sure I knew who my kids played with on the playground and whether they ate their green beans or not at lunch.  Nykolaiszyn Boy, if they get in trouble   . (Laughs)  26  P. Roush Yeah, I knew the trouble they were in, and if they left their homework at school, I had a key to the building. No excuse, we   d go back and get it, so it worked.  Nykolaiszyn Was it challenging? Both of you had day jobs and then coming back and working on the farm?  C. Roush Yeah, she took care   she pretty well raised our children.  P. Roush Oh, they were easy.  Nykolaiszyn So when you came home from teaching, then what would you do?  C. Roush Well, change clothes and then go out and work on the farm. My dad was still fairly active in farming then, and we started, Pam and I started, farming. Actually, we bought some land before we actually left Oklahoma State University, so we were farming in the summertime, commuting back and forth quite a bit then. This gave me more opportunity to start livestock because I would be here every evening and early in the morning sometimes to help take care of that, but yes, we did. Our family time wasn   t that great. Pam did pretty well take care of that. We did have a lot of family time because our children, after they got a little older, were in 4H, and they had sheep. I got to spend a lot of time going with them to sheep shows.  Then our son was born a year after we moved out here, too, so we had Cortney and Sara and Rusty, then, growing up here in this home. Both our girls and our son were both involved in 4H, and our son involved in FFA, so we did spend quite a bit time there. Then basketball and baseball, we spent a lot of time with them. Pam got them ready for sports. Sara, our middle daughter, got to be on the state championship basketball team from Arapaho for two years. They were state champion, and one year runner up. Our son was in   both of our daughters, Cortney and Sara, played basketball and were involved in 4H, and they did very well in 4H. They won a lot of state awards in their sewing and baking bread and these types of things.  P. Roush His mother knew how to teach them how to sew. She was so talented. She could look at a garment in a store and just make it without a pattern. That   s how great she was, so that   s how my girls won anything to do with sewing and cooking. Plus, she taught me how to bake bread and things. We really, we were blessed to have a lot of help, and my parents were very helpful at Weatherford. They could fill in if I was sick, or if I was teaching and our child needed to go to Oklahoma City to see a doctor, they would take them. The same with his parents. Really, that   s how   talk about me raising the kids by myself. First of all, if you   re young, you can do more, and it was fun to be with them. We did miss Clint a lot, but he usually came back in time to 27  eat with us in the evening. (Laughter) We did fine with two sets of parents right here close to help us.  Nykolaiszyn Well, and then in the summer, you know     P. Roush Yeah.  C. Roush Yeah, well     Nykolaiszyn    you   d have a whole lot of time.  C. Roush At Southwestern, we didn   t   it was voluntary whether you taught in the summer school, and I did not teach in the summertime out here.  Nykolaiszyn How long were you with Southwestern?  C. Roush See, we moved out back here in    79, and I think in 1987   . I guess eight years. I went to part-time with the Small Business Development Center, and then in 1987, we went back to full-time farming. We grew up on a farm, but we didn   t really come back into full-time farming until we were in our thirties. It   s the same way with our son, Rusty. He didn   t come back until he was around thirty years old, also. You got to want to come back to farm, and your spouse really wants to enjoy that. He finished two degrees at Oklahoma State University; got his CPA.     Worked for ConocoPhillips and Chesapeake before he came back to the farm.  P. Roush We never dreamed he would, with those two pieces of paper, but we   re glad he did because it makes traveling a lot better now to know that we got a lot of good backup.  Nykolaiszyn Sure. Well, when you decided to go back to full-time farming, what were some of the changes you hoped to put in place, versus part-time work?  C. Roush Well   we increased the amount of alfalfa acres, which requires a lot more time, which you couldn   t do on a part-time basis, and we increased the number of cattle that we ran, primarily. Like we said, we   re fourth-generation farmers. Each generation brings additional experience and technology back to the farm. Our grandparents were in the   everything was done by hand and horses without tractors. Then our parents, mechanization came along. They got tractors so they could increase the size of their farms. Then when we came along was the computer age. We can use the computer for keeping records to making decisions and using spreadsheets and everything, so I feel like during our generation is more the computer age. Now, our son, the technology is information systems and data. They got so much information. They got the internet, precision farming. Technology is increasing so rapid. I don   t know what the next generation will have for 28  farming. It   ll be different. For my case after we came back, full-time farming was just increasing the cattle part of it and alfalfa hay.  Nykolaiszyn When you go ahead and harvest your crop, where do you take it to market?  C. Roush Okay, for our wheat, which is a large part of our crop land is wheat, it goes to farmers co-ops, primarily Clinton. Some of our land is close to Custer City. We take it there or the co-op in Weatherford. We   re really big co-op people, farmers working together to help themselves to market their crops and buy their inputs. I   m on the board at the Clinton Cooperative. Another co-op we worked a lot with is the Farm Credit Organization. We borrow money from Farm Credit Association of Western Oklahoma. Our cattle, we market them, try to market them at home through an order-buyer to go to feed lots, but we use co-ops a lot to buy all of our fertilizer and feed, and sell and market our wheat.  P. Roush They spray for us, too, and   .  C. Roush Yeah, put down the fertilizer.  Nykolaiszyn Well, when you look back on your time at OSU, how did earning your education there impact your lives?  C. Roush You want me to go first?  P. Roush Yeah, go ahead.  C. Roush Well, I think working with people is one of the biggest benefits that I gained at OSU. I mean, like being on the meats judging team, you   re working with people through a coach. You   re working with your instructors and your adviser. Then in the different student organizations, you   re working with people. I think that   s one of the biggest impact it   s made on my life, and it gave me   . Coming from a small town, small school, going to Oklahoma State University just gave me a better chance to work in groups and work with people and actually develop leadership skills in this area. Besides coming to OSU, the big impact was being able to meet my wife, Pam, which it never would have happened.  P. Roush We were blessed. As far as Oklahoma State with me, I think I just had such a good time. It was such a good experience. I had so much fun. I developed such loyalty, love for the campus, the beauty of it, for the football, the basketball team. I liked all the activities. I   d say Oklahoma State University provides not only a good education, but, you know, there   s just something about it that   s   . To me, I see the farm, the agriculture connection, much more than I did at Southwestern, way much more than I did at OU. I think all that, and then not to mention that I was so blessed to pledge this sorority 29  for not much time at all and run into his sister. I agree; the big impact was meeting Clint and getting to marry a farmer, come back to western Oklahoma and raise my kids on a farm. Perfect.  Nykolaiszyn And share your love for OSU with your children, as well.  C. Roush Yes, we do   Nykolaiszyn Well, when you look at your time at OSU, and you, of course, come back to the farm here in this part of Oklahoma, do you run into fellow grads in the area? Are there many in this part of the state?  C. Roush Oh, there   s quite a few in this area of the state. We see several, probably, every week. We see a lot of Oklahoma State people in our work with co-ops and our work with farm credits, and we probably run onto someone at least almost every week. For example, last week we were at Stillwater for the dinner that Gary Clark invited us to, over with the hotel and restaurant group that serves a dinner. We were at the ag econ scholarship banquet a week before that. Just this week, I was at a Farm Credit Association directors meeting, right there in the   . One part of it was in the Wes Watkins Center, and the other part was over in the Alumni Center there. Two thirds of the people there were Oklahoma State University graduates. We run onto them all the time, and our closest friends are Oklahoma State University graduates.  P. Roush My co-teachers were. So many of my co-teachers were OSU graduates, too. We love OU graduates, too. I have friends from both universities, but really I just think we   re so connected. Clint   s got football season tickets, baseball, basketball. It is kind of a long drive, so we found a little place in Edmond that we can manage at our age to get from our farm. About an hour and a half to get there, and then forty-five minutes to Stillwater. We can go to a lot more now, so it   s working out better. We love to get back to campus. I love to watch Clint have to give out scholarships at the ag econ through his CoBank board, and it   s just fun to still be a part of Oklahoma State. I don   t want to ever quit being a part of it.  Nykolaiszyn What year did you retire from teaching?  P. Roush Let   s see. It was the year  2001  when the bombing took place in New York City. Did I say that right? Yeah, 9/11 happened. I was teaching at Mustang my last year when that happened, and then I retired after. I taught one year at Mustang. All the years (I forgot to tell you) I was at Arapaho for, like, twenty-five years, but you didn   t get to sign up for social security. It didn   t make sense that I was going to retire and not have social security, and so I chose to go one year because I couldn   t convince anybody to change, and taught one year at Yukon at a school, Trails Elementary. Anyway, that way I 30  could pay into social security, but then after that, I haven   t been back. It   s been a long time.  C. Roush When we were young, the teachers voted not to withhold social security, which sounded like a good deal to us, but then when you get close to retirement   . I pay into social security on the farming income, but she could not even draw spouse   s benefits, which is half of my benefits. She couldn   t pay into that, except there was an exception if you taught the last year while you were working where you did pay in, so that   s the reason we did that.  Nykolaiszyn Interesting. Clint, you   ve been very involved with your service in agriculture from Farm Credit of Western Oklahoma, to the Clinton Oklahoma Farmers Cooperative, Custer County Rural Water District, the Cattleman   s Association. I could probably go on and on and on. Recently, you were inducted into the Oklahoma Ag Hall of Fame. What was that honor like for you?  C. Roush Well, it was real surprise.     Rural Electric, the co-op that provides rural electric service to us here, one of the board members, Bob Travis, came to me one evening and said,    Our board would like to nominate you for this award.    I said,    Okay.    The general manager of the Kiwash rural electric co-op wrote up the application with very limited information of me, and then a couple weeks later they came and said that we   d received that honor. It   s a tremendous honor. We got to go to the capitol, and our whole family (all three children and spouses, and fourteen grandchildren) were there. There were a whole bunch of Farm Credit and Cooperative people, people from Oklahoma State University     P. Roush Your AGR friends.  C. Roush    and Alpha Gamma Rho were all there. I think they enjoyed watching our grandkids (Laughter) more than they did watching the ceremony. We really enjoyed that day and our family getting to do that. We really appreciate that honor. It   s something that we   ll always remember. Really appreciate the Electric Board for nominating me for that, but it was a joint effort. We   ve been in this together for forty-six years. As far as board service, we just happened to be at the right place and got to know the right people and work with people. We enjoy any way we can support western Oklahoma and agriculture. It   s because of Oklahoma State University and the acquaintances we made there that we got to serve on these boards. The board that I serve on now is CoBank. Their mission is to support rural communities and agriculture with reliable and consistent credit. They provide credit to rural electric co-ops, to agriculture co-ops, to the Farm Credit Association. I really enjoy serving on that board because you get to meet people from all over the United States, and they all have agriculture at heart. 31  Nykolaiszyn Well, you returned to this part of Oklahoma; your family is very much involved in the farming operation. Is that very important to you when you look back on everything?  C. Roush Yes. When we look back, we see how our parents helped us to get started. They gave us a passion for farming. They gave us a passion for living in western Oklahoma and growing up on a farm, and we want to pass whatever experiences that we have to our children. Our daughters do not live close by, (one lives in Guymon and one in Edmond) but they definitely have an interest and want to continue to farm and own farm land. It   s in their blood just like it is ours.  P. Roush And our little grandchildren, they   re all little city slickers, but they know where potatoes come from because they come to my garden and they plant the potatoes around Saint Patrick   s Day. Then they come and dig them around the Fourth of July. My son and his girls and his wife are helping me. We have enough potatoes out there last year for three families, three big families. We were really proud because our   . It started raining; we   d gotten past our drought. We had water for a while. I loved doing that with my dad.     He grew   lots of vegetables, my mother and dad both. Corn, we   d plant   . His parents did the same thing. We would freeze corn, put it in the deep freeze. Big long rows, not just a garden, enough to last you all winter. That   s what farmers did back then. When I think about this generation, the way our parents had nothing, they worked so hard. It   s such a gift for them to pass on the land to us. Then what we   ve gotten to do, we   re so thankful that we can pass it on, too.  Nykolaiszyn Great tradition for your children and your grandchildren. Well, you know oftentimes we find when talking to alumni that they have a loyalty to Oklahoma State University. What do you think drives this loyalty to OSU?  C. Roush Well   it   s just   the acquaintances that you made there, and the people that you know that are on the faculty there, or that you got to know over the years that are on the faculty there. I think it   s just the relationships that you have with the people that attended with you, that were at Oklahoma State when you were, those relationships that last forever, and then your relationships that you have with the people that are there now, working at the university now. Like the department head of agriculture economics, Mike Woods, we visit quite often. It   s just a relationship; you   re bound to it, like they say, loyal and true.  P. Roush Amen.  Nykolaiszyn Well, tell me what your children are doing today.  32  P. Roush Well, our son   s farming with us, and his precious wife gets to be a stay-at-home mom. We   re so thankful we have one of the sweetest daughters-in-law in the world. Then our two daughters, the one daughter is married to a   he has his master   s in nutrition, and he works at the VA in administration. I think there are, like, eight other nutritionists that work under him. She gets to be a stay-at-home mom. I   m thankful that   I mean, I raised my kids. They had to go to babysitters, and I worked outside the home. As far as my daughter-in-law and then my middle daughter and even my oldest daughter, they all have college degrees. My daughter-in-law has a degree from OSU. My middle daughter has her degree from OBU  Oklahoma Baptist University , but she did go to OSU two years. Then my oldest daughter has two degrees from OSU. Yet they   re all stay-at-home moms, and we could never do that  We had no money. We   re just thankful that our children are able to do that. Not very many young women get to be stay-at-home moms in this day and age. They may not get to be forever. I figure they   re going to have to go to work if they want to put their kids through college. Someday they   ll have to go back to work.  C. Roush Our oldest daughter, Cortney, she got a degree at Oklahoma State University, and then she has a master   s in speech pathology.  P. Roush I forgot to say who she   s married to.  C. Roush Her husband, Jamie Oakes, is a CPA in Guymon, Oklahoma. It   s a family business; he   s the third generation of the Oakes and Associates there. Sara has her master   s in     P. Roush She has two degrees, too.  C. Roush    counseling? No, it   s testing.  P. Roush Testing, and got it at Southwestern. They   re both in education and got two.  C. Roush We   re very proud of our children, and what they   ve accomplished, and grandchildren, too.  Nykolaiszyn Well, we   ve taken a very quick fast-forward through your lives. What am I missing? What am I not asking? Is there anything else you   d like to add that we haven   t spoken about today?  P. Roush Well, I think we need to give God the glory for everything that   s happened. I liked what Clint said one time when he was talking. We feel like God   s providence had us meet the right people, being at the right place and the right time for us to meet each other, and for us to both be farmers and not this far apart. We   re very, very thankful to our Heavenly Father.  33  C. Roush We get to attend   we   re members of a church in Weatherford, Oklahoma, where our son and daughter and three of our grandchildren are members there. We get to be with them some, besides in just a work environment. We really enjoy the Trinity Baptist Church in Weatherford, Oklahoma, together. One thing at Oklahoma State University we have, that I   ve been a little bit instrumental in helping to get started, is we got two endowed chairs in Oklahoma State University Ag Econ Department. The first one is the cooperative chair filled by Phil Kenkel. He   s been there, well, probably   oh, I   m not sure when it started, but he   s been there several years. This all happened because our Oklahoma Farmers Co-ops and electric co-ops and Farm Credit Association all went together and put up money for an endowed chair, and this was right before Farmland Industries took bankruptcy. They matched every dollar that we put up, and they   re no longer here. Then the State of Oklahoma matched it so we can have a full-time, endowed chair in cooperatives.  Then he teaches the cooperative classes and does a lot of work with co-op directors and managers for training, and he   s doing a tremendous job. Then here more recently, the Farm Credit Associations in Oklahoma put up money for the farm credit chair. Rodney Jones is the endowed chair person there, and he teaches agricultural finance and farm management and does extension work with ag lenders and farmers in the ag finance area. All the Farm Credit Associations put together money, and then T. Boone Pickens matched it. It was part of his matching program. Then the stock market fell. The value of that endowed money, before we had the person there, went down, so CoBank, which is a farm credit cooperative bank, put in money to bring it back up to the level. Now we have a fully-endowed chair there in farm credit, so I   m real thankful for that. Not only do they teach, but they do work with the co-ops out in the country.  Nykolaiszyn Well, we definitely appreciate your support and loyalty to Oklahoma State University and all that you   ve done for this part of Oklahoma, as well, from education to farming. Just amazing, so thank you so much for sharing your time with us today.  C. Roush We enjoyed it.  P. Roush It was a great day.  Nykolaiszyn Thank you.  -------  -------   
