 Finchum Today is June the 20th     Lucas Good   Finchum    2016. My name is Tanya Finchum. I   m with Oklahoma State University. Today, I am in Cheyenne, Oklahoma, which is in Roger Mills County, and we will be talking with Congressman Frank Lucas. This is part of our Cowboys in Every County project, so thank you for meeting with me today.  Lucas Absolutely.  Finchum Let   s begin with learning when and where you were born.  Lucas Sixth day of January, 1960, born here in Cheyenne, Oklahoma.  Finchum At home or in the hospital?  Lucas In a hospital, in a very basic old facility in 1960.  Finchum Brothers and sisters?  Lucas Older sister and a younger sister.  Finchum A middle boy.  Lucas Exactly.  Finchum Were you the first in your generation to go to OSU?  Lucas The first in my generation, second in my family on either side to go to college that I   m aware   well, I take that back. I was the first OSU person in the family. My maternal grandmother was a graduate of Southwestern Normal School. She was a schoolteacher back almost a century ago. My 5  father, on the GI Bill after the Korean War, had gone through a technical program at Oklahoma City University.  Finchum Education was important it sounds like.  Lucas Absolutely.  Finchum How did your family come to be in this county?  Lucas Roger Mills County was open by land run in 1892. My family, both my father and mother   s family, weren   t here for the land run. The Lucases came from Indiana. My great-great-grandfather arrived in 1900 from a place called Peru, Indiana. Then two years later, my great-grandfather, and grandfather, and their family arrived and were here. My mother   s family came from east Texas. They were cotton farmers and arrived in 1905. While we haven   t been here from day one, both sides of the family have been here almost since the beginning.  Finchum At least at statehood, prior to statehood. Do you know how your parents met?  Lucas My mother was a graduate of Crawford High School, and my father was working here in Cheyenne. Actually, I think my mother boarded at, in effect, a boarding house that my grandparents Lucas ran. They were grocers at the time in Cheyenne, so all the way back to then and there. Both members of the community, lifelong.  Finchum So grocers, was that his primary occupation?  Lucas My grandfather Lucas farmed and was a grocer-produce guy from the 1920s to the 1970s. When the soil is as thin as it is in most of Roger Mills County, when the weather is as fickle as it can be in western Oklahoma, having a second job has always been a good policy. My grandfather Lucas followed that rule as a grocer-farmer. My father, when I was in high school and college, and for a year after I got out, was in the retail hardware business, a lumberyard here in Cheyenne, and farmed also.  Course, I   ve had a day job for a good long time, matching up with my farming, too. This is just a challenging part of the world to live in. Roger Mills County was one of those places that before the Dust Bowl of the   30s and the Great Depression, we had fourteen thousand residents in my home county, where we sit today. We   ve now made it back up to about 3,800, so a massive depopulation in the   30s,   40s, again in the   50s. It   s just a challenging place to live. You have to want to live here, and I do want to live here.  6  Finchum What do you farm?  Lucas Lynda and I are cow-calf people. She refers to me as the farmer. She prefers to define herself as the rancher, but we   re beef cattle. Until I was elected to Congress, we were wheat farmers too. The congressional schedule, where you   re in DC basically nine months out of the year, makes it really difficult because here, you need to be in the field when the conditions are correct. If you are not, you   ll miss your window of opportunity, but the beef cattle works very well. Lynda   s a very good bovine midwife, and she enjoys that part, and I come home every weekend. It   s worked out well, but yes, longstanding, multiple generations of farmers and businesspeople in this county and this community.  Finchum Let   s back up and talk a little bit. Can you describe the house you grew up in?  Lucas The house that I was raised in was built as an old two-story wood frame in 1916 on the place that my great-grandfather bought the relinquishment on. When they came in 1902, they actually lived for the first fourteen years in an adobe. Prior to settlement for a number of decades, this part of western Oklahoma had been leased out to big ranchers by the Indian tribes. On the place that my grandfather bought the relinquishment on in 1902, was probably some kind of a field camp for one of those ranches, so an old adobe house. In 1916, in a wet spell, my great-grandmother, I   m told, was not fond of living in a dirt house. Insisted that after   the old story was a rainstorm, a chunk of the wall fell out, and my great-grandfather was gone.  She and the girls then proceeded to kick the end out of the house, and announced when he came home it was time to have a decent house. Up from the creek in a two-story wood frame. When I was a little, little kid, I can just barely remember this, my father did the ranch-style modernization. Took the top story off, did the Frank Lloyd Wright, kind of sloping roofs, so just kind of a standard old wood frame house with stucco on the outside. Very comfortable, very pleasant, very 1960s-ish, but the foundation and the framework had started out as a 1916-standard farmer   s house, with a lot of kids.  Finchum Probably before your birth, it got electricity, I suppose?  Lucas The rural electric system didn   t make it to the farm where I was raised, I am told, until 1948. The Depression was really difficult on those kind of development things, but I remember when the local phone company laid the phone line. We   d had cooperative phone lines prior to the Great Depression, from the first World War through the    20s. Then the economic collapse of the 1930s, the phone co-ops out in many of the rural areas, not everywhere, Durham maintained theirs, essentially collapsed. We would go without 7  phone service for   well, until 1965. As a little kid, I remember standing in the road, watching that bulldozer pull that thing with the   putting the cable in the ground. It was really impressive when you   re a five-year-old kid who had not been very far from home.  Finchum Was it a party line?  Lucas Oh, party line, absolutely. We didn   t get away from party lines until I was almost twenty years old. Now, I remember as a young teenager the standard lecture. Remember, or bear in mind, that in the community I was raised in, lots of extended family, lots of neighbors who   d been neighbors for generations. I can remember my father reminding me, very clearly,    If you   re on the phone, understand whatever you say, the whole world is going to know, so bear that in mind. If you don   t want the whole world to know, you shouldn   t say it.    Yes, I was raised on party lines.  Finchum Do you remember your ring? Two longs, two shorts?  Lucas By the time I came along, it was a rotary dial system. You dialed by numbers, but if you were calling somebody in the immediate party line, there was a weird system of you had to pick up the phone, dial the number and put it back down. It   d ring back through, and it was a challenging   but it worked, and it was awesome. In the modern world, where people think they should be able to carry that telecommunication device in their pocket, and call the other side of Timbuktu without any hesitation   well, my children just get a glazed look when I say the phone line didn   t come until 1965 where I was raised.  Finchum Where did you go to elementary school? Take me through.  Lucas Little place called Crawford, in the local community up there. Crawford was still a first grade through high school when I started in 1966. In 1968, it was a part of the major consolidation going on in Oklahoma. The numbers, the enrollment in high school had dropped to the point that Crawford had to make a decision about close the school or retain the elementary school, what to do. It was my first real memory of the legislative   or I should say election process. I can remember riding, in 1968, with my parents and listening to them discuss what to do because the question was shall we maintain the elementary school or shall we close it all?  There was this lengthy discussion to the voting place, they went and voted, and got in the car, and we started back home. Apparently in their course of the discussion, they had not actually discussed how they were individually voting. It turned out one of my parents voted to close it all, one of my parents voted to maintain the grade school, and it was a very lively discussion all the way home. Feelings were strong. It made an impression on 8  me as an eight-year-old, so my first real experience in elections and the process, but from that point on, Crawford was a grade school. I finished grade school there. It   s since   since ten seventeen of 1989, the elementary school   s closed.  It   s all consolidated in with Cheyenne, but I went to grade school at Crawford from first grade to eighth grade, and then transferred to Cheyenne to finish out high school. My class at Crawford was one of the biggest in my eight years there. There were, on average, about thirteen of us. When I arrived at Cheyenne, my high school class was forty. To a lot of people thinking about this, that seems amazingly small, but by the standards of Roger Mills County in the 1960s and    70s, it was a really pretty amazingly large class. Very diverse group.  Finchum Were you involved with FFA or 4-H?  Lucas At Crawford in grade school, I was a 4-H-er. My father had been a county 4-H president back in the late 1940s, so he was a very enthusiastic 4-H-er. He   d also played baseball in grade school and high school, and he was a very enthusiastic baseball guy. Probably the only two times I ever really disappointed him was when I came to high school as a freshman, I had a whole bunch of cousins who wore those blue and gold jackets. They were doing all sorts of stuff, and I thought it was the thing to do, so I switched from being, at that point, a 4-H-er, to being an FFA member. In truth, I probably needed these glasses about ten years before I had them. I could never see well enough to play baseball, so I disappointed my father in both of those things. But at high school I was a FFA officer, was a sophomore reporter, junior and senior president, junior class president, one-time student council president, involved in the Key Club.  I was not much of an athlete. You have to understand. When I was a freshman in high school, I was six three, weighed 170. When I was a sophomore, I was six four and weighed 165. I had a young man, who was in my class, who was probably two inches shorter, who could jump two feet higher dead still than I could with a twenty-three-foot run. I spent my athletic career, what there was of it, sitting on the bench, making sure that if he broke something, I   d be there to go. Fortunately, he never did. I was the kid whose mother laundered the suit, in junior high, when it was issued, laundered it at Christmas, laundered it when I turned it back in, not because it needed it but because you had to do that. My sum in total of probably seven and a half minutes playing time for the whole season, (laughs) didn   t spoil the suit, but that   s okay.  As I said, involved in student government, a FFA officer, speech contest from freshman year on. Probably much to the surprise of a lot of my colleagues in, I guess, my sophomore year, I came just a shade short of 9  making it to the state contest in the banking division. My junior year, I won the PI  Personal Interview  group, won the district group, and was standing at the stage in the Student Union at Oklahoma State when the results were announced. It dawned on me that the fellow that I had beaten at district and I were the only two left as we were coming up the line. Ironically, the fellow who beat me at district   or I beat at district, I should say, beat me at the state contest. A little bit of a sobering dose of reality that you can   t coast. You have to continue to work, you have to press, move forward, but FFA was wonderful for me.  That was really my first introduction to Oklahoma State was when I was a member of the Future Farmers. The scholastic contests, the speech contests, being on campus. Again, coming from the county with 3,900 warm bodies at the time, a school class of forty, it was a pretty amazing place, just a pretty amazing place. The thing that probably impacted me the most, but I would also say as a member of the FFA in my junior year, I had an opportunity to lease an old farm. My maternal grandfather, because I was seventeen at the time, cosigned my lease, cosigned my note at the bank. You   re underage. Cosigned all that sort of stuff, and I set about aggressively to be a wheat farmer. I can remember my father lecturing me about,    Wheat farming   s not a certain thing, bear that in mind.     My 1978 crop at the end of my senior year was a complete and total bust. One of those things where you go back to the banker, and you say,    Let   s try one more time. Can we please?    (Laughs) Mr. Mails agreed to that, so I cashed out my deposit on a dorm room at OSU, went to a year of junior college. Farmed and worked every day, went to school, got myself pulled back together. My 1979 crop was as good as my    78 crop was bad, and lo and behold, then that fall I wound up in Kerr Hall. One of the disadvantages of coming in in a transfer mode like that is that you   re a little off-sync from the rest of your class and everything else. I   d been very careful in junior college to only take things that would transfer. Oklahoma State had a wonderful list of what would work, and I followed it very methodically.  By the same token though, having had the rough spell in my first attempt at farming on my own, having spent a year in junior college, and chemistry   s chemistry and algebra   s algebra, it probably made me a little bit better person when I arrived as a sophomore that fall. Yeah, character-building experience, but I would admit this to you. Probably the first time I really had the heebie-jeebies or the squirms in my life was as a sophomore, the first day of full class. Standing in front of Edmon Low, working my way from Ag Hall to somewhere and back or forth, and that mass exchange at twelve thirty, when there   s literally people   I   d never been around that many human beings before. (Laughs) It was just pretty amazing, just pretty amazing. It was all a character-building experience.  10  One of the things that I loved about Oklahoma State, and one of the things I wouldn   t take anything for was the diversity of cultural, attitude-wise, geographical background, the people that I was exposed to there. Now, I was an ag econ major, farming and ranch management option. I started out as ag econ accounting, and after my fifth class of accounting said,    No, I don   t believe this is really the double major I need.    The diversity of people in my ag school classes   I mean, we had people from every continent on the planet, in the agronomy classes and the econ classes, in student government. And I was involved my last three semesters in Student Senate. Chaired one of the committees when I was there, managed a presidential campaign, vice-presidential campaign ticket. That was a formal education I might add too, but the diversity of people, I had never been exposed. I was raised in a community with a certain amount of Native Americans, a certain amount of folks with Hispanic heritage, and there just wasn   t a whole lot of diversity. When I got to Oklahoma State, every kind of person from everywhere with every philosophy and every attitude. I mean, it was just awesome. It was one of those experiences that I wouldn   t trade for anything else.  The other thing that I left Oklahoma State with, and I will acknowledge this to you, for all the classes, and we need to talk about a few of my old professors and a few things that I think really were impressive. The underlying issue was when I left Oklahoma State, I had developed an understanding that you questioned all facts, you questioned all theories, you verified everything. You took nothing for granted or by automatic assumption. Now, some would call that a Doubting Thomas, but in fact, that was the real core, I think, of my formal education was it instilled in me those qualities I carry today, which is,    Really? Are you sure? Let   s verify. Let   s cross-reference. Can we do it better? Maybe if we try this, we can do it better. Let   s think about what we   ve done. Let   s think about why we did it. What do you really want to accomplish?    The formal education process, and I loved my ag econ classes.  I will also acknowledge to you a certain amount of the intermediate and upper division classes in those days, we took over in the business school. The business econ professors had a slightly different perspective than the ag school econ professors. Neither was wrong, but a slightly different perspective, and that was also a part of broadening the view. Oh my goodness, in my senior year, I had time to take some electives. I pushed very hard as an underclassman to get all the mandatory stuff, do everything necessary. I probably would   ve done my grade point better service by taking a few electives as an underclassman instead of waiting until the end, but I wanted, in the opportunities up there, to understand my community, to understand my family better.  The two classes that I will always be appreciative for were taught by an old gentleman, Dr. Manken, long since deceased. He was about ready to retire 11  when I graduated in    82. One was Oklahoma History and the other was History of the Old South, from Jamestown to the first shot at Fort Sumter. Oklahoma History was awesome because we got into every detail, both lovely and ugly, from the beginning of this region all the way up until 1982. That   s the first time I   d been exposed to discussions about things like the race riots in Tulsa in 1921. That   s the first time I had truly had a good explanation and understanding of what had gone on in that period of the Ku Klux Klan in the teens and early    20s, when it was a real fight to the political death. By the way, the forces overcame the Klan in Oklahoma, thank goodness.  The discussion about how, in the 1950s, when the rest of our region in the South was sliding towards Lester Maddox, and George Wallace, and those guys, how the governor at the time, Raymond Gary, chose to take us the other direction. Chose to desegregate the public schools, the National Guard. Chose to end the Jim Crow school system in his term as governor, and moved us in the other direction. Saved us so much misery, so much agony as a society in our state. Those classes were very important to me. Not that they figured in to how to run a ranch, or to do this or that or the other, but it helped put all the pieces together about what being an Oklahoman was. Why we should be so proud of what we   ve accomplished, and why we have so much that we are capable of accomplishing from this point forward. Those history classes were great.  One of the challenging things about being a member of the House Agriculture Committee, and for six years, either being the ranking member, the senior Republican on the committee, or chairman when we were in the majority. I pointed this out once to one of my colleagues because it   s a forty-some-member committee. One of the challenging things was listening to my colleagues, both Republicans and Democrats, through various farm bills, make certain points, give certain speeches. Having sat through all those ag econ policy classes, having sat through all those economics classes, and all you could do is bite your tongue because they sincerely didn   t know what they were saying. Didn   t have clue about how we   d gotten from the 1930s to that point, and then trying, in a polite way, to explain the facts, the history, and to persuade my colleagues to make wise decisions, wise judgements, wise votes in committee and on the floor.  My policy class under then Dr. Ray, I took   I can   t remember if it was the fall of    81 or the spring of    82, but it was right in the midst of all the    tractorcade    commotion back East. I guess it was    80   it was probably    80, the final part of the Carter administration. Dr. Ray, in the process of explaining ag policy from 1933 to that moment, had a very diverse group of students, from homes that had a huge difference in backgrounds. Pro-American ag movement, kids from market-oriented, kids from supply to management kind of homes, and watching him tread very carefully. Always 12  honest, always accurate, always thoughtful, always trying to explain how we got from here to here, and where we   re going. Dr. Ray not only taught me a great deal about agricultural economics and the history in the process, but the same fashion with which he attempted to explain some very, very actually complex notions in class that was understandable, I   ve tried to use those same techniques, those same perspectives, trying to explain to the people in my town meetings. This is where we are, this is how we got here, these were the decisions that brought us here, these were the good decisions, and some might say these were the bad decisions, and here is where we go.  Years later, when I was the ranking member, I believe, of the full committee, Dr. Ray was one of our witnesses in front of the full House ag committee panel on a hearing dealing with the general health of agriculture. Dr. Ray didn   t recognize me because it was a huge class, and he   s long since been at a different university, but it was one of those really nifty moments. I get to question the professor who   d question me rather thoroughly, decades earlier. In all fairness, the policy professor since then, from Dr. Dicks to Dr. Kampeche, have always been very, very helpful to me in my role either as subcommittee chairman or ranking member, full committee chairman, ranking member, through all the farm bills I   ve been a part of.  The department has always been a resource that I   ve called upon, always been willing to work with me. There have been times when a lot of good people around the country didn   t want to touch something as complicated as the Farm Bill. My friends at Oklahoma State were always   and I suspect not just the fact that I   m an alumni. I suspect if any ag committee chairman had called and said,    We   re working on this. Do you have any research on that? What   s your opinion on this? You have a little guidance or advice?    that they would   ve responded just as quickly to anyone, but it was particularly gratifying to me, having been one of the old undergraduate students.  Finchum And you were there from    79 to eighty     Lucas Eighty-two. By going to a year of junior college, by changing majors, I wound up on the four-and-a-half-year plan and graduated in December of    82.  Finchum How did you finance going? Did your parents     Lucas My parents and grandparents were cooperative in signing my notes, and helping me farm, and loaning me equipment. From the    79 crop on, and in all fairness too, the oil and gas business had really started to take off. My landlord, who basically I sharecropped the wheat ground, I paid cash-rent for the grass that they ran cattle on. Basically, my landlord took pity on me as a college student. Said,    Well, if they buy water for drilling wells, you 13  can have that, or if they do surface damage when they   re laying pipelines, you can have that.    He was very, very kind to me, A.C. McCollom was very kind to me. I minded my Ps and Qs and was careful with my pennies.  First football game I went to, I believe it was October 1979, after the wheat was in the ground, after the calves were weaned and sold. I missed the earlier games, but then I always missed the early games when I was at school because I was farming. My first football game   Cheyenne was too small to play football, so I   d not been to high school football games. I   d never been part of a football team, but I went to the game where Tom Osborne and Nebraska came rolling into town. That was my first college football game. I think they beat us thirty-six to zero. That was my introduction. Years later, I would serve with Coach Osborne when he was a member of Congress from Nebraska. Great guy, just almost as stoic in person as he was on television. That was my first football game, Tom Osborne and those giant, huge, incredible red and white RVs rolling in from the north. (Laughs) Yes, Lynda and I go to the games, and very enthusiastic supporters, but that was a tough period of time for the football team, back in the late    70s.  Finchum How did you get back and forth? Did you have a car?  Lucas I had a car. I drove back and forth. My    79 crop was good enough to finance me getting back into Oklahoma State, and was able to convince the banker that I needed transportation, and to finance that over a period of years too. (Laughs) Like all real western Oklahomans, yes, I operated on borrowed capital.  Finchum Is it unusual for a seventeen-year-old to do this?  Lucas For a seventeen-year-old? Well, yes. That   s why I had my maternal grandfather   because my mother and father had started a business, and everything they had in the world was mortgaged to begin that lumberyard, everything they had. My maternal grandfather, my mother   s father, stepped up and said,    Yes, this is an opportunity that you should take advantage of. Yes, I   ll cosign the five-year lease with you. Yes, I   ll go down and explain to the banker, that I   ll cosign the note with you to finance the cows, and some really wore-out farming equipment, (laughs) and first rent, and all that sort of stuff.    That   s the way I went. Now, my first wheat crop was horrible, but cattle business was a cow-calf operation, much calmer than being a yearling or a steer jockey, so to speak. It all came together.  Finchum So that was five years? That five years got you through OSU, that particular lease.  14  Lucas Exactly. Probably missing the September football games didn   t hurt me personally that much. The team and the fans did just fine.  Finchum If you were spending so much time here working and then studying, what would you do for fun?  Lucas The first couple years actually was a pretty calm lifestyle. I had roommates who were folks from the local community. Starting my   oh goodness, at the end of my second year, I was involved in the College Republicans. I   d always liked the political process, I   d been involved in student government in high school. I was really involved in that in the 1980 campaign and the    82 campaign. Then my final three semesters, I ran for and was elected off-campus, because I   d by then moved off campus, an off-campus student senator.  That was another educational experience because in those days, and I assume it   s still the same way, student senate was divided in two groups. Senate seats were allocated on living; off-campus, residence halls, the Greek community. The other half of the senate seats were allocated on what your college was. So many for ag, so many for vet school, so many for business, so many for arts and sciences, education. Again, a very diverse group of folks. I was elected as an off-campus senator. Having looked the situation over closely, I realized that was the best opportunity. In my final two semesters, could it have been two semesters, I was chairman of the SGA committee that had responsibility for student organizations. In those days, it was the only student senate committee that was actually half students, half faculty and staff because we had the authority to engage in disciplinary processes, we had investigative authority.  That was another good educational experience, learning to work with a very cautious faculty, (laughs) which is what they should have been. They were exactly fulfilling the role that they should have, but I worked my way through that. In those days, our biggest challenge was in the aftermath of the Iranian Revolution of 1979, we had two groups of students from that country who had dramatically different perspectives about who should and shouldn   t be in control. They occasionally disagreed on campus, and they occasionally disagreed in face-to-face discussions. We spent a good bit of time trying to keep everyone calm and focused. It   s kind of like Congress, calm and focused.  Finchum It sounds like politics, or political ventures, have been part of your nature since the get-go.  Lucas Absolutely. I found early on that being involved, whether it was high school, or college, or afterwards, if you want to make a real difference, you have to be engaged. Most people, whether it was student government in high school, 15  or SGA at Oklahoma State, the college political clubs, or even after that, most of the people who were engaged in the process want to make a difference. They   re dynamic, they   re enthusiastic, they   re bright, they   re fired up, they   re the kind of the people you want to be around. I enjoyed the process, and I enjoyed the people I worked around. I didn   t always agree with them. Still disagree with some of my old friends from college to this very day in different ways, but they were good, sincere folks. That sometimes   we live in a world where there   s a very cynical perspective about how all these things work.  Everyone   s engaged in the legislative process, or in working on causes because they want to gain something personally. That   s overwhelmingly not the case. There   s a bad apple in every barrel, but the majority of folks really want to make a difference in a positive way, like myself. I used to try to explain to my colleagues in the Republican conference that I came from a county that was a part of the region of the country that Mr. Steinbeck wrote his book The Grapes of Wrath about. Which my father, to the day he died, would lecture he wasn   t very accurate about Oklahoma, but so be it, but truly, like fourteen thousand people in 1930 to 3,800 now. It was a combination of living on the east side of the Rockies and the southern Plains.  Where I live, in an area where the soil is measured in inches, not feet, where it rains   one of the things I used to point out to the folks in the Midwest, when I was a member of the committee working on the 2012,    13,    14 Farm Bill. I would say,    You know, I understand you people actually pray for dry weather to plant, and you pray for dry weather to harvest. I come from an area where I was seventeen years old before I knew that you could have a prayer in church, at home, a family gathering, a school event, that didn   t have at least one call for rain     It never rains enough. I just can   t believe this. Soil, the weather, those things are what they are, but a lot of the agony of the 1930s and the 1980s was bad policy decisions by Congress, by the Executive Branch, or the Federal Reserve system.  During the Farm Bill process, I kept trying to explain to my colleagues that I came from the Dust Bowl, the abyss area of the 1930s. The misery that my grandparents    generation went through, and my parents    generation, the misery was made worse by bad mistakes. My goal was to use my education from Oklahoma State, my experiences from Roger Mills County, to make sure we didn   t repeat those mistakes. We   ll fight the weather, we   ll deal with world markets, but don   t turn us upside down with misguided interest rate policies. Don   t come up with farm policies that hurt instead of help. My goal was to craft a farm bill that would help, not hurt. I think I   ve accomplished that, and time will tell. My upbringing here, my life experiences here make me what I am.  16  Finchum Did your parents discuss politics around the dinner table?  Lucas My mother was not fascinated by the process. My father had worked as a volunteer in campaigns when I was a little kid, in the    60s. Governor Bellmon   s campaign at the time, Governor Bartlett   s campaign, House and Senate. He was one of those folks who I suppose, like myself, liked to be around people who wanted to make a difference. Felt he could make a difference, he could do things better. He was also a young man from the Cold War period, where we couldn   t have communism destroy the American way of life, and he was focused on all those kinds of things. He encouraged me, in a practical way. He was one of those folks who said,    Never give up your day job. Don   t step away from the farm. Stay focused.    He was exactly right.  Just as my grandparents, both sets, constantly lived in fear that the Great Depression was coming back, my father and mother were newlyweds in the drought of the 1950s. My father was convinced that this was the last rain, it   s never going to rain again. He was scarred like my grandparents were about the economy. He was scarred. In the 2014 Farm Bill, the provisions that deal with drought that relate to both crops and livestock are stronger than they   ve ever been. Those painful lessons from the    30s and the    50s, weather-wise, I did try to apply in such a way to make sure my fellow citizens would never suffer the way my relatives, my neighbors, had suffered in the past.  Finchum In high school and even younger, what would you do for fun? You weren   t always working on the farm, I hope.  Lucas I had a group of running buddies, and it   s hard to believe gasoline was still ninety cents a gallon then, and all over the world we ran. My latter part of my high school years, we were pretty much hooked up in the family business and the farming stuff. Every Saturday night, in a strange custom that no one would understand anymore that   s under thirty years of age, the dragging Main Street. Cars up and down, and all the socializing, and the winking at the members of the opposite sex, and all that sort of stuff. There was life before text messages and cell phones, you just had to be there face-to-face to engage.  Finchum Dragging Main Street of Cheyenne?  Lucas Cheyenne, and sometimes venturing off farther than that.  Finchum Describe the town back when you were in high school.  Lucas Oh, the town was probably still eight hundred people at that point. We had a movie theater on Main Street that was open every day of the week. Probably 17  in those days, still had one, two, three   almost all the time three restaurants, occasionally a fourth. I   m of the generation that came too late for the community to come in on Saturdays, for the big to-dos that my parents and grandparents talked about. But there was so many teenagers up and down the streets, and round and about on Fridays and Saturday nights. It was a glorious period of time.  Finchum A hamburger place or   .  Lucas Two hamburger places, and two restaurants are the way I would describe it at the time. Yeah, hamburger places were always very popular. Again, the world has changed so much. In those days, the gas stations, at least in this town, all closed at eight o   clock. If you were going to have enough fuel you better   no automatic pumps, no credit card things, you had to do a little planning. (Laughs)  Finchum Were you getting an allowance, or you were paid for work you were doing?  Lucas To think back on that, from the time I was seventeen on, I was farming, so I was pretty much financing myself. Before that, my first non-family farm job, when I was fourteen, I got a contract for a couple summers to mow the local cemetery, which might sound a little bizarre to some people. I was an independent contractor. It was basically   my father loaned me a vehicle to get there, up and down the dirt roads, and in strange sort of way   as you know, I   ve always been very enthused about historic stuff. It was just a fascinating education too, puttering along with push mowers, mowing that cemetery at Roll  Oklahoma , Silent Home.  I can remember one time asking my great-aunt why in certain sections of the cemetery were all these obviously young women and infants. Why is this full? That   s the first time I got a discussion about the influenza epidemic of 1918, the Spanish flu, and how it wiped out every pregnant woman, and every young mother, and every infant. It was horrible. I had seen the title in the history books, but until my great-aunt gave a very graphic description about how horrible it was   basically, her account said, and when I quizzed my grandparents, their accounts basically was when the flu epidemic rolled into this county in 1918, much like the rest of the country, everything came to a stop for several weeks. No one went out, no one interacted because they didn   t fully understand how the virus worked, and how those epidemics occurred.  The whole world just came to a stop. A lot of people didn   t wake up the next morning when they had the worst case of it. People wouldn   t talk to each other. Social society just basically ground to a halt. Once the scourge passed through, slowly things got back to going. Had I not mowed Silent Home Cemetery, and asked the casual question,    Why in this section   ,    and got 18  the answer from my great-aunt, who would   ve been, she   d been twenty-six at the time. A lot of her friends were in that part of the cemetery.  Finchum And it was called Silent     Lucas Silent Home is the name of the little cemetery at Roll, yes.  Finchum That   s an appropriate name.  Lucas Where most of my relatives are buried, by the way, where I have a plot, too. (Laughs)  Finchum Is that close to Cheyenne?  Lucas The north part of the county, between   the best way to describe the county, we are visiting right now in Cheyenne, Oklahoma. It   s where I go to church, it   s my post office, it   s the county courthouse, it   s the hospital, it   s where I graduated from high school. I was raised in the Crawford community, which is north and a little west. That   s where I went to grade school, that   s where my parents, and grandparents, and great-grandparents, and great-great all were all raised. For the last thirty-two years, I   ve lived in the community just a little north and to the east, Roll, R-O-L-L. We have our   Roll would tell you Cheyenne is a suburb, Crawford would tell you Roll is a suburb, but you understand how all that works. The central part of the county and the north part is basically where I was raised, and where my family on both sides have been since they came.  Finchum We need to back up too and make sure we get down exactly how you chose to go to OSU, why?  Lucas I was involved enthusiastically in FFA from the beginning as a freshman. The Greenhand Quiz, the speech contest. My sophomore year, I was on the meats judging team in the chapter. I did the leadership activities, went to state convention all four years, in those days, in the old Gallagher-Iba Arena, so I was exposed to Oklahoma State. I was very enthused about the FFA program, and almost all the state officers went to Oklahoma State. Most of the young men and women who were really active in the programs I was a part of were going to Oklahoma State, and I knew I wanted to ultimately stay in Roger Mills County. I knew I ultimately wanted to be a part of agriculture, so going to the original land grant university made perfectly good sense to me. The time that I   d been on campus in FFA stuff, my parents didn   t go to football games, that sort of stuff, baseball games.  Stillwater, then and to this day to me, comes across as either the smallest city you   ve ever been in or the biggest town. It wasn   t that difficult a transition as a community from Roger Mills County to Payne County. I was 19  comfortable. The people I respected were going there, or had been going there, or were going there. The academic programs I wanted were at Oklahoma State. My father said,    You can do anything, as long as it   s business.    Well, ag econ was the best combination of it all, and ultimately for what I did as a member of the state legislature, and now as a member of Congress. I mean, what   s economics? It is, in its simplest form, trying to allocate limited resources amongst unlimited demands in a way that generates the greatest possible return, satisfaction or otherwise. So it was the perfect place to go, perfect place to go. Yeah, it was all those trips in those half-ton pickups years ago with my chapter advisor, instructor, Mr. Kirk, who really sent me down that trail.  Finchum So maybe midway through high school, you had decided Oklahoma State was where you were headed?  Lucas Oh, yes. Probably, I   d say by my sophomore year. I   d figured out that was where I was headed, and I was attempting to be on course to get there. Oh, yes, sophomore year in high school on.  Finchum Did your parents show up for graduation?  Lucas I graduated in December of 1982 in a time when we didn   t have an exercise. We now have one after every semester these days, but in those days, we did not. I probably shouldn   t repeat this, but this is the one time that I infuriated my mother, because my younger sister is also an Oklahoma State graduate. I went with my parents to her graduation, oh my, 1984. I made some comment about the difference between her graduation and when I   d gone back in May of    83 to go through the process. Then it dawned on me, I   d never really discussed that with my mother, who was furious, absolutely furious, if I could stress that enough times. That was a mistake, but I was twenty-two years old, I graduated in    82, and they mailed me my diploma, and all was good. My friends had called me up in April of    83, and said,    Hey, we   re going through exercises. What size do you wear? We   ll rent you a gown and a mortar board. Come on up     (Laughs) So, I have at least one major faux pas of my life. I   ll acknowledge that.  Finchum She didn   t want you to do it?  Lucas No, my mother wanted to be there. My mother was furious that she wasn   t there when I walked across the stage and received the cover in 1983. She was furious   Finchum You just hadn   t bothered to tell her?  Lucas I graduated in December of    82, as I said. They   d mailed me my diploma, I   d gone home to farm, and do this, that, and the other, and work in the 20  lumberyard, and I just hadn   t given another thought. Then in April, my old chums, some of whom were still there and fixing to graduate, called me up and said,    Hey, what size do you wear? We   ll put down the   ,    whatever it was, thirty-five bucks, fifty dollars,    We   ll have you one waiting. Come on up, and let   s go through, and have a celebration afterwards.    I didn   t give it that much thought, but I made a mistake. It would be almost two years later before my mother would figure that out. As I said, she was furious that I had not told her so that she could   ve been there. I made a mistake. We all make mistakes.  Finchum If that   s the worst, you   re good.  Lucas I   ll live, but oh, my mother was furious, and my mother   s one of the most laid back people you will ever meet in your life, so it took something to stir her up.  Finchum Once you graduated, take us through your career.  Lucas Came home, I worked in the family business and farmed. Spring of 1984, my father decided to sell the family business, gave me an option to buy him out, or at that point, I   d been encouraged by my neighbors to run for the state legislature. My father basically said,    You need to be a business person, you can run for office, but you can   t do both.    He was probably right. In    84, I made the decision that I would run for the state legislature. My father sold the business to a wonderful couple, who still run the business to this day. Good members of the community all these years later. I ran against, or my competitor, I should say, was an incumbent, who   d been a member for, at that point, oh my, six years probably. His daughter had been one of my high school classmates. I   d had the freshman science in high school under him, but he prevailed in his re-election campaign. It was a six-county district, beat me thoroughly in five counties, but in our home county, I tied him.  In his home precinct in Cheyenne, and in my home precinct in Crawford, I won handily, so ran again in 1986 at the encouragement of my neighbors. That was not a good year, second term, mid-term Ronald Reagan. Governor Bellmon was running for second term as governor, not a good year. I lost by less than one vote per precinct, which is a terrible, terrible way to lose. It   s better to lose by a million votes than to lose by less than one per precinct. In 1988, basically had decided to get married, not run again, or as my father used to say,    Sometimes you   ve got to grow up.    The week before filing, ironically I was not quite married yet. I was sitting on my sofa at home. The fellow who   d beaten me, barely, two years earlier showed up on my doorstep, and proceeds to quiz me,    Are you going to run again?    I very politely spent an hour explaining to him,    No, I   m not running again. Yes, I 21  know filing   s Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday next week. I   m not running again. I   m doing other things, this, that, and the other.     While he   s sitting there, the phone rings. He gives me the signal,    Should I step out while you   re taking the call?       No, Bert, stay.    I pick up the phone, and it   s the governor   s secretary, Governor Bellmon. She said,    Would you hold for the governor?    The fellow who   s whupped me two years earlier is sitting probably as close as you are, well, why not have a little fun?    Absolutely, I   d be happy to hold for the governor,    and my state rep at the time got a really funny look on his face, and he got the signal,    Should I leave?    Governor Bellmon proceeds to spend twenty-five minutes explaining to me why we had to do things differently in the state. We have to have change, why it was important, he needed help, and bottom line was,    Will you run? Will you run? Will you run?     Bert listens to me explain to the governor why I   m not running,    I   m not going to run.    Finally, the governor says,    Why don   t you come down to the mansion? I   ve got a few people coming in,    this was on like a Friday,    Come down on Sunday afternoon, let   s talk about it.    If the governor invites you to come have a conversation, you go see the governor. I say, while my friend   s sitting across the way,    Yes Governor, I   ll be there Sunday afternoon if you want to visit. Thank you, Sir.    I spend the next thirty minutes trying to calm this poor fellow down, who   s about to have a heart attack. Basically go into the mansion and the governor, there   s six of us altogether, very persuasive, and persuades me to run one more time.  Now explaining to your fianc   after you   ve been beaten twice why you should run again is really challenging, really challenging. My wife   s a very enthusiastic sports fan, so I settled on the comparison to a baseball game. I said,    Dear, when you go to bat in the baseball game, if you swing a strike, a mark on the sheet. You swing another strike, another mark on the sheet. If you swing the third time and you miss, you   re out. If you hit the ball, you get a base     She understood what that meant was one more time.    I   ll tolerate this, but if it doesn   t work, then it   s over.    I ran, and the fellow who beat me by ninety-some votes, I beat by fourteen hundred and ninety-some votes. Re-elected twice by bigger margins.  In 1994, my predecessor from Congress in the old sixth district, announced that he was going to leave mid-term to go do something differently, so it was a special election. Many of the same people who encouraged me to run in    84, and    86, and    88, they said,    Oh, you   ve to do this. You   ve just got to do this.    I had come to realize in the state legislature that 85 percent of the things that torment people didn   t come from Oklahoma City. It came from the nation   s capital, so I ran. Had four opponents in the primary, four good people. A state senator from Oklahoma City, state rep from Canadian County, an oily, and I use that term affectionately, from Enid, a car dealer 22  from Guymon. In their four home counties, they had something like 75 percent of the primary vote. In my home county of Roger Mills, I had, I think it was like two-tenths of a percentage point, not even one percent of the primary vote. It meant in the special election that I couldn   t sit on my laurels. I had to work, and work off.  They all assumed that their bases would carry them. Prevailed in the   came in second in the runoff, won the special general, then been there ever since, through re-districtings, all sorts of stuff. The irony that it took three times to get to the legislature, a lot of persuasion from Governor Bellmon on that final go. You   ve not lived until you ask your contributors to contribute the third time after losing twice. It   s kind of like asking your fianc   to let you run one more time when you   ve been beaten twice. It has made me a better candidate, and I think it   s made me a better person.  I always tell people the greatest danger that any officeholder or any candidate for office can have is when he or she starts to believe their own campaign literature. You have to be grounded, you have to stay close to the real world, which is another advantage of where I live, where I   m from in Roger Mills County. My neighbors don   t address me as the Congressman. They see me at the feed store, they see me at the ballgames, they see me at church, they see me at the vet. They treat me just like everybody else, which is good for me, and it   s important in my relationship with them, because I may not always be a member of Congress, but I always want to be a member of this community. Being able to come home and be a member of the community, whether it   s next weekend, or the next thirty-seven years, or fifty-seven years, is very important to me.  It all goes back, so much of it, to my upbringing by people who survived the Depression. My public school education, a little bitty grade school, a small high school in all fairness, a year of character-building in probably the smallest junior college in Oklahoma at the time, and then to be launched into the comprehensive university, the land grant in Oklahoma at Oklahoma State. The things I went through, the things I experienced, the things I learned about the past, and what made the people that I knew, I know, were only enhanced at Oklahoma State. It   s like those ag econ classes. I could never been chairman of the committee. I could never have gotten us past this horrible impasse. It took two and a half years to pass the Farm Bill, it should   ve taken six months, in the difficult environment we   re in. Had I not had all of those lectures, had I not been through all those exercises, had I not been a part of all that.  By the same token, whether it was the elective history classes that provided me insights into my community and my family, or   when I was maybe two more semesters to go, I persuaded my faculty advisor, Dr. Franzmann, great guy, to let me take a stat class over in the poli sci department. It took some 23  persuading, but he finally agreed. It turned out to be a class that was all about polling. How do you put samples together, how do you write the questions, how do you train the callers, how do you interpret. Now, in the profession I   ve practiced for some time now, those are a very important set of things to understand. It   s why I trust no one   s polls.  I   m distrustful of every poll, because having spent time in that class and having understood in the lectures how just training the callers to use the inflection of their voice will affect the outcome of the poll. That   s not even manipulating the questions, just the inflection of how the questions are asked. Not even manipulating the sample survey. It was one of those great experiences at Oklahoma State that has taken a person from an itty bitty county, and made them number fifty-five out of 435 members in seniority, and survived eleven elections.  But for all those experiences, I would not be the person I am had I not gone to Oklahoma State. Everything before that prepared me to be in a position to utilize because we   ve all seen circumstances where people are exposed to the most insightful things, the greatest character-building experiences. But if you don   t understand why you should absorb it, if you don   t appreciate it, if you   re not careful to utilize it, then it   s for waste.  Finchum Did any of your classes help prepare you for asking for money?  Lucas (Laughs) You know, I don   t know that anything ever prepares you for soliciting contributions in anything in life. There   s one other class I do have to mention, and I assume it   s still the case, but in those days, we had senior seminar in ag econ. The department head, two hours a week, for one semester, for all of us who were about to graduate in it, and we went over everything imaginable. How to do interviews, what kind of haircut to have, what compensation was appropriate. I remember the lecture on if you   re pursuing a career in a true ag-related job, go home and roll some barbwire up the weekend before because you want to show that you do things. It was the nuts and bolts    We   re about to open the door and send you out into the real world    lecture for a semester.  Dr. Osborne told us one day, towards the end of the seminar, the semester, he said,    You   re young men and women, you   re going out into the world. Wherever you finally settle, whatever you decide to do, you need to think about the kind of people that you   ll interact with. You   ll need to make your life work.    He said,    You need to find a young lawyer, you need to find a young doctor, you need to find a young accountant, a young plumber, a young electrician.    Someone made some comment, and he said,    You   re twenty-two, twenty-three years old. Do you want someone that you   ll be able to depend on for the next thirty or forty years, or do you want to change every decade?    24  Just little things that on the surface seem silly, but he was exactly right. In life, it   s all about relationships, whether it   s the heat and air person, or it   s your banker, or your doctor. Once you develop the relationship, once you develop an understanding of them and they understand you, then things are so much more productive. As he said, people that you   ll be able to have these relationships with for a long time. A fascinating point he made, fascinating point. Now at fifty-six, I can tell you he   s right. He   s right   Dr. Osborne was right, so senior seminar was an awesome experience too, and Dr. Ortman and that freshman intro agricultural economics class. It took me a while to understand that they were very careful to enroll ag econ majors first. Then they would let business econ people in, because everybody understood how strong the fundamental intro class was. If you hadn   t reserved it for students in the major first, every business   well, this shows a little prejudice on my part, but at least in the 1980s, every business econ major would   ve been there first because they understood how strong the fundamental program was. I thought about having the phrase    the inelasticity of demand    engraved on the back of my tombstone, the amount of time we spent on that very fundamental principle that drives all agricultural economics policies.  Finchum Elasti....  Lucas The inelasticity of demand. It was the donut lecture. The professor would bring in a big box of donuts to a bunch of hungry underclassmen. He   d say,    These donuts cost money. I   m going to sell them to you.    He   d sell the first two or three for five dollars apiece because some fool was starving, and then the next donut would be four dollars, and eventually get to a dollar apiece, then pretty soon it would be fifty cents. Then everyone who had breakfast that morning wouldn   t want anything to do with them, and ultimately, the last three or four, he   d give you fifty cents to take the thing off his hand, to get rid of it. The inelasticity of demand, you either have enough to eat or you don   t, and there   s no gentle curve in between. That   s the same expression my wife gives me, who told me years ago never to discuss this again in public, but the fundamental program was awesome in the ag econ department.  Finchum Well, those connections that you made through that program, are any of them on the Hill with you?  Lucas Ironically, my lead economist when we did the Farm Bill, not of my generation, but Bart Fischer, undergraduate, his master   s may be from Oklahoma State. He put off finishing his PhD at Texas A M to come work with me, but the best and brightest young economist I could find was an Oklahoma State person. The folks that were in my group, and for that 25  matter, the ones in student government, I still interact with. They   re lobbyists, they   re politicians, they   re stuff, they   re just all scattered around. Part of the challenge we faced in graduating in the summer of    82, well, I left in December of    82. Eighty-two was the year that Penn Square Bank went down, the oil and gas business collapsed, and we went through a failure in agricultural prices.  A whole bunch of my really bright classmates who went into banking, or farm credit, or insurance, or in a variety of ag-related businesses, in the contraction, all had to start all over again. I was fortunate enough, coming home to farm, that I weathered the worst of that storm, but it was a tough time. It just   when I was a young man, we had an agronomist at the local, then Soil Conservation Service. I believe Matt was either a    32 or    33 graduate of Oklahoma State, talking about   I can remember him discussing how tough it was, graduating in the depths of the Depression, to get a job. Sometimes your luck, or your timing, or a combination of the two, makes life simple or really hard. It was a little challenging for my classmates in    82,    83, and    84, just as it   s been a little challenging for undergraduates probably in the last couple years here at home. It   ll get better as long as you have that fundamental education. As long as you have that wonderful Oklahoma State diploma, opportunities will be there.  Finchum How much time do you spend in DC versus here during the course of a year?  Lucas The good number is about nine months we   re in session and then three months out. We   re typically out the month of August, and then depending on how things wind up, much of December, and a week for Memorial Day, and a week for the Fourth of July, and that sort of stuff. I fly back and forth virtually every weekend. I   ve crossed the four-million-mile mark with American Airlines.  Finchum No private pilot license?  Lucas No, that   s too complicated for me. Remember, if I couldn   t hit a baseball, I   m not sure I could hit the runway. (Laughs) Coming back and forth has been a good thing. Many of my colleagues do that. I serve with a lot of people, who basically move their families up there and stay. That   s probably not one, in the best interest of the member and his or her ability to maintain their perspective, but I wanted my children to grow up to be Oklahomans. Two of our three are Oklahoma State graduates, and I   m very proud of that.  Finchum By choice, not by mandate?  26  Lucas No, there was only one place they couldn   t go, and we won   t talk about that today. They made the right judgement call. Our oldest daughter went a year at Southwestern at Weatherford, and she chose to elope.  Finchum That happens, too.  Lucas It happens. It was wonderful, and I   ll persuade her to go back someday.  Finchum While you   re in DC, is there an OSU alumni group?  Lucas There   s two groups that we interact with a lot. Oklahoma State Society, and that   s virtually everyone with Oklahoma roots, and then there   s the alumni chapter. They tend to host a lot more events on weekends or game evenings. It   s a great rallying point, especially among the younger and the older ones. My challenge is I get on a plane on Thursday or Friday and come home. You   ll see me at the stadium in Stillwater, or you   ll see me at Gallagher-Iba in person, when the schedule works. My wife   s a very fanatical Oklahoma State fan.  Finchum We should back up, and say what   s her name, and how you met her.  Lucas Lynda Lucas. We went to high school together here     Finchum So she   s from Cheyenne?  Lucas    in Cheyenne, yes. She went her first two years at Oklahoma State and then finished the teaching degree at Southwestern. Lynda Lucas is one of those folks who wants   and we sit out with everybody else, in the open air. I turned to her in a game one time, and I said,    Dear, you are a Baptist deacon   s daughter. You are a congressman   s wife. You really can   t say that about the referee.    She looked back at me and said,    Make me.    I went and bought a soda and brought her one. Just a little anecdote about the intensity of her enthusiasm for the orange and black, and supporting the teams.  One of the happiest days, I think, was when our middle child was still in college and circumstances worked out   . When   s the last year we played in the World Series, 1999? Anyway, I sent Ashley and Lynda to Omaha, to watch OSU play in the World Series, College World Series, baseball. You   d have thought it was Christmas every day for a while after that.  Finchum You should send them this year.  Lucas It   s been discussed, I promise. (Laughter) She backed up her calving season. Lynda   s the herdsman, and she backed up her calving season. My father and most   my late father and most of the neighbors would tell you, start calving the fifteenth of February. Well, Lynda   s backed it up so we don   t calve until 27  after March Madness is over because it can   t interfere with her watching the team, supporting the team.  Finchum And having not graduated from there, that   s pretty good.  Lucas Yes, she just is enthused.  Finchum We   ll consider she   s an alum, since she spent two years there.  Lucas Absolutely.  Finchum Well, did your mother go to your daughters    graduations?  Lucas No, by that time, my father   s health had started to fail.  Finchum That might   ve made up for some of the   .  Lucas As I said, I enthusiastically went with my mother and father to my sister   s graduation when she graduated from the hotel and restaurant program, then later went to OCU  Oklahoma City University  and earned a law degree.  Finchum Do you have a lot of orange in your closet?  Lucas Absolutely.  Finchum Any OSU room in the house?  Lucas That   s best described as the bedroom because there   s the footballs from the bowl games, and then there   s the one helmet. Then there   s all the metallic stickers from the various things on the refrigerator door. Then there   s the short-sleeved shirts for certain times a year, and then there   s the long orange shirts. My bride, who   s in charge of this, tells me that there   s different styles of logos, reflecting different periods and certain shirts that are supposed to be worn to baseball games, or certain shirts to wear to football games, or certain shirts to wear to basketball games. I let the expert on the protocol dress me out. I used to kid former colleague, Wes Watkins, that I didn   t own any orange boxers like I was sure he owned, but I had everything else. (Laughter)  Finchum Is the Christmas tree OSU?  Lucas There are ornaments on it, yes.  Finchum You mentioned you went to church. Church was a very important part of your life from childhood on?  28  Lucas Yes, and it   s still. Perhaps outside of being amongst forty-something thousand OSU fans at an event, it is still when I   m at home, at my church here at Cheyenne. There   s still a certain sense of family, community, warmth, and course, the reason we   re all there.  Finchum On Sunday afternoons, growing up, would they all come to your house for dinner, the family, brothers and sisters?  Lucas In my youth, my grandmother Lucas, from the time that my grandfather   s health felled to the point that he would go to the nursing home, she and I would go to church together and then go back to my parents    house for Sunday lunch. Since Lynda and I   ve had kids of our own, and especially now that they   re grown, two of the three live in the community, I always do lunch, whether it   s at home or at one of the local restaurants after church, which is a   I come from a family where that meal is a social event. That is a business session, that   s discussion, it   s just catch-up, it   s everything, so that   s an important part of every Sunday afternoon. Lynda   s rule is if you don   t go to church, she   s not feeding you lunch. (Laughs) Spoken like a good Baptist girl that she is.  Finchum Then after lunch, what would you typically do?  Lucas Typically, either go see   when the kids were young, basically go home. In late years, either spend time with my in-laws, here in town. They   re now getting a little older, or   my father   s passed away five years ago. My mother   s still alive, go see my mother. Her favorite thing, on a Saturday afternoon or a Sunday evening, depending on the schedule is to take her to Sonic. You don   t have to dress up to go to dinner there, remember, and when you   re eighty-four, you should be able to do what you want to do in the most comfortable of fashions.  Finchum And where   s the closest Sonic?  Lucas That   s forty-five miles away. When my son was probably thirteen or fourteen, I observed one time, when he was in DC with me, someone asked him,    How far out in the country do you live?    He said,    The nearest pizza place is forty-five miles away.    (Laughs) Well, what is the focus of a thirteen or twelve-year-old on? The pepperoni.  Finchum And what town would that be?  Lucas We   re about equal distance between Shattuck, or Elk City, or Woodward in the other direction, for those kind of franchise food places.  Finchum Well, I-40 probably helps a lot with your going back and forth to the airport.  29  Lucas Oh yes. In all the trips I   ve made between the airport and home I can tell you which part of the year the deer cross the road on the interstate, or on the state highway, or on the county road. I can tell you where you   re most likely to encounter an armadillo in the spring or the fall. I can tell you, and I say this respectfully, especially on the county roads, which neighbor does the best job of keeping his cows in and the fences up because I   m very careful to avoid the obstacles. (Laughs)  One thing I have, with time, adjusted, when the kids were little   I   ll be honest with you, when session was over, I was so frantic to get home, I was just frantic. Now that everyone   s out of college, and two of the three have their own families, and grandkids, I   m a little calmer. If I can   t leave Oklahoma City before ten-thirty at night, I   ll just spend the night because ten-thirty means I   m getting home at about one o   clock in the morning. I don   t react as well at twelve forty-five, one o   clock in the morning anymore to the wildlife moving across the roads.  Finchum Turtles were an issue recently.  Lucas (Laughs) Turtles, absolutely, along the creeks, those big ol   snapping turtles, yes.  Finchum You were elected to Congress in    94, so twenty-two years. Make it a thirty-year career, a thirty-plus-year?  Lucas There are two groups of folks that ultimately decide this. One is Lynda Lucas, and the other are the 750,000 folks that I represent. We have term limits in the Republican Congress. I spent my six years as chairman of the Ag Committee, and I   ve timed out. I   m also senior on Financial Services Committee, banking, stock markets, that sort of stuff. The other committee I   m senior on is Science, National Science Foundation, NASA, National Weather Service. If my neighbors will give me the opportunity to continue to represent them, in a couple years there will be a chance to either be chairman of the Financial Services Committee or the Science Committee.  Most of my constituents would be very enthusiastic about Financial Services because that   s the committee with jurisdiction over the cost of and the availability of credit. Oilies, Aggies, we operate on borrowed money, main street. The fun committee, just a fun committee would be the Science Committee. You can imagine what my old friends at Oklahoma State would think about that. National Science Foundation, as I mentioned a moment ago, the NASA stuff, all the other things, it   s just a fun committee. We live in a very cynical time. We live in a time where a lot of the national media has a very short-term focus, but the things that we are doing. The telescopes in orbit around the earth that look at every wavelength of light, that are looking almost to the beginning of beginning. The research projects that we 30  fund at the National Science Foundation, the base at the South Pole at McMurdo  Station  on the Antarctic continent. All of the other things going on. It   s really an amazing period of time. The supercolliders smashing atoms, and going smaller, and smaller, and smaller.  I   ve been with the Science Committee to a facility that we   re helping finance in the south of France that if it is successful that will actually potentially make the concept of fusion power, splitting water to generate electricity, without any hazardous waste leftover. They   re just things that are so close to major accomplishments, but first off, Lynda and my neighbors have to agree. Then the circumstances have to work out back East.  Finchum And then you have to ask for money again.  Lucas The constitution, of course, has House members at two years, senators at six with a third running every two years, presidents for four-year terms. They wanted to keep us close to people. They wanted to make sure the citizens would have the ability on a moment   s notice   well, twenty-four months is twenty-four months, but relatively a moment   s notice to get our attention or make our changes. That   s really not a bad thing. Even though it makes the campaign work almost consistent, it   s not a bad thing. If you look historically at the re-election rate for presidents, US senators, or members of the United States    House, the re-election rate in the last forty years has been upwards of 90 percent in the House. It   s only been upwards of 60 percent in the Senate, and ask Lyndon Johnson, George Herbert Walker Bush.  There are a number of folks you could ask about how certain re-elections are to be president. The reason our number is so much higher is that that two-year term keeps you focused  I do thirty-two town meetings a year in my thirty-two counties. I   ve done it since the beginning. Things like that, coming home, being available. Remember, I mentioned a while ago, why it was important for me that my children grow up in Oklahoma, not in DC. I want them to be Okies, and two of them are even Oklahoma State graduates, I want them to be Okies. It   s hard for members who won   t stay amongst their constituents, who won   t go home, who want to depend on polling to understand what   s going on here. They wind up in that 10 percent.  If you focus   as I said, my father started a hardware store, a lumberyard here, when I was a junior in high school. He sat me down one day and said,    Your mother and I have mortgaged everything we have in the entire world to start this business. This is a community that is not physically growing. It   s not really shrinking, but it   s not growing, so we have a finite, a set number of customers. If we make any of those customers mad, we can   t replace them, so we have to keep every customer we have because everything in the world we have is on the line in this business.    I   ve tried to conduct myself as a member of Congress in that same spirit. Keep the support of every 31  constituent, keep the support of every industry within my district that   s trying to make things better, and eleven terms later   . The public will figure you out if there   s a problem. The voters are pretty smart, a lot more than sometimes the national media gives them credit for.  Finchum In those twenty-two years, have you had a highlight or two? If you just had to pick one or two?  Lucas Passing the Farm Bill when no one thought we could do one. It took two and a half years because that not only, I   d like to think, is a reflection of my dedication and commitment to the cause, but that   s using my university training to its nth degree. Creating policy, so I   m very proud of that. Creating the Washita Battlefield National Site out here, commemorating   maybe that   s not the appropriate phrase, remembering the clash that took place, west of town in 1868, between George Armstrong Custer, Civil War general, Indian War general, and the Cheyenne Arapahos, where Plains Indian culture and westward settlement slammed into each other so violently. We have to remember the bad things as well as the good so that we don   t repeat the bad either, but that was important to me. The local community had started work on that. I think the Platonic Club may have started before World War I, trying to have that site recognized. That   s very important to me.  Another issue I   m very proud of   my first old, original banker, L.L. Red Males, was involved from the 1930s, until he passed away in, I believe, 1989, in conservation programs. He was a big proponent of creating a system of upstream flood control dams to mitigate flooding. When I came along in Congress, the original structures were starting to show the wear and tear of time. In 2001, I passed a bill to create a program to rehabilitate, rebuild, extend the lives of these structures that dated back to the 1940s, building on the legacy of a member of my community. I   m very, very proud of that.  I have been there for events that were   I   m not so proud of, but I was there for. The impeachment process with President Clinton, back in the 1990s. I was in my office in the building when the third plane hit the Pentagon, the day we lost all those good people in New York City, and the fourth jet   those brave, fellow Americans who put that plane down instead of letting the terrorists get it to the Capitol building or the White House, there for that. I   ve been there for several votes on authorizing military force. I will confess to you the two types of votes that cause me the greatest personal angst as a member of Congress are ones that deal with you authorizing of military force because once you start a war, people get killed, and you never know what   s going to happen.  32  The other series of votes that causes me the most angst are things that deal with capital punishment because once you inflict capital punishment, you can   t undo that. You send someone wrongfully to prison for thirty years, you can let them out, and you can try to make restitution for their wrongful punishment. With capital punishment, there   s no undoing that, so those are the two votes that cause me the most angst as a member of Congress. Most soul-searching, hand-wringing, sweaty palms   and they don   t happen very frequently, but when they do   .  It   s just an amazing set of privileges and opportunities that I   ve had. By that, I mean to have worked under five speakers, three presidents, all people who had their strong points, occasionally a few who had some interesting points, but they all had their strong points. All I think were sincerely trying to do what they felt was correct. It   s been a wonderful process for someone who started in 1966, in a class of thirteen kids, in a county that was still reeling from the 1930s.  Finchum It   s interesting to me that Governor Bellmon played a pivotal part.  Lucas In all fairness, I must admit to you, my father was a county   they call them campaign chairman, and county coordinators now, for Mr. Bellmon in    62 and when he ran for the Senate in    68. My relationship with Governor Bellmon went back to my father being a volunteer, working in peoples    campaigns. My father loved him because he was a wheat farmer, he was an old Marine   .  Finchum OSU grad, too.  Lucas OSU grad, agronomy guy, a Presbyterian. He was just   the way I was raised as a kid, he represented every quality that you were supposed to have. Faith, education, stamina, faced combat, he just   now, the governor when I...I was one of his campaign people in    86, working to help him get re-elected. Then in    88, of course, he encouraged me and I went to the legislature, but I   ll always think of the conversation he and I had in the governor   s office. He asked me if I still had my farm, was I still farming.    Yes.    He said,    That   s good. Don   t ever, ever, give up your farm.    Henry Bellmon   s lecture to me,    Don   t ever, ever, give up your farm.    He was right.  Finchum I don   t think he ever gave up his.  Lucas Never.  Finchum It   s a centennial farm.  Lucas Absolutely. 33  Finchum Was your mother a Bellmon Belle?  Lucas You know, I don   t think my mother was because my mother was not enthusiastic about politics at all, but my father was just very excited from day one. Of course, Bellmon being the first Republican elected governor, in 1962, and Bellmon was an entire different generation than the crowd before that. My father had great respect for anybody that win a Silver Star in Iwo Jima, he just had the greatest of respect, and Governor Bellmon was one of those people.  One of the other comments he made to me, and I know he repeated it to a lot of people, but one of the comments he made to me in the course of some political debate, he said,    Always understand, Representative, tell the truth. Now that way, you don   t have to remember what you said.    That   s classic Henry Bellmon,    Always tell the truth that way you don   t have to remember what you said.    Bellmon made a big impression on me because he didn   t have to be governor that second time. He came back from retirement and sorted out the Department of Human Services under then-Governor Nigh, which was a horrid mess, and then became governor. Didn   t have to do that, and put all the pieces back to place. He just   .  Finchum And he put party aside.  Lucas Absolutely.  Finchum He crossed the line a lot.  Lucas Absolutely. His principles, he was absolutely a person of his principles. Now, we didn   t always agree on everything, absolutely not, in his term of governor. But I had just as much respect for him, having worked with him as my father had, having been his supporter twenty-four years earlier.  Finchum While we   re discussing politics, do you want to get into today   s politics or leave it off the table?  Lucas Let   s just say for the record, this presidential campaign is unlike anything that I   ve lived through or I   ve read about. The voters will ultimately decide what they want to do, and I   ll work with whoever they give me, but oh my goodness. There   s no Henry Bellmons in the presidential campaign. That might be the best way to leave that.  Finchum That might be. It   s been interesting. It sounds like you have to read a lot in order to keep up with all these different areas.  34  Lucas Oh yes, that   s a big part of the challenge, and listen to my constituents, listen to my colleagues. When I was in the legislature as well as in Congress, I spent a lot of time listening to the senior members. We live in a society where the newest thing is the best thing, the biggest kaboom, wang, and everything   s trendy. There   s still a lot to be learned from your elders, from people who have experienced or gone through it. I try occasionally to explain to the younger crowd now,    The reason you get advice from your elders is because they don   t want you to make the mistakes they made. They want you to avoid that. Just listen. If the advice is good, use it. If it   s not, smile. Just listen.    Never hurts to listen. Even though I   ve not done very much listening today, it never hurts to listen   Finchum That   s my job. We   ve covered a lot. Is there anything else you want to say before we close out?  Lucas I would go back to my one central point of this conversation. Had I never gone to Oklahoma State, had I never graduated with my degree in agricultural economics, I would not have been prepared for the things that I   ve dealt with. I would have not been prepared to take advantage of the opportunities that have come my way. I   d like to think I   ve created some of those opportunities, but in many other ways, they are opportunities that availed themselves, and I was prepared, thanks to my time. Whether it was the student body, staff and faculty, or a combination of all those things, I just would not have been the person I am had I not spent my three and a half years at Oklahoma State. I   m proud that two of my children are a product of the experience too, and we   ll work on the grandkids when the time comes.  Finchum You get to stand up, and sing the alma mater with both of them.  Lucas Absolutely. Actually, Lynda   s going to Grandparent U this week.  Finchum That   s fun too.  Lucas With granddaughter number one, or grandchild number one.  Finchum The family bleeds orange.  Lucas Oh, yes. Everybody needs a Hideaway pizza once in a while, right?  Finchum Yes, I agree. (Laughter)  Lucas If that   s enough.  Finchum That   s enough.  Lucas Maybe you can strain that down into some relevant points. 35  Finchum Thank you for spending the time with me.  Lucas You bet.  Finchum It   s been fun.  -------  -------   
