 Baeza The following interview is being conducted with Mr. Pedro Pantoja for the  Latino Americans: 500 Years of History grant project at Oklahoma State  University. The interview will become part of the Oklahoma Oral History  Research Program at the Edmon Low Library on the Stillwater campus of  Oklahoma State University. The interview is taking place on Thursday,  September 17, 2015, in Mr. Pantoja   s office in Joplin, Missouri. The  interviewer is Victor Dominguez Baeza, which is myself, Director of Library  Graduate Services. Mr. Pantoja, how are you?  Pantoja Thank you, fine.  Baeza Okay. To start with, can you please state your full name and spell your name  for the camera?  Pantoja My name is Pedro Javier Pantoja. I was born in Mexico in October 12, 1936.  I was born in Torre  n, Coahuila. It   s a medium-sized town at that time of  150,000 people, and the Torre  n is similar to Afghanistan. They get about  four to five inches of rain. It was very dry, and it could be cold. The main  crops or the main way of living in that part of the country was cotton,  alfalfa, mines, and cattle. When I was fifteen years old, I used to love to see  the crop dusters spraying the cotton. The guys who worked, the pilots were  very handsome guys from Texas or Texas A M, and I always wanted to fly  the plane. One time my cousin, he put me in a crop duster plane for two  dollars. I went on a trip; I love it. My neighbor across the street, his father  was a pilot and has two  crop duster  planes. He said,    I   ll be glad to teach  you how to fly, but I want for your parents to sign the papers if an  accident   . We don   t want to be responsible.    My father didn   t want to sign  it. I was upset.  My father was a very nice man. He only went to school sixth grade,  from  La Barca and Michoacan . At that time if you knew how to read and how to  count, you have to get a job or have to pay rent. There were no free lunches.  5  So after that time, in those days everybody wanted to be a doctor, a lawyer,  or join the Army or the Air Force. I make my mind  in 1957  that I have to  come to United States. I have an  army  general,  Luis Ibarra , who live  across the street who had a farm. I used to love to go with him  to his farm   to shoot my rifle, .22, kill rabbits. He told me agriculture is the future of  America. He said,    All Latin America, United States, agriculture is the  number one.    He encouraged me to come to United States and join the Air  Force. When I finished high school I went to Monterrey Tech  Monterrey  Institute of Technology and Higher Education  because you have to go two  years before college to be sure that you know what the hell are you going to  do. I went over there, and I like it, but I start playing basketball. The last  year I flunk, so I have to decide what to do. A cousin of mine came to see us  in Mexico City. He was going to Texas A M, and he has the uniform. He  said,    Guys  America, you won   t believe it.     I don   t know if these guys are dummies or they are too nice. They give you  money to go in ROTC. They pay for your college, and you go two years in  the Army  It   s a picnic     (Laughs) That got into my mind, so I said,    I got to  go.    I was very lucky. When I decided I was going to go I started saving  money. I sold my shotgun, my .22, and my father said,    I believe that your  brain has been damaged or you are a mongoloid because it doesn   t make  sense for you to go overseas, go to a foreign land, a foreign country, learn a  foreign language, when you have three meals a day and full free to college.     I said,    No, I got to go,    because my father was like the old days. The father  tell you what to do, and the family has to do everything what he said. So I  said,    No, I   m going to go.    I have a very protective life because we played  baseball in the streets. We sit down outside when the full moon. Everybody  knew each other. When I told my people I was going to United States,  people thought I was crazy, too.  I have a friend,  Jaime Carrillo , who his father was an agricultural man, and  we decided to come together. We went to summer school, and we took  English classes, basic, so we can have something. When I was in the  summer school, the teacher who was teaching us English, he told me,    If  you go to United States, you have to memorize this piece of paper. If you go  to the American embassy in Monterrey, tell them that you want to get a  student visa, and they   re going to give you that piece of paper. If you  memorize it, they give you the stamp.    So I did. So we practice for a month.  (Laughs) We learn it, had to read that paper  like a monkey , and when I  went to Monterrey embassy, they said,    Do you understand English?    I said,     No, but I can little bit. Not too much.    Said,    Can you read this piece of  paper?    It was the same paper. (Laughs) I got my visa. Now I have to find a  college who can accept me, so it took me about six months.  I sent applications all over United States, and I remember I got an  application from Canada. In those days, Canada was willing to take students.  6  I got an application from Wisconsin, another application from  Warner,   Oklahoma, Connors State College,  in 1957 . I want to go Oklahoma  because in those days all the Mexicans go to California, Texas, and Chicago.  That was the melting point of the Mexican. Also I like Oklahoma because if  it   s no too far away, I can always take the bus back. So I got a letter; they  accept me. They said,    You   re welcome to come to Oklahoma.     At that  time I saw the movie Oklahoma.  Great  I remember; I will never forget. I  cross the border August 28 in Laredo, Texas. My father worked for the  railroads so I got a pass, free tickets, in United States, but my father said,    If  you go to United States  you see a psychologist .    He talked to the  psychology man. He said,    Your son is okay; he   s not retarded. He   s okay.     He said,    God bless you, but you can always come back.    I decide to go to  United States, and I crossed the border.  I took the Greyhound Bus from Torre  n to Monterrey, and in Monterrey I  take the train to Laredo. I crossed the border in Laredo, and it was the  Kansas City Railroad. I went in the scenic room car that was in the back of  the train. At that time was all the  U.S. soldiers  from Korea were coming  back. They were in the train drinking beer, and everybody was happy, so I  enjoyed. When we get to Dallas, I have to take a train the next morning to  Oklahoma. I went to the YMCA, and I stayed over there. I think it was five  dollars a night or three dollars, you know. I want to go to see the airplane  factory who make the Sabres, the jet planes in Vietnam. It was a huge place.  I went over there, I have a good time, come back, stay at the YMCA. The  next morning I took a train supposed to go to Muskogee or  El  Reno,  Oklahoma. I took the train to Reno, Nevada, (Laughter) and it was Friday   Half an hour later, here come the conductor. He say,    You   re on the wrong  train. You have to get off.    That was Friday about two o   clock. I get off at  this place; it was nobody. They said,    The next train is until Monday.    They  don   t come.  I used to hitchhike in Mexico, too. First thing in my mind, I only have with  me a little bag with the basic things, so I hitchhiked. First thing, the highway  patrol stop me. (Laughs) They said,    What the hell are you doing here in the  middle of nowhere?    Said,    Well, I   m walking to school.    Remember, I can  barely speak English. I carry with me a small pocket dictionary, and still I  have it. I show them the letter that I had been accepted outside of  Muskogee-Warner. So the police took me to the  buss  station Continental,  and they even bought me a hamburger. They wait with me, and they told me  people in the station, about the Continental,    Be sure that this goddamn kid  doesn   t get off of the bus. He is going to Warner, Oklahoma. Drop him over  there.    (Laughs) So I got on the bus, and we get to Warner, Oklahoma,  about one o   clock in the morning. I don   t have only my little luggage and  maybe hundred dollars in my pocket, or less. I start walking, and the dogs  they start to chase me   big dogs  (Laughter)  7  Baeza And what year was this?  Pantoja  Nineteen  fifty-seven, August 28, Warner, Oklahoma. I stayed at a little  motel that got three rooms or four rooms, and the  rest room was at the end  of the hall. I think it  cost  five or six dollars. That was Saturday I wake up  middle of nowhere, Warner, Oklahoma. Used to be eight hundred  or less   people or something like that. Saturday morning I went to the gas station,  got a Coke, and they have a general store. They sell blue jeans, clothes,  everything, but it didn   t open until eleven or ten o   clock on Saturdays. The  guy, he said,    Where are you going to school?    I said,    Connors, but is  college closed until Monday,    because it   s after Labor Day or something.  He said,    Why don   t you stay with me?    A guy from the gas station, a little  bald guy, and we went to his house. My God, I remember the mildew, the  smell. (Laughs) He fixed supper for me. I don   t remember. It was a  hamburger or some kind of stew. Next morning I went back to him to the  gas station. I sit down with him until noon. After, I went to the store to buy  me a pair of blue jeans and clean underwear because I had been with the  same clothes for almost three days. (Laughter)  It   s funny. I start talking to this couple, and the couple they say,    Are you  Mexican?    I said,    Yes.       Oh, my God, well congratulations     Mexico had  won the championship little league and said,    We love the baseball, the  pitcher. That guy is smart. He can pitch with the right and with the left      They asked me the same question,    Where are you staying.    I said,    Well, I  don   t know. I   m supposed to stay in the dorm, but they don   t open until  Monday or Tuesday.    So the guy he said,    You know, my son is in Korea.  Why don   t you stay with us? You can stay as long as you want to.    I went  with those people. Remember, I am nineteen years old, dummy, ignorant,  but I used to think that I was fast. The guy, he said,    You know, why don   t  you stay with us, and you can work with me during the weekends. I am a  carpenter, and I remodel houses. You can help me to carry the boards and all  that.    I said,    Well, it   s okay.    I had to get up every morning, five o   clock in  the morning, you have to have two fried eggs, bacon, and gravy. They don   t  ask you; you have to eat it. I hate the gravy, (Laughter) so I hitchhiked to  Connors.  It was about two miles, but in those days everybody hitchhiked, so I  hitchhike. I went to the dorm, and I met this lady whose name I will never  forget, Ma.  Kay  Wilson. She was about sixty-five-year-old widow, and I  think she felt sorry for me. I said,    Well, I   m staying with this family, and  I   m commuting.    She said,    Okay.    After one week or two weeks, she call  me back, and she says,    You know, I need a house boy. I need a guy over  here who can clean the TV room, and also he can clean the halls and the  showers. You have to do it. Every day you have to sweep it and go in the  restrooms, make sure they   re clean. Every Saturday you have to polish the  halls, clean the restroom, and everything is right, and the television room.     8  Everybody smoked in those days, everybody smoke, and everybody watch  Bonanza, Have Gun - Will Travel. In those days, people have gun in the  rooms. It was nothing. Everybody has a gun and a shotgun.  Sometimes in the fall, they have a fifty-five-gallon barrel, and they have  cookouts with rabbits or whatever they have killed. The guys practiced fast  drawing in the dorm. (Laughter) They were friendly. Everybody was  friendly, and everybody work. I believe I was the first Mexican in that place,  but everybody kidding me, you know. They say,    Do you have a burro,     (Laughs) or they said,    How much beans do you eat,    because in Mexico  you have beans for breakfast and beans for supper. I survived two years over  there. When I was over there, I never have a Coke, or I never have a candy  bar. I was saving my money. After work and during the weekends I get my  free room and board, so that was great. All the kids would work in the  cafeteria. People who were off Friday, Saturday, and come back Sunday, I  worked for those guys. They give me fifty-nine cents or a dollar an hour, so  I went back and work in the kitchen. After, I got another job, take care of the  student hall, the student union. It was a room like this, two pool tables, and  the, how you call the, where you put in music     Baeza Jukebox?  Pantoja ...yeah, jukebox. I play ping pong every weekend. I was the best. I learned  how to use the machine. Sometimes I put scotch tape, and you put a quarter  then bring it back. Everybody loved me because we could dance all night.  (Laughter) My second year, it was better. I have very good teachers, but you  have to study. Ma.  Kay  Wilson, she take care of me and also the lady in  the library,  Mrs. Prat . I forgot her name, but I will give it to you later. I  work every day, and I spend every day two hours in the library, and I have  to study. Remember, I was learning English. The schools in Mexico, I think  they were ahead of United States because when I was in Mexico I got to  take algebra, I got to take Greek, I got to take Latin. My main problem was  to memorize and to learn the lessons. I finish the first two years with maybe  3.1 average, but they were fantastic teachers. Everybody take care of me. I  was also involved with my roommate. I   ve never forgot that guy, Harley  Reno, he was great. He has a camera. He went Oklahoma State, too. My  other roommate was Clarence DePrince from Tulsa. My roommate used to  go Tulsa every weekend, so I stayed  alone .  I have the room by myself, so I love it. I was going to the kitchen, get my  free food, and also I get my free dancing (laughs) and all that, so I have a  good time. After two years   Mrs. Wilson knew people in Oklahoma State   University , but Mrs. Wilson, he has been around. Mrs. Wilson has been  born in a wagon in Oklahoma and his husband used to trade with the  Indians. First thing she said to me,    Tell them that you are Indian. This way  you don   t have to pay outside-of-state tuition.    So I told them I was Indian.  9  (Laughs) I said,    I   m Mexican Indian.       Okay, no problem.    So I didn   t  have to pay  out-of- state tuition  for two years . I only pay for regular  tuition. That was great. When I went to college, I also got a job in a state  park called Western Hills Lodge. It was a beautiful place, the first state park  of Oklahoma,  Sequoyah State Park .  J. Howard  Edmondson was the  governor. All the politicians were there, I mean all kinds of politicians there.  We have a club, and I become a bartender because I was cook and a  bartender. I didn   t like to be a waiter because it was too fancy, you have to  take orders. (Laughs)  Baeza And where was this?  Pantoja Western Hills Lodge. I will give you a brochure so you can see it.  Baeza And where is this?  Pantoja It   s in Fort Gibson, Oklahoma,  Sequoyah State Park near Wagoner,  Oklahoma . Beautiful park, oh, my. They have landing strip, and the  nightclub was fantastic. They have booze, and all the politicians come over  there with these secretaries. First thing they said,    Whatever you see over  here, you don   t talk to nobody.    They gave me a free room, they give me my  linen, my food, so I save all my money. When I went to college I never  bought towels, I never bought washrag, or soap. I bring everything from the  hotel. It was free. (Laughs) In 1960, I become the ma  tre d', and I met my  wife,  Alice . I really like over there. People were friendly, easygoing. I  remember one time   the guy who run the private club was a very handsome  guy, blue eyes, and he has a convertible. Oh, my god, it was great. All were  college kids working over there. One day he said,    Tomorrow we are going  to paint the building. Don   t come. The place caught on fire.    (Laughs) We  never thought nothing about those things, you know? I went to Oklahoma  State, and my housemother knew somebody, and I got a job working in the  cafeteria. My roommate from Connors went over there, too, Clarence  DePrince. We were room together, and this other fellow, Harley Reno. He  was my hero.  I called him,  Harley , The WASP  white Anglo-Saxon Protestant . He was  blue eyes, blonde, he can talk to everybody, and he really make me mad  because he make straight As and he never study  He used to memorize the  day before, and I have to study two, three hours to make a B. I work in a  cafeteria. My first job  at OSU  was a pig. A pig is the guy who pick up the   dirty dishes . They bring the dishes in a tray, and you put it in the  dishwasher. So the first three months I was a pig. You know, it was a job.  Every morning from seven to eight o   clock I wash dishes, and after I come  back in the afternoon from five o   clock to six or seven, five to six. I work  over there, fifty-nine cents an hour. That was a good job. From there in the  kitchen, I was promoted to vegetable man, the guy who opened the cans and  10  put the vegetables over there. That was easy, and you serve the food. In  those days it was like the Army. You have soup, vegetables, and steak or  hamburger meat, and a little bit of Jell-O. That is all. From there, I got  promoted to the meats. I have to cook the meat. Cordell Hall used to have  about a thousand people, so I knew all those people over there. After, the  best job was to become a milkman. The milkman just serve the milk.  (Laughs)  I become a milkman at the end because you don   t get dirty. You just got the  milk and talk to the guys. Everything was bullshitting. The maximum job, I  only have it for a few weeks. I was the guy who punched the cards. That was  the best job. (Punch) Next  (Punch) Next  Every Sunday I love it because  they have bacon and pancakes, only once a week. I love it. Half of the kids  didn   t go to the dorm on Sunday because they want to sleep late. That was  an experience. Also in my senior year, I was taking calculus, physics,  qualitative chemistry, and everything you have lacked. You finish at four  o   clock. Finally, I met a guy from, I think it   s Kappa Alpha. I forgot his  name. He said,    I think you are stupid. You   re a senior. You should take  easy classes. Why don   t you take home economics  for men , take speech,  and take photography, and take meteorology. Meteorology is about the  weather and the guy is easy. You don   t have to test. You have  open book  test .    So I took meteorology, and that was the only class I flunked because  they changed the teacher. If you know meteorology, it   s between chemistry,  physics, and environment, and you can never predict the weather. I have to  make big report. I flunk. Even my wife, I met her, and she tried to make the  report for me. (Laughs)  When I was a senior I start to get worried because I have a job in Western  Hill Lodge and I was working during the weekends. I was the ma  tre d' and  making more money. After, I realized,    I have to find a job. Otherwise, what  the hell I   m going to do?    I talked to my advisor, and I have a good friend  who   s still alive,  Dr.  Richard Price, who used to be the director of  entomology and my teacher on insect physiology. The guy said,    No, if  you   re getting smart, when you realize that you   re dumb, that is the  beginning of your life.    (Laughs) My wife   I didn   t have a wife, I have a  girlfriend, and she live in Tulsa. I only see her maybe once a month. She  help me to make my resumes. My teacher, entomology, he helped me to get  a job with FMC in New York. First, I was thinking to go to FMC Florida or  FMC New York, and I was also interview with Occidental Petroleum to  California. Also, I was interview by, I think the company was Mathieson,   Olin Mathieson Chemical Corporation . They were Jewish. (Laughs) They  said,    Well, we would like for you to go to work in Israel, training   for  South Africa. After, we may send you to South America, but we don   t  know.    So I apply for those jobs.  11  Baeza Before we go into your career, can we go back to Oklahoma State  University?  Pantoja Yeah.  Baeza So when you first got to campus, how did you choose the classes you were  going to take?  Pantoja  I had an adviser in Connors State. He told me what classes to take for OSU,  to follow the agricultural field.  Because my housemother,  Ms. Kay  Wilson , knew the people in Cordell Hall. They say,    You should live in  Cordell Hall because we have a cafeteria in the basement. This way you can  go to school and only go downstairs. You don   t have to go out.    So that was  fantastic. Also, when I took home economics for men, that was the best class  I ever have because they teach you how to dress, how to coordinate your  clothes, and we have to have a date. Once a month you have to invite a girl  and bring her over there and socialize and make conversation. Still, when I  go to a party I see people eating, and really blow my mind when people pick  up the fork like this. I couldn   t believe it. You have to know how to take the  plate from the right to the left, and how to put your silverware. Also, I have  to take   when I took photography, you have to take pictures. I got to take  pictures of the football. I have to take pictures of girls and different things.  After, you write a report who are those people. I love it because I have to go  to the football games, and I go free. I used to have my student visa, and I  used to sell my student visa to people who want to see the games and they  don   t have to pay the price. They gave me two, three bucks, it   s fine  That  was great. Also, I remember that all these girls I take pictures, and I say,     We need to have a cup of coffee so I can interview you, who you are,    but I  never went steady when I was in Oklahoma because I want to finish college.  When I was in Mexico I has a girlfriend, and I think that was also problem.  His father, one time he said,    You have been dating my girl for two years,  and the youngest daughter who is seventeen or eighteen is going to get  married. I would like for my two daughters to get married together, and I get  you a job.    He was a salesman for Caterpillar. I never forgot what I told the  guy. I say,    I can   t even take care of myself. How can I going to take care of  your daughter?    (Laughs) This is why the reason that when I was in college  I didn   t have a steady girlfriend. I have one girl who teach me English. I  have another girl who washed my clothes, and the other girl who teach me  dancing. Everybody like   my housemother. It was great. My  housemother   sometimes we have a Valentine   s Day   and all that. She  used to say to me,    You know, Betty Lou   is dying to go to the dance, but  she doesn   t have a partner. She   d be glad to buy the tickets if you take her.     I take the girl because this way they pay for the ticket, and I take the girls for  dancing. We have a good time. That was my life on the weekends: play ping  pong, talk to the kids, and fool around.  12  Baeza Were there other Mexican students     Pantoja No.  Baeza    or other Hispanic students?  Pantoja There was no Mexicans  at Connors   What is really spooky, (I don   t know  if you should put in the paper or not) the football players and the basketball  players, all they were white. I had a chance when I took physical education,  I used to play basketball in Mexico. The guy he said,    You are good. Would  you like to come to play with us on the team?    I said,    Why, yes, I would  love to.    He said,    You cannot have room or board because you are not  American.    I said,    Well, no because you have to practice every day. You  have to study and you have to   so I cannot play.    So I changed my mind.  That was a good option. I really think that Oklahoma is a different place. It   s  not like California, or it   s not like Chicago, or Atlanta. When I was a senior  in college, I start to run out of money. From the beginning I try to go in the  ROTC. I signed for the ROTC, and after I signed, they said,    But you are  not American Indian. You have to be Indian or be American citizen,     because they used to give you a uniform and twenty-five dollars a month.  That was good money in those days. I could never go to the ROTC. When I  was a senior, I was interviewed by the Army and the CIA. They want to  send me to Cuba. They said,    We have the Special Forces.    At that time,  you were talking nine hundred dollars a month in the Army. That was big  money. He said,    We send you to school for about six months, and after, we  send you to Cuba, and your job is to transmit information what is going over  there.    Two of my friends, they went. I never hear from them no more. I  changed my mind because somebody, Mrs. Wilson, has a friend, and I got a  check for a thousand dollars the last semester. The guy, he said,    You don   t  have to pay me back, but you have to help somebody like you to go to  school.     Baeza And who was this? ... Who was the man who gave you the   .  Pantoja I don   t ever know the name. I think it was Renfro. Mrs. Wilson, his son was  a district attorney in Muskogee. He was a very influential man, but he was  very discreet. I think Mrs. Wilson knew all those politicians. He knew  Edmondson, the speaker of the house, and   . Also, when I took music  appreciation   they have a special class that I took, too, where they teach  you about music, painting, and art. ... She bought me a ticket for Philbrook  Museum to go on the bus to watch the opera for the season. I couldn   t  believe it. When I went to Philbrook Museum, Mrs. Wilson knew the  original owners of that place. She said,    This guy was better salesman than  my husband because we trade with the Indians for coats, or we trade for  blankets, or seeds, or guns.    He used to have a farm. This guy who owned  13  the Philbrook, this is what she told me. She   d make a ton of money selling  the skins of the buffalo and the foxes to Russia and France, and it   s where  he   d make the money. It   s closed now, part of the Philbrook Museum in the  back was like a glass  floor  for dancing. It was unreal. I am still member of  the Philbrook because that. For me, it   s a beautiful place.  Baeza So while you were at Oklahoma State   in fact, what years were you at  Oklahoma State?  Pantoja In Oklahoma State? From 1959 to    60-   61.  Baeza What is your fondest memory of being at Oklahoma State?  Pantoja I like the memories working in the kitchen and living in Cordell Hall.  Everybody got together in the morning. Every day   I learned the habit to  read the paper. It   s funny because I love the  house father, and he was an ex-  Foreign Legion, and he keep an eye on me all the time. He used to tell me,     You be sure that you read the paper every day so you know what the hell is  going on.    I read the Tulsa paper. I met my wife in the summer of 1960,  Western Hills. We become friends because she has two kids and I didn   t  have wheels, and she has a car. She gave me rides wherever I want to. We  have a friend still, Foster, who has a boat, the Fort Gibson Queen. I used to  be with him bartender or helping over there, and everybody help each other.  The first time I went to New Zealand it was the same. I got impression I was  in Muskogee. The farmers live on the farm, and they don   t have Mexican  labor. They have to do the work themselves. I felt like I was in Muskogee.  There   s no  tall  buildings, beautiful weather, and it   s the life. In fact, if I  have another chance to leave, I would like to go back to Australia or New  Zealand. New Zealand was beautiful. My wife went over there with me, and  she love it. Also, what I like with Oklahoma State, that I never saw beating  each other. Nobody abused nobody. The only thing that we didn   t like, I  remember, was the guys from Norman. When they played a game, they  always beat Oklahoma State. I remember one time they were staying in the  Student Union dorm, and the guys from the agricultural department put a  bull in the elevator. (Laughs)  Baeza In which building?  Pantoja The elevator of the Student Union when the guys were over there.  Otherwise, everything was fine. Everything was great. The Student Union   weekends , everybody danced from eleven o   clock to midnight, and ping  pong because it was free, or pool tables, but pool tables were twenty-five  cents. The tennis, the pool table was free.  Baeza Were there a lot of international students back then?  14  Pantoja At that time we have a lot of students. I met another couple of Mexicans   and some from Ethiopia, Turkey, and Thailand  and this guy from Panama,  Rolando Porras. I don   t know what happened to him. I tried to find my  roommate, Clarence DePrince, but I haven   t been able to find it. That was in  1961, and I proposed to my wife to get married December  30,  1960. I got a  job in New York. I was supposed to be in New York September 1 of 1961.  They give me the paper, and I took American Airlines first class from Tulsa  to St. Louis, St. Louis to New York. I met a guy   my boss, he was an  Italian guy. His name was Bob Cascella. He said,    You know, I like you, but   you have to  make your mind.    He took me for dinner, have a glass of  wine, and he said,    I   m going to pay you for you to stay in New York  Saturday. You can go back on Sunday, so tomorrow you are free. We pay  for your hotel.    I went to Broadway. I went to Grand Central. I had a blast.  In the plane I couldn   t believe it, you know, first class, beautiful girls, half  of the plane was full/empty, and everybody was efficient. I thought I had  died and gone to heaven. Monday I call back my  future  boss, Bob  Cascella, and I say,    I   ll take the job.     The deal was that I have to go to New York for two years, and they were  going to send me back to Mexico City because they have a plant over there  and an office. My boss, my immediate boss, was from Cuba. He went to  Spain as a manager. After two years they told me,    Would you like to be the  manager for Latin America?    I said,    Deal.    For two years I didn   t travel. I  go to Niagara Falls, I went to Jacksonville, and they teach me how to use  herbicides and insecticides. I was a technical advisor. That was my first job,  technical advisor, to tell the agents how to use the product. After a year and  a half, my boss says,    This is the salary of the salesmen, the marketing  people. This is the price of the technical people. I think you should be in  sales. Forget technical. You know how to sell the product. Go in sales.    I  switched to sales. That was the best profession I ever have. I never forgot  Nicaragua,  my first trip overseas . I thought it was the most beautiful place  in the world. You don   t remember, but in the old days used to be a song  called    Managua, Nicaragua, What a Wonderful Place.     My father used to play that song in the beach. The Grand Hotel in Managua  is like you were in Casa Blanca. Little rooms, but they have a parrot, and a  monkey, and a piano, and Saturday after two o   clock nobody work. They  went over there, and they have music and drinks. It was like in Casa Blanca.  Anything go. My agent (I never forgot his name) was Bill McGuire. He was  a guy from California. In those days everybody was WASP. (Laughs)  Everybody was. He knew everybody in town. His son was going to be a  pilot   . Those days, we spray cotton dust. That was methyl parathion, DDT,  Toxaphene. You spray the cotton fields, and they were huge. It was big  money. Then you applied it in Nicaragua eighteen or twenty times  insecticide a year. I used to  go in the duster  planes. I didn   t have a mask.  15  Look at those pictures that you see. Nobody worry about hats or coat.  Everything was natural. I never forgot, in Africa or some places in  Dominican Republic, (I better not mention those places) we used to go to the  drug stores, and we sell DDT. In those days, half of the Johnson powder,  you take it off, and you put powder DDT. That was good for the fleas, and  everybody use it. It was no problem. After, we used to sell red phosphorus  to make matches.  One time, flying from New York to, I think, Brazil, I met a guy from Bayer,  Bayer Chemical. That was the biggest, still is the biggest, company selling  pesticides. I remember we were in Brazil  at the Rio Trocadero Hotel , and  he say,    Why don   t we have supper together. I want to tell you it   s my last  trip.    He was about sixty-four, sixty-eight years old. He said,    I never forgot  Mexico. I think Mexico for me was the most exciting place I have been in  my life. First time I went to Mexico, I went to San Diego. After, I took a  train from El Paso to Mexico City. You are talking 1910 or 1915. When you  buy your ticket, it was twelve dollars. You have to  rent  a rifle, a .30-30,  and a bunch of bullets because the bandits used to attack the train. When  you were in Mexico City, you give the rifle, and you get your money back.  You travel for six months. Everything, it was big cases, and you have to  have sample, and you have to have booze. You bring the agents to the room,  you offer a drink, and you show them what are you selling. They pay you  with gold or letters of credit.    You   re talking 1920. They were so ahead of  our time, but I think that the American companies have done a fantastic job.  Baeza What years were these?  Pantoja This guy from Bayer, he was talking about 1910 to 1915, going to sell Bayer  products. They were selling insecticides, or they were selling patches,  phosphorus, medicine. It was a big business.  Baeza When was he telling you this?  Pantoja He said that he traveled in 1910 to 1930,  remember that selling is a  profession , and his trips were for five months. He carried ten cases, big  ones, like suitcases, with samples so people can see it, and hardware.  Hardware was a big business.  Baeza And that   s the job you started doing?  Pantoja Yeah, and it   s when I learned that you can sell anything if you have the right  connections. When I bought my  convenient  store  July 3, 1972 , I didn   t  have a job. I was selling secondhand   in Mexico, batteries, I was selling  secondhand overalls, anything that you can make a living. That was what  keep you alive. For me, I think marketing and selling is the backbone of  America. I don   t know if you   ve been in Santa Fe, in the museum. Have you  16  been there? I love that place because they said in those days the frontier, the  traveling salesman,  Dr. Healers , the guys who sell weapons to the Indians,  bullets, medicine, food, and also you have the ladies of bad repute because  you have to keep men happy on the road. Also, the politicians. The  politicians can sell you anything. They promise you everything, and they  don   t give you nothing.  Nothing has changed. Everything is the same. The connections, you have to  have connections and talk to people because everybody   s different. I really  think that the reason I succeeded in my business is because I have   . All  German immigrants  as teachers  who came to Ellis Island, and they went  through a lot of hard life. One of these friends of mine, he become the  president of American International, and he was my teacher. He was very  strict, and he used to tell me,    You have to save money. If you don   t have  money, you can   t make right decisions. If you become a big shot, you have  to have money, and don   t be afraid to tell the truth to the company.    I  learned that. Sometimes when I ask the Mexicans,    Where do you see  yourself ten years from now,    they don   t know.  Baeza You   re talking about the Mexicans that you see now?  Pantoja Yeah. When I travel Africa I love it. I think all the people are the same.  When I was in Africa, I love it. I think that Africa is the last frontier. I used  to go to Nicaragua, Chile, Bolivia, Congo, Tanzania, Cameroon, all these  places that Americans don   t want to go because the Americans, they feel  they have to go to Japan, we have to go to France, Germany, civilized  countries. I have been in places that   . In Corinto, Nicaragua, we stay in a  hotel with no doors. The doors were like the bars. When I got up in the  morning, five o   clock, the chickens in the place, you know, the roosters, and  no air condition. When I was in Colombia, the same, and Guatemala. For  me, one of the best experiences was Guatemala. My agent was a German  immigrant, and he changed his name to Pancho Gross, so he can look like a  native. We met a Catholic priest in Quetzaltenango  Guatemala . Nice guy  from Boston. We start talking because the Peace Corps, the Peace Corps  were involved. For me, the Peace Corps are the best. I think we should have  more of those people.  We make a deal with a Catholic priest. He said,    Why don   t we come over  here on Sunday, and we will bring little samples of insecticide or...     (fertilizers, I was with Mathieson)       little bags of fertilizers.    I bring a  little pad and a pencil. I never forgot, Union Carbide, they sell insecticide  called Sevin, that it was nontoxic, it was more powerful but not as bad as  DDT. After the church at ten o   clock, we went over there. We give money  to the priest so they can buy potato chips or Cokes, anything. We make a  hole with a cane, and we put seed, a seed of corn. We put fertilizer and  Sevin and water, and teach the kids how to plant the plants. They love it   17  The Catholic priest, with my agent, he said,    Why don   t you put the  fertilizer here on consignment, and I sell it to the farmers at cost.    So we  have a business going, but the local government said that we were  communists. (Laughs)  Baeza What years was this?  Pantoja I think that was  1968 . At that time, everything was revolutions and  everything. They kick the Catholic priest out because they thought that he  was communist because was given fertilizer  at cost , because the local  government controlled the fertilizer deals. That was in the old days. That  was an experience. That for me, I never forgot. That was an experience. The  other experience was, like I said, one time we were in Guatemala. We were  going to the store, and people stop you for no reason at all. They say,    We  are freedom fighters,    or something.    What do you have?    I said,    I don   t  have any money. I only have maybe ten, twenty bucks. I tell you, I give you  ten dollars and a bottle of booze that I have for my agents.       Okay, fine,  let   s go.    (Laughs) My agent in Guatemala was killed by the rebels. My  agent in Colombia, (it was Cabarrilla) he was killed when he land his plane  on the farm because he didn   t pay taxes to the rebels. My agent in Mexico,  don   t mention his name, he was kidnapped for almost three months. He have  to pay half a million dollars because that is a part of life. You have to play it  with the right and left. Everybody has to, and they survive. Otherwise,  nothing move.  Baeza These were all local agents that you hired?  Pantoja Yeah. My philosophy was to have three or four agents  new  every year. I  start with FMC. FMC was the best, and Olin Mathieson  Chemical  Corporation . When I went with Kennecott, like I said, they have Shell, they  have ICI, and they were great companies. I always look for Bayer. Bayer  was my competitor. Wherever Bayer has an office, I try to find an agent  over there because they have a similar product like mine. Bayer, for me, was  the best, but my philosophy was you take away 20 percent of the business of  the market and then let it go free. If you take more, Bayer lowered the  prices. Bayer used to give 180 days credit. I was selling cash 90 days, 120  days rough. We did a lot of business with Pakistan, Turkey, Iran, and those  guys are a different breed of people. When I went, I remember Morocco.  The guy was fantastic, and  I  said,    You have to sign this piece of paper to  be my agent. Now you promise to buy so much material every year, and the  trademark and the registration are mine.     The guy said,    If I have to sign the paper, I don   t want to do business. I trust  you, but if we shake hands I will do it. You have the paper, I will not do it.     I didn   t have papers in Iran, Pakistan, Turkey, Egypt. We didn   t have  because they were different people. They were Muslims. I   m sorry to  18  mention that word. They were not Christians, but they are the same.  Everybody want to make a living; they want to make money. I try to get  three or four agents every year so I become more and more. At the end, I  had ninety agents. We sold the company three times. Now, what used to be  Kocide, Kennecott, and Agtrol, Kocide, Kennecott was sold to DuPont.  Now DuPont sold it to the company in Chile, to my first customer. I used to  buy product from them in 1961. After, the other company, Agtrol, was sold  to people in Australian agent, Nufarm, Australian company. Everything is  the same. When I travel, I used to give to my people a silver dollar and a  pocket knife.  That is the minute  I said ,    We work for the  Yankee  dollar, and the knife,  we hope that we can cut a deal. Anything I can do to help you, I   d be glad  to.    I love  Lee  Iacocca. I met him one time in Saint Louis with our senator,   John Danforth . He was pushing the sales. He said,    America can do  anything if you have the right incentives.    This is when they come with the  rebate.    You buy a car, I give you a thousand dollars. You use the thousand  dollars on down payment to get a car, and you take six years to pay for the  car.    You have to help people to make a dime. They   ll love you. Also, I  used to give them my business card   and a dollar. I used to tell people,     One dollar is not enough. You need to have too many dollars  and a wallet   inside the pocket, but you have to sell. If you don   t sell, you don   t get no  commissions.     Baeza So where were you living during whole this time?  Pantoja In Joplin,  Missouri . In   72 I went with Kennecott, but I was afraid. I was  really scared the second time I lost my job. I was with Transammonia  in  New York . It was trading company. When I was with Hooker  Chemical ,  they give me six months, and they give me a secretary, my telephone, plus  we used to have a psychologist so you can talk to him so you relax until you  have to do your resume. I never forgot. I sent 800 resumes, and you only get  3 or 5 percent interviews. Now it   s very difficult because everything is in the  internet and people don   t have to see you face to face. Like I tell people  right now, don   t have tattoos and don   t gain too much weight. Take a picture  from here up when you apply, and tell your background, your habits, and  what have you learned in life. It   s very difficult a second time. The second  time they lay me off, I survive six months or seven months. I call them the  trader are the professionals. The US traders, they give you desk and a  telephone, expense account, and got on. You do whatever you want to. If  you want to go to Europe, you go to Europe. If you don   t want to work, you  don   t come to work.  The guy  Don Stanton, owner of Transammonia , said to you,    That  telephone is mine. That desk is mine. The credit card is mine. At the end of  the month, all that I ask for is you to have  10 percent  and profit for me. I  19  don   t care if you ever come to work, but money is the currency   . If you  cannot make money, we don   t need you.    I survive six months. That is  pressure. That is pressure. By ten o   clock, was very good because my boss,  we click. After one day, I said to him   no, before. When I was laid off the  second time or the first time, people cry. I couldn   t believe that people cry.  If you lose your job in those days you are dead, especially if you are fifty-four.  What happened to Enron in Texas is horrible. You work for them thirty  years, forty. The company declare bankruptcy, and you don   t have a pension  plan. Always want to have something of my own. My boss   he says,    You  always have to save money. Don   t put your eggs all in one basket. Always  have security because you never know what is going to happen.     When I met my  agent Fron  from Jordan, people don   t have idea of what is  going right now in Palestine. In those days if you work in the Gaza Strip,  every day to cross the border, it cost you  fifty  dollars to cross, cash. The  guy says,    You need to have a solid Rolex watch, thirty-four thousand  dollars,    or,    You need to carry with you five  or more  thousand dollars in  your wallet because you don   t know if you are coming back.    One day he  said,    Going back, they demolished my office and my house in the Gaza  Strip,    so he have to move to Israel. People don   t understand those things.  What is going right now in the Middle East is horrible. That is because we  don   t have nobody to tell the people what to do. Like I said, I learned that  long time ago that you have to be productive and you have to take care of  your family. I love my wife, and I give you an article   we have been  married fifty-four years.  Like I told people, we are so different, but it   s a compliment. I told my wife  we are like a magnet. I am positive; you are negative. I can only be as good  as my wife because positive and  negative forces  they get together. My kids  are a success. They don   t love me for money. When they were kids I teach  them to work. They have to cut the grass. We paint the house together. We  do everything together, and they are a success. We used to have breakfast  together and supper together when I commute. When I was  a kid  in  Mexico we had breakfast, lunch, and dinner together. It   s time that you can  talk to your family what is going on. Now I see a lot of kids that they never  have supper together or lunch together because the mother work. She work,  and they   re not on the same schedule.  Baeza Where is your wife from?  Pantoja My wife is from Joplin, Missouri. This is why we came here. When I left  New York, you need to have a mailing address for insurance. Otherwise you  are dead. We sold all that junk  in my house in Connecticut , so we drove a  ten-ton truck, and I have a little van in the back. My other son drove  fastback Volkswagen, and my wife drove a Comet convertible with Michael.  Like gypsies. We came over here, and I stayed with my mother-in-law for  20  July, August, September, October. After, I got a job with Kennecott, and  Kennecott, they offer me a job as a director international. I took it for one  year, but I said,    I need to go back because I have some business over there   in Joplin .    I make a deal.    Give me half percent of my salary, and the other  half percent is for traveling. If I sell, you give me small commission.    The  boss  Joe Thywissen , he was another German immigrant. He said,    It   s a  deal.    We shake hands, he said,    But if you double-cross me, I kick your  balls.    (Laughter) We become friends, and it   s amazing that these people,  they were immigrants.  One was from New York, Lobel Chemical  Company . He  the owner Ervin  Lobel  said,    If you ever need money to start your own business, go to the  synagogue and give my name, and I cosign the note.    This other guy, Joe  Thywissen, when I came over here  in Joplin  and I start, he said,    If you  ever start your business, I   ll lend you money. Let   s go to do something  different.    When I have my store (Star Country Store), I have sent  or  helped  maybe more than twelve, thirteen, kids to college. I lend them  money, but you have to pay interest. I call them the godfather family.  (Laughter) We have to keep the family together. If you have an idea, I   ll  lend you money. ... We used to sponsor the Kappa Alpha and the animal  house. We used to sponsor the forty-eight hours    marathon dancing. That  was great   Baeza What school is this with?  Pantoja Missouri Southern. All the college kids   we were invited to the toga party,  the godfather party. They had one time parents    day, and they dedicate a  football game for my wife. That was good. (Laughs) I love college kids, but  now I call them different. I think they are   I don   t know if they have lost  direction, or the families are apart, or the pressure of leaving is very  difficult.  Baeza The fact you were from Mexico, how did that affect your career as you were  going?  Pantoja My personal opinion, the Mexicans have to work twice as hard as the  Americans because I was a good salesman  and had a good teacher  and  somebody was promoted. I didn   t like that. My boss said,    Listen,  sometimes you have to eat shit and go with the flow. Don   t fight the system.  Go with the flow because at the bottom line, the company, what they see is  profit, but it   s a lot of politics.    I won   t mention the company. The big boss,  he never invite me for lunch alone. He invite when I have my agents. I  remember one time he came to see me, and he said,    You know, this guy  who won the,  Lee  Trevino, the golf, he was a good Mexican. He   s like  you.    I said,    I hate to tell you, but if I have to give you a raise, I will give  you a raise because the way you dress,    because in New York you dress  21  perfect. You have to dress for the occasion. We used to train our salesmen.  One time we were with Griffin  Company , and we went to Laredo, Texas.  The guy said,    How can we train people like you?    I said,    Very simple.  They cross the border, take away their wallets, and tell them,    You have to  come back in the next two hours with fifty bucks in your pocket.    That   s it.     People go, and they sell their watches, their shirt, anything.     Some people  don   t know how to do it.  Baeza You mentioned lending money to twelve students. Have you done a lot of  working with students over the years?  Pantoja Yes, I tell you. My wife is very good with that,. too. We bought several  houses, and my wife bought that house. We didn   t have windows, nothing,  and we succeed. Everybody think that we were crazy. In the beginning I  thought,    I don   t want to live over there. It   s a monster house.     The college  kids help me to restore my house and we paid them to rebuild the houses  (ghettos) .  I really think that in life you have to take chances. Even right now I don   t  know where I   m going now because all my friends are dying. You cannot  take care of yourself no more. I now talking Oklahoma State about the place  for retirement people. I have a place over here, College View Manor. You  get to the point in life that you have to guess where to go. You cannot take  care of yourself anymore. My wife, she has been active all her life, but she  has arthritis, she   s anemic. I have to do my exercise every day because my  back. Now I have my ears. I told my doctor,    I would like for you to give  me shot of Viagra and steroids every month.    (Laughs) They gave me one  for the hay fever. I couldn   t go to sleep for two days. Your mind go crazy   You think about all the places that you have been. Why? I   ve talked to other  people, and I say,    I don   t dream.       You don   t dream?    I say,    Half of my  life has been dreaming.    (Laughs)  Baeza You mentioned, you said people have to take risks. What   s the biggest risk  you   ve taken?  Pantoja I think the biggest risk is one time I went to Ivory Coast and I didn   t have  passport. I didn   t have a visa. I have this guy,  Gils Dangla , he was a very  good guy, French. He said,    No, no, no, no, don   t worry, don   t worry      They took away my passport, and I give the guy fifty bucks. Next day I  come back, they gave me my passport. If you don   t get a passport, you   re  dead. Another time, flying from Uganda, the same. I didn   t have a visa for  Uganda. The guy said in the morning,    Where is my passport? Oh, hell, it   s  in the office     The office is about forty-five minutes, and the plane is  leaving in an hour  or two . I have to get a car, and I have to tell the guy,     I   ve got fifty bucks and a taxi to go all the way. If you get a ticket, I pay  22  you.    We come back, we went to the main place   to get my passport, come  back, and get on the plane.  Baeza Why did you go to these two places?  Pantoja Because I have to sell my product in coffee or tomatoes. You have to go,  and I didn   t have my visa because if you traveled during the weekend the  embassies are closed. My agents sometimes, they are crazy, too. The other  time, it was in El Salvador. I went to El Salvador, and in that time it was the  revolution. I used to have a good agent, Gabriel Montenegro, a very  influential guy. I took my watch, and it was a Timex, maybe sixty, seventy,  bucks. I told the guy in immigration    Listen, you keep the watch, and you  close your eyes, and I   ll be back in two hours.    We went over there, we  signed the contract, and come back. I said,    You keep the watch.    This is it.  Also, what people don   t realize, like when I was in El Salvador, you go on  the road, and you see people dead on the side of the road. They say,    What  the hell?    They say,    Well, then we keep it over there to scare the  terrorists.    This way they have to scare. I never felt bad in El Salvador,  never.  Baeza What years were this?  Pantoja That was in 1968 to    74. I remember another time in Nicaragua. We used to  go all the places where they have revolutions. Remember, they have to eat.  They have coffee, they have cotton, they have cocoa, and they have to sell it.  They kick my agent, who was  John  McGuire, they kick him out because  he was a gringo. They kick him out when the revolution. I went to the  company Proagro. It was the company who buy the products for the farmers  in Nicaragua. I went to the office. I couldn   t believe it. They have the  picture of Jesus Christ in the  center  over here, the right was the picture of  John F. Kennedy, and then the left side was the picture of Lenin. (Laughter)  Why do you think they have those things? Because they think that if you are  a Christian, you are good. John F. Kennedy, he was the best salesman in  Latin America. They loved that guy. Lenin, he said,    Because he give us  opportunity, socialist.    After, the guy, he said,    Have you ever shoot an M-  16?       No.       Well, let   s go to the back. Let   s shoot rifle.    You get it over.  You have to do those things. That really blow my mind. Everybody is the  same, really is the same. As long as everybody likes you or you do favors  for people, everything move.  Another time, we used to go to Tanzania and Ethiopia. In those days it was  the third world countries. I remember the Cold War. I remember one time  we were in Tanzania. I   m at a table like here, and it was only beans or rice.  That   s all what you eat because the restaurant   and it was a first-class hotel  at their control. The next guys over there, they said to me,    Are you CIA?    I  said,    No, no, I   m not CIA. I   m an agricultural advisor. I sell pesticides and  23  everything.       Oh, God, I like you because we are agricultural advisors, too.  You want to share vodka with us?    John Kistner and myself, we went over  there, and we have a shot of vodka and have supper with them. They were  doing the same. The Russians, they were trying to  promote  communist.  Also, they give the farmers rifles, and they try to give them a little bit  fertilizer, but they try to make them more socialist. The Americans, we were  trying to give them fertilizer, seeds, and education. Everything go together,  and the Peace Corps were the best. I wish we could have more people like  that. Now people are afraid. They don   t want to go.  Baeza Were you ever involved in the Peace Corps?  Pantoja Yeah. I was involved with the Peace Corps in Peru. I was involved with the  Peace Corps in Guatemala. We were involved in Bolivia. We gave them  samples, and they gave it to the poor people, the farmers.  Baeza So you were supplying these people from the Peace Corps so they could  then   .  Pantoja Yeah, yeah, yeah. You see, my object was to promote my product so the  people feel it and they know it. In Africa we start to sell it that way. We   d  make it a fifty-gram sachets. Everybody thought that we were crazy, but that  was the way. You put one sachet in the back sprayer  thirty-five to forty-five  pounds weight , and those people work from seven o   clock in the morning  to four o   clock with a backpack. I cannot do it no more. I used to have three  of those bug sprayers over here. I cannot do it no more. Those people do. I  never remember one lady. Her name was Charlotte Garfield. She   s another  immigrant from Germany. I met her in Tanzania. In Tanzania it was a big  business. You were talking  two to twenty  million dollars business. She go  to the  second  floor of the hotel, pick up the sprayer, threw it on the floor,  pick it up, fill it up with water, and it   s fresh. She say,    This goddamn  machine doesn   t break under the worst of conditions. You have to buy this.     I never forgot. (Laughs) This is the way you sell in the third world countries.  So many adventures that it   s hard to believe.  We used to fly Concord sometimes, Concord, because everything was so  fast. I go to Douala in Cameroon, have dinner with the minister of  agriculture, the people over there. Still I keep in touch with Dr. Bondji was  the director of the agricultural department. Still we communicate. I took the  plane, went back. I took the Concord, and we went to Paris, and after     Paris I saw my agent,  Calliope, in France . The agent, we come back to  the   center. In those days, in 1961, only Shell Oil, Sumitomo,  Bayer , they  have internal communications that you could call the country without the  help of the operator. I remember when we were in Paris, in New York, Delta  ,  I.C.I. Shipping Company  , you pushed the telephone, and you talk to the  agent in Australia. They say,    What is the price of urea? What is the best  24  price that you can get for urea?    After, they call Indonesia,    What is the  price over there?    After, the other guy called, they called Brazil.    What is  the price of urea or the insecticide?     We compared the prices, but we   re talking to the marketing information.  They say,    What do you think is the price going to be?    They say,    I take  this price. What are the rebates that we have to give?       So much.       It   s a  deal?       It   s a deal.    I remember one time I called the guy from  Sweden , at,  like, one o   clock in the morning, two o   clock. I say,    Are you crazy?    He  said,    No.    I said,    The tender is going to be closed tomorrow at ten  o   clock.    It   s going to be 700,000  kilos . We   re talking five million bucks,  and we have to be sure that everybody play the game so we get that share.  Competition really have a place, but everything is okay. The guy, he said,     You do whatever you want to, but I never hear this conversation. I don   t  even know you. You go ahead.    (Laughs) This is the way. It   s so fast, and  people don   t realize.  Baeza So going back, you came from Mexico to the United States for college and  then started working. Did you become a citizen?  Pantoja Sure, I become a citizen, but you remember, when I crossed the border   .  This is why sometimes I get upset. When I crossed the border the first time,  the first time was easy because a student. Second time, they have to put in   the job application  the New York Times for the unions to say,    We are  going to hire this person. These are the qualifications.    If the unions have  somebody like that, they apply, and you are behind. Luckily nobody have  something like me: entomology degree, agronomy, Spanish-speaking  country. I went by myself to Laredo. I cross the border, and I went to  Monterrey Tech. I have all my papers ready. You have to have the blood  test. You need to fill out the questions that you are not communist. They  don   t ask you, like, you are not homosexual, that you have no commit  adultery, that you don   t have a social disease, and you have to bring your  blood test. You hang it on your neck with a cord. When I went to the  American embassy, I told the guys that I have to be September 1. It was  already  August  or something. They start laughing.  They said,    We have over ten thousand people ahead of you. It   s going to be  at least seven months or a year, so get out  You better get a part-time job  over here.    I was so upset. When I went out of the American embassy, here  come an old friend of mine: the coach from Monterrey  who  worked in the  embassy. I tell him what happen. He said,    This is true. You   re in the shit  house.    I said,    My wife, I want to get married in Joplin next week, and  after I have to go to New York. If you do me a favor, I have money in  Oklahoma. I can write you a check, and it   s good. I give you 250 bucks.    He  said,    Okay, I   ll do whatever I can do.    That night I call my wife because  they said,    You have to have a college degree. You have to have a job. You  25  have to be clean. You have to swear that you are no communist or left-wing.     I have signed those, but if you have an American wife, they give you  preferential thing.  So I call my wife at night, and I said,    Alice, you better come to Laredo  because that will help.    She took the bus, Greyhound, to Laredo. That  afternoon I have dinner with my  friend , and he said,    I think I can help  you.    He put my papers on the top. I was the second date they mention in  the bulletin. I am in it. My wife is coming on the Greyhound bus. I went to  shine my shoes, and I never forgot. I went to the Catholic church, and my  wife, a Baptist, I went to the Baptist Church. I said,    How much do you  charge for the wedding?    I never forgot,     19.95.    Why  19.95? The  Baptists, the same. Oh, shit. When I was shining my shoes I told the guy,     Where do you get married over here? How can you afford to get married?     They said,    My cousin is a judge, and he can marry you for three fifty.        Let   s go to meet your cousin.    I met the cousin; I pay him; I call my wife.  Next day, my wife arrived at eleven o   clock. I have my blood test. Alice got  her blood test. We got married in twenty minutes.  Baeza What year was this?  Pantoja In 1961, July 22. I have to cross the border illegally because my papers were  in Monterrey.  I will never forget that date .  Baeza So was that     Pantoja I told my wife,    Legally, we are not married because my papers were over  there. I   m not legally married to you.    We got married in no time at all. The  next day, we took my Greyhound bus to Monterrey. The second day, we  spent over there. Went to the embassy, they have my papers ready.  Baeza So how long after graduating from OSU was this?  Pantoja Oh, I graduated from Oklahoma May 28,  1961 , and I got married July 22.  By July 28 or August 1, I have my passport and everything ready. We came  to Joplin, and I didn   t have driver   s license. Alice had a car, a Mercury,  beautiful car,    52   . We drove with no insurance, and I don   t have driver   s  license. We went to New York no problem, and we stay (I never forgot) in  the Tudor City Hotel next to the United Nations. It was sixteen dollars a  night, and they give me a week to find a house. I told my wife,    I think we  should go to New Jersey because it   s cheaper.       No, no, no, I want to live in  Connecticut. I like Connecticut because there is not a bunch of   .    We went  to Connecticut, and we find a beautiful, an old house, but it was two floors.  The lady who live in the first floor was a retired lady, divorced. She say,     Yeah, you can rent this place for  395,    or something like that. I try to  chisel a little bit. (Laughs) So we got a place. We went back to Connecticut.  26  The next day we couldn   t find Connecticut. It was the Wilton, Connecticut.  It was a beautiful town, beautiful place, but expensive.  It was a good experience. I commute from Wilton to New York every day. I  commute for twelve years. It   s funny. When you commute, this is what I  have, that picture over here. In twelve years, you never talk to the next guy  to you, never. You read the paper. When you go to New York, you read the  New York Times or Wall Street Journal. When you come back, you read the  Daily News to see what the hell   . You do your homework and take a nap.  On Friday, you get a beer for fifty cents, a dollar. You have a beer, and you  have your attach   case. You   re happy. The trains always leave on time but  never arrive on time. They   re always late. My wife, like I said, I give her  credit because she pick me up for one year. The second year, we move to  better place because it was too far away. We move to South Norwalk. It was  better, but it   s not the same. A Mickey Mouse house, two bedrooms  and  one bathroom , and I have three kids, no, two kids. I didn   t have Michael.  The kids were fantastic. I feel sorry for them. In New York, you don   t talk to  the next guy. You have to realize you don   t. I remember one time it came a  friend of mine, and he say,    You have to let me in advance that you   re  coming because we have schedules. You just cannot,    I   m here.       When  people used to come to my house in Connecticut, sometimes I used to put a  timer for half an hour.    You have to go home,    because we have to eat  supper, watch Johnny Carson, eleven o   clock go to bed, five o   clock you get  up. You have to control your system because you go on the train, it was a  train. Horrible. Sometimes the air condition work; sometimes they don   t  work. It   s shitty. One time I broke my leg commuting. Nobody in the train  stop to help you. Nobody  Finally the conductor, he said,    What happen to  you? Oh, shit, you broke your leg. I   m sorry, we have to leave. I   m calling  the police to come and pick you up.     The police came up and picked me up, take me to the emergency room  at  the South Norwalk Hospital . There were about six, seven people in line.  The leg from my wheelchair fold down, so I had my good leg in the floor  and the bad leg on the top. They came, two guys, they put a wheel, they kick  it and,    It   s okay.    I was still with the doctor when it happened. They say,     Oh, shit, your brain has been damaged. I don   t believe your story at all.     (Laughs) He take a cigar and smoke in the emergency room and not work.  He say to the next girl to me,    Hey, honey, after that, fix this stupid  commuter. I   m going to Florida for a weekend. You want to come along?     This is the real world of America. People don   t believe me, but this is  America, a bunch of wackos. How a person like me get involved with those  wackos? Because I am one of them. I really think that you have to know  people to see what is going on.  27  Baeza So in your time in the United States, you worked with communities of  Mexican Americans or the Latinos?  Pantoja Yes, I got involved with my Catholic priest. One is a Mexican, Daniel  Roblez,  in Joplin, Missouri . I used to have another guy, but all those  Catholic priests, they finish in the cuckoo farm because too much pressure.  My sister, Francine, I love my sister Francine. I worked   to promote  English and help the Mexicans to get a job. I brought the Mexican council  over there three times. The first time, they give 169 passports or visas  because most of the Mexicans, they have no driver   s license. They don   t  have birth certificates; they don   t have driver   s license. We started teaching  Gringo 101. It   s a book that you teach with pictures. Don   t worry about the  grammar. One picture is about supermarket. The other picture is going to see  a doctor. The other picture is about a mechanic. I work in the community  clinic for about three years, and I gave you a report. You have over there  reports and the papers. For one reason or another, the Mexicans and the  community don   t get together.  Also, you have a report over there that I sent to the governor. I have a  picture with the  Missouri  governor, Mr.  Mel  Carnahan. I went with him  to Chile, Brazil, Argentina, and he make me director for advisor Missouri. I  love the guy, but he died in a plane accident. If he had been alive, I would be  working for him because he care about the people. He cared  about me . I  remember one question I asked him one time.    How do you make decisions  when people give you money for lobbies?    I never forgot that. He said,     You have to make the decision what is the best for America. Money is  immaterial. Money, it come to you anytime.    At that time, we were   promoting  the satellites for Latin America, and the M-16  planes , and  college education, and vegetables, corn, from Missouri. This is what I really  think that I   m involved with NAFTA. Also, I was  on the Board of  Directors  for the agricultural division of Missouri. Mexico is importer  number two. Canada is number one; Mexico is number two. It passed  already Japan.  I have the Mexican council with Missouri Southern  University , and they  were going to offer six scholarships for Mexican American. You should  meet the Mexican council in Kansas City. The condition is that if you finish  college over here, you have to go to Mexico for three years because Mexico  has close to 6,200 plants. If you go to Monterrey, Guadalajara, Saltillo,   Mexico City  and CFI  Trucking Company  over here has the biggest  warehouse in Laredo, Texas. It   s a big future, but like I said, it   s the  communication with their Mexican commission. I told them what we have  to do is talk one-to-one basis with your state representatives. I went to  Washington with Roy Blunt and talk about that. For two years I was in  Jefferson City every year. You have to talk how are we going to get working  permits for the Mexicans here. The Mexicans want social labor. They don   t  28  want food stamps. All they want is chance to work. One day you work, you  pay your taxes, and get your driver   s license. Right now, I talk to Steve  McIntosh, he   s the Roy Blunt right hand for Joplin.  He say,    I would like to take you to Laredo, Texas, and we cross the border  illegally in two days so I can show you how it is done.    I said,    No, I   m  afraid that you   ll never bring me back.       I have to bring you back     I said,     No, it   s so simple.    Maybe I should not talk about this thing, but you can  cross the border if you pay seven, eight thousand dollars right now. You  cross the border ten o   clock in the morning   . If you pay less than three  thousand, you pass other ways. I don   t tell right now, but you pass. If you   re  going to buy a fake driver   s license, you can buy one for five thousand  dollars or three thousand dollars or less. When we have the Mexican  council, we have so many people from Guatemala that  claim they  are  Mexicans. I say,    Where are you from? What is the name of the city? What  is the name of the   ?    This is going on. A lot of people from Central  America, they think they are Mexicans because they said it easy to cross the  border.  Baeza What years were you involved with the Missouri Commission?  Pantoja Two years ago. With the Catholic church, I was involved with them about   five  years ago. You have papers in the newspaper over there, and they tell  you everything. I have four pages how we should do it in America. America  need working class people. The average American don   t like to cut the  grass; they don   t like to fix the roof. I was teaching that   first I want to be a  welder when I came to United States. I wanted to go to Alaska because they  were paying nineteen dollars an hour. That was big money. I learned how to  weld, but I didn   t like those kind of people. I really think that the welding,  roofing, (I am pushing that in technical school) they should buy an old  house. The kids or the people teach them how to put it together, we sell it,  and they give the profit to the kids.  I have couple of Mexicans and a lot of people, they want subsidy. For one  reason or another, don   t quote me, but people learn a lot of bad habits in  California. Like, I don   t believe that you should have a kid because you  have a kid, you get subsidy from the government, and they give you money  every month. I would not have a kid because that reason. I will not have  more kids. Like in Canada, the more kids you have, less taxes you pay.  Canada is thirty-four million people. America is 330. I really think that the  technical school, they should get more involved. This is my philosophy. You  have a report that I sent to governor and to the commission over here. I think  the future of NAFTA is great, but you have to really get people dedicated to  improve the Mexicans, improve the relations with United States.  Baeza So what   s the thing that you   re most proud of for working with Mexicans?  29  Pantoja I think for me it   s the satisfaction I get, because when I came to this country  I will have never succeed, like the guy who allow me to stay at his house the  first night. God, it   s amazing. The police pick me up; they didn   t take me to  jail or anything. When the guy in Oklahoma lend me the money, and when I  work in Oklahoma State in the cafeteria everybody was friendly, and  everybody mix. I didn   t see too many freeloaders like I see sometime now. I  have a kid over here living in one of my cabins, about, oh, say, twenty-three  years old. Have borrowed already sixty thousand dollars going to school,  and he lost his job. He went back to St. Louis because they closed his job at  the Federal Express. I really think that people who fall for the subsidy, I  think is horrible. I think you should help people but no forever. Try to find  out what is the talent of those people. I made a comment the other day   .  The Catholic church are losing a lot of those people because now you have  all those people after six months you become a minister and they have  Mexicans working over there. They don   t teach them English. They don   t  teach them customs. I think that in a certain way, politics and the religions  and even the chamber of commerce have to get involved with those people.  Baeza How did you first learn about customs when you came to the United States?  Pantoja Well, I think that my father and my cousin never want to come to the United  States. My father, he said,    I think you are crazy.    I have another friend of  mine, my cousin, who has a son. He said,    Swear by your mother that you  are never going to invite my son or my daughters to United States. I don   t  want to lose them.    I have another guy from Argentina. I tried to get him a  scholarship to go to school over here, and the mother told me the same.    I  don   t want my daughter to come to the States.    It   s how do you feel  yourself. My friend from Mexico, they think I   m crazy to live over here.  They say,    You   re living like an average joe blow. Over here you will have  a butler. You will have a maid. You don   t have to do a damn thing. Why do  you have to do all the shit?    My father never want to come to United States.  My uncle came to United States during the Revolution. He stay for two  years and marry a Mechicano. He become big shot in Mexico. My father  never want to come. It is a lot of people who they don   t want to come. It   s  how do you feel about things.  Baeza But how did you get involved, or how did you learn to do things in the  United States?  Pantoja Necessity and sometimes my wife. My wife get involved with everybody,  but my wife is a different   . You are going to meet her today. I really think  that my bosses in New York were a big factor. All were immigrants. They  came, and they make a success of life, and they push people, not pushing  bad. They want to make the best of the people. I always want for my kids to  go to West Point because West Point for me is the headquarters of United  30  States. I remember we went to see a game, Oklahoma State and West Point.  We went to the chapel, and we went to the classes. I talk to the kids, and I  saw the parade. I went to the chapel, I sit down, and after, I touch the plaque  of Eisenhower and MacArthur.     Everybody help each other at West Point.  My kid had a chance to go to West Point. He was All America. Gary, my  second kid, he was All America in high school.  He was a natural. He was defensive back, and he got a chance to go to West  Point and Colgate. He was number five in her class, the top of the team,  invited to Washington DC. He said,    I don   t want to go. I   m going to go to  Aspen. I like to ski.    I teach the kids. I bought them ski. I grab him by the  neck, and I throw him against the couch. I said,    You are crazy  If you go to  West Point, you never have to worry.    He said,    I am sick and tired of  people telling me what to do since I was twelve years old,    because he had  been playing football little league. I used to push my kids in little league  because I like baseball, but they play football, and I support them. After he  said that, I said,    You go wherever you want to go to college, but if you  need me, come back. We make a deal. I give you 50 percent to go to college.  The other 50 you have to work, and you have to make 2.5 or 3 average.     When he was a senior, he said,    I want to take a semester off because I like  to ski.    When he finish college, I have a chance to get him a job with Shell  or with a big oil company. He said,    No, I want to go to Ventura with my  friend, and we are going to paint ghetto houses.    He never went to work for  a big company. My  oldest  kid, Larry, I got him a job with Celamerck  because they were my agents. I told my friend,    Listen, I have a kid who   s a  biology major, and I think he would be a good kid to work for your  company.    So he hired him. Three years later, they fire my friend, and they  make president my son  of the agricultural division . (Laughs) After Shell  Oil bought Celamerck, they make my son the  director  of Shell Agricultural  Division. My son he says,    You know what? My boss is retired from Shell  London. You have to hire him.    So I hired his boss to work for me for  two   years in China. Everything is communications. You help people. You have  to.  Baeza Let   s go back to   what year was it that you went to go watch West Point  against Oklahoma State?  Pantoja It was in  fall  1961 because I was new in Connecticut and I was in favor of  Oklahoma State all my life. However, in  1984-85 , I drop. Why? They have  on Good Morning America, I think he was the fullback from Oklahoma  State. He had become our congressman from Oklahoma, and he dropped out  of college. On Good Morning America, they use Oklahoma State as a  punchline.    Why is school going down?    He said the coach from Oklahoma  State is making  about  197,000 dollars, and the director of science and  31  engineering only makes 67 000 , and he has no private plane. I drop  Oklahoma State at that time.  Baeza What do you mean by    dropped    Oklahoma State?  Pantoja Had become no more member of OSU. I was out. After, I met my friend  Richard Price who was entomology  professor at OSU . He worked for Shell  Oil in New York, too, but he didn   t like New York. He went back to Shell  South Carolina, and he went back to Oklahoma State. He   s retired from  Oklahoma State. We become friends, and he came to see me. I fixed his  honeymoon. I fix it and restore his lodge free, or half price. It   s how do you  communicate with people. You help me; I help you. My wife sometimes has  a hard time with that because I told her,    If I invite you for lunch two, three  times, you have to buy me at least one. You cannot have all the time lunch  free.    This is really upset me sometime.  Baeza So have you worked with Oklahoma State since then?  Pantoja I have been talking with them. Like I said, I am planning to help them with a  scholarship and still am talking about selling this corner. I have been talking  about a scholarship. I met this guy,  Bryan Close from Tulsa, Oklahoma . I  give you his name. He came to see me, and we click. He was a very nice  guy. He went to Oklahoma State, but he   s about six years behind time. I   m  trying to convince  my old friend Harley Reno , who was a big shot with  Exxon and environmental  professor at Baylor . He, for one reason or  another, he said they don   t allow him to talk at Oklahoma State. He was an  Indian. He went to school free in Oklahoma. I said,    You need to come  back.    I   ve met a lot of people now from Oklahoma State here in Joplin, two  or three people that I think would be good to have all those people together  how we can help the Mexicans, Americans, to make this place a better  country because I see a lot of changes.  Baeza What kind of changes?  Pantoja I tell you I used to love the senator from Oklahoma,  Tom  Coburn. I love  that guy. He was a straight shooter, but now he   s gone.  Baeza What are your dreams or vision for the future?  Pantoja God, that is a tough question because I don   t even know, myself. I tell you, I  worry that I am seventy-eight years old. I cannot take care of myself. I have  been talking to help senior citizens now. I am a volunteer in the new  hospital, Mercy Hospital, Joplin. God, it   s beautiful. It   s nine-hundred-million-  dollars project. It is the best. Also, we have the science building. I  am pushing that especially Mexicans who want to be doctors or  or go to  college  or have to be nurses is the place to go and is the future. It   s so much  32  money in Obamacare. If you look Oklahoma State next to the stadium, they  have this physical therapy center where they take care of the athletes and  they take care of the astronauts. We have a population, I   d say, the average  is fifty years old, and they are no going to get younger. Like the meeting that  we set today, we have an old population that cannot take care of themselves.  Our next neighbor is eighty-six. My secretary is eighty-six. They used to  walk. They have to be very active. I   m pushing that we should get a dog tag.  They know your citizenship, your medicine, your records, who are you, so if  I collapse like my wife collapse, then you come, and they take you to the  emergency, and they revive you. I don   t want to be revived. I want to die. I  don   t want to be cripple in a bed for the rest of my life. For one reason or  another the hospitals don   t communicate. This will be a good punchline for  Oklahoma State because Oklahoma State is so advanced in the astronaut,  science, and therapy. I think will be great.  Baeza Is there something that you   if you were standing in front of current  Hispanic students at Oklahoma State, is there something you would tell  them?  Pantoja No. I would like to talk to them because I really think that, like I said, I  really believe that NAFTA   . I was born and raised in Mexico. I worked  with the Missouri Department of Agriculture. We went to Monterrey. We  went to Torre  n. There   s so many factories. You have to motivate those kids  to go to Mexico and become a plant manager or become bilingual because  that is the answer. Labor in Mexico I think is cheaper now than in Japan.  When I was consultant for a company over here, I looked Mexico because if  you buy a product in China, it   s going to take six, seven weeks to bring it  over there. It   s going to take two, three weeks to send the order. If you do it  in Mexico, you can deliver the product in forty-eight hours from door to  door. This is what I like CFI  Trucking Company, Joplin, Missouri . CFI for  me is a fantastic company that we should get it involved with Oklahoma  State or with the local university transportation. They have CFI   when I  have my Japanese consul, the Taiwanese consul, the Mexican, I took them  over there. They (CFI) have a war room.  Glen Brown, president of CIF  Trucking Company  was the first guy who put fax machines and telephones  in the truck, and he went first year to Oklahoma State. You have to meet that  guy,  Glen  Brown.  He said,    I drop because I didn   t have the money and my parents were  poor.    He become a truck driver. Now, President Bush came over here to  open the building. They have this room, and it   s a war room, and they know  everything about the truck driver. They know how many miles, how many  accidents, and how much profit that person made. If it make profit, we are  in. If you are underweight, you don   t have overweight, then you don   t have  to pay health insurance. He talked to the driver like he talk to his son. This is  what we need. Companies and people from Oklahoma State encourage those  33  kids. I   d be glad to talk to those kids. I   d be glad to go there, or you bring  them over here because I was involved with Pittsburgh University with the  technical center.  Dr. John Chen was the director of the center.  He was  Chinese. We went to Taiwan, we went to China, how we develop business  with those people. They have maybe 260 foreign students from China. Over  here, I don   t believe that we have more than twenty Mexicans, but we have  129 from Saudi Arabia. Why?  Baeza To finish this up, can you explain to me or for the camera the most  important or the most meaningful event in your life?  Pantoja This is a 64,000 dollar one. I think I am lucky that God gave me chance to  come to United States because it   s very easy   . Like my best friend, he  chicken out at the last moment. Also, I was very lucky to find these people  in Oklahoma that help me and encourage me. Of course, (I hate to tell you  this) I give credit to my wife because she follow me. Wherever I go, she  follow me. A lot of people don   t follow their husband. When I went to  Mexico, beach bum, she never say no. Let   s go to try. Let   s go to try. When  I bought that convenience store  in Joplin, Missouri , even my brother-in-law,  he thought I was crazy. He say,    You are buying the ghetto.    He never  go out. When I talked to my lawyer, the lawyer we have over here, he said,     It   s a good place, but you can never make money, only make a living.    I  met another guy, Larry Hickey. He   s another good guy who brought FAG,  the German company. He said,    It   s a good company, but you have to make  the best.    I really think if you are happy where you are and if you   re wife  encourage it, and your kids   . I   m lucky. I never worry too much about my  kids. Like I said, I have been blessed with my wife and the kids because I  never worry about those kids. They raise hell, but I remember we talked  every night what was going on.  When I used to have people from overseas, I   d bring them to my house.  When I have the Taiwanese ambassador, or Japanese, they came to my big  house. We have a party, and I brought the teachers from the school.  Everybody have to say five minutes  to tell us  who you are, how can we  help each other. Everybody love it, but people don   t do it. I don   t know why.  Like these people that we saw today, you have to communicate, tell them  what you want. I love it. I have so many experience that it   s spooky. Like  one time I was flying the Concord from Paris to New York. In those planes,  everybody   s the casual rich. Nobody dress to kill. Everybody know that you  have money. The next guy, because it   s only one person and I, this guy, he  say,    I have a headache. I don   t feel good.    He asked the  air hostess  for an  aspirin. She said,    No, we cannot give you medicine.    I said,    I have  Tylenol. I have an Aspirin.    I give the guy one, so we become friends. When  I get to New York, here come a limousine. He was a prince from Saudi  Arabia, gave me a ride to the hotel. I had those things happen. Another, I  have a drink with General  William  Westmoreland in the plane flying from  34  Holland to New York. I said,    Oh, my God, I want to congratulate you.  What you have done in Vietnam is great.    We have a drink together.  Another time I was in Rio  Trocadero Hotel , and I saw Sally Fields and  Michael Caine across the aisle. I told the bartender,    Do me a favor. Give  them a drink on me. We love people like you.    They come back and shake  hand. Why? Because I don   t know. I really think that good salesmen are like  the dogs. You have a sixth sense. My cat or my dog, they know who is good  and who is bad. I used to have a dog. When company come, he go crazy. He  want to kill you. Why? Another guy come from China; he kiss his hand.  Why? I really think that you get that instinct in the schools and from your  teachers. This is what I really feel that a teacher should get involved with the  teachers helping these kids. It   s very difficult because I, myself, I have some  people that, oh, my God, I cannot handle those people because they are so  arrogant. My boss, Dr. Stoner, he was a nice guy. He said,    I don   t  understand. You took all the shit people.    Nobody said nothing to me   .  This is the thing that I have met so many people important, and, like I said, I  would like to write the names of all those people like Westmoreland, and  Michael Caine, Shirley Temple. I meet her in Ghana, and my mother used to  love Shirley Temple. I had to see all the stupid movies of Shirley Temple. I  met her in Ghana, shake hands, because we do business with the  government.  I met  John  Negroponte. He was an ambassador in Honduras and in  Nicaragua and all that thing. I met him in Vietnam because we were making  business with Vietnam. Our company was Agtrol  Chemicals , so we were  on the top of the list. You tell that we want to do business with your country,  and thank you for what you have done. You send a postcard and say,    Thank  you very much.    You have to follow up. Like today, that sort of meeting,  you have to follow up. You have to connect with customers. I used to have  three files of the people that I   ve met in my life. I learned that from John F.  Kennedy. He said you have to meet all those wacko people you have on the  business card, who they are, and how can you use the talent for your  personal ideas. I used to have that. About six months ago I put all a big pile  and burn it. I only have now the selected people, very few. Everybody   s  gone. I think we have to teach that to the new Mexican American. Like my  son Michael. Michael is forty-six years old. They took Spanish four years in  high school, they took it in college, but they don   t practice because the  mother is American. I don   t care. They talk to everybody.  You can leave the guys alone, and, shit, they know everybody because it   s  communication. It doesn   t matter what is your race or where are you from.  Like when I used to go in Brazil or Ecuador or   I remember Brazil. I  usually tell the taxi driver,    Why don   t you take me to a place where you go  where they sell local food, and I   ll buy you food.    We go over there. I never  was afraid that I was going to get kidnapped, and they loved me. One time I  35  remember in Guatemala, the taxi driver took care of my luggage over there  and give me kiss. (Laughs) My boss is talking, and he said,    Oh, shit, you  are not coming here  What the hell do you do with those people?    You have  to give them tip and be social. They love people who talk because some  people are born in hell. Like I said, I have an article, why do I like   inaudible . Because some people are so poor, they live for today, not  tomorrow. Tomorrow they may die, and they live for today. Like the kids, I  don   t think that any of the kids in America have shined shoes for a living.  That is a profession in Mexico, and to sell popsicles is a profession. Like I  said, to be a salesman it doesn   t matter where you are. All my friends were  doctors. They went to school, medicine.  That was my first idea. I wanted to be a doctor, but because my neighbors or  kids wanted to be a doctor   . In those days, the professional, you go to the  Army, you go to engineering, you are a lawyer, or you start your own  business. I never forgot when I was in Oklahoma State, you have a chance to  take shorthand or typing. All my friends over there,    Oh, hell,    they said,     only the tutti-fruttis take that class. You should take slide rule, take some  kind of science. Forget that stupid thing.    Now typing is a way of life. When  I work in New York, I always have a secretary. After, I have a private  secretary. That was great. When I travel, I have a notebook. In the back, all  your expenses, how much money you spend. In the front, I have all the  people  I met  in the country. What was my experience? Sunshine. What  kind of person I met, what was the prices, and you have to repeat prices one  more time to be sure no mistake. Now people don   t take notes. I don   t know.  Like the guy we were talking today. They keep the calendar over here, and  you   re driving the car. I don   t answer the telephone because I cannot handle  the car and the telephone and changing the radio. What else can I tell you  more?  I can tell you so many things, but I tell you something. I have a friend over  here. He   s a doctor, and I love him, Dr.  Donald  Patterson. We were talking  about that before, and I said,    Will you change your life to be something  different?    He said,    No, I would do the same. I would never change it. I  would do exactly the same.    I think selling in America is the place   . This  is where I get upset. People take this country for granted. Really, they take it  for granted. It   s the best place to live, but you have to make it the best. I will  never change my life. I tell my wife, I may kill her, I collect insurance, but I  don   t want to go to jail. It has to be perfect. Really, it   s fascinating because,  I tell you, this country has everything, but it   s changing very fast. I can tell  you more after we stop talking. I really think we have to keep it the best and  keep going. People ask me if I want to run for politics, like a representative,  and I told them,    I would love to run for a state representative, but I need to  have a paper sack with thirty thousand bucks because I   m not going to play  with my poker money.    It   s very dangerous. Politics is very dangerous, but  36  it   s the way of life. I love it. It   s like a religion. You love it, and you hate it.  What other questions you may have? I don   t know.  Baeza That   s it for now.  Pantoja If you have chance, you have to go to Branson. When I have people from  Japan, the Germans, I take them to Branson.    Oh, my God, we love it over  here.    The people from Japan,  Nagase Corporation , my agent   when I  retire I couldn   t believe it. They came to say goodbye over here  They say,     We want to give you this picture of something, and we want to thank you  for what you have done for our company.    They were my agents for thirty  years. After, they asked me,    We have a very young, bright kid who has a  degree in agricultural chemistry, and we want for him to be a third-world  salesman like you. We would like to send him to you for three months  for   summer so you can tell him all what you have to do.    So they did. I teach  him how to cook, how to make drinks, how to dress. I give him a job as a  ma  tre d    in a restaurant, and they gave him free meals so you can talk to  people. I took him to Nola to read the papers. Once a week I take a company  from this area, and he have to write a report how his company could do  business with that company. Now, after that they sent him to India for six  months. He went to China, now he   s the vice president of Nagase in Brazil  running a five-hundred-million-dollar company. We have to teach American  kids how to do those things. I really think that is the answer, how to survive.  Baeza Thank you very much.  Pantoja You   re welcome. I hope to see you again. Okay. Oh, my God, you made me  cry.  -------  -------   
