 Finchum Today is December the 3, 2015. My name is Tanya Finchum, I   m with  Oklahoma State University and today I am in Waukomis, Oklahoma, to  interview Dr. Barry Pollard. This is part of our project where we   re  focusing on a Cowboy in Every County. Thank you for having me today.  Pollard Well, great. Happy to be here.  Finchum  Tell us a little bit about where we are.   Pollard Waukomis. We   re just south of Enid about seven miles, a little, small town  called Waukomis. I actually live out in the country here in Waukomis.  Finchum Do you know what the meaning of that word is?  Pollard I really don   t. Other people say    walk-among-us   , so maybe it has  something to do with an Indian name, I don   t know.  Finchum Okay, that would make sense. Okay, let   s begin by having you tell us when  and where you were born.  Pollard I was born in Guthrie, Oklahoma, 1951.  Finchum Nineteen fifty-one. And what did your parents do for a living?  Pollard Well, my dad started out farming. He went into a farming life and then  worked in the oil field some, and then realized that maybe he wanted to go  back to get more education. So after being out of college for seven years he  drove forty-five miles to OSU every day to get his degree in agriculture  education. He then became an agriculture teacher.  Finchum What year did he graduate?  Pollard Oh gosh     5  Finchum When it was still Oklahoma A M?  Pollard No, I think it had probably become Oklahoma State University by then. I  was in the third grade, so     Finchum Fifty-eight,   59? Somewhere through there?  Pollard Yes, about sixty years ago   not quite that   yeah you   re right. About     55,   58, something like that.  Finchum And he commuted for class, he didn   t live on campus because he was  married?  Pollard That   s right. He was married and already had three kids. That   s when I  learned how to milk cows (Laughs) because my sister, she had milk  allergies, so we had a goat around to milk. So we had a goat and a bunch of  cows to milk. That kind of fell to me since he was going to school then. Got  to learn how to milk cows at an early age.  Finchum Did he go on the GI Bill?  Pollard No, he was just a little   the war was over about the time he got old enough  to be eligible for military service.  Finchum He just decided to go.  Pollard Right. I guess farming, and raising kids, and working the oil field, kind of  thought maybe he should go get an education or something different. So he  did.  Finchum Had anyone else in the family gone to OSU?  Pollard No, he was the oldest of his brothers and sisters. He had a brother that was a  few years younger that later went to Oklahoma State and later got his degree  in agriculture education, but no, he would   ve been the first one.  Finchum So he started.  Pollard Right, my mother went to OCU and got her degree in music. But they   d  already met and gotten married by that time, so.  Finchum How many brothers and sisters do you have?  Pollard I   ve got three brothers and three sisters. I   m the oldest.  6  Finchum You   re the oldest, so you   re in charge? (Laughs)  Pollard Yeah, yeah.  Finchum That   s quite a houseful.  Pollard And all of us went to Oklahoma State.  Finchum All seven?  Pollard Yep.  Finchum That may be a little bit unusual.  Pollard That   s probably true. I have one sister that went to a branch of Oklahoma  State, so we count that. (Laughs)  Finchum Did you all have choices or did you just wanted to go there?  Pollard No, I think we could   ve had a choice of where we wanted to go, but you  know, with my father having been from there and listening to OSU on the  radio, and then he was in agriculture education, so we had a really involved  in the agriculture way of life as a child, and so Oklahoma State was a natural  fit. Whenever I was in high school, I don   t think I really thought much about  going to any other place at that time. I could have and really just didn   t put a  lot of thought in it. I was asked to come to Oklahoma State by some people  I   d met in 4-H and they were in Farmhouse Fraternity and it seemed like a  good fit. So I really didn   t entertain anything else very much. OSU certainly  had the right fit for me.  Finchum With 4-H, had you been there for Round-Up?  Pollard Yes, actually I   d been there for Boy   s State is when I was actually there, but  I don   t believe was there for any 4-H events, but with Boy   s State we were  there together. We stayed in the dorms back then, it was a lot of fun.  Finchum Do you remember which one?  Pollard I could place it, I don   t know the name of it, it   s gone now.  Finchum I was going to say, it may not be standing.  Pollard That   s right.  Finchum So let   s back up, where did you go to elementary school?  7  Pollard Well, I started in Marshall, Oklahoma. Real small school, just north of  Crescent and kind of east of Hennessey. We lived out in the country there  and all of us went to school in Marshall. Tiny school, like first and second  were in the same grade with the same teacher. That tiny. When my dad  graduated with his degree in agriculture education, his first job was in  Alfalfa, Oklahoma, down in the southwestern part of the state just near  Carnegie. We moved there and I was in the fourth grade there. He taught  there for a year and then he got the teaching   opportunity to teach at  Hennessey, which was close to his hometown where he grew up. Where all  of his brothers and sisters and family farm, in that area, so we moved to  Hennessey when I was in fifth grade. Then he taught ag from that time on  until he took a different job. But I finished my elementary and high school  education at Hennessey, Oklahoma.  Finchum What year did you graduate?  Pollard Nineteen sixty-nine.  Finchum What was your favorite subject?  Pollard Probably math. Math and science.  Finchum Did you know at that point what your career path might be or wanted it to  be?  Pollard Well, I thought it was going to be baseball.  Finchum Really?  Pollard But then I wasn   t hitting the balls well when I was a senior and I didn   t  know until the season was over that I needed glasses. Probably worked out  for the best (Laughs) because I then decided what I really wanted to do was  go to vet school and be a veterinarian. So that was my initial thought was to  go to Oklahoma State University and go to the vet school. Interesting story  about that to divert a little bit, I was in Farmhouse Fraternity and I was in a  room and three, two of my roommates were in vet school and one had just  got accepted to medical school. I came home one weekend and my dad said,     Why don   t you help the vet, Dr. Bennett, go doctor one of my sick cows?     I thought, that   d be a good idea. So we went over to the farm where we had  the sick cow. We didn   t have very good corrals, so we ran the cow in the  barn. Unfortunately, he had a lariat rope, and even more unfortunate he  caught her. She ran through the door, it was a big sliding door, the door fell  down on the vet and I, she took off with the rope, we never saw her or the  rope again. I decided I might want to go to medical school instead. (Laughs)  That was kind of a career-changing day I guess I   d say.  8  Finchum It   s interesting you can pinpoint it to one event.  Pollard Yeah, that and I really would   ve been more interested in large-animal  veterinary medicine. A lot of those guys, it   s a pretty rough life. They do a  lot of hard, physical work. I   m not afraid of that, but a lot of the things that  sometimes they do what I was already doing. I got an opportunity to see  what it was like in medical and went and visited with our family doctor and  ran around with him some and decided I   d probably like to change my major  to medical school.  Finchum That didn   t require that you switch from OSU to somewhere else?  Pollard No, not at all. In fact, that leads into an even more interesting topic kind of  dear to me in that I really didn   t have to change anything. I have the same,  very much the same, requirements of studies and classes for vet school as  you would for medical school. The thing that   s interesting about it is that  after medical school, and after I came here in Enid and went into practice in  neurosurgery, I eventually was asked to be a part of the OSU Foundation,  and became a governor, and later became on the board of governors, and  then the board of directors of Oklahoma State University Foundation. While  there I had several of the Foundation staff came to me because their children  wanted to go to medical school and their counselors in high school had told  them that if they really wanted to go to medical school perhaps they needed  to go to OU  University of Oklahoma  so that they could get into the OU  medical school. It just kind of dawned on me that that   s not the way it really  is. You can go to any school and try to go to any medical school at any time  at any place. You just have to have the undergraduate training and classwork  to get in it. I started a group called the OSU Medical Cowboys, which is part  of the OSU Foundation.  The effort was to raise funds for kids to come to Oklahoma State University  to go on to further their career in medicine whether it be medical doctor,  osteopathic doctor, veterinary doctor, or nursing, dentistry, whatever, and be  able to put that money out there in the form of scholarships for the high  school counselors, so that the high school counselors could then recognize  kids who might want to go to Oklahoma State University for their  undergraduate training and then choose to go on to a professional career  wherever they wanted to. I felt like that was an idea to try to get the  counselors at the high school level to encourage kids that wanted to go to  Oklahoma State University and engage in some career medicine in some  type to go there with scholarships. That   s been a good project. We   ve   I  might have the number wrong, but I think we   ve raised almost 3.5 million  dollars at this point in time for scholarships. Some of it   s in the form of  future giving, and things like that, but our goal is to eventually get to a  5  million group of scholarships for kids to get to go to Oklahoma State  University to further their education in the field of medicine.  9  Finchum How long has that program been going?  Pollard Probably about eight years now, I believe.  Finchum You don   t have to have a pre-med track in order to go into med school is  basically what you   re saying?  Pollard No, you can get your degree in really anything. You just have to fulfill the  basic requirements of medical school. Some certain sciences and math  courses. Certain requirement basics that they have that you can get a degree  in art, or music, or literature, or whatever, and still go to medical school.  You just have to have the basic coursework done.  Finchum When you first went to OSU, you weren   t in the fraternity at that point, did  you     Pollard As a freshman I went into Farmhouse as a freshman, yes.  Finchum So you didn   t live in a dorm?  Pollard No, I lived in the fraternity house.  Finchum From the start.  Pollard Right. That was really good. They had high academic standards, Farmhouse.  Academic achievement was expected of you. Studying hard was expected of  you, and making good grades was expected of you. So you had the  upperclassmen that were there to make sure you were doing your proper  classwork and keeping up your grades.  Finchum Did they have study time? Study hall? Or similar?  Pollard Yes, if you needed it there was. As long as you were making good grades  there wasn   t any structured time, but if you were having some trouble they  certainly were arrangements made for you to have time at the library under  some supervision to get some time in on your courses.  Finchum Did you participate in Homecoming events as part of the fraternity?  Pollard Oh yeah, we were a part of Spring Sing, had our floats, did intramural  athletics: played softball, football, flag football. It was a very well-rounded  education. A lot of fun.  Finchum Any special memories from living in that house? One or two?  10  Pollard I could go on for days about that probably     Finchum Any trouble you got in? (Laughs)  Pollard There was very little trouble. Not compared to what you hear about these  days. Yeah we had occasions where somebody needed to be talked to or be  set on the right track, but not any real formal punishment or anything like,  we never had anybody getting in any of that kind of trouble. It was mischief,  but nothing of any nature that would cause any concern.  Finchum Didn   t throw anyone in to Theta Pond?  Pollard We saw the   I saw the goat   what   s the name of that big bull? The big  Sirloin Stockade bull, I saw him going to Theta Pond one night with some  kids on it. We had plenty of fun. Some of it was on the mischievous side,  probably not worth talking about, but none of it was mean or   it was all in  fun, and teasing each other, and things like that.  Finchum There   s an urban legend that a cow or bull was taken on an elevator in the  Student Union. I don   t know if that was during or time or earlier     Pollard I don   t remember that one, but that would   ve been the kind of thing that  could   ve happened, yes (Laughs).  Finchum Well, intramurals, did you play your baseball or was it     Pollard Softball. We played softball. We had a really good team. We had one of my  neighbors down the road here that just lives out in the country here and  Fairmont was our pitcher. Nobody could hit him, he threw the ball so fast,  so well, I don   t think we ever lost the game. Hardly anybody ever got a hit.  It was a lot of fun. Intramural football, we played flag football, played  basketball. It was a lot of good rivalry just like there are between different  schools, and high school, or different colleges these days, the fraternities had  rivalries with each other. It was always a fun event.  Finchum Do you have a favorite building on campus from that time period?  Pollard I   d have to say the library.  Finchum Really?  Pollard Yeah.  Finchum Did you have a favorite spot or floor?  11  Pollard Yes, I had a certain floor that I went to. I could probably take you over there  right to the same spot. There were one or two tables right in there, or booth,  that were kind of my place to go. Because at times in the fraternity it   d get  noisy or people would interrupt you and somebody would be out playing  basketball on the basketball court and you   d hear the bouncing of the ball.  Just something was kind of not giving you all the study environment maybe  you wanted, and I found the library was just a great place to go because you  could go there and it was quiet, you could study, some of your buddies were  there, you could take your girlfriend there, or you know   it was just a neat  place to go. It was easy walk and always quiet, and always someplace you  could study and think. I enjoyed the library a lot.  Finchum Which floor do you remember?  Pollard It was probably the third floor on the north side.  Finchum Okay, looking out toward Noble.  Pollard Yes, looking toward the north. I made many walks from Farmhouse to the  library.  Finchum Now it   s a nice walk. They   ve got a pretty walk through there.  Pollard Oh yeah, well everything around there is prettier now.  Finchum Farmhouse isn   t   it was     Pollard Right, then we were north of town.  Finchum North on Washington.  Pollard Now it   s south. It   s changed location.  Finchum Distance wise it   s probably about the same?  Pollard Probably.  Finchum To the library?  Pollard Maybe a little closer back then. Not enough to make any difference. It   s   to  be able to go someplace where you can study and be quiet, really  concentrate   s worth it, worth the walk.  Finchum And air-conditioned.  Pollard And air-conditioned and heated. (Laughs)  12  Finchum Now they allow food, so you   d be even happier.  Pollard Oh really? Oh good, how about that. Now that   d be my favorite place. I  went to the Union a little bit, but not much. It wasn   t really on one of my  paths. Most of my classes were west or northwest side of the campus, or the  west side of the campus.  Finchum Did it have a bowling alley at the time you were there?  Pollard If it did   yeah, I think it did, but I never went.  Finchum What year did you graduate?  Pollard Seventy-three. Went to medical school at OU. There was probably another  ten or fifteen guys in my graduating class at Stillwater that went down to  OU as freshman in medical school.  Finchum Then the better question is who do you cheer for when they play?  Pollard One-hundred-and-fifty percent Oklahoma State University, you bet. Now  that   s always been my home and always been my favorite. Always will be.  Finchum Had to ask. (Laughter)  Pollard I   m happy for them to win most their games, just not against us. It was so  much fun. I mean, I think back at those times the values that   looking at  going to OSU out of high school like I said, I didn   t put a lot of interest in  any other schools, but once I was there, I   ll never forget how comfortable I  felt. It was an environment that everybody was helpful, the instructors were  helpful, the other guys in the Farmhouse were very helpful in helping to get  oriented to college life. I came home after maybe several months of being  there and I   ll never forget what I told my dad. I was so happy I just told him,  I said,    You know, you can go over there and then you can study to be  anything you want to be.    If you want to go to vet school, or medical school,  or go into architecture.  This was eye-opening to me. I don   t know, as a kid from a small town  Hennessey, Oklahoma it was just like opening up the entire world to me  because my life in Hennessey was football and athletics, and studying, and  FFA. Then you go over to Stillwater, then the world is so much bigger and  the opportunities are so wide open. I just thought, man, if a guy studies hard  and puts his mind to it you can do anything you want. It was just   I don   t  know if I was just immature at the time and didn   t realize that, but it was  just a great feeling, a comfort that I had. Then on top of that the opportunity  13  that it created for somebody who was willing to study hard and work hard. It  was just a great, great feeling.  Finchum Did you have scholarships or did     Pollard I went over on a President   s scholarship. It wasn   t a large scholarship, but  you know it was helpful.  Finchum Did you have to work through, or did your dad help?  Pollard No, I worked. I was the oldest of six kids so there wasn   t any way for me to  get help. During the summer before going over there, I worked for a  different farmer to make some money. Then for the first two years, between  my freshman and sophomore, and sophomore and junior years, I went back  to Hennessey to work for the same farmer to make money. Then while I was  at school I worked at the weed   s lab, which is part of the agronomy farm out  west of town. I worked there for probably about two or three years after  school and on afternoon   s when I didn   t have classes and on Saturday  mornings. Was able to make enough money to help with my education so  that   like I said, I was oldest of six kids. I didn   t have access to parents     ability to pay. I had a scholarship, but it wasn   t a big one. So I mostly  worked my way to pay my tuition and books. I had a bank in Hennessey that  would loan me some money when I needed to, to get by. It worked out real  well. It was a lot of fun. At the weed   s lab there     Finchum I didn   t know we had a weed   s lab, it makes sense though.  Pollard It   s interesting, it   s part of the agronomy division and my job was to clean  the weed seed so we had a good crop of weed seed to put out on the crop  ground. Then we would go prepare the crops and plant them with a planter  and a little tractor. Everything was plotted out by the guys working on their  PhDs and their master   s programs. Don Mary was one of the organize  masters there. He later stayed on as PhD, he   s still there to this day at the  weed   s lab. I   ve known him for now forty years I guess, almost, probably.  We   d plant the crops and then you   d put the weed seed out there, and then  you   d have pre-emergent chemicals that different companies would want  you to try. Then you   d have post-emergent chemicals that you   d apply, so  we had to measure those chemicals and calculate how much chemical would  go on each plot, and then you   d spray different rates on each plot, and then  you   d   but the true test was how   every one of the results depended upon  the weed control in the crops.  The weed control was measured by visually looking at it, but most  importantly by how long it took me to hoe the weeds from one end of the  row to the other. So they timed us. Me and another guy we rode weed  choppers, so we had a hoe and so they   d click the stopwatch and you   d start  14  chopping the weeds up those rows up and back. When you were done the  stopwatch would go off and that   s how they determined how well the weed  control was. I told them one day when we were eating ribs down at  Chickasaw  Oklahoma  at noon, I said,    I may not be able to mow at the  same speed this afternoon as I did this morning.    So I   m not sure the test is  going to be a true test. (Laughs)  Finchum I can see that being a variable.  Pollard It   s a little hotter and on a full stomach of ribs you don   t hoe quite so fast;  we tried to be consistent, though.  Finchum You didn   t like it well enough to switch your major again?  Pollard No, no I was pretty set at that time on going into medical school.  Finchum Do you remember what your pay was?  Pollard Oh, not really. I   m sure it   s probably four dollars an hour, something like  that. Wasn   t much.  Finchum It may not have even been that much.  Pollard May not have been. Three-fifty, four dollars and hour back then was a lot of  money.  Finchum How did you register at that time?  Pollard Register for?  Finchum Like was it on computers or did you have to stand in lines, or what?  Pollard I think we     Finchum It wouldn   t have been computers at that time.  Pollard I think we just met with our counselor and filled out the form and that   s  what you got into. I mean you submitted   you had to write it out     Finchum Pencil and paper?  Pollard    submit what courses you want and turn them in, yeah. You usually got  what you wanted. Not many people wanted to take calculus II anyway.  (Laughs) I remember whenever the   but computers were just becoming a  big deal back then. You could take computer science classes. That was some  of the first times that those were offered. Course I thought that that would be  15  interesting at the time, I didn   t do it, but maybe in retrospect I wish I had.  Now I   ve got three great kids that are really, really smart with computers, so  I don   t really need to know too much.  Finchum Just call?  Pollard Yeah, just call and say,    Now what do I do?    (Laughs)  Finchum If you were on a limited budget, how did you do your food? At Farmhouse  I   m sure supplied   or you ate meals there, but     Pollard I worked in the kitchen too there, I forgot about that. I was kitchen boy. We  cleaned all the dishes, put everything way, helped the cook, that was another  means of support I guess. I   d kind of forgotten about, yeah. That was just  part of your tuition   part of your fee to Farmhouse every month was the  room and board, and the meals. I think it was probably the same way at all  the fraternities.  Finchum Did you learn to cook anything that you still do? Or know how?  Pollard No, we didn   t do the cooking. We had a cook, she did the cooking, we just  had to do all the cleaning.  Finchum Do the other     Pollard Yes.  Finchum Do you remember your first day when you traveled from Hennessey to  campus, do you remember how you got there? Who was with you if anyone?  Pollard I   m sure I went by myself in my    69 Cutlass. I had a red    69 Cutlass and I   m  sure I drove there and got over to Farmhouse, probably didn   t know a soul,  and walked in, and said I was one of the pledges, and somebody showed me  where my room was. My first roommate was Greg Thomas. Greg was from  Aline, Oklahoma. Greg is just now fixing to retire from the Federal Land  Bank Service in Wichita, but he was my roommate. Really great guy. He  was my big brother. See they put you with your big brother on your first  year there, so somebody that   s supposed to be your guiding light and keep  you under control, and help you learn the ways of college.  Finchum That   s a good thing. And your parents didn   t go with you?  Pollard No, no. My dad, at this time, he was running a seed   feed and seed  company there in Hennessey. Retired from teaching and was running  manager of a feed and seed store. My mother was probably teaching school  at that time. She taught third grade (she taught grade school) third grade, one  16  through three. They had plenty of things to keep them busy at home. They  didn   t need to be messing with me.  Finchum She didn   t stand at the door crying when you left?  Pollard No, I was pretty independent. I doubt if anybody   my mother might have  looked back and had a tear, but I don   t recall that. They were probably glad  to see me gone. (Laughs)  Finchum You didn   t bring your laundry home to her, did you?  Pollard No, we had ways to get that done at school. I might have brought it home a  time or two, but usually had some way to get that done at the fraternity.  Finchum Would you have to do your own or was there someone     Pollard Most guys did their own, but you could put it in laundry service and they   d  do it for you for a fee.  Finchum If you   re on a limited budget.  Pollard That   s right, you learn how to do your own.  Finchum Once you got to campus it was a while before you came back to Hennessey?  Pollard Probably several months.  Finchum You were   you didn   t get homesick too quickly.  Pollard Well, it wasn   t that far, it was only forty-five, fifty miles, and the summer  before I   d pretty much moved out of the house and lived with the farmer out  there in a school bus because the hours were long and it was best just to kind  of stay in that old school bus that summer. I went home on weekends to see  my family and stuff, but it was just ten miles away. It wasn   t like it was a  long way away, so I   d became pretty independent by that time. Going over  to Stillwater and having guys like friends like that   you made friends real  quick in Farmhouse. Everybody was helpful, and I   m sure it   s the same way  in all the other fraternities over there. Guys go over there and they meet  other guys and pretty soon you say, man, this was good. This is fun.  Finchum If you   re playing intramural sports, and trying to keep up your grades,  there   s not a great deal of time to come home, I guess.  Pollard Right, there   s plenty to do.  Finchum Did you have a favorite professor?  17  Pollard Yes, I did. Several. John Goodwin was my ag-econ instructor. He   s kind of  legend over at OSU. He was a very good teacher and very personable guy,  but he would challenge you. I mean he had a way of trying to get the most  out of you. Then challenging his students. I enjoyed that. Funny story about  him, I turned in my semester final one day and it was the first paper turned  in. He stopped the whole class. He said,    Well, class Mr. Pollard had already  competed his final. How   d you do?    I said,    Made 100. Nope, 110, I got  your bonus point too.    It was so funny (you just had to be there), but it was a  lot of fun and he was just a real good instructor. I enjoyed those instructors  that would challenge you. Not just there just to teach and on the next class,  but the ones that would have some back and forth with the students and get  more involved with them. More personal basis, and do a little bit of a  challenging to them. I appreciate that, he was excellent at that. Another  instructor that I had that I never forget was Dr. Berlin.  He taught organic chemistry. In organic chemistry II, I had been accepted to  medical school already, so there wasn   t any push upon me to make an A  anymore because I   d already been accepted. I guess I kind of felt that way  for a while. I didn   t study very hard for the next test after I   d been accepted  and it showed in the grade instead of making an A like he would   ve  expected me to make, I probably made a C. He called me to his office. I  really didn   t know what to think about that. I thought, what   s he want?  Anyway, I went by to see him and he had a simple message. He said,    I  know you   ve been accepted to medical school already, congratulations on  that. You didn   t give a full effort on the last test. I think you should  understand that if you   re ever going to make the most of your life, do the  best that you can. You should always give your best effort. I would just  challenge you to do better. Don   t take this to your head, come on back in,  and get involved, and do the best you can.    Needless to say, I busted my rear  to ace that one. It was a great lesson.  Finchum End up with an A for the course?  Pollard I think so. I had to do awful well on that last test to get it, but I can   t  remember if I made an A or a B because of the C that I made. I can   t  remember now, but it was just a teacher going out of his way, doing  something extra to let a student know that he cared about you and that you  needed to do the best. It was a meaningful thing.  Finchum Did you come close to failing any class?  Pollard No, no. That wasn   t an option.  Finchum What was the toughest one? Besides   I mean that one     18  Pollard Analytical chemistry. It was a little far removed from some of my interests  and it was difficult. That and calculus II were the two toughest classes, I  thought, for me. I was more of a science and math guy. There was some  math involved in that, but it seemed to be more challenging to me than  anything else.  Finchum Did you have any female teachers?  Pollard Oh yeah, I   m sure I did. I was in the college of ag, so there probably wasn   t  a lot at that time.  Finchum English maybe.  Pollard Yeah, English probably and we had to take some social science, studies,  over at the Seretean Center and I can   t remember really that far back who  that was.  Finchum Was PE required at that time?  Pollard It was an optional and I did have a female teacher in golf. I took one  semester, I took an hour of golf for PE, enjoyed it immensely. Had a lot of  fun.  Finchum Do you still play?  Pollard When I can. I love to play, but I   m not very good. I don   t get to play very  often, but I   d like to play more. It   s a lot of fun, but takes a lot of time. It   s  three-and-a-half hours to go play.  Finchum You don   t have that time.  Pollard I really haven   t had the luxury of a lot of free time in my life. Free time I  have I   ve chosen to spend other ways doing other things than golf.  Finchum Like what?  Pollard Agriculture is dear to my heart and all of my family, pretty much, has been  in agriculture. I got involved with buying farm ground here and farming it  myself and enjoyed that. I started a purebred Angus herd thinking that the  breeding, and the DNA involvement, and the matings would be fun, and it   s  interesting, it   s a real rewarding thing to be involved in. So it   s been a good  part of my life has been in the registered angus business. Of course P K  Equipment became a huge part of my life as I started through my career here  in Enid and in 1985 I took the opportunity to buy a John Deere Dealership  down at Kingfisher. It's the family   it was a store that we dealt with when I  was a kid for John Deere products so I knew the place and it was going to be  19  sold. I looked upon that as an opportunity to get more involved in  agriculture and the business of agriculture, so I was able to negotiate the  purchase of P K Equipment, which is just north side of Kingfisher, which  is the John Deere dealership there. Purchased it with a managing partner,  and onsite managing partner by the name of Wendell Kirtley. Wendell was  in the ag business, he   d been in the Allis-Chalmer business and he became  my partner and he was the store manager, and part owner, and the day-to-day  manager. We started that in 1985 and went through some really tough  times there. There were tough years back there in    85,    86,    87 in  agriculture, tough times, but I kept finding ways to fund it through my  medical practice and keep things going.  Then it became a good business, had a great group of people that were  employees down there. Then several years after that I got the opportunity  too to buy the Enid location. The Enid John Deere store and was able to  negotiate that purchase with the Long family. Later on, I got the chance to  buy the store in Norman, and negotiated that with Purcell. Then it really  started growing. John Deere Company nationwide decided they wanted to  see their dealers get bigger and not have so many small dealers because the  technology was getting hard to manage. You needed skilled technicians at  every location to manage all the computer aspect of the farming business,  and all the technology was going into the engines, and the machinery, so to  be a dealership capable of handling and paying those employees they felt  like you needed to be bigger. So the push was on for dealers to expand and  get larger. So you kind of faced a time there where you were either going to  be selling, or buying, or merging. During that period of time I had a good  staff and I was fortunate enough to hire a general manager who   Scott  Eisenhower who is still with me today. He   s an Oklahoma State graduate  out of the college of business at OSU. Scott joined the team as our general  manager and we the very next day bought the Stillwater location I think.  Several weeks later bought the one in Edmond. A year or two later bought  the one in Tulsa, and Owasso, then Bartlesville. It just really expanded up to  where there   s ten P K locations in Oklahoma. We   ve got probably 250, 260  employees at those locations.  Four-and-a-half years ago, I got the opportunity to buy some John Deere  dealerships in Iowa. Bought six stores up there. A year and a half after that  bought three more, so we   ve got nine dealerships in Iowa and ten  dealerships in Oklahoma. Almost 600 employees now. I   m told we   re  probably the fifth largest John Deere dealer in the nation, which would be in  the agricultural end of it, which it   s not the size that   s important, it   s how  good you are and how well you manage your people and take care of your  people and how well you take care of your customers. We   ve got a staff that  I   m real proud of that we   ve built over years and years that believe in the  same things and same principles that we as the managing people do and that  is that service to the customer is the absolute only way you can take care of  20  a company like this and manage the business. Your employees all have to be  customer-friendly and take care of people. It   s just the same way in my  medical practice. I   ve got a great staff. They greet people properly, they  answer the phone courteously and properly, we treat people like they should  be treated and like they deserve to be treated, and try to take care of them. I  carry that same type of attitude into our John Deere business. Myself and  our manager, and my sons who are part of the business all feel the same way  and expect that of our employees. We   ve got those kind of people as  employees who want to take care of people. It makes it real rewarding when  you look at it that way.  Finchum Quite a bit different from neuroscience or surgery to John Deere.  Pollard Yeah, it   s certainly   there   s a lot of things that are different, but there   s a  lot of things that are the same. I mean you   ve got provide a quality product,  and you   ve got to provide superior service at either one of those businesses,  and you   ve got to have good people. Even though they   re worlds apart in  what they are, the values are the same.  Finchum Kind of keep you balanced too, I guess. Boy, machines have gone up in price  a lot since    85.  Pollard Oh my, wow. It   s not at all   we   ve sold a combine here not too long ago for  a combine they had for  400,000. Some of these new tractors this year,  they   re coming out with some five and  600,000 four-wheel drive tractors  on tracks.  Finchum Air conditioned and GPS units and all that good stuff?  Pollard Everything now comes out of the factory to be hooked up to a GPS. The last  tractors I   ve got, combine, and swather, they all have a little compartment  down here for a refrigerator. They   ve all got the monitor over here so you   ve  got the GPS system. It   s amazing the changes.  Finchum Makes a farmer   s life easier in that respect, but financially though.  Pollard There   s a financial commitment obviously, but as far as getting things done,  and keeping track of things, and keeping records, it   s very good. Some of  the value is hard to realize sometimes for some of the people. I think even  environmentalists. This is a good thing for a lot of people because these GPS  coordinated systems allow you to precisely not overwork the ground, you   re  not overlapping three foot, you   re not wasting three feet of diesel, and three  feet of fertilizer, and three feet of extra chemical, and three feet of extra  seed, and all of that is a waste. You   re able to precisely drive where it needs  to be driven, so you   re not overdoing it, you   re not underdoing it, you   re  covering everything like it should be. So the economy and savings, and fuel,  21  and fertilizer, and diesel, and labor are certainly worth the technology. Then  the environmental impact of less diesel being burned to go over more  precise acres. Less chemical being used that could wash off. All of those  things need to be factored in, so there   s a lot of positives about it.  Finchum As the owner do you get the latest and greatest thing as it comes out?  Pollard Oh yeah, you bet.  Finchum Get to play with it first?  Pollard I   m a firm believer that we need to   I need to understand what   s going on  and we try to keep some of the better   we try to keep the latest stuff out  here so that my guys are running it. If there   s something new that comes out,  we   d just soon have it ourselves first so that we can help understand where  the problems might be and understand how to help the next guy if he has  problems and so we like to stay on top of it. That doesn   t mean I have all  new equipment. We have plenty of old stuff out here too that keeps on a  running. I got tickled one day, a friend of mine in the angus business we   re  in Arkansas, he sells Budweiser beer. That   s his main business. He looked at  me one day and he said,    I just don   t know how you make any money at this  John Deere Business. I   ve got the same John Deere lawnmower now that I  had twenty years ago. I just put a little gas in it, crank it up, go mow the  grass, and everything   s fine. I don   t have to go get a new one. So I don   t  know how you make any money. Heck, every time I hear an empty beer can,  a beer hit the table, I know I   m fixing to make another sale.    (Laughs) I  didn   t have a comeback for him right there, you know? Anyway, maybe  he   ll buy a new lawnmower one of these days.  Finchum In antiques, if it   s twenty years it takes to be an antique, doesn   t it?  Pollard That   s right.  Finchum Do you have any antique ones?  Pollard No, I   m not much into antiques.  Finchum I   ve had centenarians call them Poppin    Johnnies.  Pollard Poppin    Johnnies, that   s right. The old Poppin    Johnny. The old D John  Deere I think was the main one they talked about like that. I grew up on a D  John Deere. It would be like that. I mean you got it started and it had a fly  wheel and it   d go pop, pop, pop, pop, pop, pop, pop, pop, that   s how they  run. It was a great tractor back in its day.  Finchum I mean people choose   they   re faithful to whichever     22  Pollard Oh yeah.  Finchum Most of the ones we   ve interviewed have been John Deere. Nothing but John  Deere. Several of them have claimed to have gotten the first one in their  county. I don   t know how to verify something like that, but     Pollard It   s a long history. It   s been a good company for a long, long time.  Finchum Yellow and green.  Pollard Yes. Green, orange, and black. Green tractors, black cows, and orange  shirts. That   s my life.  Finchum There you go.  Pollard My three favorite colors.  Finchum Let   s get back to OSU for a minute. Graduation day, what do you remember  about that?  Pollard Gosh     Finchum Where was the ceremony?  Pollard I don   t really remember a lot about it. I think it was at the football field,  that   s where they usually had them. I was so excited about getting into  medical school and moving on that it was kind of   I can show you the  picture. My mother and father being there for graduation, but it was a fun  event. I don   t remember a whole lot about it, frankly.  Finchum So you went directly from OSU to OU that fall?  Pollard Right.  Finchum And finished   when did you finish at OU?  Pollard Would   ve been from    73      77 would   ve been graduating from medical  school. Seventy-eight, getting my internship. Finished neurosurgery training  in 1982. Came here to Enid, went into practice in July of 1982.  Finchum How did you choose your specialty area? I mean how did you come to  choose neurosurgery?  Pollard That   s kind of interesting. In medical school, you get a chance to go through  the different specialty areas. I really loved internal medicine. It was  23  challenging and we learned about all the organs, and endocrine system, and  all the heart, and lungs, and all that. That was fun, but I really liked to use  my hands. I really liked to do things with my hands, always have. I think  surgery was just   I was born to go into surgery I think because I just loved  to do things and accomplish things. You just feel a sense of accomplishment  when you put your hands on something and you fix it and you see the x-rays  and it   s fixed. Makes you feel good. I mean there   s something really good  about that for me to see it with something I wanted to do. I thought a little  bit about internal medicine, I thought a little bit about cardiology, thought a  little bit about pediatrics, but very little. I thought that would be a field, but I  spent five weeks with a pediatrician in Chickasaw and realized I did not  want to field phone calls from mothers at nine o   clock at night about their  children   s sore throats. I changed. Thoroughly enjoyed surgery.  Thought mostly then I might go into orthopedics, but then I spent some time  on neurosurgery rotation and just really loved it. Met some really good  people. It was, again, probably the most challenging area, one that most  people are afraid of, most people don   t understand. Most people just say,    I  don   t want to have anything to do with that, that   s too complicated.    Maybe  that   s what drew me to it. That plus, I just met some good people, enjoyed it.  Had a great instructor in medical school who taught neuroanatomy, Dr. Alex  Roberts, who was one of the best instructors I   ve ever been around. He won  the outstanding instructor award down there almost every year. He was an  integral part of me getting interested in it. Meeting some of the guys in the  field of neurosurgery and some of the residents. I just fell in love with  neurosurgery. It was   took about three years really to figure out what I  wanted to do. But once I made that decision I   ve never looked back.  Finchum Why Enid? Why start in Enid?  Pollard That was pretty straightforward. There were three large groups in Oklahoma  City, they asked me to join them. I really didn   t want to live in Oklahoma  City. I   ve got nothing against Oklahoma City, I just didn   t want to live in  a   I preferred to stay connected to the agriculture background. If I   d have  stayed in Oklahoma City, it would   ve been hard to accomplish the things  that I felt like I probably wanted to accomplish or be involved in the lifestyle  that I wanted to be involved in. I couldn   t see myself just going home, or  going to the Country Club, and playing golf, and going to social events in  the evenings. I just   it wasn   t me. I knew it wasn   t me. I thought me as  being outside as much as possible, and me as probably being on a tractor  some, and me as probably owning some cows, and me as probably being  involved with the agriculture lifestyle. That   s where I grew up, that   s where  my roots were, I thought that   s where I needed to be. It   s where I felt  comfortable. It was just more my upbringing. My comfort zone was not in  Oklahoma City lifestyle. It was more Enid, America, lifestyle. I live here ten  miles from the hospital. I can be at the hospital in ten minutes. In the  24  country as you can see, surrounded by my cows, and my guys out here that  help me farm and take care of the cows. I can step right out the door and get  in my pickup and go get on the tractor, go help feed, go drive around, look  at my cattle, help make decisions we need to make on farming. It just suits  me better.  Finchum How many cows do you have, roughly?  Pollard Somewhere around a thousand. Probably about 700 cows and then with their  babies and some of the bulls out there and stuff it   s probably about a  thousand head out here within probably six miles or seven miles from here.  Finchum You ride the fence rows?  Pollard (Laughs)  Finchum Have somebody do that.  Pollard We drive around them with a Gator. (Laughs) You take your hammer and  nails and you drive around them with a gator and fix everything.  Finchum At that point you could   ve moved out of state, but you chose to stay in  Oklahoma.  Pollard Yeah, I almost went to do my residency in Kansas City. I went to San  Antonio, went to Dallas, and Kansas City, and St. Louis, and Columbia,  Missouri, and looked at residency programs and actually had chosen Kansas  City to go to. But whenever at OU when they found out that I had made that  choice I was given an offer I couldn   t refuse to stay here. They said if I   d  change and stay here they   d leave it as a four-year program one more time  instead of turning it to a five-year program. The extra year was going to be  operating on rats and I said,    You know, I think I   ll just stay here then.    I  did a little operation on a few rats, but I didn   t want to do a whole year of it.  Anyway, it was a good choice and I   m glad I stayed in Oklahoma. I didn   t  really entertain leaving the state to go and practice anywhere. I just wanted  to stay back, I wanted my career to be built around the practice of  neurosurgery, but I also wanted it to be built around the agriculture  background. It   s worked out real good I think.  Finchum Rural health care, I guess as a neurosurgeon that   s not one of your areas.  Pollard It   s not really because neurosurgery is usually practiced in an area where  you got to have a referral   s base of a hundred or two hundred thousand  people. So you have to locate in a city at least the size of Enid to be able to  draw the people you need to have to keep your practice busy. But rural  health care is an important issue for me because my rural background that  25  these people out here have good health care. That   s one reason Medical  Cowboys are so important because the facts are the Oklahoma State  University has a much higher attraction to the kids from smaller, rural  Oklahoma towns because of our agriculture base. Even though we   re in a  very well-rounded university, we still have a very strong agriculture base.  As a land-grant college, we were kind of charged with educating those. It   s  my firm belief that to get people to go back to practice in rural America they  have to come from rural America. I don   t think kids from St. Louis or  Midwest City are likely to go out to Beaver, Oklahoma, or to Shattuck,  Oklahoma, or Cherokee, Oklahoma, and practice medicine because they just  don   t. So if we can provide scholarships for those kids to go to school,  they   re more likely to go back out there to a smaller community and  practice. Hopefully programs like the Medical Cowboys will help serve that  purpose. We hope.  Finchum These days, a typical day for you is what?  Pollard Oh a typical day? Get up at six, start the coffee pot, go get on my email,  answer the emails that I need to or that came in late, get out of here and be  up to the hospital by seven or seven-fifteen, have surgery at seven-thirty  every morning. Surgeries last from seven-thirty until I   m doing one, or two,  or three cases every day, depends on how long they last, but we have a time  slot up there that lasts until one-thirty or two o   clock in the afternoon. So  every day I   m up there in surgery form seven-thirty until roughly one or so.  Then we go to the office and see patients every afternoon. Thursdays are the  occasion   the exception. Sometimes I don   t see people on Thursday. We  usually do see two or three patients on Thursdays because we can   t get them  all fit in the rest of the week, but ordinarily on Thursday afternoons, I can  get out of there about four or five o   clock sometimes. Usually I   m there at  the office until about six or six-thirty. Then I come home. Depends on the  time of the year     Finchum If it   s not dark.  Pollard If it   s summertime, if it   s harvest, I go straight to the combine and when I  show up they know that one of the combines is mine. I   ll go get on one  because I love to drive the combine. We   ll cut wheat until ten or ten-thirty,  whatever we do, and that   s during the harvest time. Rest of the time  whenever we   re farming we don   t always have enough people out here to  get the work done, so I   m kind of the   sometimes the evening and weekend  farmer. I enjoy that. Big part of the time I   m going out here to the barn  talking to my herdsman who takes care of the registered cattle or one of the  guys out there and just seeing, what   s going on, what do we need to decide,  what do I need to help with, I like to be actively involved in selecting the  breeding for all the animals. The mating   s are important to me, it   s a big part  of what we do. All the cattle are AI   d  artificially inseminated  and I like to  26  pick that. I like to select that. There   s sales going on September, October,  November, big sale, months for Angus.  We   re going to a sale, or one of the guys are going to a sale, or there   s an  online sale we   re looking at almost every weekend: Friday, and Saturday, or  Sunday for a couple months. You got to be skilled at knowing what you  want to purchase, what would help your herd, and managing that. I enjoy  that. Almost every day I   ll talk to my general manager or my sales manager  at P K or my son who   s our business manager at P K. I talk to one of  them every day. Then every Friday my general managers and I get together  on the phone and we talk about the week in general. Then we try to have a  monthly meeting at the P K that   s the staff. My manager and sales  manager, they have a service manager, and my son who   s the business  manager, we all get together once a month roughly. Then there   s other  meetings with P K that we go to, sales meetings, and things like that. I try  to go to as many of those as I can. There   s never a dull moment. We   re  involved in a lot of stuff.  Finchum What time do you finally lay your head down?  Pollard Oh, we seldom go to bed around here until about eleven-thirty. Eleven-thirty   s  about the going to bed time around here it seems like. There   s just  something going on all the time. My wife   s been the chairman of the YWCA   Young Women   s Christian Association  for the last two years. She   s the  chairman   the president of the Enid Food Bank, Regional Food Bank, this  year. She   s been on the board of the Women for OSU for a couple of years.  Finchum We should back up and ask how you met her.  Pollard We actually met here in Enid. She worked at the hospital.  Finchum Did you get married after you finished med school then?  Pollard Yes, I was already here. So she   s involved in a lot of stuff. We   ve got a  couple of grandkids. Only one lives here, a couple live in Tulsa, and a  couple live in South Carolina. My oldest son, he is in the computer world.  He lives down at Norman, he has a   his company does electronic medical  billing services for physicians and computer services in general. He   s got  two separate companies. One that takes care of computers and the other one  is a billing service. He stays really busy at that. He manages all the phones,  and the telecommunications, and all the computer systems for P K too.  That   s my oldest son. My youngest son, he   s a business manager for P K,  he   s our office manager and business manager. His wife is finishing her  internship in Oklahoma City in internal medicine and then they   re moving to  the Mayo Clinic next year. He   s going to   she   s got a position up there for a  27  three-year residency in anesthesia at the Mayo Clinic. So they   re fixing to  move     Finchum Minnesota, right?  Pollard Yep, and then my middle-aged son, his wife got her PhD in genetics and  went out to South Carolina to do a fellowship, four-year fellowship, in  genetics. That facility hired her to stay on as one of their managers. They  live in South Carolina and they   ve got a little boy, little girl, grandchildren  of mine. Looking forward to seeing them here at Christmas.  Finchum So three sons. Did they go to OSU?  Pollard One did. Two went to OU, one went to OSU. We have a lot of discussion  about our schools. I   m the only one who has been to both (Laughs).  Roxanne has a son and a daughter, so we have a lot of fun with the kids.  Finchum Do you get to go back to campus very often?  Pollard I do. When I graduated and went to medical school and then came up here  and started and practiced, that whole period of time from leaving OSU,  graduating, until I   d been in Enid for probably ten years was a period of  time where I didn   t do much but work. I worked through medical school at  Bone and Joint Hospital as a scrub tech, I worked during internship and  residency at three different hospitals and stayed on the weekends to make  money, I came here and was trying to start a practice by myself, and build  up a reputation, so for that whole period of time there I really didn   t do  anything but just work. Can   t remember what year it was, but the OSU  Foundation approached me. Ross McKnight, and Malinda Berry Fischer,  and Kirk Jewell approached me about being on the OSU Foundation, one of  the governors. I thought, well that   s a great opportunity. I started going back  to a few ball games and I really enjoyed going back to the campus because it  was the energy and the student atmosphere. Just the electric feeling of being  back in college and around the campus was a real excitement.  We started going to a few basketball games, and a few football games, I just  kind of got the fever to kind of get more involved. Then the foundation  came and asked me to be on the foundation so I said yes. I was on the board  of governors for a year or so and then got asked to be on the   one of the     on the board of directors. Enjoyed that. I spent two years as chairman of the  OSU Foundation. The two years that we were in the middle of the billion-dollar  fundraising campaign. It was a great time to be the chairman of the  OSU Foundation because president Hargis is an avid supporter of wonderful  fundraiser, and great personality. I spend a lot of time at the foundation with  meetings, and about fundraising, and about organizing our staff, and about  how to go about doing what we do as a foundation, and hiring the right  28  people, trying to grow the staff, spending time with Burns going to different  functions to talk to donors, and supporters, and alumni. It was a really fun  time. Got to meet a great many of fantastic OSU alumni.  We would go to   we took a couple years where we went down to the  colonial golf tournament. Boone Pickens has a suite there on the eighteenth  hole and he would let us use that to entertain all of our alumni in the Dallas,  Fort Worth, area at that tournament. That was   a lot of folks that I met there  that live out of state that are OSU alums and live there that are great  supporters. Different events like that that we had as a foundation. Sponsored  events that get you in touch with a lot of the alumni and a lot of the  graduates and just some of the really successful and great people that have  gone to OSU. It was a very rewarding, very rewarding time to see the  commitment that the Kirk Jewell and the people at the foundation have to  OSU is a   it   s a warming feeling to see somebody   all those people are so  committed to one cause. That is to try to raise funds for the university for the  betterment of the students and better the educational quality. It   s a great  feeling   great group of people, great purpose, and raise a lot of money.  Who would have thought that Oklahoma State University would be one of  the few universities to raise a billion dollars in a campaign.  Finchum And quicker than they thought.  Pollard Yes, and you get to meet such great people who had ideas about how to get  that done. The idea that Mr. Pickens had about matching funds was just  wonderful and his generosity to let people name their scholarships in their  name or whatever name they wanted to. Didn   t have to use his name even  though he   s putting up half the money. What a generous idea. Other people,  I could name them by the dozens, and dozens of people from   that I   ve  been involved with at the foundation that have had such good vision and  have offered such good ideas and have helped promote the foundation and  the fundraising efforts and have been willing to sacrifice not only their time,  but money, to help see the university grow. Then to see what   s happened  and to see how the money spent to know where it   s gone, to know that we  formed a special committee on the foundation, the Donor Relations  Committee, just to make sure that the donors feel the appreciation that they  deserve for the gifts they   ve given. That   s the only way you   re going to  make people feel good enough to want to see the fruits of their gift and want  to do it again is only if they can see what good it   s done. Those kinds of  ideas that have come out about all of that to make it what it is today. It   s  been a good feeling; it   s been a great   well one of most rewarding things in  my life   s been on the OSU Foundation.  Finchum You   ve got a lot of orange around this room to show some of that (laughs).  29  Pollard Oh yeah. My wife   and I have her to thank for that. She decided to remodel  the house a few years ago and I   m the kind of guy that I come in the back  door, change clothes, and I   m right back out the door in the evenings. I don   t  pay a lot of attention to what goes on inside this house sometimes. I came  home one day and I looked back here, and it looked a whole lot different. I  stepped back here and they had done this room this way. They had done it  all without me knowing. They just kept the door shut. So they put up OSU  memorabilia and OSU things we   ve accumulated through the years and  filled the room with it. It   s pretty neat now.  Finchum It is very neat. So have your grandkids   do you anticipate any of them  heading in that direction?  Pollard You know, I   m happy for them to go wherever they want to go, but I just  pretty much told them if they wanted me to help them with their education  funding they probably should consider going to Oklahoma State University.  So I don   t want to put any pressure on them, but I   ll probably help them out  a lot if they want to go to OSU. (Laughs)  Finchum Take them to Grandparent   s U?  Pollard They go, yeah Joannie   s already going. She   s going to a few football games,  and she   s already talking about her time coming up to be an OSU student.  Finchum This room will help with that too.  Pollard Yeah. I won   t have much trouble with several of them. My one son and  daughter who graduated at OU are pretty loyal OU fans. I might have a little  trouble convincing that one, but I   m not going to give up (Laughter). Not  going to give up on it. She comes here and I say,    Go Cowboys.    They don   t  like that. They like for her to say,    Boomer Sooner.    We   ll battle that  forever.  Finchum I   m surprised you haven   t painted one of your tractors orange and black.  Pollard Oh no, no.  Finchum That conflicts with the John Deere I know, but     Pollard We put a little orange and black on the Gator over there the other day.  We   ve had a Gator now that goes to the football games and it goes out on  the field and it   s all boom boxed up and everything. The announcer, I think,  at OSU he   not Larry, but the guy that gets out on the field and incites the  crowed, he drives it around. They had Rickie Fowler on it the other day, so I  got a picture of Rickie riding around on the John Deere Gator. It   s got a little  orange on it. It   s not as green as it used to be (Laughter).  30  Finchum If we   re looking forward, what do you expect the next ten years?  Retirement?  Pollard For me? People always ask me when I   m going to retire from the practice of  medicine and I   m not sure, I really don   t know. I think I   ve still got a great  office staff, I still have a very devoted group of girls that help me, we still do  a good job, and there   s still a big demand for our services, right now I won   t  even have a partner again until August of this year. I   m finally getting a guy  that   s going to get out of the military. He   s had a three-year commitment  and he   s committed to come back and join me. So I   ll finally have some  help in August. I might practice a few more years. There   s a lot of things I  like to do with John Deere and the agriculture stuff I   m involved in. There   s  always a possibility of getting involved in something else too, but right now  I   m happy with the way things are going about. Pretty happy about how  things are going. If I do decide to retire from medicine, there   ll be a little bit  of a hole there, but I think there will be plenty of things for me to fill it up  with. I still enjoy all the things that I do.  Finchum When you do have down time, is it riding the tractor or is it doing something  else?  Pollard There   s not a lot of down time. I can fill it in pretty quick.  Finchum When you take a vacation, what do you   or do you take vacations?  Pollard My wife asked me a few years ago, she said,    Are we ever going to take a  vacation?    I said,    What do you mean?    We go to neurosurgery meetings,  we go to John Deere meetings, and we go to OSU stuff, and we go to the  bowl games. I mean   the angus show is in Denver every year and you get to  go. There   s lots of places we go, they   re just not real vacations.  Finchum Not a week on a cruise.  Pollard But we did take a real vacation a year ago. It was her birthday, her sixtieth  birthday, we went down to Grand Cayman for four days with her favorite  cousin. That was a vacation.  Finchum That counts.  Pollard We   ll see; we   ll take some vacations. By the time you go to a neurosurgery  meeting once or twice a year and go to a John Deere meeting somewhere  once or twice a year, to an Angus meeting or to Denver every year, you   re  spending a fair amount of time. Plus, we go to California in October every  year. There   s a couple of Angus sales out there that I go out to every year so  it   s a little bit of a trip. It   s only a three-day deal, but at least I would call a  31  trip for her benefit. We   ll   we   re looking at doing something after  Christmas. I kind of reserved some time. I figured we   d probably go to the  bowl game, just don   t know if we   re going to Orlando or to the Alamo  Bowl. Guess we   ll find out.  Finchum Pretty soon. I   m hoping Orlando.  Pollard She doesn   t mind those kind of vacations. The Orlando vacation   if they go  to Orlando that might be a little more involved because she   ll probably want  to gather the grandkids up and make the Disneyworld trip out of it. That  may mean a little bit more involvement right there. Might be a little bit more  than a few days gone.  Finchum You   ll all have to wear orange on that day if they go to the park.  Pollard Absolutely.  Finchum Do you have any advice for future students or current students for that  matter?  Pollard I   m always full of advice.  Finchum Interact with their professors it sounds like because one of the things you  would say.  Pollard Interact with the professors, take advantage of the time you have with them,  certainly enjoy the experience, the overall experience, it   s a great time in  your life to grow relationships and to meet people, and meet people you  didn   t know in high school, meet people that are from different parts of the  United States. Different parts of the state having different ideas. There   s a  lot of things to be learned in college life that they need to take advantage of.  It   s important to have fun, but it   s important to study, and it   s important to  grow your value system and keep your value system and keep your eyes  open. I think sometimes we can learn as much from seeing what other  people do wrong as sometimes we can learn from seeing what other people  do right. You should be able to look around and stay aware and know what  path you want your life to follow. And those are important things I think you  get an opportunity to learn in college amongst a lot of other things. Study  hard, and then try to find where your passion in life is. What interests you?  What   s going to make you want to get up every day and go to work? What   s  going to make you feel good about what you   re doing every day? Try to  walk through that garden, and see through the weeds, and see what you want  to do. I started out thinking about veterinarian, and then I started thinking  about medical school, then I started thinking about is it going to be  pediatrics or internal medicine?  32  Is it going to be orthopedics? Is it going to be neurosurgery? You decide on  neurosurgery and then after that you decide, well what kind of life   what do  I want my life to be like when I walk out of the hospital? What do I want to  do at six or six-thirty at night? Do I want to go home and get on the couch or  go out to the Country Club and meet? Do I want to go play golf? Do I want  to go fishing do I want to   do I enjoy farming? Do I enjoy cattle? Do I  enjoy   what do you want to do? What do you want   do you just want to  have   committed to your family? What do you want? Try to spend some  time finding that area that interests you, that makes you feel good. Hopefully  everybody can. For the most part I think I have. That doesn   t mean I haven   t  made mistakes. Doesn   t mean there aren   t a few things in my life I wish I  would have changed along the way, but you adjust, and you learn, and you  go on. Hopefully you can do something that is rewarding to you and also  helps your society and the people around you and your family. I think that   s  what   s important. I just feel blessed that I was able to go to Oklahoma State  and be around those kind of people, be able to find my way through all that.  I wouldn   t have had it any other way. I would go back again if I could.  Finchum You came from a good foundation too; I mean your parents set you on that  path too it sounds like.  Pollard Sure.  Finchum And you were smart to diversify. You   ve got several passions, not have just  one it sounds like.  Pollard I think you just live but once as far as I can remember, so I try to do it all as  much as I can.  Finchum If you had to go back would you choose the same path at OSU? I mean  you   re happy with your career choices?  Pollard Sure. Yeah. Probably the best thing that happened to me was not being able  to have glasses when I was a senior. I didn   t hit that ball as well as I thought  I should, that probably changed my path right back there. But no, I wouldn   t  change anything. Like I said, you look back on it all, there   s things you wish  you could   ve done different or decisions you wish you made different.  That   s that way in everybody   s life I   m sure.  Finchum You might have made an A on that test instead of a C.  Pollard Yeah, well making a C on that test probably helped me out too.  Finchum Taught you something too, didn   t it?  Pollard There   s probably something to be gained from that for sure.  33  Finchum And you said you were in the glee   no, it was singing     Pollard Varsity Review.  Finchum Did you sing?  Pollard Yeah.  Finchum You could carry a tune?  Pollard Well, you   re in with some other people. They blend you in. However,  yesterday I was on the phone. I had to call back a physician with an  insurance company because they needed to get clearance to do the surgery,  one of the surgeries I was going today. So you have to get these   sometimes  you have to get   the insurance company wants you to get it approved. So  they had a doctor call me and he needed to talk to me about the case. I got  on the phone and I said,    This is Dr. Pollard. I understand you want to talk  about Ms. So-and-So. What can I help you with?    He said,    Oh my god, you  sound like Blake Shelton.    (Laughs) He said,    My wife and I listen to the  voice all the time, your voice sounds just like Blake Shelton.    When you  mention did I sing, I blended in with the other guys, but I don   t know what  was wrong with that microphone, that phone, yesterday, but I don   t think he  was hearing Blake Shelton on the other line. (Laughs)  Finchum Do you know the song? Alma Mater?  Pollard Oh yeah, it   s better if you have the words up there in front of me, but yeah I  can go along with it. Proud and immortal.  Finchum Loyal and true.  Pollard Loyal and true. It   s a great university and I   m certainly happy to see all the  changes that are being made. It   s progressive and continually building.  Making things prettier. The brick and mortar   s one thing, but the attitudes  and the teaching, the quality of the teaching, and the environment is the best  thing. I understand they   ve got some money donated now towards the nice  dairy barn facility. We   ll soon have a new horse facility and there   s going to  be other additions coming along. President Hargis is real interested in the  performing arts center. I understand they   ve now got a lead donor for that.  So that   s all going to become a reality. The university continues to move  forward, and continues to get better, and provide the atmosphere and the  brick and mortar, and the scholarship money that   s needed to continue and  do what they do. It   s going to be more and more difficult all the time, I  think, with education to be able to come up with the scholarship money, and  34  be able to fund education because the cost just keeps going up and there   s  competition out there.  There   s online stuff you can go to now, there   s universities like UCO   University of Central Oklahoma , they   re growing because people can live  at home, don   t have the fee of the dormitory. Then you also lose that  dormitory and fraternity experience, which are very valuable I think for  kids. The demands on the state funds are tremendous. The story   s been told  that whenever I went to college the state provided probably seventy-five  percent of the money for education. Now it   s more like twenty-five percent.  So much more money has been diverted to other social programs and prison-system.  All the other entitlement programs that they   re just   education has  suffered somewhat by a loss of funds to other competing needs that the state  has. The private donations and scholarships become more and more  important all the time. As President Hargis has said,    We   ve got to learn  how to function like a private institution.    We have to learn that we   ve got  to support our university if we want to keep it. The one we remember and  keep it going. Us as alumni need to understand that and to be generous in  trying to help out.  Finchum Well then that leads us   we need to talk about your professorship. The  endowed professorship. A little bit of it.  Pollard I wanted to do something for the college of agriculture, the college of  business first. I wanted it to be kind of a shared professorship, but looks like  we   re going to settle on it being the college of ag for agribusiness. So I put  funds towards that so we   d have a chair for that position. I   ll be   something  I   ll be involved with hopefully. I meet with them very year.  Finchum What will it be named? Have you decided?  Pollard It   s the Berry Pollard/P   K agribusiness.  Finchum What   s that stand for? P   K?  Pollard P   K was Pollard and Kirtley. That   s the John Deere dealership name, it   s  called P   K.  Finchum I figured the P was Pollard, but didn   t know what the K was.  Pollard Wendell retired many, many years ago, but I just left the name the same.  Finchum Then the other thing I had read, you had something to do with wind  turbines?  35  Pollard Oh, that   s kind of a thing in the past now. For a while we sold wind turbines,  we were involved with a wind turbine company trying to promote wind  energy for homes, and for schools, and vo-techs. We put some of those up. It  didn   t turn out to be   there   s a lot of people interested in it, not that many  people really wanting to do it still. The return on the investment is still about  six, or seven years, or eight sometimes. People want that to be less and until  the technology catches up a little bit better it   s probably going to be a little  less desirable for people. The big companies and the big wind turbines are  doing a good job looks like in providing electrical stuff, but for houses and  business it   s just not quite there.  Finchum They   re popping up everywhere.  Pollard Yeah.  Finchum Not individual homes like that, but   I had read though that there was  something to do with one that was in the business building?  Pollard Down at OSU we put the one down in Oklahoma City at the college for the  students to study on and study. It   s part of their education process is to have  a wind turbine at the university down there in Oklahoma City campus for  OSU where they can study the wind energy technology.  Finchum Your finger   s in a lot of things.  Pollard (Laughs) I have a lot of help.  Finchum That   s a good thing. And you have to keep them in good shape too to do  your surgery. When you   re doing things on the farm do you protect them?  Pollard Oh, I try to. I try to be smart with what I do and I think I   ve learned through  the years. I probably haven   t put on as many gloves as I should   ve and I  probably had my hands in some places I probably shouldn   t have been. I  made my dad a promise about probably twenty-five years ago. He walked  by whenever we were out here working some cattle and I was castrating  some bulls. He just told me he didn   t think I needed to be doing that. He  said,    You probably ought to be letting somebody else do that part of it. You  can do everything else you want to, but you probably ought to leave that  alone.    Down there working with a knife between the bulls    legs and him  kicking and the skeet shooting. He just thought that that probably wasn   t a  good idea. I did elect to give up the castration of the bulls (Laughs).  Finchum One piece of father advice you took.  Pollard I decided to get in the registered Angus business. We don   t castrate them,  we let them be bulls forever, see? So I just changed how I raised the cattle  36  (Laughs). That   s about the only thing I didn   t do, but we try to be smart, try  to be careful. We don   t want anybody being hurt.  Finchum I didn   t realize how close this was to Enid, so you   re in a nice location here.  You can get to campus pretty quick.  Pollard Ten or twelve minutes I can be at the hospital if I need be.  Finchum And about what? An hour? Maybe not quite an hour to get to OSU?  Pollard A little over an hour. We   ll start going to some of the basketball games now  that football season   s over.  Finchum We need some fans in the stands.  Pollard Yeah.  Finchum There weren   t many there last night.  Pollard It   s   I don   t know what   s happened exactly. The Thunder probably taken  away some of the fever     Finchum It   s a problem across the country, it   s not just here.  Pollard So I hope they can figure out a way they can get more involvement.  Winning always fixes a lot of that though.  Finchum It does, doesn   t it? (Laughter) We   ve covered quite a bit of things. Is there  anything else you want to talk about before we close out?  Pollard Gosh, I don   t know. We have covered a lot, so I suppose not.  Finchum I usually have people   my last question is when history   s written about you,  what would you like for it to say? How do you want to be remembered?  Pollard Oh, I guess I   d like to be remembered as a good physician. Got to take care  of a lot of people and did a good job. And as a father who took care of his  family and helped grow them up right. And as a community advocate and  somebody who tried to give back to the university and to his community. I  think those are the key things.  Finchum I   d say mission accomplished.  Pollard We   re working on it.  Finchum I appreciate you taking your afternoon to spend with me.  37  Pollard Thank you.  Finchum Quite a pleasure.  Pollard I appreciate you coming over, it   s brought back a lot of memories thinking  back to college.  Finchum Good ones.  Pollard Yeah, a lot of good ones. I appreciate it, thank you.  Finchum You   re welcome.  -------  -------   
