 Gill and today is November 6, 2008. I   m visiting with  Dr. Lester Johnson in his home in Stillwater, Oklahoma. This interview  is for the O-STATE Stories Project of the Oklahoma Oral History  Research Program. Dr. Johnson, would you share some information  about your early life, where you grew up and your family? A little about  before you came to Oklahoma State.  I was born in Ravia, Oklahoma, on April 5, 1918. Spent my early years  there, finished high school there in 1935. My background is farming. My  dad was a farmer and a rancher   mainly ranching   and we had all kinds  of livestock. That   s my background and the reason I   m in veterinary  medicine, especially the large animal aspect of it. This is what I had in  mind whenever I could accomplish it for a long time. I went to Murray  State College first and then came to Oklahoma A M College. My first  degree  was  in education at Oklahoma A M. There was no veterinary  college at that time here.  What year did you graduate?  1939.  And then you went to Texas A M.  Went to Texas A M and received my DVM     Did you spend any time out of school in between?  Yes, I spent time in between my graduation from Oklahoma A M and  Texas A M in World War II; spent three and a half years in the Air  Force and two years in Europe with the Eighth Air Force. Then came  back and finished my veterinary work and practiced in Ada, and then a  short term with the Agriculture Research Service in Dallas. Then moved  5  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  up here for what I thought would at least be a short term to get some  experience and that turned into 30 years.  So you were in World War II. Were you stationed in Europe?  I was stationed, most of the time, in Europe   in fact, two years to the  day from the time I passed the Statue of Liberty to the time that I came  back and touched U.S. soil.  Two years. What job?  I was in the air weather service with the Air Force; enjoyed it. Very  interesting work; meteorology is to me an interesting type of work.  Challenging.  Had you thought of that as a career maybe?  Sure did. (Laughter) It was a tough decision to change, if I hadn   t gotten  started in veterinary medicine I might have wanted to step right into a  job on discharge they were trying to get us. And you knew aviation was  going to really boom once we got into the peace aspect of it. I sure did  have a time to make a decision but I wanted to be a veterinarian. So I  did.  Is there a story about how you got to Texas A M?  Oh yes, there is. It is a long one so I won   t tell it all. At that stage, they  were taking only Texas students. They had all they could do to fill their  quota with Texas students. I was told how to get in. I did apply at  Colorado and I inquired at Colorado, Kansas State and Iowa State and  the one I could get into sooner was Texas A M. I was told that I would  come in and they would let me in as a special student. Once I was there,  and even though I didn   t make the next class, I would slip into the first  vacant slot they had in that class. They said,    We will have drop-outs  and I   ll put you in one of those drop-outs.    So in a way I didn   t have to  compete with the Texas students to get in.  Great.  I made it, and another thing, there was kind of a gentleman   s agreement  (that may have been more formal than I realized) between Oklahoma  A M and Texas A M on the acceptance of students. I sense I was there  as a Texas student even though I wasn   t. I always thought it was a  gentleman   s agreement because we didn   t have a veterinary school in  Oklahoma   that if they could they would take Oklahoma students and  that   s kind of the way it was.  6  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Well, just a sidebar, understand that we sort of reciprocated in some  years because at that time it was all male.  Oh, yes.  So we would get some of the women that applied that couldn   t be  accepted into Texas A M. We took some of those women, is that right?  That   s right. When I came here we had, I guess the first   not the first  girl, but there were just a few years we had   most of the girls were from  Texas because it was all male down there, military, and they weren   t  accepted but we had a contract with Texas to take their girls. So they  came here and we had some good students from Texas.  Their loss was our gain.  That   s right and at the time they went co-ed down there, we had a girl  here that, I don   t know, she must have been about her third year and she  could have gone either place. She said,    No I   ll stay here. I like it here.     She went on and finished her degree here. But it was interesting, being a  military school and how they felt it and how they did and how they  accepted students and I was glad that they thought enough of me and my  application to tell me how to get in and that   s what they did.  That   s great. What do you remember about your program at Texas  A M? Any professors you remember particularly?  Going to school there, you mean? The thing that I thought was good  about Texas A M, it   s the most friendly place I had ever been. One of  the things that impressed me was with the youngsters coming in   the  first year students. You had better introduce yourself and speak to  students   anyone you saw, speak. I guess that communication and  friendly aspect was really to know how important that was. I noticed that  we did it here, but not like they were down there. In fact, the upper  classmen watched the lower classmen and if they didn   t (laughs) they  had them do a little extra duty.  Did you have to learn some of the Aggie traditions?  Oh yes, oh sure.  Even though you weren   t an undergraduate but a professional?  You did anyway. Of course they had their bonfire. And the interesting  thing about it, I already had the military, the hard way and interesting  thing about it was, when they decided to do something or protest and  7  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  just wanted to get something done as a unit, they   d fall in the line and  march to the Presidents    office and tell them what they wanted, rather  than one or two go in; it had an effect.  You said growing up on a farm influenced you to go into veterinary  studies. Most of your career was in equine practice? So what drove you  to that direction?  Well, I guess really it   s   my dad used to say he made his living out of  cattle and made his money out of horses (laughs) because he liked fine  horses and of course we had to have horses, then, on the ranch to do the  work and to pull the wagons. He got into the American Saddle Horse  breed and had some real good ones, had some national recognition with  his horses. I showed horses, he did and I did too as a kid for a number of  years and that   s how I got into the horses. Now, as far as my practice, I  would say my interest was large animals especially. I never thought I  would be just strictly an equine practitioner because I liked both. I liked  to be able to help the beef man and the dairy man and the swine man, for  that matter and their endeavors to make a living out of it. So I had an  interest both ways. When I came here I did just about everything that  involved large animals.  This was at Ada?  In Ada.  How long did you practice there?  I practiced there, I think, for four years.  You were telling me a little bit off camera how you came to Oklahoma  State. Who influenced you to come to Oklahoma State? A student, a  professor?  Before I was working at the Agriculture Research Services at that time  in Dallas and the people at the University of Missouri, which was a  relatively new  veterinary  school, also. I went up there for an interview  and they wanted someone that could do their outside field work with the  college herds and the farms around Columbia and they offered me a job.  But on the way home I said,    I believe I   ll stop by Stillwater just to  visit.    I ran into Dr. Wolfe, J. Wiley Wolfe, and we had a short visit.  First thing he said,    I   ve got a spot here, would you like to come to  Stillwater?    Of course, I had a preference for Oklahoma. One thing I  thought during the war was,    If I ever get back to Oklahoma or the  Southwest, I   m not going to leave.     8  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  So you decided to stop by Stillwater?  Yes, and after our visit, he decided he was interested and I was  interested and my wife happened to be with me. He talked to Dean   Harry William  Orr and I would say within about three hours with a  lunch in-between, I was on my way to Stillwater permanently. I had to  go back to Dallas to give them notice and I started the first day of July  1954.  Things are different now.  They   re sure different and they   re different at that time because now you  go through the affirmative action aspect of it and it takes a while to hire  somebody, but the situation was such then, as I said, in about three hours  it was all done.  At this time did you still have your practice in Ada?  No, I was still with the Agriculture Research in Dallas. I was there about  six months.  I see. Well in 1954 you got to Oklahoma State. Can you tell us a little bit  about the college and the facilities? I   m sure it was little bit different.  It sure was a lot different. When I came here, the present part of the  present building, about a third of it was there. The rest has been built  since. Let me think a minute, the anatomy of the first year or two, the  program was over in what they called TF9, it was about halfway  between the present facility and the main center of the campus. That   s  where it started out and it was one of the buildings built during the war,  the temporary building.  The barracks building?  The barracks building and that   s where they had their anatomy   where  they started and the  College of Veterinary Medicine . The dean   s office  was over in Life Sciences. So we were scattered in about three or four  places over the campus. After the second wing was built and I can   t  remember when that was done, that was several years later. By the way,  the small animal clinic was in the south wing of the old large animal  clinic, what had been intended to be the sheep, goat, and swine part of  the building, so they modified it to the point where that was where the  small animal clinic was. My first office was in a horse stall. (Laughter)  Another interesting thing about it, the department head   s office was up  on the third floor and we used to joke about it, he got up there and hid  and you wouldn   t go see him because it   s too much trouble to get up  9  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  there. (Laughter)  What were some of the equipment, some of the facilities? Can you  describe some of them for us?  We had the old horse and cattle operating table that came from Fort  Reno. In fact, Fort Reno was closing down about that time and they gave  us quite a bit of the old equipment. One thing about that was it took so  long to put a horse or a cow on the table. It took a lot longer to get them  on than it did to do surgery on them. So consequently, we had a mat, just  like a wrestling mat, we   d put them down on the floor and we   d do our  surgery on our hands and knees. The first one  operating table  was a  wrestling mat. When I came here, they were using a wrestling mat that  they had gotten from the athletic department and that   s what we put  them down on to do the surgery  (Laughs) That   s a great story. What were some of the offices   you were  in a stall?  I was in a horse stall. It was, I   d say a roughly 12 by 12 and it was built  for the larger horses, or the draft horses or Percherons. Most of the  clinicians were in those stalls. I had a part-time secretary and we locked  them with the padlock from the outside and she would come whenever  she could. I   d leave her work to do and she   d come and do the work.  One Saturday we worked until noon on Saturday and one Saturday I  didn   t know she had come in and I had gone out and she had come in to  do her work. I came by and put the chain on the thing and locked the  door  (Laughs). Dr.  Lewis H.  Moe happened to be out on a call and  came by and heard her kicking on the door trying to get out. I don   t  know when she would have gotten out and she accused me of course of  doing it on purpose, but I didn   t. But fortunately he let her out. She was  in there about an hour.  Who was the dean then?  Dean Harry Orr.  Who was it that talked to you about joining the faculty?  Dr. J. Wiley Wolfe.  Was he the department head?  He was the department head of surgery and medicine and director of  clinics.  10  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  What was your first teaching assignment? We were talking earlier about  Equine as your specialty.  I did sporadic diseases of large animals. That   s mostly the non-infectious  diseases aspect of it. It was a six hour course and we had also taught  restraint of large animals. How to catch them, hold them without getting  hurt, and I taught that aspect of it. I didn   t make any difference. I did the  horses, sheep, swine and cattle. At that time we had quite a few dairies  around here. So dairy cattle and beef cattle, of course, that aspect was  our main practice. Horses had declined because of World War II, but  they were coming back and it was several years before they came back  and became a major force and a different type of horse too. Of course,  racing has always been for entertainment.  Draft horses?  Yes, draft horses. We quit seeing draft horses, though we did see a lot of  mules. And I don   t know why, but for some reason Shetland ponies  became the most popular. For awhile those little things were worth gold  almost, but it was a fad type thing. There were two really large Shetland  pony farms in this area. Then quarter horses were coming on and more  popular and with time became fairly important to Oklahoma   s economy.  So generally, the Shetland pony fad is part of it, it was a light horse type  of the practice.  Quarter horses?  Quarter horses, race horses, and show horses like the Tennessee  Walker   s American Saddle Horses gradually declined. The one that is  popular right now for show horses in addition to the Quarter Horse are  Morgans. There are some nice Morgan horses in the state.  Can you tell me some about some of the faculty that you recall?  The organization of the college was different than it is now and where  faculty from our point of view were short because of the case load as  well as the number of people you had to do the work. I did mostly large  animals. I think I probably was hired to do medicine, but I did all of it,  medicine and surgery. I took the place of Dr. Henry and at the same time  Dr. E.W. Jones came and he was the surgeon, but we didn   t cut the lines  out fine. We all tended to do the same thing. Dr. Lewis Moe had been  here a long time and he was our farm or ambulatory clinician and he had  a fellow, Dr. Paul Cardeilhac, a fine young man that helped him.  At that time, we didn   t have formal class work in the summer in clinics,  but we kept it open because we felt like we had to support our clients  11  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  and keep a clientele so we could have the animals come in during the  school year. And that was an interesting thing for us because we didn   t  have to prepare for classes but we   d still do the work and the students  liked it because we would hire two or three students to help us and they  got to see and do everything that came in and they liked that aspect of it.  Later on, I think it was about 1970 when we went to a year round  program and we thought,    Well we have got the facilities. Why don   t we  go to the year round program?    and we did. That   s much what they   re  doing now with some alterations.  Was Dean Lewis still around at that time?  No, no. Dean Mac was. Dean McElroy. Clarence McElroy was. He had  just retired when I came here and Dr. Orr had just taken over. By the  way, Dr. Orr taught me physiology when I went to school here back in  the late    30s.  Did you sort of gravitate to equine later in your career?  We tend to kind of gravitate species-wise and even though we thought of  it early as just large animals, we got to thinking in terms of food animals  versus   as the horse became less important as the beast of burden     work animal s  and more for pleasure. We think, as we do now, of the  horse as a companion now. So even though I continued to do cattle work  all the time while I was out there, I had had more experience with horses  than anyone else there at the time. So I gravitated that way, and we  gradually built a pretty good size horse clientele.  You said earlier your love of horses came from your dad.  My dad and my background on a ranch, and even though I still like the  horses, I like the cattle and the sheep and swine. I guess next to the horse  I usually did more work on cattle.  So you wound up staying at OSU for 30 years, from    54 to    84? Did you  think you would stay at OSU that long?  I had no idea. I came as an assistant professor as a three year  appointment and I thought I   d stay here a year or two or three and then  I   d move on. Well, I didn   t for awhile (Laughs).  Did you think you would get back into practice?  That is where I would have gone in my earlier thoughts, but I did enjoy  the students, teaching and working with the students. You have a student  that comes in, to be plain with it, kind of green; leaves here, able to step  12  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  out into practice, provide a service, and make a living. It was good to see  that.  Well, I   m going to come back and ask you some questions about that,  because I know you   ve had some lifelong relationships there, but what  was the attraction to keep you here for 30 years? I   m sure you had other  opportunities to go other places? What is about OSU that kept you here?  Of course, I like Oklahoma. I   m an Okie from way back.  You got your undergraduate degree here.  Undergraduate here, and I liked Stillwater. Still like Stillwater. As I said  earlier, once I got out of the service, I was going to settle in the  Southwest. I didn   t want either of the coasts. Too many people. Not  enough apples. And that   s, I guess, my main thoughts all along and had I  gone into practice somewhere else, it would have still been in this area  because I just liked this area and this state. People from Oklahoma, I  think, are the best. I guess that   s my background.  Can you recall some of the faculty and the administrators that you  admired and respected over the years?  Well, of course, shortly after I came, after Dean Orr died Glenn  C.   Holm came as dean. Being a new school and I guess most, maybe all, go  through similar growth pains, he did a lot (I always thought) with a little,  from a standpoint of finances and the things that we needed, and  somehow we got things done. Of course, Duane  R.  Peterson and Dr.  Jonathon  D.  Friend were in anatomy; they were the first ones that got  the shot at the students. They did an excellent job in giving them a  background to come in and do clinical medicine. Dr. Leslie  E.   McDonald was head of physiology. Dr. Wendell  H.  Krull, a noted  parasitologist, international renowned, was head of parasitology. And  shortly after I came, Andrew  W.  Monlux became head of physiology.  What was then called, I believe, bacteriology and later microbiology was  headed by Dr. Lynn Gee. And they were all good people. Good,  qualified people in their field.  I heard some talk; there is a very collegial aspect there. Can you tell us  some stories? There   s got to be some good stories. Some funny,  humorous stories about your colleagues?  Well, the thing I always   I think it was because we were not just loaded  with money and equipment and things to do, and we had to make do     we worked together. We   d go out to Lake Carl Blackwell, picnics and  visits. There was a good rapport, generally speaking, with us. We were  13  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  all working towards the same goal and that is producing a good student.  I think we all enjoyed our work, even though it might not have been the  best circumstances.  To tell some of the interesting things, I can recall a number of animals  getting away from us   large animals (Laughter)   because we didn   t  have a way to contain them. I can remember one old cow that started  running down the hall and someone had failed to close the big door that  was to the outside and it still had a four-foot drop and she leaped out of  that thing (laughs) like she knew what she was doing and we saw her  going out across country.  Have you seen her again since?  Yes, we found her. (Laughter) We caught her. Dr.  David A.   Schoneweis was there. Dr. Schoneweis and I got a tractor and trailed her  like a dog and we caught her over there on the west side of the animal  science pasture. Roped her and tied her to a tree, went and got a trailer  and brought her home.  And let   s see, one other thing that   s interesting   and some of them  didn   t particularly, especially some of the small animal people didn   t  think  so    we stopped at noon to have our lunch and we came back and  here   s a dog running back and forth on the roof of the large animal  clinic. (Laughter) We found out that somehow he had gotten out of his  cage, had gone upstairs, on the third floor was a dormitory for sixteen  students   there were students that worked that helped us out there, got  out a window in their shower and was running back and forth. The small  animal people didn   t think that was funny at all (laughter) and I got a  picture of it. Dr. Walt Rice,  who  was head of small animals, said,    Can  I have that picture?    and I said,    Yes.    I thought he wanted to save it;  it   s the last time I ever saw it. (Laughter)  He tore it up and threw it away. Well, you talked a little bit earlier about  students and you working with students, can you recall some of the  outstanding students you had over the years, from the time they were  students here to later in their practice in their professions that stand out  for you?  The first students that I had; now this was third year   third year is when  I really started teaching in clinics as well as lecture courses and this year  we had one of them named Outstanding Alumnus, Dr. Louie Stratton, at  the conference this year he was named Outstanding Alumnus. And Dr.  Ray Henry over at Pawnee was always very supportive and was helpful  to us and we tried to reciprocate. I didn   t teach him, but he finished the  first class that he had here. But I got to know him. He was a good man.  14  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  We had some of the students that went on nationally and internationally  to accomplish something. I hate to start naming   there   s so many of  them, I know I   ll leave out some good ones. But we had Bob Whitney  that was Assistant Surgeon General for the federal government for years.  We have one now that is head of Plumb Island Research Station on the  east coast. There   s another one   one also out in that area that was  interested in wildlife and was quite well known. There are plenty of  them that don   t come to mind right now, but I might think of them a  little later on if we have a chance to slip it in.  Were there any special students that you were a mentor to?  Oh, a number of them really. It   s kind of the same way, I felt like it was  my obligation to be helpful to the students after they graduated if I  could. And they would help me if they could, if I needed help, and it was  great because we could reciprocate with one another and it was quite  frequent   well all of us went out on consultation, especially in the  clinics. And working   this is one thing about coming here   out in  practice, the people that you could call on and consult with were few  because not many were veterinarians. Here there were a number of them  you could call in other areas or other departments that would help you  out, if you felt like you needed to talk and consult. I thought that was  great.  How have vet students changed over the years for better or for worse?  They   ve changed. Well, I guess you could say they   ve changed with the  times and with the generations. Many of the students that we had early  on were I guess from rural backgrounds and they had some farm  experience, ranch experience from a large animal standpoint. Some that  came here without any large animal experience still went into large  animals and some vice versa, they went into small animals, some of the  farm boys because there   s a difference in the physical work that you do  and the type of work.  Early on I   d say we had mostly the rural background students that came  here. And then I believe there was one girl in the first class when I came  here, June Iben, and there were years when we didn   t have any  females   and then the first girl we had to graduate was Janet Grantham. She was  out from western Oklahoma. I think she   s still active. I see her every  now and then and she makes meetings. And of course we had the  contract with the Texas students and more girls came in and I don   t  know the percentage right now, but I think over half of the students are  probably women.  I think it   s about two to one now.  15  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Just turns out I think, I wouldn   t say predominantly, but it still turns out  they probably would go to small animals. A concern that I   ve had in the  last few years has been probably the lack of food animal veterinarians. I  believe that   s being recognized now and they   re trying to do something  about it. I don   t know what they can do. But that   s a factor.  You being close to your students, what are some special qualities that  you   ve always appreciated about OSU students?  Well, I guess the first thing, they have to realize that the curriculum is  very time-consuming. And I used to tell them, you can do it because  you   ve shown that you have the scholarship and the academic ability to  do it, but don   t ever fall behind and say I   ll catch up next week because  it never tends to arise. The time is not there to recoup, so you better stay  up. I   ve had students that have dropped out of veterinary school, just  saying I   m not willing to put this much time into it. And that   s fine  because that   s too long to go to school and still find out you   re in the  wrong profession. So the characteristic, that I would say, is the ability  (in addition to the academic ability) is the ability to stay with it and like  the work and enjoy it because after all it is work, especially with the  large animals. But it is, I think, very rewarding and you   re  accomplishing something for society. Even all, almost to a fault,  sometimes (back early, especially) are kind of workaholics. They need  to wake up and be able to do something else too rather than just work.  Do Oklahoma kids have a good work ethic?  They do. They have a great work ethic. We had contracts with other  states and they sent us some good students, Arkansas, Carolinas, West  Virginia, Dakotas, and Nebraska. They would send us good students. Of  course, they would actually send good students because that   s what they  wanted to do.  Surely you   ve got some stories to tell on Dean  Michael D. Lorenz? Did  you have him as a student?  Michael was an excellent student. In fact, he was an outstanding student  the year that he graduated from the university. Good person, his interest  was small animals and he would chide at me every once in awhile about  something to come in about large animals. But I tried to chide back.  Anyway, even though I would see him at meetings after he graduated  and kept up with him, we were in different areas and attended different  sessions of meetings because of his interest. But I think as a dean, he is  really willing to look at the overall picture.  I thought you might have some good stories or some dirt that you could  16  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  give us on him.  No, unfortunately (laughter) because of his interest. Even though I had  him in class and contact with him, and went through the clinics and did a  good job, he wasn   t one of those that knew he was going to be large  animals and was going to follow the clinician round and learn everything  he could and that type would tend to   things would happen and come  up, I might tell you one. I won   t tell you the name. I was told in school  that the most dangerous animal we would ever work on was a dairy bull  because they   re moody. And you never know when they   re going to turn  on you, but at the meeting last week I saw this student and he said,    Do  you remember seeing me in the stall with a bull and you told me,     Would you please come out a minute?    and I walked out?    He said,     You just did that to get me out of there because I was in a dangerous  spot.    And he said,    I appreciate it.     He didn   t know where he was?  No, he didn   t realize it. He was a city boy; you talk about the city vs.  country. He had no idea; he thought that the bull would just be fine, and  he was, but you never know when they   ll turn.  You were interim head of surgery for awhile?  Medicine and surgery.  You   ve worked in the industry and I want to pursue that in a little bit.  But in your professional career, what has been most satisfying, most  rewarding to you?  Teaching, yes, the education aspect of it. In both to the pre-professional,  as well as afterwards, the continuing education aspect of it because I  think it   s one of those things you can always learn more and a better way  of doing things and that   s continuing education; teaching is really where  my interest was and still is.  What was your special joy that you got from teaching?  That student that came in green and went out a professional. You   d see  him or her and you can recall some of those students and how really  green they were the first time they hit clinics and how they were able to  get out of here and handle things, work on a mean bull or horse without  getting hurt. You can   t make a living for yourself and a family in a  hospital bed (laughter) so you better pay attention to this restraint.  In later years, in your practitioner experience, did you all have some  17  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  good stories to tell at some meetings?  Oh meetings, at one meeting one of the fellows got up and said,    I  challenge some of you to tell some of your goofs and some of your  mistakes.    And that was hilarious. (Laughter)  Well as I talk to you, you still have a smile in your voice and I can tell  you enjoyed it. What   s kept you going for so many years in your  profession? You worked 30 years and obviously you   ve stayed  interested.  I guess just loving my work. I liked the work and the animals, I don   t  know, I make a distinction about loving animals and liking animals. And  for me personally,  it  is the liking animals and to work with them rather  than loving them because you can get too emotionally attached with that  loving aspect if you   just talking semantics. I always liked animals and  liked working with them and you   d see this animal that you can help.  One of the things that gratified me a lot was working with dairy animals  and thinking of the person that   s milking these cows and making a living  out of it, a good living out of it too. And that is, if you have one that she  drops in production just the slightest amount, that dairyman knows it.  The good dairyman will call the veterinarian and find out why. And if  you can do something to that animal to get her back to her top  production, that   s very gratifying to me.  It sounds like you liked the animals and loved the students.  That   s right. Yes. (Laughter)  Well, also Dr. Johnson, you had a long distinguished career in Equine  Medicine and Veterinarian medicine. But in addition to your academic  duties, just to read off some things, you were the President of the  Oklahoma Veterinarian Medicine Association 1975-1976; you were  recognized as the Oklahoma Veterinarian of the Year in 1983; and there  are other rewards you received. Can you share a little bit about your  philosophy of working with practitioners, with alumni in the field, in the  horse industry, and comment on the importance of the relations?  Well, from the public relations standpoint, when I came here I thought  that was very important. Dr. Wolfe, the department head agreed. Of  course, as a new school, we wanted to build a decent reputation, a good  reputation and we were willing to go out and help veterinarians, whether  they were our graduates or not. I had as many good friends that were not  our graduates that I didn   t teach as I had students that I had taught after  they got into the profession.  18  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Early on in your career we didn   t have any graduates out there?  That   s right, and the thing that I noticed when I came to Oklahoma,  about the south half of the state were Texas graduates and the north half  were Kansas State graduates. And then a few scattered and others in-between.  But I didn   t want to make any distinction and I wanted them to  help us and I wanted to help them. As president of the OVMA   Oklahoma Veterinarian Medicine Association , the state association, I  knew at one time just about every veterinarian in this state. I felt like  with most of them I had a good relationship.  How did that play out? Was it important in two ways? Of course it was  important to them at the college you personally stayed close to them, but  important to the college as well.  Yes, we needed the support and as the alumni we needed the goodwill.  And they needed our goodwill and help. Going out on the consultation,  many of them just weren   t quite sure that they were on the right track.  Most of them were, but they just wanted that reinforcement. But of  course if they weren   t, we would help them or try to help them and it  worked out very well, I thought. We didn   t have the extension service     we had it, but not like we have now and especially in the clinics, in the  large animal clinics, we went out a lot. If they wanted to have a meeting,  a small meeting and have a speaker, if we had someone to go, we   d go.  And we did not expect anything for it.  No reimbursement for travel expenses or anything?  No, most of the time the clinics for other schools were willing and did  furnish us a car and we weren   t out anything except, I believe, the time.  But I still think that was one of the best things we were able to do here  from our public relations standpoint was go out and help them.  Did you form a close bond with the racing industry?  Not too much as some of the veterinarians because I was really in a  different phase of equine practice. And racing here, of course was not  legal, pari-mutuel wasn   t until more recent years and I did have some. I  think I had more close relationships with veterinarians involved in it  from a consultation basis than owners. I didn   t feel like really we should  be competing particularly with that veterinarian say that   s down in  Oklahoma City trying to make a living out of it at the race track, unless  he needed our help. We didn   t want to take clients away from them  because we were paid a salary to do our teaching and do our job. One  thing that Dr. Wolfe told me right off when I came,    You   re working for  OSU; just don   t take tips. You   ll find people that will want to do it.  19  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Don   t do it because you can   t; it just won   t work out.    And I think he  was right.  Horse racing people are interesting people.  They are.  Some characters. Have you got some stories you can share with us about  your experiences working with some of the horse people?  Well, of course, they want that horse that comes in first. They want that  head in front.  Sure they do. Just a nose even.  One of the things that I was always concerned about, especially with  young horses, was that I felt some of them are running too young. But  when you talk to them and they explained it to me that their business and  their desires, I could see this point of view. They wanted this horse to  make a reputation as soon as he could, especially a stallion for breeding  purposes because that eventually is what they hope to make some money  on. The winnings were fine, but the horse still had to have the reputation  before he could have a breeding reputation that could produce offspring  that could win.  There was a farm over at Perry; I guess he was a famous race horse that  had a reputation for producing winners, and he could make some money  out of that as a breeding animal. Out in western Oklahoma they had a  horse called Jet Deck, I forgot some of the names of those horses, they  were quarter horses and race horses that produce winners. And, of  course there were, in thinking about their relationship with themselves,  they support one another, yet they   re fiercely competitive when a horse  is out there running against the other fellow   s horse they want that horse  to win. (Laughter) And they have some pretty good theories (not always  very legitimate) on how to get that horse to win. It is the same way I was  with the show horses with the American Saddle Breeds for a long time;  it   s the same way because it   s pride of ownership and they want to have  that winning horse.  Did you get asked some strange questions about performance?  Oh yes, you have that. Of course another thing though is you sure better  stay legal and keep it legal or else you   ll get in trouble and that   s what I  did. And I   d instill that in the students.  Did you get asked questions individually?  20  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Not much, because if you never start it, you won   t be asked much. But  no, there wasn   t a great problem there.  How important are the relationships for the college? You   ve got all the  duties of teaching and research, you can be full time just with the  academic responsibilities and so on. But is it important to take time, for  professors, faculty members today as well as when you were teaching to  stay out in the industry and to stay engaged?  Very important, to me. And there are people that sure don   t agree with  me and don   t agree with going out without substantial pay, but I think  just from a public relations standpoint and goodwill, I think that is very  important. And to me it   s one of the reasons that I enjoyed it because I  felt like I had helped the student, I could help a professional out in its  practice. After all, if we   re trying to provide a service and make a living,  we expect a decent living. A person that does that I think will make a  decent living for himself and for his family. You have to be careful that  you   re not a workaholic, if you can. And I guess there was a time that  maybe I bordered on a workaholic, maybe I was, I don   t know.  I think you went to an awful lot of meetings.  I did.  Dr. Johnson, I picked up on when I visited with you, your passion for the  business and for your field. Looking back on your career, what were  some of your favorite memories that stand out for you? Some high  points, some special times?  Well, of course, you mentioned it earlier, some of the awards or  recognition that I had for teaching. I had several and I really appreciated  it. I thought I should do a good job. I tried to do a good job and here my  results are out there, so judge them for me. (Laughter) I feel like,  generally speaking, that that   s where I got my most pleasure, as far as  the work in general. Now the basic work though, helping that animal is  also important, but I want that student to have that same feel towards  them and do it.  Does the teacher get a special role because you   re teaching animal  health but you   re really   more than you   re teaching students about  animal health, you   ve got that dichotomy of both sides you are working  on.  And you mentioned animal health, we also have to think of public  health, the human aspect of it and the relationship of the veterinarian to  the public, the public health and the health of the person. Especially  21  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  dealing with food animals or farther than that animals that have disease  that are transmittal to man or vice versa.  That   s becoming more of an issue, currently.  That   s right, yes. This is why I mentioned earlier the   I   m wondering  about the food animal aspect of it because we need food animal  veterinarians to assure that we have a healthy source of food.  We talked about some of your high points, what were some special  memories, some special moments, some other ah-ha times you had?  Well, as organized medicine I enjoyed serving; I was a delegate for a  number of years and then went up and got on the ladder and went up to  the presidency. Organized veterinarian medicine, I think, is very  important. I think every veterinarian should join their organizations  because you can do more as a group than you can individually and  everyone sometimes needs help, regardless. Some of the things that were  issues early, and well I guess right on through, were admissions to  veterinarian school and of course serving on various committees of the  schools and especially those that might have to do with admissions.  There was a time when that was a big issue here, I don   t know if you  recall it or not, but we had to meet certain requirements. We felt like  we   ve got to follow those requirements to assure that a person can get  into veterinarian school and accomplish his will and goals as a  veterinarian student to become a veterinarian. You have a pretty good  idea by the time they have gone through the process of applications and  interviews and such whether that person can do a good job or not. There  are persons, as I mentioned earlier, who will get into veterinary medicine  and find    this is not for me    and they should get out. It   s too long to  spend in something you don   t like. Not that they couldn   t do it, but  there   s certain things in  other  professions that I wouldn   t want to get  into.  I mentioned meteorology; I was very interested in meteorology and  could have easily gone that way. I was very interested in climatology.  It   s very challenging. And I think there are phases of veterinary  medicine that if a person can handle it all and wants to, that you can find  a niche. Industry, schools, teaching, practice, and the variety of things  that you can do. I think it   s a good thing to get into and know that you  can make a decent living if you wish too. But it is back to, I think, the  first thing is time consuming. If you   re familiar with the book All  Creatures Great and Small they emphasize the service aspect of it, it  says,    You must attend    which says you have to be available to do your  work and your job.  22  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  On the other side, we   re talking about some of your highlights, if you  will, have there been some frustrations, some disappointments? Some in  your career that you couldn   t get it the way you wanted it to go?  Well, I mentioned one earlier. Not really at this point, and in a way, not  important. In a way it kind of is. Thinking of the history and just what  you   re doing I think is a good thing. I have tried for a long time to get  them to get a museum going out there. The equipment has changed. We  have so much better equipment, the technology and the things that go  with it. Some of the old stuff, I don   t know where it is now and whether  they know where it is out there.  The thing that may have pushed me so much was at Texas A M, they  had a museum. We would go in there when we had a little break and  look at some of the things and some of the stuff was real old stuff. We  had in here, really, especially since Fort Reno gave us a lot of their  material when we established the school and they closed, they wanted to  get rid of it. I would push it (laughter) but it seemed like I couldn   t get  anywhere. But the main thing we need is room. And somewhere there is  a collection of stuff, unless somebody just trashed it, that I think would  be very     and you could tell some good stories seeing that. It would be a  reminder because we had to in restraining a horse back in the early days  we didn   t have the chemical stuff that we have now.  To sedate them.  It was mechanical. So if we had a big horse, how are you going to get  him down? It   s mechanical, put on a harness, put it on him and put it  down and there were a number of ways of putting him down. And one  that really impressed me as a man that could do that was Dr. Lewis Moe.  He had experience in the army as well as here and he went to school at a  time when they used the mechanical restraint to restrain a large animal.  He was trained to do that?  Yes and it   s a technique that not everybody has that can do it and not get  hurt. And that   s why I taught that out there for years, over 30 years, and  to me it was very important   and we were fortunate, I don   t think we  ever had a serious injury.  Seeing that museum, I could just imagine that wrestling mat that you got  as your operating table.  Then when Dr. Jones came about the same time I did, of course, he did  surgery and he along with my helping him some worked up some  anesthesia for large animals where we could put them on the mat, stand  23  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  them on the mat, give them the medication and they would drop. That  was better than putting a harness on them (laughter) pulling them down  with man power and the same way with a bull.  Still trying to see in my mind   visualize it, getting on your hands and  knees to operate. That must have been tough on your knees after awhile.  Some of them used to tell,    You better quit doing that, you   ll ruin your  knees.    Well I didn   t ruin my knees but I do have some knee problems.  You had a chance to observe for half a century now or more of  veterinary medicine. How has veterinary medicine changed over the  years?  Of course, it   s been gradual; how a person that graduated in 1950 would  go into practice now with maybe the same general type, say large  animals or small animals. I think they would think they were in a foreign  land, a strange world, because we have made so much progress.  In technology?  In knowledge and technology and what we have available to use to treat  those animals, and we can do so much more. One thing I didn   t touch  on, when I was in school it was thought you didn   t do abdominal surgery  on horses, it was too risky. It was done, but not common like it was with  other animals. But now it   s a fairly common occurrence to open up the  abdomen to try to correct something and be successful and when I  graduated, to most people it just wasn   t done. You can say that   s a  similar thing with other surgeries that have occurred and, again, the  medications, we use very similar medications. We stop and think, most  mammals basically are very similar, you have the species differences  that you have to account for and you can adjust for that.  What changes have occurred to small animal clinics and practice for  companion animals? Has that changed?  Yes, probably because of the size and type of facility that you have to  work with. The size of the animal is important. You can have much  more sophisticated equipment. They can come to the hospital, a small  animal hospital and you can do your work there with the best of the  equipment or anything that you need. But if you have to go out into the  field, say you have to do a cesarean on a cow or something like that, it   s  not near as convenient. You just don   t have the things that you would  like when you tie one down between two trees. (Laughter)  Sanitation factors a little different?  24  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Yes. (Laughter)  Are there any trends you see that aren   t good for veterinary medicine?  Really, probably if anything, it   s not being able to serve all facets. And  again, I   ll mention food animals, I hope we can get more food animal  practitioners because of the importance to just people in general.  Again, looking back. You   ve been associated with the OSU program for  50 years, for over half a century. What has been, in your mind,  significant achievements or milestones in the college?  Well, I   ll start again with surgery in horses   abdominal surgery. A long  association with that was the anesthetic medications that were developed  and the anesthetic machines that were developed; some of those were  developed here.  What about some of the things at OSU particularly? You mentioned the  antiplasmosis thing? Was it Dr. Holm that worked in that area?  As the Dean, of course, he really supported it. The other that did a lot of  work, not all of the work but a lot of the work, was Bill Brock. Dr.  Brock later was our Dean and he developed the antiplasmosis vaccine.  Going back historically a little bit, Texas Fever was one of the things  that got them to establish the veterinary school at Texas A M.  Antiplasmosis was a great factor in getting the cattlemen (that was  causing such losses to get the cattlemen) to push to establish this school  the second time around. Of course, first time, when Lowry Lewis was  here, that was back in the teens, but that push by the cattlemen along in  the    40s was very important in getting this school established. And the  number of veterinary students that wanted to become veterinarians.  There   s some animal disease work that you talked about, there   s some  things that Oklahoma State has made a name in for itself. You think of  Oklahoma State in veterinary medicine, you think about what kinds of  achievements or milestones we   ve come across?  Well, of course, the vaccine that Dr. Brock developed was one of the  first and the anesthesia and the anesthetic machines that Dr. Jones  worked on, that was early. They used to have some projects here on  disease-free pigs   swine. Of course here, I   ve said we used to have  more dairy cattle than we do now. Going way back, they did some hog  cholera work here. Just trying to think, in small animals, surgery for  diametric hernia for cars hitting dogs and rupturing the diaphragm. And  equine infectious anemia. Worked with that. Getting the program  through the legislature to get some support and rabies vaccination     25  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  promoting vaccination for rabies in mammals.  Was getting the teaching hospital a part of   ?  Well, I was thinking about the physical plant, yes. That was some work.  They built the   now we call it the old part of it, which was the north  wing out there where the library is, they built in that    Like I said we  were scattered all over campus. The offices were. And the thing that  those accredited veterinary schools, really, they didn   t criticize our  product or students, but our physical plant. We were on probation for a  long time just because we didn   t have an adequate physical plant until  we got that teaching hospital along about 1980 or    81. Then we got off  and got full accreditation.  Full accreditation for the first time and it was opened in the late    40s?  Yes, it took all that time. And it was one of those, I guess you could say  about frustrations, it was one of the frustrations; it was over the hill it  seemed but we just couldn   t quite get up that hill and get over.  Kept moving.  It seemed like all the time that I was out there in my early years, about  every four or five years, they   d say,    Draw up some plans    and we   d get  this from higher up.    We want to move along with this hospital.    Then  we   d do it and the funds were not there. I don   t know how many times  that happened. I don   t how if you could put your finger on it. You  couldn   t put your finger on any one person I don   t believe. When they  decided to get up the hill and get over it and build it, but there were a  number of persons: veterinarians over the state, the faculty and our  legislators now. The two that I noticed probably the most at that time  when I was involved were     Senator Murphy?  Bob Murphy, Senator Murphy, and Dan Draper.  Dan Draper, Speaker of the House?  And there were others over the state that really got on the bandwagon  and helped us do that. Otherwise we still would have been doing those  four and five year remodeling jobs that we didn   t have money to do  anyway.  That   s great. Like I said, getting the accreditation was really special.  26  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Getting the accreditation and it always was pleasing to me in one way, in  that they were not criticizing your product. You   re putting out a good  product but you have got to have physical facilities and that   s why the  probation  went  on and on and on. It was quite a relief to get fully  accredited. Just the emotional feeling   yes, you   re approved now.  Was it exciting? I mean you   re a teaching clinician, you know the  clinical work and to finally have a teaching hospital?  That   s right, and the facilities to do so. I was on the committee that  planned the thing. The one thing that I learned, when you stop and think  there are not very many teaching hospitals, there   s not many architects  that have had experience building one and this fellow that helped us, told  us. On his background were human hospitals and some of the things  that     Drain pipes     Just doesn   t work  And you got drain pipes on a hill. (Laughter)  I heard a story about your operating table. Did you guys design a pretty  unique operating table?  Yes and I would say all of us in large animals were involved in it and  had input, but Louie Stratton, I guess, really pushed that and got money  to have a prototype. Because see, this is why I said at the beginning, it  took you so long to get a horse on and off the table than it did to do the  surgery and that   s why we said,    Well we can drop them on a mat and  do it and be through    We had to do it down on our knees.  I understand you had the hydraulics to put the horse on up and down?  See if you stop and think you   ve got a horse, say he weighs 1200  pounds. He   s not going to get on the table; you   ve got to put him on the  table. Well, he   s out of it then you   ve got too much to move. But if he   s  not sedated somehow he   s hard to get on there and keep on there    til you  can get him under anesthesia. Usually you put him up the side, start  fastening to the table, give him a tranquilizer and then maybe short after  the anesthetic, hastily tilt the table, rotate it, get him on it, tie him down,  get him on anesthesia and do your surgery.  Seems a lot safer way to do that?  It   s a lot safer way to do it. (Laughter)  Dr. Johnson, in your opinion, what has been the strength of OSU   s  27  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  College of Veterinary Medicine through the years?  I would say producing good, qualified practitioners that can go out in a  field whatever their choice is and do decent work and grow from there.  I   ve heard something like maybe three of the last twelve years, the  President of the American Veterinary Association has been from OSU.  Yes, we   ve had three of them. For a young school that is pretty good.  Pretty impressive.  Pretty impressive.  Our product has been pretty much recognized.  That   s right. It   s recognized now that we can produce a professional  person that can do their job.  I understand that your persona wouldn   t admit to this, if you would give  some advice to current and future faculty and administration of the  college, what would it be?  In the university in general, you   ve got your research, extension, and  teaching. Of course, my interest is teaching and I guess my advice would  be think of the teaching and what you   re producing and try to continue  to produce a good product and a better product. You have to think of  both, of their service they   re going to provide to the public as well as  doing a decent job and making a decent living. Do it in a safe manner.  Dr. Johnson, if I could ask you this, if you could put your humility aside,  what do you think your legacy has been with your 30 years at the  college?  Oh, it   s no doubt, teaching education. That   s what I liked and a person  that is doing what they like to do, I think, will do a decent job. Now, of  course, this is not to downgrade research and extension. Both are  important   you   ve got to have this research. Some people are good  researchers and not necessarily good teachers and vice versa. And the  continuing education aspect of it that   s both to the general public and to  the profession that   s out there, I think it also is very necessary. We just  had a conference here last week. Had a very good attendance and what  I   ve heard a very good conference, but that   s the continuing education  aspect of it and that   s important. But to me, personally, it   s teaching.  And actually continuing education is teaching as well?  28  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  It   s teaching as well, right. The only research I ever did was clinical  research. And to me, in the research work you may be successful in  developing something and you may not or it takes a long time. I like to  see immediate results. (Laughter)  You like to see the test score? (Laughter) Well, one thing I wanted to ask  you about, at one time the college was involved in Guatemala?  Yes.  Can you tell me a little bit about that project, thinking of extension and  education, international education falls into that?  Yes and even before that, now I didn   t go, but a number of our people  went to Ethiopia. Well, then, I went to Guatemala and it was on the Aid  Program and worked. Let   s see, Dr. Brock, later Dean Brock, at that  time he was in pathology and he was in the party, what we called Chief  of Party. My job was to go down there and work in the large animal  clinic. It turned out I worked both clinics, the large and small clinics for  animals. Well, I guess I have mixed feelings on it. I felt like I was  accepted well (and did to a point) a decent job of working with them and  I worked with the students, but especially with the faculty down there.  The thing that I felt was lacking was the basics; you   ve got a have a  foundation like our extension program, things to build on. They didn   t  have a lot of that type of work.  Were they building a veterinary college there?  They were building a veterinary college when I was there. They were  still building when I left, but they were well along and it looks like it  was going to be a decent facility. One thing that I did notice among their  faculty, in addition to us being there, there were some Germans there. In  fact, the Germans took over our program after we left. But they had a  number of veterinarians from Latin America   other countries, South  America, Central America, in there working with them. And they were  trying, it seems to me, to make a concerted effort to bringing people  from different backgrounds to help them out. It was interesting, yet on  the other hand sometimes frustrating because the things we   re used to  here and used to having, it wasn   t there. I wished they   d had better  foundations to build on. I think it we would have accomplished more.  How do you hope people remember Dr. Lester Johnson, DVM?  Well, I guess as a mentor. In fact, I guess I still am for the association to  go out and be a mentor for students. But I haven   t been doing that  recently and, of course there   s, oh I don   t know how it fits the term  29  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson     gentle doctor    that you used. Someone I guess that has a personality  and the desire to want to work with young people and see them develop  and help them develop and then they go out and do a good job in  whatever they want to do.  That   s a great way to be remembered.  There were some that I thought of in the past that I can   t think of right  now.  We were talking about you when you got here in 1954 and what it must  have been like at OSU as opposed to now. You were going to share some  of those things with us?  One thing I just mentioned in passing was what we called the Crow   s  Nest. That was up on the 3rd floor. It was a dormitory.  When we think of the school  McElroy Hall  not the teaching hospital  it   s had two additions since the original wing.  Yes that was where the large animal clinic and the small animal clinic  were. It was built primarily as a large animal clinic.  And it had two additions     Two additions later on, a middle wing and then the second wing. The  third wing would be the second aspect   the third aspect of it was for  where physiology is right now; that was the first and it wasn   t  necessarily small, it was what was built for large animals and made into  small animals, but we had some interesting happenings at the dormitory.  There were sixteen places there for students and they were students that  worked for different departments.  Third floor?  Third floor. It had a shower and beds, I don   t know how many rooms  were there, probably seven or eight rooms they had. They also answered  our phone at night and of course they became pretty good then at  handling the public and public inquiries. They were the ones that took  the calls and then called us then to go on an emergency.  And we had some people that would leave home with an animal, this is a  large animal especially, they were hauling him around and somehow got  sidetracked. Probably meeting buddies and having fun and didn   t get  there    til after hours and I would go out sometimes at night, nine or ten  o   clock, because they had just arrived from maybe 15 miles away  30  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  (laughter) because they all had their little cow wherever they went out  and had a visit with their colleagues, and that happened on two or three  occasions. One particular fellow seemed to be pretty bad about that and  one night his wife called and I talked to her and I said,    Well, he   s not  here.       Well he   s supposed to be. He left at 9 o   clock this morning.     And she said,    Oh well, that   s just like him,    and she didn   t bother a  whole lot.  I thought he might have some explaining to do.  I guess she was used to it.  So that was the main building I guess they degutted it and done it  different now.  It   s different now. On account of the mid section, I guess you   d call it  the second floor, was where some of the offices were then, where the  department head was then. You had a temporary stairway you had to  climb. That   s why nobody went to see him. It was too much trouble to  go up even if you wanted to complain, to go up and visit him.  Were some of the other facilities   you were describing a few of those a  little bit earlier, but you had the   of course you were talking about the  barn and the stalls. Your office was built in the horse stalls. Were you  just in a stall?  That   s right. We just put a desk in there and what we needed and that  was our office.  You didn   t redecorate it in years?  The only thing about it was that we were safe in there (laughter) because  no one could get in and get out. But the one thing that I should have  mentioned that I didn   t is the next set of offices that we had was old  army barracks that they moved over from off campus. The building is  still there. We had our offices in the north end of that, and a small  animal clinic was in the south. At least it got them out of the pig pens  and the sheep pens and that area. That was the second.  So the Quonset hut was a move up?  Yes. (Laughter) But we were there in the north end in the large animal  office part of it and then when they built the second wing, they built a  small animal clinic. And of course it remained there until they built the  teaching hospital. The quadrangle between the first wing and the second  wing wasn   t paved and when it rained it was just a mud hole   mud  31  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  water. That extended from Farm Road to around the building to into that  quadrangle. Finally, we got it blacktopped in  case of  inclement  weather. But I   ve seen the mud ruts so deep you were lucky to get  through it in getting to the facility.  Now they   ve seen the status about all the office buildings?  In that old Quonset you   re talking about.  Not Quonset but in the actual building. It   s all offices now isn   t it?  Yes. Now I understand, I know they have more faculty member   s  numbers in the clinics than they had when I was there, but I think they  are making some effort to get more office space because they need it for  the clinicians because they have more interns, residents and young  people coming in working. But I don   t know how they   re progressing on  it.  Something that may be interesting to ask, you may not remember but  when you went to work in 1954 you probably had a huge salary.  (Laughter) Do you remember what it was?  I think it was  6500 and the department     Not a month?  No, a year. (Laughter) Dr. Wolfe, I   ve kind of forgotten, his was a little  more, not much more, because he was the department head.  He might have gotten  7,000. (Laughs) A lot of fringe benefits I   m sure.  Well, there weren   t many, even the retirement benefits came along later.  Because I remember going to a meeting over on campus when we were  deciding whether to join Teacher   s Retirement or not. It turned out to be  a good thing but other than that, all we had to look forward to was social  security.  Did you have medical coverage   insurance?  Not    til we joined Teacher   s Retirement, no. Let me put it this way, it  wasn   t an official type. It was more someone was ill and someone else  would step in and do a little extra. But at that time, and this was of  course the problem I think with Oklahoma, because in visiting with OU  people, I think we had a better deal really than they did. They were  separate, not like we have now. A common Oklahoma State employee   s  thing.  32  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Gill  Do you remember anything special or unique when you got here in    54  that stands out in your mind? That you can think of that was pretty funny  or pretty unusual?  Well, of course, when I came in while I went to school here Dr. Bennett  was president. Of course we had that change after we lost him, and Dr.  Willham was president. When I came here in the    50s I started to work  even because they had hired me before and it was on weekends when I  came by. He wasn   t available but that went on anyway. I went over to  visit him and I was impressed by his friendliness and we just had a real  nice friendly visit, didn   t say much except to get to know one another.  Two things that I can remember really impressed me; one of them was  about him. He   d come out to the clinic and especially in the afternoons  and the first time he came out he says,    Do you mind my coming out?     And of course he   s our president.    No, I   m not going to mind him.    And  he says,    I don   t want you to think I   m checking up on you, but I found  this was a good place to come because I wanted to get out of the office  for awhile.    (Laughter) And he   d follow  me  around when I was  treating cases and he   d follow me around we   d visit. Another one that  would do that was Dean McElroy. And he had a few animals and he  would bring them out, once in awhile and he would do it on a similar  basis and they assured me,    We   re not checking up on you, it   s kind of a  relaxation for me to get out here and do this.    I appreciated it. To show  an interest. To know that they were there.  Dean McElroy, he retired.  About a year before. Hang out and visit.  What did you think about him?  As a person, I really liked him. As Dean of Men when I was here  as a  student , I did. He struck me as one of those fellows that pats you on the  back, everything is going to be great. But if you did something wrong,  look out. There   s a line that you didn   t cross because there is a good  chance you   re gone if it   s serious enough, but he was a very friendly  person. Personally I liked him, but I also know of some things that  happened that he didn   t fool around. He could dismiss a person or  faculty member just like that if he thought it was necessary.  That was before tenure?  Yes.  And he did some of it, I guess?  33  Johnson  Gill  Johnson  Yes. There were times in really the history and you   ve probably read  those history books or some of them, of course that   s either skipped  over, or skimmed over. You   d probably find more reading the News  Press about some of that controversy back in the    30s and    40s than      they  really didn   t want to put in books. You don   t need to hang out the  dirty linen. (Laughter) But I did enjoy Dean Mac and Oliver Willham  and their rapport.  Very supportive of the program it sounds like. Was there anything that  we didn   t talk about before we finish? Anything we didn   t cover?  I guess that   s about it for now. About to run out of thoughts, but I   ll have  plenty of them tonight.  -------  -------   
