 Gill, and today is March 22, 2010. I   m visiting with  Dr. Gary Trennepohl on the Oklahoma State University campus in  Stillwater, Oklahoma. This interview is for the O-STATE Stories project  of the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program. Gary, I appreciate  you taking time to be with me. A little bit of background: I know you  served several years as dean in the College of Business Administration  at Oklahoma State University, now the Spears School of Business. You  served then as president, after that, of OSU-Tulsa.  Right.  So, I thought what we might do, though, is back up a little bit and find  out a little more about who you are, your background. Can you tell me a  little about where you grew up, your family, your early childhood?  Sure. And there are some connections, obviously, but I grew up in Tulsa,  Oklahoma, from about the fifth grade on through college. My wife and I  got married in 1968 after graduating from the University of Tulsa. I went  in the Air Force for six years and got commissioned out of TU, so we  spent some time living in various places and had good experiences. I  ended up getting a PhD in finance at Texas Tech University and I was  always interested in economics and finance were my areas. So, from  there we went to Arizona State University was my first academic job. I  was there five and a half years and then went to the University of  Missouri as the head of the Finance Department for four years and then  to Texas A M for nine years in various roles as finance department  head and then as associate dean and interim dean. In 1995 I was  recruited to come to OSU as the dean of the business school at that time.  Let me back up a little bit and ask did you have brothers and sisters?  No, I   m an only child. And so that has its curses and its blessings in  5  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  many ways, but my folks were both second-generation in America. My  mother   s Norwegian and my dad was German-Scotch-Irish. Nebraska   s  where they grew up and met. Dad went in the service during the Second  World War. They traveled around in the US quite a bit, and he liked it  better in the South than he did up in the North where it was a lot colder.  And he had been stationed at Ardmore Air Force Base and ended up  coming back to Fort Smith and so I kind of grew up in Fort Smith for  about six years and then moved to Tulsa.  So, Tulsa won, but you went to Texas A M, is that right?  Ultimately we ended up at A M. I went to school at the University of  Tulsa.  Can you tell me a little bit about your experience at the University of  Tulsa?  Again, I was first generation to go to college, so it   s an interesting  perspective compared to the way we talked to our daughters about going  to school. But, I guess a couple things are very important. One is that my  folks   it was always assumed that I was going to go to college. Most of  the people I was around in high school at the time   and this was in  Tulsa, and this was in very much of a middle class high school. My dad  was an entrepreneur, small businessman, but it was very much assumed  by virtually all the people that we were around that you were going to go  to college, get a college degree. You   re familiar with that generation.  You know what that was like. I really didn   t have a perspective about  differentiating colleges or where you go for whatever, and, obviously,  cost was a consideration. I had a job in Tulsa. I started working for Bill  Dillard in Dillard   s department stores, which, you recall, was called  Brown-Dunkin at the time. I was doing that and it was a very, I   ll use the  word, easy process after graduating from high school to just stay there  and work. So, I worked about twenty-five to thirty hours a week and  went to college at the University of Tulsa.  Paid your way through work.  Paid my way through. I got a ROTC scholarship after two years, and so  that covered all the tuition and books and they paid you  100 a month, I  think it was. So, that was a good deal at that time, too.  So, your major, then, was in finance?  Well, it was in economics because they really didn   t have finance.  Finance as a major at that time was not that well defined, and so if you  had a finance interest, typically you majored in economics.  6  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Where did your interest in economics and finance come from?  You know, part of that, I think, was just being around my dad and living  in a small business environment. He was in the motel business and  operated motels and built some motels later in his career, and so it was  just being around and growing up in that environment, seeing how you  had to manage the books. You had to manage the operation, and I  enjoyed numbers. I was fairly good with the math and with the numbers.  I thought about going into engineering, but he was saying business  probably makes a lot of sense. I really wanted to do something in  business but wanted to do something that was more quantitatively  oriented than not, so I guess that   s part of it. I mean, I was always  fascinated, frankly, with, even back then, the stock market and how you  invest and try to create wealth.  Obviously your background, your interest and your father being an  entrepreneur and working at Dillard   s can help. Are there other values  that you learned growing up, principles of your family that influenced  you later in your life?  You know, that   s a very interesting question because a lot of people  don   t ask that, but I   m convinced that those kinds of things dramatically  affect how a person turns out. I could look at myself now and put some  pieces together, but I think my parents, my mother being Norwegian.  We ended up, actually, a couple years ago going back to Norway and  visiting the old family farm over there where her grandparents and  parents came from, and that was a lot of fun.  And it had to be interesting and educational for you.  Very educational. We actually saw the church where her father and  mother were married and baptized and where her grandparents, my  great-grandparents, would   ve been married, and we   re talking in the  early 1800s, so it   s interesting to have that perspective. But coming from  that background, number one, my mother grew up in the Lutheran  church, so when you grow up in a small town in western Nebraska,  there   s like one church, and if you listen to Garrison Keillor you know  what that   s like. I mean, that influences a lot of what your daily and  weekly routines are like, and just the mentality and the ethics and the  value system that comes out of that, I think, is important and that helps  shape you, about the way you behave towards the future and what   s  important and what   s not. And this certainly is not a fanatical religion or  anything like that. It   s very much just part of everyday life, so I don   t  want to say that was an extreme, but it was certainly important in how  you view the world and what   s important and what   s not in your life.  And also the folks there tend to be much more reserved, quiet. They  7  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  don   t talk a lot, even to each other. There   s a lot of time for silence, so  it   s just that whole background, where you come from affects why I am  what I am today, be it good or bad. But that defines what you are.  Gary, pursuing that, there   s some people who will say that second-generation  families that migrate to the US, the first one   s adjusting and  trying to learn the language and the second generation picks it up, and  there   s also the American dream. They come in as immigrants and want  their children to do well. Did you sense some of that in your family? Not  in an overbearing way, but did you sense something is important to  achieve and to do things and to take advantage of your opportunities?  Yes. I really got that, especially, and my mom and dad had a very  traditional kind of relationship. They got married in 1936. My mother  came from a family of nine and my dad came from a family of five, but I  think influenced my attitudes and views about work ethic and  perfectionism and all. He was very much a perfectionist about things and  very mechanically inclined even though he never went to college, but he  worked during the war with engine development test operations in  Detroit, and then when he got in the Air Force flew in B-17s. That was  interesting because they actually used what he was doing rather than sent  him to the typing pool. But this attitude about what you have to do and  the need for education came across from both of them that in America,  education is something that you need to create your own way to the  future. And I think that was instilled, like you were talking about, with a  lot of immigrant families that you had to be educated to move ahead.  Part of that also comes from, I think, the Northern European background  as well.  Strong work ethic, and     Yes, the work ethic and the need to just study and learn and do those  kinds of things.  So, Gary, which high school did you go to in Tulsa?  I went to Nathan Hale High School.  Nathan Hale Rangers.  That   s right, and we were about the third graduating class, I think. I  graduated in    64, and I think they opened in    61.  Will Rogers was your big competitor in those days.  Will Rogers was, and Edison was where all the rich kids went to school.  8  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  I was actually on the borderline between Rogers and Hale, so a lot of my  friends went to Rogers also, and some of them went to Hale, so it was an  interesting  time .  So, Gary, you went to ROTC.  Right.  You had an interest in serving, but certainly finding some implications of  helping support you when you got out. Can you tell me a little about  where you were assigned when you left Tulsa and the rank you acquired,  some things you did?  Sure. University of Tulsa had an Air Force ROTC program then, which  they don   t have anymore, but we had about 170 cadets. At that time, it  was a little early for Vietnam but it was just starting. The draft was still  going on, so there were a lot of people. I mean, you kind of went in once  you graduated from high school. If you went to college you had a  deferment, and as long as you were in college you had a deferment. That  would allow people to go ahead and get their degree. But my attitude  from my dad was,    You need to go in the military. It   s a good thing for  you to do,    and blah, blah, blah. So, I grew up in that environment and  knowing that. It was, in a way, a no-brainer decision to enroll in ROTC.  The first two years, there   s no obligation, but then the last two years you  actually sign up, and you   re going to get a commission and so forth and  so on. So, that was an obvious choice for me, although many people, I  think, also were looking at ROTC as a way to, you know,    Don   t want to  be drafted yet. I want to go in and go in it as an officer.    That was  important for many people.  I had a good experience in ROTC. I ended up being the group  commander the last semester, so that was a good experience for me to  have some leadership responsibility. We had an organization, it was a  group, and the cadet colonel was the head person for the ROTC. From  there we went to Ogden, Utah, Hill Air Force Base, which is a base like  Oklahoma City, like Tinker. It   s a logistics base, and everybody who  goes in, typically   you want to fly, and you all want to do that. But I  inherited bad eyes from my mother   s side of the family, so there   s no  way I could pass the flight physical. I knew I couldn   t do that, so I ended  up going into logistics plans and programs at Hill.  I got to work on two very exciting projects during my three and a half  years there, and I think those were the two key things. One is, most of  the operations there were large civilian contingents just like Tinker is,  and then they were assigning young officers, integrating them in with  the civilians to learn about how you do the logistics plans programs for  9  aircraft. Our responsibility was worldwide support for F-4s, which was  the mainline of fire at the time.  The colonel I worked for was also getting a MBA out there, and I was,  too. I   d started doing that program, so we ended up going to class  together. We had a project that I started working on for him about how  to improve the maintenance landing gear in the landing gear operations  for all the F-4s around the world, and, actually, then of all the aircraft  because we had landing responsibility for everybody. I designed a  statistical sampling program for aircraft when they came into major  overhaul cycles to see if we needed to replace them, remove them, or do  whatever, and we ended up implementing that, saving about   10,000,000. At that time, that was a significant amount of money for  the F-4s alone, but as you expand that throughout, it made a big  difference. We got to brief that back, all the way up to logistics  headquarters at Wright-Patterson.    What are you doing, and why are you  doing this, and how do you do it?    He was the lead on that because he  was the colonel, but I came along because I   d done the numbers and  could explain to people what we were doing. So, that was an interesting  and a visible process.  In doing that, I got to do some briefings, and so the two-star general out  there decided he wanted some young officers to do the mission briefings  for visiting dignitaries that came out there, and since I had had the  briefing on our project, why, I was the first one. He said,    Well, I want  you to do this.    So, I got to, probably a couple times a month, I   d do the  mission briefing, which says,    This is an introductory briefing to the  dignitaries about what you did at the Air Force base, at Hill Air Force  Base, and the weapons systems,    and all that. So, that was also a good  experience. And then, the second thing was setting up a bunch of field  team operations in Europe to repair aircraft that were over there that     most people don   t know about all this stuff, but there   s a whole lot of  change orders and technical orders that come out after an airplane is out  in the field to fix things or to update things or whatever. And, so, you  usually try to take care of that when they come back for three- or four-year  major overhauls, but there are certain things that just need to be  done more quickly. So, I ended up as a very young captain setting up  seven different bases where we actually had a contract with the field  team operators that came in and negotiated with each of the bases to get  hanger space and logistic support and then got the contractors in there to  do the work on the aircraft.  And, so, after doing that with the seven bases, I went back and spent six  months TDY at one of the bases in England, and my wife got to come  over and join me, and we lived in the BOQ, and for two young kids from  Oklahoma who   d never been abroad much, it was kind of a fun  10  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  experience. It was kind of stressful for me because I know a bunch of  people that wanted the airplanes back quickly, so you kind of had to  work on it, but that was a good experience. And then came back from  overseas and ended up going to Texas Tech. At Texas Tech I   d  volunteered to teach ROTC because I wanted to get back to school,  ultimately, and get a PhD. I looked at different ways to make that  happen with either the military or getting out and going ahead to do that,  so I   d volunteered for the ROTC assignment. I got assigned to Tech and  started working on my PhD out there.  Then after two years they   I had what you call a regular commission,  which is if you come out of the Air Force Academy or if you   re a  distinguished graduate coming out of ROTC you get a regular  commission, which is like tenure at the university. That   s your main  force of reserves or the added forces, so could   ve stayed in but they  wanted to send me to another school if I wanted to pursue on with a  career in the Air Force. I decided that after two years I didn   t want to do  that. I wanted to become an academic, so I got out in    74, off active  duty, and resigned my regular commission, took a reserve commission  back then, and worked for the Air Force Academy, then, actually out at  Luke Air Force Base in Arizona later on. That   s how we ended up at  Texas Tech.  So, you started your PhD program in what year, then?  I started taking classes in    73 and got out full time in    74, and then it was  another two and a half years after that to finish up. I finished up in  December    76, and I actually got my dissertation defended in early  December. We really wanted to stay and get that done. Sandra, my wife,  was teaching school at that time, which she   d been doing ever since  we   d been to Lubbock. She was working, and I had the GI bill at the  time, which was very nice, so that worked out well. I stayed and got  done and then started at Arizona State in January of    77.  And so you were at Arizona in    77. How long were you there for?  We were there five and a half years at Arizona State, and for one  semester I was asked to be acting department head. It   s an interesting  dynamic because I was a little bit older than the typical student who had  just gone through school and gotten a PhD. Having the military  experience and background and the leadership training that you get  through ROTC and just the experiences, you often get picked to go do  this, so I was asked to be department head for a semester out at Arizona  State and then for another summer because the department head was on  leave. I kind of figured over time I probably wanted to get into academic  administration. That would leverage my prior background and being in  11  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  the academic environment, which I enjoyed, so I did that. The  University of Missouri, who I   d interviewed with when I came out of  school, they were looking for a department head and they called and I  interviewed. I was fairly young. I guess I was thirty-eight or so at the  time, and I took the job as head of the Finance Department at Missouri  in 1982.  And the department, was it economics or finance, or what was the  department that you were head of?  At Arizona State it was called Insurance and Real Estate, and at  Missouri it was the Department of Finance. It was called finance but we  taught a little bit of insurance and real estate at the time, too. It was an  interesting time, Jerry, in academia, and speaking from the business  school environment because, frankly, business schools started gaining  popularity in the    60s, and it was a great time to be coming out with a  PhD in business at the time. So many schools were looking to hire  faculty and grow their programs, and you didn   t have that many new  PhDs coming out. I remember at the time I think there was 110 or 112  PhD students that were listed in the resume book that our organization  puts out, Financial Management, and there were something like six or  seven hundred job listings.   Whistles  Was it ever that good again?  You know, that lasted until the    70s, and then in the    80s it started to  turn, and by the    90s it was totally reversed. It was the other way around,  but it was a great time to get out and get started because you had a lot of  upside and a lot of growth. We had 35,000 students at Arizona State, and  the business school had over 200 faculty at the time when I left, and it  had just been growing and adding people. So, it was a good time.  So, was your experience at Missouri a good experience for you?  My experience at Missouri was a very interesting, good experience and a  good learning opportunity. They had, frankly, an older department, a  very established department. They had some internal squabbles amongst  different faculty. You know, you always have that, but coming in as the  youngest of all the people in the department, and I was in charge and had  to do all this stuff, it was a great learning experience for me, frankly, to  be honest. Columbia   s a great town. Missouri   s a great university, so we  had a good experience there for four years.  Then Texas A M was the next stop.  Yes. One advantage of going to school at Texas Tech was getting to  12  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  know a lot of the people in Texas and at the schools. In fact, we still get  together with faculty who were at Texas Tech who are now at a lot of  other places. You always keep track of each other and try to assist and  help wherever. I got a call from Texas A M because one of the guys  that I had gone to school with had been there and they were looking for a  new department head, and they called and asked if I   d be interested. We  were looking to go back to Texas. It was a good move for us.  You had some ties there, some friends there still.  Yes, and of course A M is a great school, and it was quite an operation.  We went down and interviewed in    86 and got the job to go down there  and be head of the Finance Department. And that was a different deal  because it was a younger and a growing department. The positive things  that they were dealing with was managing growth, recruiting faculty,  and working with the business community. The negative was I went  down there in    86 when the oil bust was starting to hit, so we got into  that for a few years but got through that.  You, of course, were involved in the administration and management at  that time, but you were still teaching some classes. What was your  specialty field in finance?  Well, the short answer to that question is investments in option pricing  and portfolio strategies. When I was at Arizona State, a friend and I had  started writing a textbook, a basic corporate finance textbook, which all  the students who go through the business school have to take that class.  A colleague out there had asked me to work with him to revise an older  book that was out there, so we did that. When I was at Missouri, I ended  up teaching the large class for corporate finance, the introductory class,  and it was a class of between 200 and 300 students a semester. So, even  as department head, I was teaching that, and I really enjoyed teaching  the introductory class. Students are eager, excited and don   t know a lot  about it, so it   s kind of fun to get them started out on the right foot. That  was an interesting experience. I   d done that at Arizona State. We   d  started that class out there, and I taught that. So, that   s what I did at  Missouri, and I actually taught a doctoral seminar in investments and a  graduate investments class. Investments is sort of the specialty area.  At A M I didn   t teach too much. I taught a few classes down there, but  the administration workload was such that it was just really hard to  teach. You had to do a lot of other things. But over time I got involved,  in 1987, with one of my doctoral students from Arizona State had been  employed as a consultant up at the Options Exchange in Chicago, and he  knew that was my area of interest. That   s what I wrote my dissertation  on in    76, and they were looking to expand using some faculty to teach  13  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  classes. So, I went up there and started teaching for them. So, over time  I   ve always maintained, and still do to this day, that relationship and still  work at the CBOE  Chicago Board Options Exchange . But it focused  on how to use options and derivatives to manage risk in portfolios. So,  that   s my area of expertise.  Derivative seems to be a term that   s been kicked around a lot.  I know. It has positive and negative connotations, and for people who  don   t understand how all this works, it tends to be a negative thing for  them.  So, you were there until Oklahoma State, then? How did you find out  about the position at Oklahoma State for dean?  Gary Simpson, who is a graduate of Texas A M, actually, was  somebody that I always saw at the finance meetings. I was president of  our, it   s called the Financial Management Association. I was president  of that in the 1993 period. Gary and I would always see each other at  that meeting, and he mentioned he was on the search committee and if I  would be interested, why let him know. And, frankly, I   d interviewed for  other dean jobs over the past few years prior to that, and we   d looked at  positions, and some of them I didn   t get offered and others I said,    I  don   t want that.    I had a good mentor at A M who had been around as  the dean, and he was kind of giving me advice on,    Well, I   d go here. I  wouldn   t go there. I   d look at this.     Who was that, Gary?  Benton Cocanougher was his name, and I guess he   s pretty close to  retirement if he hasn   t retired already. So, the Oklahoma State job came  open, and I looked at that one. I   d looked at Florida State, and Louisiana  State was another one that we looked at, South Carolina, mostly  southern, because that   s where most of our connections were. And once  you do that, you figure these jobs are all very similar, and what   s the  motivating reason on why you   d want to take one of these jobs? And  part of that was just, since we were familiar with Oklahoma we knew  about Oklahoma State. My sister-in-law had gone to school here. There  was somewhat of an attraction after about twenty-five years of coming  back to Oklahoma and being here.  Did Sandra have family here as well?  Yes, her folks lived in Tulsa at the time, were still there, and my folks  were traveling around at the time, and they would spend most of the  time wherever we were because of the grandkids and so forth. The really  14  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  only family connection was with her folks, too, which was important at  the time.  Sure, and we haven   t talked about your family. Could you talk about  where you met Sandra and the background and maybe your kids briefly?  There   s that side of your life, too.  There is that. We met in English class, freshman year in college, and  really didn   t go out until the start of our sophomore year. I pledged a  fraternity and she was a Tri Delt over there in Tulsa, and she sat in front  of me in English, and so (Laughs) our dates were to go to the library and  study because I was working and I was going to class. I was pretty  focused on what I was doing, and so we would do that. But we started  dating in our sophomore year, and so that continued pretty much through  the rest of the college career. We got married June 9, 1968. I got  commissioned and graduated. I graduated on the second of June, we got  married on the ninth, and on the fifteenth of June we were in Utah. We  had our first duty. So, we had to plan the wedding with the uncertainty  of not knowing where we were going to end up at the time. So it all  worked out, but it was kind of     A lot going on there, Gary.  There was a lot happening at the time; that   s exactly right. But we  waited until after I finished my PhD for the family to start, and we had  our two daughters. They were both born in Arizona when I was at  Arizona State.  Going back to your taking the position at Oklahoma State, you   d  indicated you   d been to Florida State and South Carolina and LSU,  looked at some different places. What was attractive to you about the  position at Oklahoma State? What year was that?  I interviewed here   I came in    95. It would   ve been the spring of    95.  Just an interesting set of circumstances. One was the new president at  Texas A M was Ray Bowen, who was the provost and interim  president here. So, talking to him during that process I got some insights  that you don   t normally get. And so that was one of those things that was  just serendipity, but it happened. And the other was I felt comfortable  with the faculty and with the people that were here. It was people that I  felt I could work with, that they had some ideas and wanted to do some  things, and I had some ideas about what I thought would be good for the  school. I know you talked to Bob Sandmeyer, but it   s an interesting  dynamic about who you   re following, if you   re following someone  who   s only been there a few years and things are kind of in turmoil, or if  you   re following somebody who   s been there a long time like Bob had  15  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  been and it pretty much established the routine and the process and so  forth and so on. And both of them may have opportunities, but Bob had  been there as long as he had and, I think, was very effective as a dean,  and there weren   t any big problems that I was going to have to deal with  or messes to clean up. And there was a strong relationship with the  business community, which was important to me.  And, actually, I guess just asking your perspective, but even Dick Poole  before Bob Sandmeyer, there had been two terms there, two tenures of  very successful deans.  Yes, there   d been good stability of leadership and it is interesting. Gene  Swearingen, who ended up being president over at TU, had also been in  the administration here at Oklahoma State. And I hadn   t kept in touch  with him, but when we moved back to Tulsa he called me because he  knew me from being at TU and then the OSU relationship. So, there   s a  long history of good values and good leadership at Oklahoma State.  Back when you got there, you said the situation was pretty stable. Can  you think of what your goals were at the time, maybe not immediately  but after you had a chance to assess the program at the college? Do you  know what some early goals you wanted to achieve and accomplish  were?  Well, the first thing that was obviously very important was we were up  for reaccreditation, and that had been delayed because they were  changing the rules. Bob Sandmeyer had been very active in the AACSB   Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business , which is the  accrediting body, and had worked within because they had a transition  time for schools to go up under the old or new standards. So, I knew  when I came that it would either be two or three years that we were up  for our ten year review. Those things take about two years to put  together. You don   t have a lot of time to think about it. You have just  got to get going, so obviously that was the first thing that was on my list  of things to do. We needed to get ready for accreditation, and especially  with the new rules, you had to rethink how you were doing things.  The second thing was building upon and expanding our relationship with  the business community. I think that prior deans had done very good  things with those relationships and it was the kind of school that, I think,  was viewed by the business community as a supporter, not as an ivory-tower-  isolated operation. And Bob had started the Associates, and we  had a good group of external folks who we could work with and wanted  to make some things happen. So, I think you   ve got to put it at the time  also. This was at the second wave of the energy problems, and so state  budgets had gone down since the early    90s, and we were struggling in  16  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  both Texas and Oklahoma about funding for higher education. So,  getting external private gifts in the college was something that was also  very important. Frankly, the third thing was to try to build upon and  strengthen and move us forward in our academic reputation. That deals  with our faculty and tenure factors and those things.  Did you have some specific goals for those last two things you  mentioned? Of course, I guess it was very helpful to you for the  accreditation that you had to dig in and get a lot of that information and  details that were good for your learning process, if you will. What were  some of the goals you set for the last two things, your relationship with  the business community and with enhancing the academic reputation of  the college?  On the business community side I guess two things would come out.  One is to work with and expand and increase the involvement of the  Business Associates group. That   s the group of folks that the business  leaders contribute money to the college and become engaged with what  we do, and along that same line, what I really wanted to do, and we   d  been successful with that at A  M, was increase the number of endowed  positions. And again, in perspective, the    80s and    90s were when public  universities started to get a lot more interested in private fundraising,  and as you probably recall, OSU was just gearing up to start their first  ever capital campaign. That actually started in    95 when I got here. That  was the first official year of the campaign.  The    Bringing Dreams to Life    campaign.  That   s right. We had a new Foundation director that had come in, Ron  Area, two years prior, putting things in place. We had a development  officer in each of the colleges and so forth and so on. So, expanding the  number of endowed positions, and I think we went   I checked on this  before, but over those four to five years when I was here, we about  doubled the number of endowed positions. Both, professorships were at   250,000 and chairs at  500,000 to  1,000,000. So, that was important.  We created some additional professorships. Some people who stand out,  Norm and Suzanne Myers, whose names attach to the dean   s support for  the College of Business. Norm and Suzanne continue to be very good  friends. We get together a couple times a year and play golf and just  enjoy each other   s company. He and Suzanne are both great supporters  of this school. Making those relationships are a lot of fun.  There at the end, I had actually moved to Tulsa, but in closure we ended  up, during that last year, we got funding from Chuck Watson for the  Watson Trading Floor, which currently exists over in the College of  Business, which they use for teaching a lot of their classes, especially in  17  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  the finance area. We got funding for that. We got funding from Williams  for a chair. Chuck also gave money for a  1,000,000 chair, as did  Williams, to support the program in finance and marketing. So, those  were kind of the last at the end when I was finishing up getting things  done, but that was important. The other side, in terms of academic  reputation, it really comes down to hiring the right people and setting the  right tenure standards. That   s how you grow through time, and it just  takes a long time to enhance academic reputation. So, it   s encouraging  faculty to get involved with their professional associations, and I think  we   re doing that well with the college. Certain areas, historically, such  as accounting and economics, have been well recognized for many,  many years for their academic programs, and marketing has a very  strong reputation that has developed more recently, and finance I think is  starting to build that.  Were you engaged pretty heavily in the speakers program, the business  forum in Tulsa and Oklahoma City? Could you speak to that a little bit?  Bob Sandmeyer gets, obviously, the credit for starting that back ten  years before I got there, which would   ve been in about 1985 or    86. He  had started a speakers program that did three or four major presentations  a year in Tulsa and in Oklahoma City. As dean of the college you were  responsible for hosting that program and being the MC and all that stuff,  so I did that, and that was a lot of fun. We got to meet a lot of very  highly visible people from around the world.  Did that start off as the Tulsa Business Forum, then expanded over to  Oklahoma City?  Yes, that   s right. It   s Oklahoma City Executive Briefing series, yes, and  the typical routine was you had one major speaker, like President Bush  was in 1997 or    98. He had gone out of office in the    90s and so     The first President Bush?  Yes, the first President Bush. He was one of the speakers. You   d have  them be in both Oklahoma City and Tulsa. That was the big event, and  then you typically had two or three other speakers that were probably  less well known, but in many cases, probably, what they presented was  as valuable or even more valuable just because of their area of expertise.  Didn   t have the name recognition.  Didn   t have the name recognition, and when I got here the first year in     95 the speaker was Mikhail Gorbachev, so we had a lot of press on that  because he was fairly new on the speaker series.  18  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Was Colin Powell one of the speakers when you were dean?  Colin Powell was a year before.  I know there   s a risk by omission of offending somebody, but who are  some of the faculty that stand ahead in your mind, looking back during  your tenure, that maybe were already there or that were created on the  faculty that were important to the development and the growth of the  school?  Boy, that   s an interesting question. You know, the faculty, the people I  worked most with were the department heads, which most of them had  been there a long time when I got there, so they had a long history with  the college. But people who were, I think, very good at what they did  and very supportive of the college and really dedicated to the education  process, Wayne Meinhart comes to mind. He was head of the  Management Department, and Lanny Chasteen was head of accounting.  Wayne passed away about ten years ago and Lanny   s retired now.  Wilton Anderson, who   s a famous name in accounting, he   d retired a  few years prior to when I came, and people still would talk about him.  Productive faculty, maybe in terms of research or external work?  We hired Dan Rickman as the OG E chair in economics, and that was  important. The faculty in finance   of course Janice Jadlow was the  department head in finance, and we   ve added some new young faculty  since then. John Polonchek   s the head now, and he was there and was a  very good person and still is, in terms of what goes on at the college.  You know, Margaret White ended up   I had her as an associate dean  during our accreditation year, and she did a good job with that. Jerry   Gerald  Lage is somebody that everybody remembers. Jerry   s passed  away as well, but he was a good solid person throughout my tenure over  there.  Looking back, who were some of your best hires as dean?  Well, you know, I wish I had a list of people to think about  (Laughter)  Yes, you haven   t had to think about this in a few years. Sorry about that   Well, that   s kind of a tough one, and frankly from the dean   s  perspective, really I felt my role was to facilitate and aid the department  heads because they   re the ones that knew their people and the  departments. So, what I felt that I needed to do was,    You guys are  going to have to go identify the people that you want to get in, and my  job is to help you get them here once you told me who they are.    A  19  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  name that comes to mind from your prior question is Ramesh Sharda.  When I got here we had just started the telecommunications master   s  program, and Ramesh was the faculty coordinator for that program. He  is a very loyal, solid person that is well respected by both the outside  community and by the inside folks. He   s a very good person that we  need to put on that list as somebody who   s made a difference.  We hired Tim Brown in marketing, and he   s still here today. He   s a  young faculty member that I think has made a difference in marketing.  Betty Simkins in finance. Because she was in finance, I knew of her  when she was coming out of school, and she works harder than any one  person that I   ve ever seen in all the things that she   s involved with. So,  those were all good hires, but I   d probably have to go through a list of  names to recall some of those.  Turning that just a little bit, some of your administrative staff, I don   t  know if you worked with Rudy at that time or     Rudy was there over the time period. Julie Weathers is still there and ran  and still runs the Executive Development. We called it Extension back  then, but now it   s the Center for Executive  and Professional   Development. Julie does a great job. She gets things done and makes  things happen, so that   s important. Donna Thomas worked with Bob  Sandmeyer, and she knows everybody and makes good things happen.  Barbara Bremer worked in the advising office and was always  somebody who did that.  Jim Hromas, did he have something to do with that?  Hromas had left the college, as I recall. I think Julie had just taken his  place. He had moved out of that extension operation and was over doing  something else in the university at the time. Josh Weiner is another one  that   s in the marketing area. He became the head of marketing, and he  still is the Marketing Department head, so he brings a dose of reality,  realism and pragmatism to the whole process, which in many cases is  very important. Those are some of the ones that come to mind.  Who was your associate dean, Gary?  Greg Mosier was there when I arrived, and he served in that role for two  years. Then when he decided he wanted to go back to the faculty, he had  just gotten promoted to full professor, so he wanted to go back and do  some more academic-related things, and so that   s when we reorganized  the dean   s office and brought in Margaret White and Jerry Lage to do  that. The other one that I really should call out for special recognition is  Raj Basu. Raj   when I got there, we needed an MBA program director.  20  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Steve Miller had moved out of that job, or had expressed an interest that  he wanted to, so I solicited from the faculty people that might want to do  that and actually recruited Raj to do that. He did a great job with the  program for about four years and then decided that he needed to go back  and work on his academic things as well, so he actually grew that  program a lot during his tenure.  So, looking back through about five and a half years or so in the dean  position?  Actually it was four.  Four? It seemed a lot longer than that.  I know. It does. (Laughter) Well, what happened was I was there for  four years, and then when I moved to Tulsa they had a search process,  but they still engaged me to do some of the things that I had done before.  It was a year, wasn   t it, before they got     Yes, and it was a year before they hired my replacement, so I was still  engaged with some of the things going on at the college.  Looking back, what gives you the most satisfaction, the most personal  pride in the accomplishments in the college from the time you got there  to the time you stepped down?  I think a couple, three things. One is the moving ahead on the  accreditation. We got that done, and that happened, and you have to  have that. I mean, if you don   t have that you have got big problems, so I  was very pleased we got that done. And the whole process, what that did  is help get the whole college on the same page about what we   re about  and what our goals are, so I thought that was a very useful thing. We put  in place some processes and procedures to move forward that, I think,  make a lot of sense in terms of just daily operations and strategic  operations within the college, you know, tenure time for department  heads and length of time for service in an endowed professorship. These  are not jobs that you get for life. You may have them for a while, but  there needs to be an accountability and review process built into that.  The way we do the tenure process and the criteria and redoing the  criteria for tenure, those are all processes that are important, I think, to  move a college forward. So, those things come to mind.  What I   m pleased about is creating a relationship with the business  community that enhanced our reputation with the business community as  somebody they could rely upon for graduates for doing things that made  21  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  a difference in Oklahoma with regard to the business operations. We had  a very viable, great group of people with our business associates, and I  think that   s demonstrated by the gifts that they made over the time  period I was there and since I left.  Gary, you mentioned fundraising, as well, some chairs that you  endowed.  Yes, we did the Myers Professorship, the Watson Center and the chair  that went with that, the Williams Chair that happened that last year after  I   d left, the couple of chairs and programs in entrepreneurship that were  established that are now being. Fran Jabara, we started working with,  and another one that had given money for an entrepreneurship program,  and on the finance and accounting side, just adding to some of the  endowed positions there that existed. So, like I said, I think for the long  term, that   s what will make a difference in your ability to hire and  recruit faculty.  How was the college different when you left, four or five years later,  than when you came? How was it better, how was it the same, how was  it not as good?  Well, let me put it this way, and this is not derogatory for anybody, but I  think there was a sense of enthusiasm and spirit going forward that  maybe didn   t exist when I came. And, again, going back, Bob  Sandmeyer had been there for fourteen or fifteen years, and I have a  strong feeling that when you   re in these leadership roles, probably seven  to ten years is your maximum contribution you   re going to make. So,  you can tend to get more into maintaining the status quo rather than  moving forward, and that   s why change is so important and so good.  So, bringing somebody new in, it could   ve been me, it could   ve been  somebody else, you know, but adding some excitement and enthusiasm  and setting some new goals and,    Hey, we can do this. These are our  new aspirations.    I think that there was a stronger feeling about,    We  feel good about ourselves.    We   d gone through the early    90s in the state  budget where we hadn   t gotten a lot and we needed to do things with the  infrastructure to support the mission. And we were playing catch-up at  the time, so bringing the new technology into the classrooms, that   s a  signal that says,    What you all do is important.    Doing some  redecorating and remodeling in the building. We have a very tired  building that   s over there that   now that   s the main goal of our new  dean that we   ve got coming in this year is to get a new business school,  and that   s going to be very important. But at the time, that building was  built in 1968, so we went and did some things inside that we could  afford to do and made it look better and enhance the learning experience  22  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  by doing things in the classroom for students.  Gary, you mentioned enhancing it electronically. Can you speak to some  of the things that you did in your tenure to get it more in the forefront in  terms of technology that was coming in?  Sure. It   s interesting, and again you   ve got to put this in perspective. The  internet, distance education in the modern sense rather than the TV  sense, and the use of technology in the classroom was just starting to  come in in the early    90s. While I was at A M we   d started  experimenting with some of those things, but for everybody it was a new  thing about,    How is this really going to come out?    I think, as we know  as we get older, you realize it   s never one or the other. It   s always some  blend of what you think the extremes are, and there are people that said  that we   re not going to need university buildings anymore because it   s  all going to be done online and on the internet, and students are going to  study at home, so you don   t have to have colleges. And the other  extreme is people who   d always done it this same way for hundreds of  years, and this technology will come and go and nobody will pay any  attention.  So, what we end up with is a blend, and a few of the things   we started  experimenting and working with modern distance education in terms of  putting classes online and doing them on the internet-based systems,  doing them on CDs where the students can look at the CD and have an  interactive session by the internet with their faculty, but how we  incorporate technology into the learning process, we experimented. I  funded faculty to work on that, to see how that might work. The  advantage we had, frankly, compared to many schools is that Oklahoma  State has a long history of the old traditional distance ed, which is what  we used to call    talk back TV.    You broadcasted it on TV, and you had  a chance to ask questions, but that   s about all you could do. And so the  mindset was there that we can use technology, but the technology is now  different and much more powerful than what we had before.  Sounds like delivery of programming.  So, we experimented with putting classes online, and it was probably the  last semester or the last year I was there the Accounting Department  said,    We   re going to try this by putting all of our sophomore  introductory accounting classes on CD-ROM, and the students won   t  have to go to class. I   ll get them a CD, and they   ll have to come in to  take tests, and they   ll have a study session each week if they want to  come to that.     The intermediate accounting courses?  23  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Not intermediate. The basic, the fundamental. And I remember the class  schedule was published in the spring, of course, for fall, and I had a  revolt in my office when the students saw that there weren   t any regular  classes scheduled, they had to do it on CD-ROM. The students were  coming in saying,    We don   t want to do it that way. We want to go to  class. We want to have the interaction.     Go figure, right?  Go figure. So, we compromised. I talked to Lanny and they added some  real classes, and the students self-selected. Those who said,    I don   t  want to go to class. I want to do my CD,    they could do that, and those  who really wanted to go to class, they could do that. And that   s why I  say typically it   s going to be a blend. I think what we   re finding today is  that the technology is much more a facilitator of the education process  rather than a replacement.  One piece of that is just the delivery by distance education, so how you  do that is one thing we worked on. The other piece we worked on is  putting the technology in the classrooms so the faculty members can  come in and use it to assist what they do. And, you know, the classrooms  at most universities weren   t built for that purpose, so we had to do some  remodeling over there. It used to be that faculty thought high tech was  having colored chalk versus white chalk, so between the chalk and the  overheads, overheads were really high technology if you had a projector.  When I started teaching, having a projector was really high tech, and  now it   s moved so much further beyond that. But, what we did in the  college over there is select various rooms and actually put the video  projectors in the rooms. They were hard-wired in, and faculty could  come in and   of course, PowerPoint was the medium of the day, and the  big thing was putting them on PowerPoint so the students could use that  rather than using overheads or other things. And, of course, what that  has transitioned to is the ability to access the internet during your class  to bring in real-time live discussions or access information sites that  contribute to the knowledge of what   s going on.  So, putting that technology in and, skipping ahead a little bit, that   s one  of the things I did over at Tulsa for the last ten years. All the rooms over  there have the, I don   t want to say the best, but they certainly have the  high tech equipment and the internet connections that any rooms could  do that.  Well, Gary, and this is an opinion status, looking from a distance, what  do you see about the college, how has it changed since you  left , which  would   ve been in     24  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  I left in August of 1999, and so it   s been ten-plus, almost eleven years.  In your mind, how has it changed, and do you like the changes you   re  seeing in the college?  Things will evolve and move, regardless. You put things in place, and  they may or may not stay. Since I left, we   ve had two deans, and, of  course   we   ve actually had two deans, but we   ve also had Greg Mosier  serve as interim dean for a year or two in the middle of that process, so  we now have a new dean coming on board. I   m excited that he   s a little  bit of a nontraditional person in that he   s an academic and has been  through the academic process, but for the last probably ten to fifteen  years, he   s been in business in a marketing research operation and is still  highly regarded by the academics in terms of what he writes and  publishes but certainly has a strong relationship with the business  community. And I really think that   s what it takes in today   s  environment. It   s a tough job because the dean needs to have leadership  and managerial skills and also academic credentials but also has to have  the ability to interact with the external community. So, you need  somebody that is somewhat of an extrovert to get out there and do that.  Those are hard characteristics to put together in one person that can  make that happen, and so that   s why I think it   s always hard to fill these  jobs, either as deans or as presidents of universities. I think Sarah   s done  a good job. I chaired that dean search committee, and I   ve known Sarah  for probably twenty years. I think she   s done a good job internally of  making things happen and keeping people together.  And the morale, kind of, is up.  Yes, and keeping a very positive face on the community. And I respect  her wishes to move on to the academic side now, and I think that Larry  Crosby brings a different perspective that he   s going to need people on  the inside to help manage that because he hasn   t done that before, but  he   ll be very good on the outside. So, I think with Burns in the  president   s position and his strong relationships externally, and then  getting somebody who can also work externally in the college but has  the ability and the respect internally, that that   s a very good combination  for the future.  Well, Gary, changing a little bit, after you   d been there four years or so,  the opportunity to look at the presidency of OSU-Tulsa arose. Let   s first  back up a little bit and explain, as far as OSU-Tulsa goes, it   s a pretty  complex thing.  Could you talk about the OSU-Tulsa campus , its  inception, and a little bit about the dynamics?  Sure. And I think probably of all my time, which has been almost fifteen  25  years at Oklahoma State, the thing that   s probably going to make the  most contributions to what we   re doing is getting the Tulsa campus up  and running and integrating it into the Tulsa community. When I came  here as dean of the business school we were teaching MBA classes and  offering an MBA in Tulsa, and some of the other colleges were teaching  there under an umbrella organization called the University Center. It was  highly political. It was, in some ways, dysfunctional. There was no  motivation in any sense to do it, in terms of our participation over there,  other than basically,    Well, you kind of have to.     But what we had, and I observed it from this side, not from the Tulsa  side, we had a strong push with Ed Keller, who has been our regent for  many years, and also is a strong leader in the Tulsa community, to get  OSU established in Tulsa. And he was really looking at it, not  provincially for OSU, but he wanted Tulsa to have access to quality  higher education, and the University Center was not the future to make  that happen. It was an umbrella organization that was run by a politician,  a former mayor and then a senate pro tempore named Rodger Randle. It  had its own little administration, and then it contracted with Oklahoma  State, with OU, to do graduate classes and programs, and with  Northeastern State, which is a regional college, and Langston, which is a  historically black college in Oklahoma, to do the undergraduate  programs. And the overlying thing that incorporates all of this was not  only that center relationship but there had been an agreement between  the state regents of Oklahoma and the Office of Civil Rights about trying  to promote the growth of Langston University degree programs and the  University of Oklahoma. Part of that agreement was that they had  monopolies over degrees in Tulsa. So, I would get continual questions  about,    Why don   t you teach an undergraduate accounting program in  Tulsa?    and I   d have to say,    I can   t because the state regents won   t let  us do that because of this agreement.     So, we were constrained by a lot of things that we could or couldn   t do  in Tulsa because of that agreement. Any time you had four schools all  sharing the same spot but with degree programs allocated, it became a  very political environment. Jim Halligan deserves a lot of credit,  working with Ed Keller and working with the OSU regents to try and  help solve the issue of    What can we do in Tulsa?    And if you talk to  Jim, he   ll tell you the story, but the legislation was passed in 1998 to  create OSU-Tulsa. And frankly it was at the last thirty to forty-five  minutes of the last day of the session in 1998 that this came to be, and it  came to be because Frank Keating threatened to hold up any funding for  higher education if they didn   t do something. So, ultimately, they got an  agreement that would establish OSU-Tulsa as an operation at the old  University Center. It would disband the University Center  administration, create OSU-Tulsa, which would be able to provide OSU  26  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  classes and ultimately degrees at both the graduate and undergraduate  level. Northeastern was building a campus in Broken Arrow, so they  were going to be moving to the Broken Arrow campus and then  Langston would be co-located at the campus with OSU because we were  both under the same Board of Regents. And then OU, knowing all the  political processes that were going on, actually made an agreement to  move their operations to the old Amoco research facility at Forty-First  and Yale in Tulsa.  So, you had the thing set in place to dismember the consortium over a  three-year period and let OSU establish itself in Tulsa in conjunction  with the Langston programs that were there and still had monopolies  over what we could or could not do, so that became an interesting  political process. The thing to keep in mind that I try to emphasize to  everybody in Tulsa is that, while OSU-Tulsa is recognized as an  institution in Tulsa, the degrees that the students get are OSU degrees, so  it   s not like in Texas where you have various UT branches that give their  own degree. The degree all students get in Tulsa is an OSU degree. It   s  the same degree that they get if they take classes in Stillwater, and when  I went over there my objective was to keep Stillwater and Tulsa, make  that the real focus, being together, providing programs for the Tulsa  community, but making it seamless. For students if they wanted to take  classes in Tulsa and Stillwater both, they could do that and put all the  student records, all the advisements, all the financial aid under the OSU  umbrella. Before, all the individual schools were doing their own thing.  Gary, could you speak to the Stillwater side of that cooperative  agreement? Speaking candidly, did you have to pull some people along  with it?  Well, it   s interesting and it still is. It   s interesting because, for example,  in the College of Business, that was probably easier than many of the  other colleges because they   d been teaching over there for ten or fifteen  years, and frankly most of the faculty liked teaching the MBA over there  because they had very good students who were oriented towards the  business community. They were experienced. It was a different   population .  Of people wanting to further and advance their career.  And they could ask and explore much more real world questions than a  typical MBA student that has no practical experience. I   ve taught in both  these kinds of environments, and I really enjoy teaching the business  folks as well as teaching the regular traditional students. They bring a  dimension that   s not there, so the business college was a little easier.  Some of the other colleges that really hadn   t offered programs in Tulsa,  27  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  yes, we had to bring them along. We still have to bring them along.  There   s still a concern, I think, at various levels about,    Is this going to  dilute the resources for Oklahoma State? Is this going to take students  from Stillwater and keep them in Tulsa?    My response to that is,    If  OSU isn   t over there, then it   s going to be OU doing the same thing, and  for OSU I   d much rather have us together in Tulsa than have no  metropolitan exposure and try to just attract students to Stillwater.     It should be noted, I didn   t say earlier, OSU-Tulsa only offers  undergraduate junior and senior classes and graduate classes. So, I was  very surprised to see one of the main services we provide, frankly     students who would go to Stillwater or go to Norman or go to KU, go to  Lawrence, go wherever, and then after two or three years come back to  Tulsa where they grew up and had gone away to go to school, not  finished, but because of money or whatever reason having to come back  home. We provide that opportunity for them to get finished. So, what I  looked to capture are the OSU students who, they get an internship in  Tulsa so they can move over there and finish up their degree in Tulsa,  not come over there, do that, have to move back to Stillwater, or maybe  drop out and never finish.  Speaking of moving people back and forth, literally moving people, part  of that was that you had students going both ways. Your students in  Tulsa that live in Tulsa, taking classes and needing to take some classes  on the Stillwater campus, and vice versa, a person from the Stillwater  campus needing to take some courses over there that are offered in  Tulsa.  Right.  So, you came up with a pretty innovative solution as I recall.  (Laughs) Well, when I went over there in    99, we   d always had the issue  of moving faculty because back then it was primarily just faculty going  to teach over there. I   d had faculty for three or four years saying,    Can   t  you buy some vans or provide a van service to bring faculty back and  forth?    So, towards the end of my first year over there we started to  explore this question about    How can we facilitate the connection  between Stillwater and Tulsa?    because going back to your earlier  question, there was a lot of doubt, uncertainty and apprehension about  creating a Tulsa campus and what that might do to Stillwater. So, not  everybody was bought into the deal, I   ll guarantee you that, but  providing the connectivity was very important. So, we discussed it with  the leadership on the Tulsa campus, and we said,    Well, instead of  buying vans, let   s get some buses,    and so we ended up creating a bus  service, basically. We bought two buses and made about   we started out  28  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  with about eight trips a day back and forth. We started one in the  morning at each location, about 5:30 or 6:00, and then they would drive  back and forth all during the day.  Now, these weren   t just buses.  Well, they were nice over-the-road kind of buses. They were not  necessarily a Greyhound per se, but they were the kind of bus that was  an over-the-road bus.  But they were billboards on wheels, weren   t they?  (Laughs) Well, the other side of that, that   s exactly right. Our marketing  lady, Mary Bea Drummond, concocted the name of the    Big Orange  Bus,    and so we nicknamed it    BOB    for    Big Orange Bus    and we put,  as you say, a billboard on it. They   re very distinctive, and when you see  it you know it   s an OSU bus with Pistol Pete on the side.  I used to go up and down that turnpike a lot myself, and, boy, you see  those buses coming and going.  Yes, any time you   re on that road, it   s like having a billboard, but it   s  moving all the time.  It is. It   s great advertising.  We talked about how we   re going to do this and how we would cost it  out, and the fact of the matter is, we set prices   the big ridership today  is students. There   s a number of graduate students, historically, that live  in Tulsa either because a spouse has a job or they have a job or  whatever, but they   re pursuing a graduate program at Oklahoma State in  Stillwater. Instead of driving back and forth every day or four times a  week or three times, they can now take the bus back and forth, so the big  ridership was graduate students living in Tulsa. We also have  undergraduate students, and I took the bus over this morning when I  came over to talk to you, but it   s Monday morning, and it was obvious  that some of the undergraduates were getting on. The bus is probably  three-quarters full. They were coming on over to spend the week in  Stillwater, and they   d catch the Friday afternoon bus to go back home  for the weekend. So, they   re coming over. Instead of having to drive and  have an extra car to bring over here, they can take the bus over, live on  campus, and then take the bus back home on Friday if that   s what they  choose to do.  Gary, did you put a stake in the ground when you got there? What was  the enrollment, do you recall, over at UCT, now OSU-Tulsa?  29  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  I can give you the numbers for OSU. When I came over in    99, we  offered twenty-some-odd graduate programs of various types. A lot of  them were in the College of Education, College of Business, a few in  engineering and then a few others in some of the other colleges. That  was the big bulk of what we did, and we had twelve resident faculty in  Tulsa, so most of the faculty commuted to teach classes over there.  When I left a year ago, we were offering about eighty-some-odd degree  programs, fifty-some-odd master   s and doctoral programs, and then  thirty undergraduate degree programs that we have grown into. And we  have approximately seventy to seventy-five faculty members in Tulsa,  so it   s a growing thing. You have to have the resident faculty to work  with the students, and as you grow and expand through time you just  have to have your presence really in Tulsa so people take you seriously  and know you   re going to be there. I think that   s one of the main things  we   ve done is really establish the credibility that OSU is in Tulsa to stay.  We   re not going to leave and fold our tents and go back to Stillwater.  We   re an important part of the community over there. We spent about   42,000,000 building an engineering research center so we can expand  our graduate and undergraduate engineering programs.  I was going to ask a little about the physical plant expansion. There are  some fairly new facilities, but really you needed more than you got there  because of expanding enrollment and classes being taught. In addition  to your engineering center, what were some of the major campus  expansions during the time you were over there?  Again, this just complicates the politics of the situation, but the campus  land is held by University Center Trust Authority. That   s a city trust.  The city, starting in the    80s, bought up a lot of property on the north  side of downtown to put in that trust. When I went over there we had  about 200 acres of land in the trust, and our facilities were located on  about twenty-five of those acres. The blessing, frankly, we had over  there was that those facilities were all new. They   d been built in the     90s, so it   s a very nice physical plant. One of the things that we didn   t  need to do is we didn   t need to go over and build new buildings to teach  classes because with the other schools moving out and freeing up space,  we had and still have good space for growth in Tulsa. We have a main  hall, a north hall, and then a kind of annex facility with an auditorium  that   s used for a conference center and external programs.  The big investment we made in the physical plant was to build an  engineering research building because there wasn   t any facility. All we  had were classrooms and offices, so you couldn   t really hire people in to  do academic research because they didn   t have the laboratory space. So,  we added that building. We   ve expanded our footprint with regard to  parking and other things over there and just controlled physical area out  30  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  of that 200 acres. Part of the funding that we got for our building,  Langston University got money to build a building for their programs in  Tulsa that are co-located on that site. There   s a new Langston University  building, and, so, most of the Langston faculty and degree programs  have been moved there except for their nursing, which is still in our  space. The latest thing that   s been added, Oklahoma Educational  Television Network is building a new facility on campus. It   ll be, I  think, about a 12,000- to 15,000-square-foot building that   s basically TV  studios and offices that they   re moving from an old site they had.  Your research facility, I was trying to think what the cost was, several  million dollars.  It was  42,000,000.  And how many square feet?  It   s about 200,000 net square feet. It is one of the best research facilities  nationally you   ll find anywhere. Our challenge right now is to add  faculty to grow, to utilize that facility, and, once again, because of the  organization structure we have, faculty are hired through the College of  Engineering here in Stillwater. So, they   re the ones that really drive the  hiring, and then the faculty would be located in Tulsa.  Accreditation is all through, though, Oklahoma State University?  Yes, right.  Maybe I missed this before, but the enrollment there now is about what?  No, you didn   t miss it. I forgot to say. The enrollment, student-wise, is  about 2,700 head-count students, and of those there   s probably 300 to  400 that are taking classes in Stillwater and Tulsa both. And that,  again   I think we   ll see that growing to the future. More and more  students are going to   to me, it helps motivate freshmen to go to OSU.  This is what I tell parents and students when I talk to them, to recruit  them to OSU. I say,    If you go to OSU as a freshman in Stillwater, you  can come back in the summer if you want to take a class. We offer  classes here on campus so you can get some extra hours that are OSU  hours that are totally transparent. You could be in Stillwater and take  them, but you can take them here in Tulsa. Or, if at some point in the  future you wanted to come back here and get an internship or move back  to Tulsa, you can get your degree finished because you   re on that degree  track. It   s not like having to start over at a new university.    So, I think  that   s a motivation, frankly, for parents and freshman students to choose  to go to OSU versus going to those other places in-state because they  31  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  know that they   re in a degree program that they can complete.  Gary, you alluded to some of the dynamics, if you will, of the community  there. Can you share a little bit about the political interaction, the  presence in Tulsa, in terms of how that works in your working  relationships with the city and with other education communities?  Right, and that   s a very good question, Jerry, how that works out. I  probably should preface all this by saying I gave credit earlier to Jim  Halligan for getting OSU-Tulsa off the ground. He really deserves a lot  of credit, and frankly he   s the reason I ended up going over to Tulsa  from the College of Business. You know, I enjoyed what I was doing at  the business school. We were making, I thought, good progress and so  forth, and Jim said,    I really want you to apply for this Tulsa job.    My  first response was,    Why would I ever want to do that? That   s a political  quagmire over there     He said,    Well, I think you can do it,    and I said,     Well, okay.    So, I ended up taking the job, frankly, because of him. I  think there was a deep-seeded feeling that Tulsa deserved OSU in Tulsa,  and so I was committed to the program that he was envisioning.  Gary, can I back up a minute and ask you, it seemed like I heard the  statement made that Tulsa was the only city of its size in the United  States that didn   t have a public institution located within its area?  That   s true. The Tulsa Chamber of Commerce was a big promoter, not  necessarily of OSU, although they certainly supported us and have been  great since we   ve been over there, but their concern was Tulsa   s being  underserved in terms of higher ed.    We   ve got this University Center,  which nobody understands, and the students don   t know how it works. It  really doesn   t serve the needs of what we want,    so they were strongly  supportive of getting higher ed in Tulsa. That was a commonly quoted  statistic that they were the largest city that didn   t have public higher ed.  The one thing that Tulsa did have was Tulsa Community College, which  was started in about 1971 which is, head counts, about 20,000 students.  So, you had a big first and second year operation, but once they finished  they had nowhere to go, and that   s really what was driving a lot of this.  The dynamic when I took the job over there in 1999   and I remember  going over there in August. Our mission was to establish OSU in Tulsa,  however you needed to do that. There were two things that happened in  that legislation that I didn   t mention earlier. It created OSU-Tulsa and  disassembled the consortia. It also created something called a graduate  center in Tulsa. And that was essentially throwing something to OU for  losing out, because OU in many ways didn   t really want the mission in  Tulsa, but they didn   t want OSU to have it, either. Logistically, it   s  much harder for them to get there than it is for us. You know, we   re an  32  Gill  Trennepohl  hour, hour and fifteen minutes away, and they   re two and a half hours  away. So, it just made a whole lot more sense, but they were over there,  and, of course, being the two major state schools, there was a lot of  competition about who would get the mission. We ended up getting that,  but as part of the deal, they established a joint graduate center between  OU and OSU that had a director, and then underneath that, the graduate  programs for the two schools would be run by their two schools but  coordinated through the director. Well, that was an interesting deal, let  me tell you.  Plus, at the same time, OU was co-located on that campus because their  facilities were not ready. They   d gotten approval to get the building at  the Amoco Center but  it was  going to be two years before they got  moved over there, and I can still remember this. The spring, early  summer, in    99, Ken Lackey called me, and Ken was Keating   s Chief of  Staff, but Ken had been hired by David Boren to be the OU-Tulsa  president to establish their programs in Tulsa. Ken and I got to be great  friends and had great respect for each other, but he called me and he  said,    Well, I guess we   re in this together, so let   s figure out how we   re  going to make it work,    because the way the newspapers were  presenting it and the dialogue that had taken place to get this done  legislatively had pitted Boren against Halligan kind of as enemies in this  whole process. So, there was a feeling in the public, whether it was true  or not, that there was animosity and OU and OSU were fighting all the  time. So, that was one of the other mandates I got from the state regents  was,    You and Ken need to play well together when you go to Tulsa.     So, Ken called me and I agreed, and Ken had no background in higher  education. He   s a really good business guy, smart guy, but had no higher  ed background, and I said,    Well, we   ll make this work because it   s  good for both of us and it   s good for Tulsa.    So, we actually became  good friends and really worked together and got some things sorted out  at the front end to stifle the discussion about OU and OSU fighting and  actually looking at how we could cooperate and do things together.  Was part of that who was going to teach what courses or not?  Not too much that. That was the Langston issue about who could teach  what courses. There was a little bit of that with OU but not nearly as  much. It was more just the operations stuff about,    How do we transition  out of your facility and establish our own, and then what are the going-forward  relationships?    as we had graduate programs. And the fact of  the matter is, once they moved out and we looked at when we had our  other budge time in 2003, Ken and I both argued that having an  organization structure of a graduate center but the schools running the  programs, there was half a million dollars of cost that didn   t need to be  33  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  there. We said,    Look, we   ll just divide it up. Give it to us and let us run  our programs, but there   s no sense having the overhead.    So, we got that  done, and the graduate center, I mean, today nobody   s ever going to  know what that was. It   s basically gone away. Really, it was a political  purpose. It wasn   t for education.  Just to get the votes.  Well, to get the votes and get the state regents to go along and get OU  feeling like they   re part of what   s going on in Tulsa. So, what   s evolved  is over those first two to three years we really put on some growth  spurts. We brought some new degree programs over at the  undergraduate level that didn   t exist before, and then after we had done a  lot of the easy things, then the hard stuff were really degree programs at  the undergraduate level is what we needed to grow in Tulsa. That  became a much stronger sticking point with Langston.  Can you share a little bit about that?  Langston, they had fourteen degree programs, according to the state  regents    guidelines, that they were supposed to have priorities on. I  mentioned accounting before, but it included elementary education,  some of the other business areas that were sort of related to ours but not  the same: sociology, psychology. It   s kind of the heart of if you are  creating a university, these are the degree programs that everybody   s  going to offer. So, that left us with the idea of,    How do we do this  without violating that relationship but provide the opportunities for  students?    We added degree programs. Langston agreed to let us teach  elementary education about four years ago, which to the long term will  be a big program, and we   ve added some of the other business programs  that they teach. Computer science, for example, they do in the business  school. It   s not the computer science that we do, which is arts-and-sciences  based, so it becomes a lot of this, that and the other.  The interesting thing is that in, I think it was, 2002, Ernie Holloway,  who was president of Langston, filed a letter with the state regents  complaining about the duplication of their degree programs in Tulsa by  all the schools, which included OSU, OU and Northeastern. And so that  process   it was still going on, and it   s still going on today. They   re  trying to get some kind of resolution going forward about what   s fair for  Langston but also what   s fair for Tulsa. I don   t think it   s fair to impose a  requirement on the students in Tulsa that you can only get an accounting  degree from this university.  I want to ask you to go out on a limb a little bit. You indicated there had  been a real sticking point with this, but thinking from the delivery of  34  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  service and thinking of the people who are being served in the Tulsa  community and greater Tulsa area, are you optimistic for OSU-Tulsa to  be able to offer more classes that were concerns and issues with  Langston?  We need to get beyond the degree program restrictions, and that   s the  key thing, and I probably spent the last three years devoting most of my  time to figuring out and trying to do things that would help us move the  ball on that. Not in disrespect to Langston, but it needs to be a win-win  for both of us in terms of making things happen in Tulsa. Bottom line,  I   m optimistic. It   s one of those things that for the long term it   s got to  be done. It just has to happen, so we   ll figure out some way to get there.  I thought last year we almost had a solution. The state regents, the  governor   s office, the Office of Civil Rights were all working hard to try  to come up with a win-win for both Langston and for OSU and Tulsa. I  started about three years ago filing a request with the state regents to  dramatically expand our degree programs. That kind of got everything  all excited about how they were going to respond and what would  happen and so forth. That   s still in place, and Howard  Barnett    s  working to try and make that happen.  One more question and then we   ll move to something else. But, it seems  like I came across some enrollment projections from back a few years  ago for OSU-Tulsa that perhaps aren   t there, haven   t gotten to those  projections. Has that been a primary issue for, and I   m not using this  excuse in the sense it   s only cost, but has it been one element that has  sort of restricted, perhaps, the growth to the extent that we anticipated  for OSU-Tulsa?  Well, two or three things, and to put it in perspective, when I went over  there in    99, the marketing folks at OSU had put together an idea of  20,000 students by 2020. That was kind of the mantra. It was sending a  signal to the Tulsa community that we were going to be there and we  were going to support higher ed in Tulsa. That would   ve been feasible.  There are two things that had to happen and that could   ve happened.  One is, if TCC would   ve merged with us so that we captured the first  two years   you know, with that during the first two years, you look at  the enrollment in Stillwater, it   s a big number. So, if somehow we  would   ve gotten a joint operating agreement or relationship with TCC,  that would   ve brought in probably 10,000 students very easily right  there. And then the other part of that is the restrictions with the Langston  programs. We   ve done the easy programs, the ones that we can do that  are right up to the margin about what we can offer, so until we break the  program restriction issue, you   re not going to be able to grow too much  more in Tulsa.  35  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  You   re not going to see that getting much more than 3,000, 4,000, 5,000  without that?  I think if we got to 4,000 without that   because about three years ago  we kind of hit a plateau in terms of adding students. There   s just one  thing that   s working against anything in the state is the high school  graduation numbers are going down, so demographics to grow are  against you. And then the other thing that   s happening, you   ve got  Northeastern in Tulsa that   s offering a broad range of degree programs,  and they   re claiming they can do that because they   re really in Broken  Arrow, in Wagoner County, which is, according to the OCR folks, not  really accurate, but that   s what they   ve been doing. And then you have  some different   Rogers  State University  was the other university that  was started there in Claremore, and they   re trying to grow more to  become a four-year school. So, you   ve got increasing competition for  the students, but frankly, I don   t see us in competition with Northeastern  or with Rogers. The kind of student that we   re looking for is typically  not the student that   s looking to go to a regional school. They want an  OSU-quality degree.  Gary, do you see the model working and going forward in the future?  Yes and, you know, what is interesting, and you have to be there to  experience it, but when I went in    99 we had all four schools there. The  only graduate students were OU and OSU graduate students. All the  undergraduates were Northeastern and Langston, and there were  probably, I want to say, 3,500 total students with all schools there at the  time. Just the difference   and I was saying to my leadership team after  about four years, the evolution that took place from the attitude of the  students who were there and the seriousness of the students to me was  dramatic over four years. They were motivated younger men and women  that wanted to get a college degree. Some of them had transferred from  Stillwater or from wherever, but the median age from 1995 at that  campus was thirty-seven, and in 2005 it was about twenty-five. So, you  had dramatically dropped the age by adding the undergraduate degree  programs, and then OSU was recruiting the OSU-kind of caliber of  students into those programs, so it became a much different     If you go over on campus today, it feels like a campus environment. You  see students walking around. Most of our classes are late afternoon and  evening, still, but we   ve got opportunity to grow, to the future, during  the day. But what you see is more of a typical university environment.  They understand what it is. There   s not four schools competing, and they  don   t know who   s doing what and where do I get a degree and how do I  get advised. And, frankly, with the Tulsa operation leveraging off what  Stillwater provides, the base over here with student advisement,  36  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  financial aid, Foundation work, all the support stuff that goes with it, it  makes a big difference for us to do things in Tulsa that we couldn   t do  just on our own. The people who were running the university before  OSU took it over did not come from an educational background. They  didn   t understand the academic side of the business, and I think that   s  what we brought.  Some of the social dynamics of being located in Tulsa, I mean, in terms  of being part of the community, can you talk about that some?  Yes, and that   s another thing that Halligan and I talked about. What we  have to do is put a face on OSU-Tulsa, and that was my job as president.  So, I ended up belonging to about everything that I was asked to belong  to, community-wise, and sharing a lot of these community fundraising  events that go on.  And, Gary, just to put in context, more than the typical university  president would be doing, you have a lot of external relations with your  alumni, but the different kinds of external relations.  Yes, that   s right. It   s not that it   s any more than what Burns Hargis or  anybody is going through on this campus. In terms of their demands on  their time is just tremendous, but ours in Tulsa was different because it  ended up being not university-related operations. It was the United Way;  we were big. I was on the board for the United Way. It was the  Oklahoma Council on Community Injustice. It was the Tulsa Air and  Space Museum that I   m still involved with. It was the zoo. It was the  philanthropic public service orientation. I was on the chamber board.  One of the former mayors put me on the Economic Development  Commission for the city, which that makes a lot of sense. I need to have  that exposure, and I chaired that board about three years ago and a lot of  the city-kinds of things that come and go and how you can help the city  and the Chamber of Commerce recruit new business to Oklahoma. That  was all part of it but in addition to spending time in Oklahoma City with  the legislature and getting to know all of our Tulsa delegation and trying  to work with them to rally support for OSU-Tulsa.  Putting some of that in context, Tulsa was wanting you as president and  the campus there to embrace Tulsa, to be Tulsa, and I don   t mean that in  the sense that they didn   t have extended outreach, as well, but it was  important for them to feel that connection.  Yes. They were very, as I mentioned earlier, supportive of getting higher  ed exposure in Tulsa that made sense, because the center of the  consortium was not working. And, so, when we came over there they  embraced us as they embraced the other schools. I mean, it wasn   t just  37  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  OSU, but they realized the leadership, that OSU was going to be the one  providing that comprehensive university education both at the  undergraduate and graduate level. I can   t tell you how many chamber  committees I was on that explored,    How can we increase research?  What can we do to bring economic development to Tulsa? How can we  attract these high tech firms?    A lot of time and effort and energy that  goes into all that stuff.  The other dimension, Jerry, and we haven   t even talked about this, and  it   s changed now, but about halfway through, the Oklahoma State  University College of Osteopathic Medicine, which is in Tulsa, changed  leadership and we actually did an agreement with them to assume a lot,  jointly, of the back-office functions like personnel, accounting,  purchasing, all those things that would be jointly done with staff in Tulsa  to support both of those operations. So, that dynamic in our relationship  with the medical school over there, which has now changed just recently  and I think in a very positive way, is to put the OSU-Tulsa president,  now Howard Barnett, as the president for OSU-Tulsa operations, which  includes both the medical school and the campus, and that really needed  to be done.  So, the person they   re hiring to come in now will simply be dean of the  College of Osteopathic Medicine and provost of the medical campus?  I don   t know if they   ll attach the    Provost.    They may attach the provost  title for Academic Programs. So, that   s what you need, and when I went  over there as OSU-Tulsa president, Tom Allen was the dean of the  medical school, and we worked very closely together. He was getting  ready to retire and move out, and we even talked about co-locating  facilities, which made a lot of sense. I mean, if we were going to do it  over, that would be the way to do it. But when they hired his  replacement, John Fernandez, part of his deal was they gave him the  president   s title for the medical school. So, that   s set up as a co-equal  and confusing operation in Tulsa because now you have two OSU-Tulsa  presidents. Who is responsible for what, so forth and so on. So, John was  totally always on the medical school side, but it created confusion and  with all the politics   we talk about higher ed, but all the politics that  surround medical operations are another thing too, and that   s always  been an under-funded operation. So, there were a lot of OSU efforts both  for the medical school and for Tulsa.  Are there any personalities in people you worked with that you want to  mention, and in Tulsa, talking about your many publics that you had  there just in Tulsa alone. Can you share some of your opportunities and  challenges you had in those relationships as they impacted you and the  campus?  38  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Wow. That   s an interesting question. Well, it   s interesting because you  get involved in the political process, and I guess I mentioned, probably,  three or four folks in a very positive way in terms of personalities. One  is the fellow who   s executive director of the Tulsa Metropolitan  Chamber when I went over there whom I   d gotten to know real well  because of prior work with the business school. And because we had a  close relationship, it made it really easy for me to work with the  chamber and work with their board members, and so I got to know all  the Tulsa business leadership through that chamber board, and that was  very, very helpful for us.  And who was that individual, the executive director?  Jay Clemens is his name, and he left about four or five years ago, and his  replacement is Mike Neal. Mike and I, again, have a very strong  relationship and have done things to work together through time. On the  chamber side, that was very important. In the mayor   s office, Susan  Savage was mayor when I went over there and Jim East worked for her.  Jim East is an OSU guy, and I   ve gotten to know Jim very well and  work with him on a lot of other things throughout time. So, that   s been a  good relationship. Bill LaFortune replaced Susan Savage, and then  Kathy Taylor replaced LaFortune. Kathy has put me on the economic  development committee and working on a lot of things for the city and  different committees and all those kinds of things. So, getting to know  those folks has been interesting, and the leadership of the political side  in Tulsa has been interesting. You also get to meet a lot of those folks on  the United Way board, because all of the big organizations are exposed  there. That   s the way you get to know people is doing the volunteer  things.  I think the last name that comes to mind, which is not strictly Tulsa, but  Chris Benge, who is currently Speaker of the House in Oklahoma, was a  brand new legislator in 1999 when I went over to start working with the  Capitol because of my new role. As he progressed up through the ranks  and I was at OSU-Tulsa, we worked together on things. Since he became  Speaker of the House, he   s always been somebody that you could talk to  and take your message to. He didn   t stonewall you or turn you away or  whatever. He   s very supportive.  He ended up, actually, being a student in one of my classes. He finished  up his undergraduate degree   and, again, the value of OSU being in  Tulsa. He had gone to work at the family business out of graduating  from high school and never had finished his undergraduate degree. He  ended up, he was a student in my investments class about five or six  years ago, so it was kind of nice having him as the Speaker of the House  and working with him on things. And he recently, because of that  39  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  experience, he put me on the Teachers Retirement Board for the State  Teachers Retirement Pension System.  That   s important, Gary. I want you to keep that in mind.  I know. (Laughter) We all have a vested interest in making that work, so  it   s a lot of fun, but it   s also a lot of work.  Looking back on your nearly fourteen years   how long you were there?  It   ll be fifteen years this August.  You just stepped down within the last year.  Last October.  So, give or take, you were nearly fourteen years there. What gives you  the most satisfaction, looking back? What have been some special  moments for you, some special accomplishments, for you personally but  for the campus, as well?  You know, it   s hard to measure those sorts of things because they really  tend to be long processes rather than single events. But let me mention a  couple or three. One was, being in a leadership role in Tulsa gave me the  opportunity to be the CEO of an organization, and for people who  haven   t done that or had that opportunity, it   s kind of fun. It has  responsibilities, but it also has a lot of rewards when you accomplish  things. As I   ve mentioned to other people, when I went over there I said,     You know, seven to ten years is my window on this because I   ll be  sixty-three by that time, so I   m not going to be looking to do this  forever.    And I really think as a leader it   s a lot of fun. The first few  years, you   re learning what   s going on, you   re learning the players and  so forth, and probably years two through six you can affect most of the  things you can do. And then after that, you either become a caretaker  and don   t get anything done, or you need to move on and do something  different that   s more exciting. So, I think during those first couple of  years, just learning the politics, learning what goes on in Oklahoma City,  learning what goes on with the state regents, and trying to get OSU-Tulsa  established, that was very exciting. I think that   s something that  I   ll always remember.  The physical thing that happened during those next four years was the  construction of that Engineering Research Center. And we need to keep  getting the funding necessary to hire the faculty and staff that up, but  I   m convinced that twenty years from now people will look back and  say,    This is one of the most important things for economic development  40  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  that we did in Tulsa,    because it will bring in and create new business of  a kind that will really make a difference for Oklahoma. So, I   m excited  about that part of it. I guess the other thing that goes with that is just  seeing the campus there become something other than seen as a step-child  operation that nobody was really responsible for or knew what it  was about. So, I   m very pleased with that. And in terms of an event     and part of this has to do with my friendship with the Speaker, but he  didn   t motivate it. Somebody else actually did, but this past spring it was  a big surprise. They got me over to Oklahoma City on a false pretense.  But the purpose was on the chair of the House, and then Halligan went  over and did it on the chair of the Senate, but they passed a joint  resolution about what I   d done for Oklahoma State University and Tulsa  and the things that had happened over there. And the Tulsa delegation  was very supportive, so I really appreciate that. That was kind of a  recognition that you   ve done something.  Had to feel good about that.  It made me feel good, yes.  Sort of put a stamp of approval on what you   ve done over there. So,  you   re retired, or you   re teaching now, actually?  Well, see, now don   t use that word    retired    because people     Not retired, I   m sorry. You went back to teaching.  I   m back in the classroom full time, so what I want to do   and various  things affect you. We   re linking back to our first part of the discussion.  Obviously when you   re young, and those youth experiences in your  family and history affect what you   ve become. But I saw in the last  couple or three years people my own age dying from stroke, dying from  a heart attack, becoming incapacitated and can   t do anything, and I   m  thinking,    I don   t want to do that.    Who knows what   s going to happen,  but I   m reasonably healthy and have been taking good care of myself.  We   ve got two young grandkids now, and it   s time to do more things for  ourselves and think about how Sandra and I can enjoy our retirement  years rather than worrying about responsibilities and doing things every  day.  So, part of that motivated me, plus the tenure thing, I told Jim Halligan  was to go back and change the schedule. The great thing about being an  academic is that you can teach and work with the students regardless of  your age or your physical capabilities, so I told them that I wanted to go  back. I wanted to teach a regular faculty load, so I   m teaching two MBA  classes this semester. One   s here in Stillwater; the other   s in Tulsa. And  41  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  that   s a lot of work, frankly, since I haven   t done that in about   the last  MBA class I taught here in Stillwater was in about 1997. So, the thing  that I   ve done, which is not like going into the classroom cold, I had  been teaching in Tulsa every year, one class, but I also continue to work  with the external with the business community with my contacts in  Chicago in teaching and working with institutional investors and doing  seminars for them and so forth and so on. So, you keep up with what   s  going on in the real world, and at this point, bringing those experiences  back into the theory side, the academic side, I think, is probably going to  be useful for the students.  You   ve done a lot of things in your life and had a lot of different  administrative experiences, teaching, experienced educational  opportunities. Looking back on your career, how do you hope people  remember Gary Trennepohl? How would you want them to remember  you?  You know, I never have thought about that. I guess the main thing that   s  important to me is that people feel that you   ve done a good job, that  you   re conscientious, responsible, and really made a difference for the  institution or whatever you were trying to work for. They may not agree  with me, but I hope they respect me for what I   ve done and the  contributions that we   ve made to Oklahoma State.  Gary, I appreciate very much you taking time to visit with us. Thank you.  Okay.  ------- End of March 22, 2010 interview -------  My name is Jerry Gill. Today is May 24, 2010. I   m visiting with Dr.  Gary Trennepohl on the OSU-Tulsa campus in Tulsa, Oklahoma. Gary, I  appreciate you taking time to visit with me a second time. In your  previous interview we talked about the inception of OSU-Tulsa, and I   d  like to revisit that issue if that   s okay with you. Who were some of the  Tulsa personalities, the players, if you will, involved in making this  happen and in creating OSU-Tulsa for the OSU and for the Tulsa  community?  This may be a little back-tracking, but I think it   s important to set the  scenario of what was going on here, realize that OSU had been offering  classes in Tulsa for several years, like the MBA, and were in a  consortium arrangement here in the Tulsa community with three other  schools: OU, Northeastern, and Langston. It was called the University  Center at Tulsa, and that was the model that the state regents had come  up with to try to bring education opportunities to the Tulsa market area.  42  Gill  Trennepohl  And, the real impetus for OSU getting a foothold in Tulsa and being  established as the educational offering here came about from the fact  that this consortium model just wasn   t working very well. There was too  much politics and too  many  things that could or could not be done that  kind of tied the hands, frankly, of all the schools, so it was just hard to  be creative and innovative and bring new programs to the Tulsa area.  So, the motivators of OSU-Tulsa getting established, on the community  side, the Tulsa Chamber of Commerce was a very strong advocate for  higher ed in Tulsa beyond this University Center. Ed Keller had been  chair of the Tulsa chamber a few years past, and he was also on the OSU  Board of Regents. He very much saw the need for OSU to have a  metropolitan exposure and thought that Tulsa would be the right place  for that since OU is located close to the Oklahoma City area. So, Ed and  the Tulsa chamber and the business leadership in Tulsa, I   ll be broad  enough to say they wanted quality higher ed in the Tulsa area and  figured one school needed to be able to do that, and it needed to be one  of the comprehensives in the Tulsa market that could provide a public  university comprehensive option for the Tulsa students. So, I   d single  out Ed and some of the community leaders of the time.  On the legislative side, what finally got this passed in the legislature in  1998   the authors of the bill were Penny Williams on the senate side  and Charlie Ford, and they were kind of the drivers as a senate bill that  created a campus in Tulsa.  Tulsa was in both their districts.  That   s true. They were both senators from the Tulsa area, so they had a  lot of people that joined in to try and make that happen. It   s an  interesting political process because you   ve got all these other schools,  too, and they all have their constituents, and they all wanted something  for their school, and so to get this through the political process was quite  a task. The fact of the matter is, just to get down to the end of it, the  legislation was passed on the last day of the session, as I recall, in May  of 1998. Basically, the bill had been prepared, the bill had gone through  various iterations, and you had the Langston group wanting certain  things, the Northeastern group and the OU group with David Boren, and  then Jim Halligan and the OSU group wanting certain things to be put in  the bill.  What the legislature wanted was to dissolve the consortium arrangement  and put a university in charge. So, the bottom line was, there at the  eleventh hour, they really thought it was not going to happen, and I  talked to Jim Halligan and Robert White. Robert White   s somebody who  ought to be singled out as well as Jim Halligan, working with the  43  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  legislative groups that final session to get this done. I know talking to  Jim, he said,    I was certain our deal was dead on Thursday before that  Friday because we just couldn   t get people to agree, and Langston  wasn   t going along, and blah, blah, blah.    Frankly, Governor Keating  should also be recognized because he basically told him,    If you don   t  get this solved, we   re not going to have an education budget this year.  I   m going to withhold the money, so you guys have got to get something  done.    You   ve got to remember that Keating was from the Tulsa area,  and, so, he was sensitive to what needed to be done here in the Tulsa  area.  Had he been former mayor?  No, he had not. No, Rodger Randle, who was the UCT president, if you  will, was the former mayor and Senate Pro Tempore of the Oklahoma  Senate, who was then running the consortium here in Tulsa. So, you had  all kinds of political parties engaged in this, but, finally, they thought it  wouldn   t go and get done, and everybody had to get something for doing  this. So, Langston got approval for establishing an endowment fund for  them to the tune of about thirty-some-odd million dollars. Northeastern  got something promised to them for essentially establishing their campus  in Broken Arrow. So, it   s the typical back-office deals that you don   t  want to hear about in the public, but that   s the way you get the political  process done.  So, all these agreements were made, and then OU, the other part of the  bill which people have forgotten because it   s gone away   the first part  created OSU-Tulsa. The second part created a graduate center in Tulsa  that was a combined OU/OSU deal. Since we were all still located here  in the same campus for three years, why, that consortium became the  OU/OSU graduate research center. They hired a director, Ken Lackey,  who was the president of OU that Boren hired and had been Keating   s  Chief of Staff and was a former business guy. I give Ken high marks,  too. He was really good to work with, and he and I both saw things very  similarly about the need to get resolution and get things working in  Tulsa. So, we worked together very well. We were not acrimonious  about it.  As I recall, literally, like thirty minutes before the legislature was to  adjourn, that bill passed. I   m not exaggerating that, am I?  It was about just like that. One of the legends that I heard was that  somebody looked up in the gallery and Ernie Holloway gave a thumbs-up  that he was satisfied, so that his constituent group knew that,    Okay,  we   ll vote and pass this thing.    But you can see how politically  contentious making any of these changes in higher ed is. It   s really hard.  44  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  So, anyway, it got done and that was in    98, and so it established OSU-Tulsa  would start operating in January of    99, and that   s when the  process started to develop a plan and develop ideas on what should  happen here in Tulsa.  What were the key community and corporate education relationships  that had to be forged to make this work?  Well, I think one of the key community deals was making sure that  Tulsa Community College understood what was going on, and that was  part of the legislation. They made sure that there was wording in there  that all the schools in Tulsa could only offer junior and senior and  graduate programs so that that wouldn   t detract from the Tulsa  Community College relationship.  Were there some corporate relationships that were important in making  this work?  Well, I think the only thing corporate is   really, what we tried to deal  with was the chamber and the large corporate environment like Williams  and some of the major banks and the accounting firms so that they  understood what was going on. But in terms of just direct support, not  really from the corporate side that I can think of, other than the fact that  their corporate leadership was providing leadership for the chamber.  You mentioned the chamber in our previous interview and then again  today. Is that still a good solid relationship and the other relationships  that you forged earlier on? Are we still maintaining those? How are they  working out?  I think a lot of things are still going forward and working well. The  chamber   when I came over here, I got asked to serve on the chamber  Board of Directors. That helped. I got to know all the players, and they  have monthly meetings. That helped us get that relationship going, and I  should single out Susan Harris at the chamber. She was on the education  subcommittee of the chamber, and she was a great supporter to make  sure on the business side that there was dialogue and meetings and all  these things taking place to make these things happen. The Tulsa World  was another community spokesperson, and they had been very  supportive. Ken Neal, who is the editor of the editorial page, he was  very supportive in getting something to happen over here. None of these  folks were OSU graduates. They had no vested interest in seeing that  OSU got a deal. What they were interested in is that Tulsa got  educational opportunities, and so we tried to be very accommodating to  do what needed to be done here.  45  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Do you think we   ve successfully maintained those relationships over the  past ten or so years?  You know, I think we have. There   s been changes that have occurred in  the chamber, obviously. Jay is the chamber president who I knew when  he first came here, and we had a very good relationship. Mike Neal is  currently the chamber CEO, and we have a good relationship with him. I  think the chamber really understands the need for higher ed to succeed  in Tulsa, and we work hard to work with them on those sorts of things.  You mentioned in our previous conversation an early marketing goal  and slogan for OSU-Tulsa was 20,000 in 2020.  Right.  But the current enrollment is what, just under 3,000?  It   s about, yes, right under 3,000.  Can you discuss what reaching that 20,000 goal was contingent on?  Sure. You know, there   s a lot of marketing in all this stuff. This was  1999 when Jim Halligan and the marketing folks in Stillwater came up  with the idea,    2000 is the year, so let   s have 20,000 students by the year  2020.    That   s kind of an alliteration to it that people like. Here   s why  it   s important: the signal it sent to the Tulsa community and to the  chamber and to the newspaper and the outside groups that wanted  education opportunities was that OSU was here to stay in Tulsa, and we  had some dramatic goals on how we wanted to serve the community.  There   s still an undercurrent over the first five to ten years, basically,  that,    Well, OSU is not serious. They really don   t want to commit to  Tulsa. They   re willing to be here, but they don   t want to do anything  here.    There was still that group of people that would suggest that  they   re not serious. We sent the signal to them very early that we are  serious and we are here to stay. I think that was the importance of  sending that marketing message.  To get to the 20,000, various things would   ve had to fall in place. We  would   ve had to have a merger with Tulsa Community College. They  have 20,000 students and teach the first two years. So, we could   ve very  easily picked up another 10,000 students if we   d have had a merger with  Tulsa Community College because, as you know, that   s where the big  growth numbers are, at the first two-year level. And whether that  happens or not, going forward, we   ve worked out various relationships  with TCC, but a lot of the stuff that they do is not related, per se, to four-year  or college degree programs. They do continuing education,  46  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  professional education, and other things, so not all of their students are  going to be interested or capable of having a four-year degree from  OSU. So, that isn   t in the plans at all.  Gary, can I probe a little bit? So, you were anticipating taking their  program, for those that were interested, and starting a two-year  program and moving towards a four-year degree program. Is that the  part you   re talking about merging?  Right. And we   ve had various discussions with them and with our  people, too, about how you would  accomplish this . There are one or  two examples around the country where, basically, you   ve got a  partnership with the community college and a major four-year or  graduate comprehensive university. So, those students are streamed into  the higher ed academic programs, and we make sure that they take the  right courses in the first two years to seamlessly move into the last two  and get their degree. So, we have done most of those things. Other  schools say that they have, but they really haven   t like we have. We had  meetings very frequently early on with the Tulsa Community College  administration and staff so that basically a student   we   ve done  everything except have an official merger, if you will. So, all of their  students   we have advisors on some of their campuses that have high  demand for going into OSU programs. We   ve merged the scholarship  side, so that   s one hang up where a student is getting scholarship  support, but taking classes at two places. You have to be able to  accommodate that and the advising process. We have a TCC advisor  here on this campus because a lot of our students are taking classes still  at TCC when they come over here. So, we   ve tried to do all those things,  but those students still all count as TCC students. They   re not OSU  students.  Is TCC teaching any of their classes on the OSU-Tulsa campus?  They are doing some. I   ve been trying to motivate more of that, but what  people have to understand is that it has to make sense. A student is not  going to come over here to take one class and go back to TCC. Right  now, they were looking at having some capacity issues a year or two  ago, so they were very motivated to do programs. For example, if you  would offer the business major prerequisites, which is a large major that  we have here at the undergraduate level, if you would offer those  prerequisites here, like on Tuesday or Thursday morning so a student  could come over and take two or three classes, that makes sense. You  can   t teach business calculus over here or elementary accounting over  here and only teach one class. That makes a student go back and forth,  and they can do the same thing without having to go back and forth at  one of their campuses. So, we   ve done some of that, but it   s still  47  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  working together. And the other side of that is TCC. They dance with all  the folks at the dance, so they have to be ecumenical to Northeastern, to  Langston, to OU. So, they are sensitive to being too much in bed with  one of the providers.  So, the perception is that there   s a good working relationship between  TCC and OSU-Tulsa.  Right.  How would you characterize that relationship? Is it still continued?  It   s still continued. Howard Barnett, who took my job, his wife Billie is  the president of the Tulsa Community College Foundation this past year,  and he   s been very active in working with Tulsa Community College.  So, I think there   s a natural relationship there and that will continue.  Do you see that relationship ever being sort of like the NOC presence in  the OSU campus in Stillwater?  You know, it   s hard to say. I don   t because it   s the reverse in terms of  size at the comprehensives. They have a large comprehensive like OSU,  and then you   re offering a small offering with the community college to  allow the students to cycle back and forth. Here we have a large  community college with a small comprehensive presence, so it doesn   t  work in quite the same way. So, it   s just the politics of the situation, and  if it works for the students    benefit, then I think that   s where we   re best  off for.  In my perception, the relationship with Langston has been somewhat  problematic, and some would even suggest contentious at times. With  that in mind, could you provide the background on that court mandate  for Langston   s presence in Tulsa and how that   s affected the regents     policy on higher education course offerings in Tulsa?  Sure. And you will probably get different perspectives on this depending  on who you talk to, because there   s still a lot of it that seems to be a bit  murky. But the issue is in the early 1980s the state of Oklahoma through  the state regents entered into a letter agreement with the Office of Civil  Rights out of Dallas that related to settling discrimination issues in  higher ed in Oklahoma. Now, to set the context, people need to  understand that in most of the southern states that had a historically  black college and other colleges, that there certainly were issues of  discrimination and other things that should not have been done to try and  keep the segregated student bodies. And if you look at Mississippi, for  example, Alabama, Maryland, even Florida, Texas with Prairie View,  48  Gill  they had historically black colleges, and they had tried to promote, if  you will, segregation by maintaining two sets of colleges.  The interesting thing in Oklahoma, when this discussion came up,  Oklahoma had made some very positive, good moves, starting in the     70s, frankly, to desegregate. And in the    60s, I mean, you were here in  college at OSU. It was starting in Oklahoma to desegregate the colleges.  What was interesting is that by the 1980s the most segregated school in  Oklahoma was Langston, the historically black school. And so the issue  was,    How do you address segregation? I   ve got a historically black  college that   s 99 percent black, and I   ve got desegregation occurring in  the other colleges.    Bottom line, what they ended up doing, there was  never a court issue as there were in many of the other states that  prevented various things from happening until the states righted the  wrongs, if you will, with the historically black colleges. And the  agreement that the regents struck with OCR at that time in the    80s was  that in Oklahoma, what they did, there was not any money that changed  hands regarding programs and support as there was in many of the other  southern states. The agreement was that, in order to desegregate  Langston, frankly, and create a level playing field in the state for all the  colleges, Langston was given a monopoly on higher ed in the Tulsa  market.  You   ve got to realize that in 1982, in the early    80s, there was no higher  ed in Tulsa other than the University of Tulsa, and so what was  happening was that, I   ll say it   s fairly easy, but if you were giving  somebody priority programs in Tulsa, there wasn   t any competition,  anyway. OSU was, frankly, bursting at the seams in Stillwater and didn   t  have the resources to provide very many programs in Tulsa, and the  other schools were kind of far away and just didn   t make any sense. So,  it was, I   ll say, fairly easy, but you could give Langston the mission to  serve higher ed in the Tulsa market at that time. So, they structured  about fourteen degree programs that Langston could offer that nobody  else could. The problem for us now in the 2000s is that those were the  heart of the university offering. They were psychology, sociology,  business, accounting, management, a variety of popular degree programs  that people would seek, and that   s why you didn   t get the growth, and  that   s why the consortium, frankly, didn   t work real well either, was it  was hard to expand undergraduate degrees with the other schools in the  consortium because Langston had the monopoly on those programs.  Doesn   t that cut both ways? Just asking your opinion, is Langston  currently, and has it been in the last, say, ten years or so, positioned to  really, one, fulfill all the needs? Do they have the resources, the staff for  all those degree programs to really offer those? Two, are Tulsans  seeking a degree more from Langston, or would they prefer a degree  49  Trennepohl  Gill  Trennepohl  from a major comprehensive university like Oklahoma State University?  Sure. I think, again, putting that in perspective and understanding how I  think the education marker works, as they did and still do in many of  these states, they restricted degree offerings by the majority schools.  That   s the same thing they did in Tennessee and Nashville, for example.  University of Tennessee couldn   t offer degree programs that the  historically black school in Nashville could offer. The same was true in  Florida with Florida A M and Florida State. So, I am opposed to  restricting students from choosing degree programs that, if they   re  capable, they ought to have the right to pursue.  What happened here in Tulsa was that, because of the mandate that you  couldn   t offer things, it was hard for us to implement these programs,  and what we would find were students   I think students gravitate  towards getting the best degree that they are capable of. And the  competition in the Tulsa market is not between students going to OSU or  Langston, and that   s what is often perceived by the public. That   s not the  case. The students who can get an OSU degree that are willing to take  the set of prerequisite classes   they have to take the math, they have to  take the college algebra, they have to take English, intermediate  accounting. They don   t have to do that in the regional schools. Their  course requirements are not as severe.  And, so, what is happening and happened in the Tulsa market is that the  students would choose not to go to OSU. They could go to Langston or  they could go to Northeastern because those were regional colleges with  similar requirements. We would often get characterized as trying to take  students away from Langston if we offered accounting, but what was  happening is Northeastern, when their campus was established in  Broken Arrow, said,    Well, we   re not in Tulsa County, so this restriction  doesn   t apply.    So, they   ve actually expanded degree programs out in  Broken Arrow and are offering things that we are not allowed to offer  here.  Gary, would you suggest that they are in some areas more likely to be in  competition with Langston than OSU?  Oh, certainly they are. And, I mean, students are going to   if Harvard  were here offering programs, and people could get a degree from  Harvard, they   d say,    Hey, I want to go there.    That   s great. But number  one, it   s very expensive, and number  
