 Peters. We   re at Oklahoma State University. It   s November 23,  2015, and I   m with Ron Stevens for an interview for O-State Stories.  Welcome, Ron.  Stevens Thank you.  Peters Please say your name, and please spell it for us.  Stevens Ron Stevens, R-O-N, S-T-E-V-E-N-S.  Peters Thank you. Okay, Ron. Where did you grow up?  Stevens Grew up in Oklahoma City and lived there until I came to OSU.  Peters What did you do? Did you come straight to OSU out of high school?  Stevens No, I stayed. I didn   t go to college immediately. I worked to save money,  and I was also, at that time, wanted to run in college. I was sort of scouting  out different options, and originally, in fact, was going to go to University of  Arizona but changed my mind. Well, first I went to Central State   University  for a semester and ran there and then was going to go to the  University of Arizona but decided to not to try to run anymore and ended up  coming here.  Peters Where   d you graduate from high school then?  Stevens Northwest Classen High School in Oklahoma City.  Peters You said    run.    What were you     Stevens Cross-country  and track . I was a distance runner.  5  Peters Why did you end up here?  Stevens When you grow up in Oklahoma, back then, anyway, I think in, my class  had 500 and something students. The one afterwards had a lot more, but  very few people from my class went out of state. I mean, you went to OU   University of Oklahoma , or you went to OSU. My brother had gone to  OU. I don   t really remember why OSU. My wife was the same way. It   s  what you did.  Peters You didn   t run in cross-country here?  Stevens No, no.  Peters What years were you here then?  Stevens I got here in fall of    64 and then left January of    68.  Peters What   d you major in?  Stevens Sociology.  Peters Where   d you live?  Stevens Oh, well, I lived off campus most of the time. At the point which I decided  to come here, you actually, it was too late to get into a dorm, and I lived on,  I think it was Ramsey  Street , in a converted back porch on Ramsey where  the floor sloped. Then that was my first place, and then I moved into the   Single Men   s  Apartments. They had just built the Apartments out  northwest of the campus.  Peters Is that Brumley or     Stevens I don   t remember the name. I think they just called it the Apartments at the  time. I   m not sure.  Peters Just usually student housing is     Stevens Yeah, and four people were in a n apartment . That   s where I lived my  second year and then moved off campus again into a little house with friends  on Third Street, I think. That   s right, and that little house doesn   t exist  anymore. That   s where eventually The Drummer, ultimately, it ended up  becoming the office of The Drummer. That   s where we produced it.  Peters How   d you get around? Did you have a car?  Stevens I had a car, a    65  Ford Falcon .  6  Peters What activities did you get involved with while you were here?  Stevens Well, the first thing  I  got involved with was the Wesley Foundation. I   d  been a Methodist, went to St. Luke   s Church in Oklahoma City and was a  fairly religious person and just found my way to the Wesley Foundation  when the two campus ministers there were really exceptional. There were a  lot of things going on there, and they took me under their wing, especially  one of them. That really was the beginning of just making connections  around because a lot of people, including people who hadn   t even grown up  Methodist, ended up hanging out there because it was an interesting place to  be with interesting things happening.  Peters What were their names, the two ministers?  Stevens Carl Caskey was the head campus minister, and Vance Engleman was the  other one.  Peters Did you get involved with any of the local Methodist churches, Highland  Park or First Methodist at all, or mostly     Stevens No, I didn   t. It was really just the foundation, the Wesley Foundation.  Peters Do you remember other personalities from the foundation? Do you  remember Ted Agnew or     Stevens Well, yeah, yeah, I do actually. Yeah, Ted Agnew was involved. Actually  Robert Kamm had been involved, as a matter of fact. I mean, when Kamm  was named president, there were cheers throughout. I mean, it was very  ironic the way things turned out, but he was a Methodist. Caskey knew him  and liked him and thought this was really great. He was the first president to  come out of College of Arts and Sciences. He   d been a dean in College of  Arts and Sciences before, and a lot of people, the head of the sociology  department was thrilled. Everybody was at the time. There were other  people   I can   t think of, it   s a little hard for me to remember which of the  faculty members that I knew had a relationship with the Wesley Foundation  and which didn   t. During that time, it was an interesting time because I got  to know a lot of faculty members who I never had classes from just because  of the stuff that was going on on-campus, and it was very, Clarence  Cunningham was     Peters I was going to mention Clarence.  Stevens    Clarence, gosh, what a man, I mean, seriously, what a man. I had a  conversation with him one time, later, after I   d been at here for some time  and had grown disenchanted with the way a lot of things were done here,  7  and I remember having a conversation with him one time where,  complaining about how awful it was to be stuck here. At the time, Berkeley  was always, stuff going on at Berkeley, and I think he   d gone to Berkeley. I  think he had a degree from there, and he said,    Ron, you don   t understand. If  you were going to Berkeley, you wouldn   t ever get to know any of your  professors. The classes you would take often wouldn   t be taught by  professors.    He was right. This was a much more, for a reasonably large  university at the time, it was a much more intimate environment, and that  was a real good thing. It really was. There were a bunch of people. Margaret  Brooks, I got to know very, very well and became very close to. I   ve never  had any classes under her. It   s true, a bunch of people.  Peters Clarence has passed away recently.  Stevens I know, I know. We were Facebook friends actually, and his son is now,  friended me after that. We keep in touch, Steve, I think it is. Yeah, he was a  really good man. I remember a bunch of them, Alex Ospovat. I can   t think  of all the names now, but there was, the thing about that period at OSU was  that, I think this happens now and then in places where there   s just this  coincidence of, where interesting people end up being someplace at the  same time, and that, the students as well as the faculty. There was just an  extraordinary collection of interesting, thoughtful students. There was a guy  named John Giancola who was a philosophy major. He   s from New York  City. How he ended up at OSU, I have no idea, and John was also an  influence for me. I was this naive kid, and John was a couple years older, I  think, from New York City. He was a real character. He used to say,    People  ask me what I   m going to do with philosophy as a major.    And he says,     What are you going to do without one?    (Laughter)  Chic Dambach, who I had talked about, Chic was another one. He came here  to play football. That   s what brought him here. Then he got injured, but he  became a real star here and a lot of other people and other places later in his  life. There were just a bunch of people like that, Ken Dahms, Bill Streck,  Hank Hankla, who was on the student senate from the IFC  Interfraternity  Council , raised in Boise City, Oklahoma. A lot of the people who were here  in that period and got involved were from tiny little towns, and it was an  enormous change for them from where they came from intellectually and in  their minds, in their attitudes, in their politics. It was just amazing. Another  quick story, Maurice Stein was a well-known sociologist, and he taught at  Brandeis. He came here to speak, and a group of us stayed after and sat at  his feet and complained again,    Oh, we   re stuck here in Oklahoma. It   d be  so much better to be at a place like Brandeis.     He chided us, and he said,    No. Here, you   re experiencing reality. You have  to really struggle for your beliefs and to pursue them. At Brandeis, kids will  decide one day that they   re against the war. The second day, they   ll go out  8  and demonstrate against it, and on the third day, they   re surprised it didn   t  end.    That was an exaggeration, but he was making a point. It was true.  When I did leave Oklahoma and went to Chicago, I was, CTS was the  Chicago Theological Center. Everywhere I went was right next to the  University of Chicago, and this was 1968. At one point, the administration  building was taken over. Anyway, when I first got there, I   m going,    Oh my  gosh. I   ve landed in heaven.    Everybody had long hair.  Everybody was against the war or for civil rights and blah, blah, blah, and  then after a while when I got to know the place better, I realized that their  having long hair and being against the war and for civil rights was pretty  much what being in a fraternity was here, which is to say it   s what you did.  There was no struggle to get to where they were. Everybody that I knew at  OSU who went through that period, that very difficult period and developed  commitments kept those commitments the rest of their lives, and all,  everybody that I ever was able to stay in touch with, all of them were doing  really good things. They weren   t trying to make as much money as they  could. Not that they weren   t successful, but they pursued careers and  activities to try to make the world a better place. It was because of what  happened here, the process that we all went through.  Peters When you first get here, Oliver Willham is president.  Stevens Yeah, I guess so.  Peters Do you remember anything about the administration or     Stevens No, no.  Peters Then in 1966, Robert Kamm, who was former dean of Arts and Sciences, is  named the new president. He   s the first real, well, we   ve had two presidents  in the previous forty years, but he   s not from an ag riculture  background,  comes right out of Arts and Sciences. Student Services actually was his  background even before that. How did the campus atmosphere change with  the appointment of Kamm?  Stevens Everybody I knew was just thrilled. I knew him a little bit from the Wesley  Foundation because he was a Methodist and had some involvement there.  The campus ministers there were thrilled. The head of the sociology  department, Gerald Leslie, was thrilled because Arts and Science s   president. Initially there was just this excitement about it, but     Peters What happened? (Laughter)  Stevens    well, there were a series of things that happened. There was a relatively  small group of people (I mean, I think we all knew each other), who were,  9  who had gotten involved in pro-civil rights stuff and anti-war activities on  campus, and it was really a small group. I can   t remember all of the different  grievances the people had, but I remember what the precipitating event was.  That is that the Oklahoma Civil Liberties Union wanted to hold a convention  at the Student Union, and they weren   t allowed to because they were too  controversial. (Laughter)  Peters Who stopped them from being there?  Stevens I don   t know if it was the Student Union leadership. I think it was, but I   m  not sure.  Peters Abe Hesser, I think, would have been director.  Stevens Yeah, I think he would have been. I think that   s right, and there were some  graduate students, Anne Schneider and Beverly Goodman maybe. They  were both poli-sci students. They called a meeting at the Student Union to  talk about it. They were so upset about it, and I   m going,    Oh God, I don   t  know those people. That   s interesting. Well, we   ll go.    We went expecting  there to be twenty or thirty people there, and the room was overflowing.  Peters When was this?  Stevens I   m not sure. It was probably    66, I assume. Might   ve been    67. It was  winter. I remember that because of the snow.  Peters It was after Kamm had been appointed     Stevens Yeah, he was president.  Peters    within about a year or so.  Stevens There was a decision to hold a rally about free speech and that sort of thing  and academic freedom. There were flyers printed up, and we distributed  them. I thought,    Okay, yeah, we   ll do it, but nothing   s going to happen,     and it was scheduled for the   in front of the library on the lawn.  Peters Was that a common meeting place for     Stevens We   d never had anything like that, not that I know of, and 400 people  showed up, which was like,    Whoa.    I mean, nobody expected that, and  there were speakers, oh gosh, David Block and Terry Denton. Wow, I can   t  believe I remember these names. I can   t remember who all   I spoke. I have  no memory of what I said or anybody else said, and there were some faculty  speaking. Then it got really interesting because Dr. Kamm was out of town,  I think, that day, and he came back. He was furious about this happening on  10  his campus. He called in four department heads to his office, political  science, history, philosophy, and sociology because there were people,  either faculty or graduate assistants had been involved in the rally from  those four departments, or at least that   s what he was told.  He called them into his office, and he told them that they were to hold staff,  faculty and, meetings with faculty and graduate assistants and inform them  they were not to be involved in such activities in the future. If they were,  they would risk, if they were graduate assistants, they would risk losing their  assistantship. If they were regular faculty, they would risk losing their job,  and if they were tenured faculty, they would be, risk losing, being frozen in  their current position. Well, the four department heads were all,    Did he  really say this?    Three of them decided just to do nothing, figuring he would  think better of it and it   d just, it would go away, but Sare, I think, Dr. Sare, I  think was his name, from political science   oh, the other   .  Peters Harold Sare.  Stevens Yeah. The other thing was that these instructions were to come from them,  not from him, and Sare held a meeting. That   s where Anne Schneider and  Beverly  Goodman  worked. They were in political science. He held a  meeting and told them. He also told them that Kamm had told him to do it,  and Anne was just, I mean, they were terrified of losing their assistantship.  Peters Sare was also Methodist, too.  Stevens Oh, I didn   t know that.  Peters Yeah. (Laughs)  Stevens The next part is really weird because we were so conservative about things,  and we didn   t want to be perceived as being radicals or Berkeley-type free  speech movement or anything like that. We really wanted to be responsible,  and so much so that there wasn   t this   there was going to be a second rally.  It came off, but nobody knew what had happened, very few people. I found  out from Anne. I went to Dr. Leslie, the head of the sociology department,  and confronted him about it, and I said,    Did this happen?    He just sunk  down in his chair, and he goes,    Ugh, God.    He didn   t say anything. He  hoped it would go away, and he was just aghast because he was a big  supporter of the president   s. He could not believe that this had happened.  There   s a second rally. Two thousand people showed up, even though   I  suspect there were rumors, something had happened, but they didn   t know  what. We didn   t tell anybody.  Peters At the library again?  11  Stevens Yeah, 2,000 people. I couldn   t believe it. (Laughs) At this rally, David  Larson, who was a sociology professor, announced his resignation at the  rally, and he made references to, without being specific, about what had  happened. Then it just really got   oh, and the other thing that happened was  we had, a group of us had gone to Dr. Scales, who was then the head of Arts  and Sciences, who was, (gosh, he was good, a loss there), anyway, went to  him to talk to him about this. He was very political guy in the sense he was  very careful about how he did things, and he didn   t say   I don   t remember  the whole conversation, but at one point, he said,    You   re exercising your  right to free speech. Good for you.     I think Kamm was going to be out of town. Yeah, he was out of town for  that rally, I think, and he had instructed Scales to keep his eye on it or  whatever, something like that. The rumor got around about what had  happened, and  David  Larson resigned. I mean, that was a big deal. You  have to understand the sociology department at that time was like a crown  jewel at OSU in the Arts and Sciences. Leslie had brought in just a really,  really top-notch group of professors and had a great reputation, and it really  was something that the university bragged about. At the end of that  semester, I guess it was, every single member of the sociology department  except for Gene Acuff, who was on leave to get his PhD (he was the only  non-PhD)     Peters He was at the University of Missouri getting his PhD, yeah.  Stevens    resigned en masse, the entire department. Scales resigned and became  president of Wake Forest  University , a bunch of people. I think Klaus  Heberle from history resigned. I mean, it was big. Word got around about  what had happened, and I think it was the Arts and Science s  faculty  council created a committee to investigate these rumors. Margaret Brooks  was put in charge of it.  Peters Margaret is the head of the honors college, at the time.  Stevens She was a botany professor and head of the honors program, and her  husband was an ag professor, really radical traditions. (Laughter) Dr. Brooks  was just a really honored person and honorable. She really was. She was  great. They conducted an investigation and wrote up a report, only when  they went to present it, it was squelched. I don   t remember exactly how, but  it was. People didn   t see it, and she was told that she had to sit on it and  could not release it.  Peters Who told her to sit on it? Was this Arts and Sciences?  Stevens I know Dan Wesley was involved. He was the one, my understanding is that  he is the one who finally went to her because she had tenure. You couldn   t  12  fire her. He went, and my understanding is that Wesley went to her and told  her that if she didn   t resign that they would close down the honors program  because they knew that that was her love. That was her primary love right  then, and she was just adored by the honors students. She resigned, and  many of the honors students left also after that semester.  Peters Did she stay on in botany?  Stevens No, no, no, no.  Peters No, she resigned from the university.  Stevens No, she had to resign from the university. That was what was required. Then  she taught at OCU  Oklahoma City University  after that. I saw her years  later, and she was just, she was like a shadow of herself. It was a horrible,  horrible thing for her. As I   ve said as I am about other aspects of that period  and the principles of free speech and everything else, what they did to  Margaret Brooks was just   .  I later learned that Dr. Brooks recovered and  lived a vital, creative life as a teacher and writer, continuing to inspire  students and others who knew her.   Peters Who sent Dan Wesley? He wouldn   t   .  Stevens Kamm did. It was just   she had become the, also the advisor to the student  senate, and the student senate all got to know her. This would have been     this was actually would have been the fall of    67. It started, I think, in the  spring of    67 and then the fall of the rallies, and then in the fall, there was a  student senate election, student government election. David Harris and Gene  Dorris ran as a reform slate with a group of student senators, and Tom Lucas  and Bob Swaffar ran as the establishment slate and won. It was a close  election, I think, but anyway, they won. The student senate going into that  fall year was not   it was an establishment in student senate for the most  part. By the end of that semester, it was not, and I think that what happened  with Dr. Brooks was the thing that brought a lot of people off of the  sidelines on this because that was, they knew her. They knew what was  happening to her, and it wasn   t theoretical anymore. It wasn   t free speech. It  was a human being who was being persecuted because of this investigation,  and she wouldn   t be quiet about it.  After I left, the student senate called an all-campus meeting, and everybody,  the fraternities and sororities got people out and everything. I think this is all  in that, in those materials that I gave you. There   s some speeches and stuff, I  think. The way it all snowballed, it   s a little like if you think about  Watergate. They say the cover-up is where they get you, and if it hadn   t  been   I mean, none of this had to happen. It just was so unnecessary, and  the Board of Regents got involved in supporting President Kamm. A group  13  of us went out and tried to meet with members of the Board of Regents to  talk to them about it, and those of us who   everybody came from a  conservative family pretty much. They just couldn   t understand.    What   s  going on in there?    I talked to my mom, and she just didn   t understand. I  know that   s true of Hank and probably everybody. It was a hard thing to do.  This was not a popular, this was not the sort of thing where,    Oh, let   s get  on the bandwagon    kind of thing at all. It was risky business, and it was a     people had to think long and hard about it.  Peters The Oklahoma legislature got involved.  Stevens Oh yeah.  Peters Talk to me a little bit about the campus speakers    policy. In 1967, the  Religious Emphasis Week   .  Stevens Thomas, yeah, Thomas Altizer.  Peters    was invited to come speak, and then his invitation was withdrawn.  Stevens Yeah, and the irony of this is that Thomas Altizer was actually a pretty  conservative theologian. However, he had written a book, the title of which  was God is Dead  Radical Theology and the Death of God , which was a  provocative title but did not represent what was in the book at all. It was  really talking about how we have killed God by not doing   I mean, it was,  he wasn   t even a radical theologian, but the book title was provocative. Dr.  Kamm, my recollection is that Dr. Kamm specifically refused to allow him  to speak, and that was the beginning of the speakers    issues. There were  others. I don   t remember even who they were, but there were two people  who had been invited to come and didn   t. One was Henry Steele Commager,  and the other was John Kenneth Galbraith. Galbraith was going to come,  and two student senators, who I think were also on the speakers    committee,  Ken Dahms and Bill Streck, sent a letter to Galbraith asking him not to  come.  Peters Who had invited him to come?  Stevens I don   t even know. I don   t know. I mean, it may have been the speakers      I  don   t know. It may be that they invited him and then decided we   d rather,  that things had escalated. I don   t know that.  Peters I can   t remember the name of the original group, but they were really upset  that he didn   t come because they had, I guess they had spent a year  prepping this thing, getting it ready.  Stevens It might have been the economics department.  14  Peters Then all of a sudden   go on. Two gentlemen contact Kenneth Galbraith  informing him of the controversies going on.  Stevens He wrote a letter, and I have the original of it, a letter where he appreciated  them telling him and he supported what they were doing and stuff but he  was going to come anyway. I don   t know if they contacted him again or not.  They had sent him a file (I mean, it was like this thick) that documented  what had been going on on-campus, including with Dr. Brooks. It   s the  closest thing to a written history, I think, that exists of documenting that  period, and I didn   t even realize that I had it. Ken, I think, must   ve given it  to me at one of these reunions that I mentioned, one of these Kindred Spirit  reunions we had because that   s where I got the Galbraith letter and telegram.  Anyway, Galbraith, for whatever reason, reconsidered and decided he  wasn   t going to go. He sent a telegram announcing that and saying,    You  can use this in any way you want to. Publicize it.     Peters Did they rewrite the campus speakers    policy?  Stevens After I left, we held a couple of Kindred Spirit reunions, and I think it was  the second one. We actually   we were welcomed, officially welcomed on  campus, which was cute, and we stayed in the Student Union hotel. When I  checked in, I wish I could remember his name, but there was a guy who had  been there when I was there. He wasn   t the head of it at that point. I don   t  know if he was head of the Union or the Union hotel.  Peters Norman Moore?  Stevens No     Peters    No? Okay.  Stevens Anyway, I remember he was the guy who would go around if you had your  feet up on a table in the French room or something. He   d tell you to put  them down and all that stuff. Anyway, I get there, and he apparently  remembered me or at least he knew why we were there. He was really  friendly, and he said, his name   s Lou Bullock, I think.  Peters Lou Bullock was actively involved with some of the  law suits.  Stevens Yeah. He said,    Is Lou Bullock coming?    and I said,    I don   t know who that  is.    He said,    Well, he should be here.    (Laughs) He   s now a prominent  civil liberties lawyer in Tulsa. I checked in, went in my room, and looked  him up, called him and told him about what we were doing, and he came   On the Saturday night of our reu   we just, people traded, just talked about  15  things, and he got up. I   m going to get emotional here. (Laughs) When I left  Oklahoma   .  Peters You left in     Stevens       68, to go to seminary, and when I left Oklahoma, I was never coming  back. I just felt like all the stuff that had happened at OSU was just for  nothing. Everybody left, and nothing changed. It just felt like we failed. Lou  Bullock gets up, and he says,    I don   t know anybody in this room and you  don   t know me, but I knew your names and I knew what you did. You were  my inspiration.    I think he was head of the student body, and he sued the  university over the speakers    policy. That was the beginning of him going to  law school and becoming a prominent civil liberties lawyer, and he thanked  us.  Peters You see, after you left, I mean,   68 was a tough year. You had the  assassinations of     Stevens No kidding     Peters    King and Robert Kennedy.  Stevens    and I got married that summer, yeah. Yeah, it was a very tough year.  There were riots in Chicago. It was a tough year.  Peters They revised the campus speakers    policy to a certain extent. The regents  had signed off on a new campus speakers    policy. Then, I think it was in    68  or    69, the students, of course, test it right away. They try to bring in  Timothy Leary, and he   s rejected. (Laughter)  Stevens Surprise. (Laughter)  Peters They tried to bring in Philip Berrigan. He can   t come.  Stevens Oh yeah.  Peters Adam Clayton Powell  Jr. , sorry, he can   t come. They kept pushing the  powers that be. Finally, in    69, Abbie Hoffman is allowed to come.  Stevens Really?  Peters This was just a few months after he   d been convicted as a part of Chicago  Seven, but he is allowed to come. He gives a presentation in Gallagher Iba   Arena  in 1969. There was a real reaction both from the legislature again,  the regents again, Kamm again, but they started having people. Jerry Rubin  then was invited and came, and then eventually   .  16  Stevens Oh, God. (Laughs) First group was a lot better group, some of them,  anyway. (Laughs)  Peters Do you remember Sexpo    68?  Stevens No.  Peters There was a group. They had to meet off campus, but in 1968, summer of     68, fall of    68, they had various speakers. Some of the churches sponsored  these individuals, but on sex education and sexual mores and that stuff,  which was also controversial. It was held off campus because they couldn   t  get facilities on campus to do that. What you did enabled or empowered  later students to continue to test the waters, push the administration.  Stevens When Lou said that, I mean, it had a profound effect on me, and not just  because of that. It illustrated that you don   t know what the consequences are  going to be even if you seem to fail, but you don   t know the lives that are  touched and the ripples that are sent out from that and that usually you never  find out. The only reason I knew was because the person at the Student  Union told me his name and suggested that he come. I mean, how weird is  that? Everybody was moved by it who was there. It was a big deal, and the  rest of my life after that, it was a lesson to me, a lesson in life that never  assume that, what something you did failed because you don   t know that.  Peters You were just planting seeds.  Stevens Yeah, yeah, absolutely. It made all those years feel different.  Peters What pressures do you think were on Dr. Kamm? Why was he making the  choices, I mean, you don   t know, but what you do think some of the  pressures on Dr. Kamm were?  Stevens I mean, initially, there weren   t any. I don   t think there were any pressures on  him initially from that 400-person rally. It was just him, I think. He was a  very conservative guy, it turned out. He ended up running for the senate.  You can be in Arts and Sciences and be     Peters    conservative.  Stevens    reactionary. I mean, he was. Nobody realized it because he hadn   t been in  a position to demonstrate that. There hadn   t been anything come across his  desk as head of the Arts and Sciences College that brought that out of him. I  mean, that was my sense. I remember having a conversation with him after  that. It didn   t go anywhere. It was a couple of us went to talk to him because  I knew him a little, and he knew me from the Wesley Foundation.    Maybe  17  there can be a connection here,    and there wasn   t. I mean, eventually, sure,  the newspapers picked up all this stuff, and    we don   t want a Berkeley at  OSU    and all this. Sure, there was   and the Board of Regents, what I  remember about the Board of Regents was, I hope this is not true anymore,  but at that time, at least this is what I was told. I think it   s true. There was  essentially one requirement to be on the Board of Regents, and that is that  the majority of the Board of Regents had to be working farmers.  Peters That   s true.  Stevens They didn   t have to have a college degree. (Laughs)  Peters They had to be from that district because there was a divided district. They  had to be from a specific district, but then they had to get, a certain  percentage of their income had to be from agricultural production of some  kind.  Stevens You get a Board of Regents that   s selected that way, it   s not terribly  shocking that they would be upset to have people on college campuses  raising difficult questions and all that kind of stuff. It   s not at all surprising.  What you need is a president who can be a buffer for that, and Dr. Kamm  certainly was not. He was quite happy to, I mean, Kamm made a speech  against, in those papers. There were newspaper articles. He made a speech  in Kansas or somewhere saying that SDS  Students for a Democratic  Society  was responsible for the stuff going on on-campus. Well, I can tell  you. I mean, I was a member of SDS, and SDS at OSU was like Young  Democrats at University of Michigan. I mean, what passed for radicalism at  that time, most of the members of SDS were that way. There were a couple  that were not important members but who were a little crazy. We were  against the war, and there wasn   t any other place to do that. We were against  the war and pro-civil rights, and SDS became, at this campus, a place where  people could do that. It was not radical at all. It really wasn   t.  Peters Do you remember how many students were members?  Stevens Yes, yes. Oh, it was maybe a dozen. A friend of mine ended up, apparently  there was a   he claimed later that one of the people who was involved and  who was, in fact, one of the most inflammatory members was apparently a  plant. (Laughs) I mean, it was just, it was inconsequential. It was completely  inconsequential. Gene Acuff was my mentor. He   s the reason I was a  sociology major. I had taken a couple of his classes, and we were friends. I  had a closer relationship with him than I did any other faculty member, and  he was on leave during this for his sabbatical. Leslie had told him he had to  get a PhD or he couldn   t teach here. He didn   t really want one, and I had had  an incomplete in one of his classes when he was teaching. I was supposed to  do a paper.  18  I took the paper over to his home to give it to him when all this was going  on, and his wife was there. She started ranting about the stuff on campus and  saying it was all communists, and she mentioned three organizations or  activities. One was The Drummer, one was SDS, and the other was the  Student-Faculty Association, which was the group that, I mean, it wasn   t  really a group but that put on the rallies. I said to her,    I know one person  who was involved in the leadership of those three organizations, and he   s  sitting in your living room right now. Are you calling me a communist?     Gene knew me. She said,    Oh no, you   re just a dupe,    and I   m going,    Oh  my God.    It was sad because I really liked the guy, and of course he became  head of the department as the sole, remaining member. (Laughs)  Peters Do you remember who the advisor was for the SDS?  Stevens Yeah, it was  Gerald  Clemmons, philosophy professor, and he wasn   t into  it. It was just we needed an advisor, and he was a good guy. He left, too,  incidentally.  Peters He was called in to, by Kamm at some point.  Stevens I didn   t know that. I didn   t know that. I   m not surprised, and he went to  Toronto somewhere. I really liked him a lot. I did have him for a teacher,  and he was really good.  Peters Like you mentioned, Scales went on to Wake Forest.  Stevens There was a secret meeting. I think there were probably a number of them. I  don   t know. After he went to Wake Forest, several of us got in my car and  drove to Tulsa where he was at a, some conference or something. It was  really weird. He had a close relationship with Oral Roberts. I don   t know if  you knew that. He had a   can you imagine? Is that weird? He did. They  were friends. We arranged through somebody to meet with him at his hotel  in Tulsa and to seek his advice about what can we do because he was  supportive in a very careful way, not in a disloyal way to Kamm or  anything, but he couldn   t stomach what was going on. I mean, he thought  that the rallies were great, would get people talking. That   s what universities  are for, exchange of ideas, all that, battle it out, and he was in an untenable  position here. He left, and good for Wake Forest.  Peters I know of only two previous rallies on the library lawn. One, not really a  rally, a gathering, was when John Kennedy was assassinated November of     63. There was a group that met at the library lawn, and then Kamm   s  inaugural was on the library lawn. Do you remember that at all?  19  Stevens I didn   t. I had forgotten that. There also were some other things that  happened on the lawn that were not   there were things called    Provo  Picnics.    I think there   s a picture, I think, in one of the yearbooks of a Provo  Picnic, and it was an idea somebody picked up from some other campus.  The idea was you just come, and you bring lunch. You sit out on the lawn,  and you socialize, really radical. (Laughs) The campus police went out and  took pictures.  Peters When did that start,    66,    67?  Stevens Yeah, it was in that era, and gosh, I can see, I can almost remember his  name  E. Gay . It was the head of the campus police. Anyway, they were out  taking pictures of people at the Provo Picnic. (Laughs) They had no idea.  All of this was just so foreign to them that it was a threat because it wasn   t  what they were used to. It wasn   t normal. It was just kids out; they weren   t  doing anything. They were just talking and eating, sitting on a lawn and  eating. It was     Peters Do you remember the hedges with the thorny, the hedges with thorns? They  had about a two-and-a-half-inch thorn on them that they were planted along  the sidewalks as a crowd control.  Stevens Oh. (Laughs) Well, there was one incident that happened after I left. I had a  very close friend named George DeWoody, and he was there after I left. I  don   t remember what this was about, but there was, you know how they  would do these stencil things for different events on the sidewalks? Well, I  think they were going to have, reinstitute the Provo Picnics or something. It  was something really threatening like that, but they couldn   t get permission  to do that. At night, they crept onto campus, and they were going to do  these, a similar thing publicizing the Provo Picnic, I think it was. All of a  sudden all these lights came on. Somebody had informed the campus police  that they were going to be doing it, and they were waiting for them.  According to George, there were guns drawn. (Laughs) It was just really  strange.  Peters Did you ever see any acts of violence or conflict?  Stevens No. Oh God, no. No. People didn   t even scream or anything. No. I mean, I  literally never   here   s the only time that I ever heard anybody, heard of  anybody mentioning anything about violence, okay? There was one guy  who was in SDS. His name was Mack Eakes, and he was looney. Nobody  took him seriously, and he was just very over the top. He, at that time, was  rooming with Jim Gundlach, who was a friend of mine, and they were  talking. No, no, Eakes was talking to somebody else in some restaurant, and  Hubert Humphrey was coming to campus as the vice president. Eakes just  said something about,    Somebody should plant a bomb,    and Mack Eakes  20  never did anything, I mean, anything, useful or not. It was just him popping  off to somebody,    Oh, somebody ought to do that.    Well, somebody heard  it, and Jim Gundlach, who was his roommate and who had been in the Army  and had experience with demolitions in the Army, he didn   t even know  Mack had said this. He gets a visit from the Secret Service. (Laughs)  Peters The US Secret Service?  Stevens Yeah, because Humphrey was coming, the vice president, and word got to  him. That   s what they should do. They investigated this, and Jim, oh, he was  so furious. (Laughs) He got in trouble because of this idiot just saying  something stupid. That   s literally the only time I ever heard anybody or  heard of anybody proposing, talking about anything that could be considered  violence ever. God, The Drummer, if you compare The Drummer to any  other off-campus publication because I went around and looked at them, this  was so mild. I mean, really everything was. It was just   there was nothing  to get excited about. I mean, by getting excited, they just fanned the flames.  I mean, it was just really stupid.  Peters Let me give you some other names of folks. George Gries came in as Arts  and Sciences dean after Scales left     Stevens I remember that, yeah.  Peters    He must have left right after you got here. Abe Hesser was   .  Stevens That   s who was head of the Student Union.  Peters He was head of the Student Union, but he was the one who mentioned the  Louis Bullock to you?  Stevens No, no, no, Hesser was gone by then, no, no, no. There was another guy at  the Student Union that I can picture who, again, was not the one who  mentioned this that came after Hesser and I liked. I didn   t like Hesser, but I  liked the guy   .  Peters Norman Moore was director of the Union for a while after Hesser. I   m not  sure     Stevens It might have been. I don   t remember the name, but it might have been.  Peters Will Hammons.  Stevens No, don   t know that name.  21  Peters Supposedly, he was a graduate student and then visiting faculty in  journalism and broadcasting who helped provide printing resources   .  Stevens Sounds like Bill Harmon.  Peters Yeah. Oh, I   m sorry, William, Bill     Stevens Bill Harmon, yeah.  Peters    Harmon, okay.  Stevens Oh yeah, I knew Bill real well.  Peters Tell me about Bill Harmon.  Stevens He was just a   he was a journalist. I mean, he really was a   he was what  journalists are supposed to be, and he was behind the scenes. He was  supportive of The Drummer. Actually, there was another guy who was a  student. Enoch Needham was the assistant editor of the O   Colly, and Enoch,  he actually wrote some stuff for us under a pseudonym or something. Enoch  was great. He was, and he tried to do stuff with the O   Colly. He had articles  in the O   Colly that, and Harmon was, I think that he was the student advisor,  I mean, practically the advisor for the O   Colly, I think. No, Bill was great,  and he left as well. I don   t remember if it was around this stuff. I think he  got in trouble at one point somehow, but I don   t remember. I think I had a  conversation with him after he left one time, but no, he was one of my  favorite people here. He was really good. He was a journalist. Go after the  story, and I mean, he was really a good guy.  Peters He ended up at Southern Illinois  University .  Stevens Yeah, that   s right.  Peters That   s where he went. My understanding was that he had provided support  in some fashion for The Drummer to be published. I guess none of the local  printers, at least initially, were willing to print it. Do you know where The  Drummer was printed?  Stevens I   m trying to remember. I think we had to take it to Edmond or someplace.  Yeah, I think it was not in Stillwater. This was the old days, and we would  type everything out and then cut it into strips and glue it on to these  mockups. I mean, it was a big production putting that thing out, it really  was. We sold ads and didn   t make any money, but it covered the costs pretty  much. I don   t remember whether Bill   it   s possible. I mean, he certainly  gave us moral support, and he was not antagonistic in the least, which meant  a lot, frankly, just like Enoch. The editor, I   m trying to remember her name,  22  but I can   t remember. She wasn   t antagonistic. She didn   t want to rock the  boat. Enoch did.  Peters What numbers would you print? How many issues?  Stevens Oh, I have no memory of that, no memory at all.  Peters How were they distributed?  Stevens Well, for a long time, they were distributed on campus, I think in boxes or  something, and then they were banned. We couldn   t do it, and I don   t  remember what we did then. I just don   t remember how we distributed them.  Peters Did the Methodist Student Center distribute any of them or     Stevens Yeah, yeah, we would have them places like that.  Peters    someone like the, places like that around campus, Hideaway? Do you  remember     Stevens Oh, I remember Hideaway. I don   t think we distributed them there. In fact,  that   s where I think I   m going to have lunch. I think it   s the only place left.  The Hideaway would be one of the places we would go to discuss, plot, you  know, whatever. Yeah, it was quite the place.  Peters The old Hideaway, the little one on   .  Stevens Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, and with the collage on the wall. We had a collage  on the wall of The Drummer office, what became The Drummer office,  where we lived, and one time Julian Bond came to speak. Somebody, (don   t  remember who, Wade Martin maybe), brought him over after the speech,  over to The Drummer office, and he autographed our wall. (Laughs) That  was fun.  Peters Where was this office?  Stevens I think the address, I think I have   I think I came across in   I   m digitizing  all of our photos and old documents and stuff. That   s how I came across the  stuff that Kenneth had given me, and I think somewhere it had the address. I  think it was 1311 West Third Street, I think, something like that, but the  building   s gone. People rented out their houses, and we were there for a  couple of years at least, different people at different times.  Peters Were you the first   did you first get involved with The Drummer when it  first started?  23  Stevens Yeah, yeah, I wasn   t the, I was the religion editor initially, and I had edited a  publication out of the Wesley Foundation called Challenger II which dealt  with issues. We   ve had people write articles about one thing or another, and  I think it included some critiques about campus stuff. Then there was  another publication coming out of, oh man, I wish I could remember the  residence hall, but I can   t. I can   t remember the name of   I think maybe it  was, the Beeline was the name of the publication. Is there a dorm that starts  with a B? It was a men   s dorm.  Peters Well, Bennett Hall.  Stevens No, it was a women   s dorm. I don   t remember, but anyway, there was this  one hall, residence hall  Parker Hall  where people collected it who were  interested in that stuff. They published this thing, and somebody came up  with the bright idea of just, of having a real off-campus newspaper. The  people who were involved in those two things both got together for it, and  the first editor was Dennis Durbin. Then he graduated, and then I became  the editor after that.  Peters Did you feel like there wasn   t appropriate coverage in the Daily  O   Collegian for what you   re     Stevens No, no, I mean, and they didn   t talk about   I mean, we had articles about  war in Vietnam. We had articles about just current events. I mean, it wasn   t  focused initially, I don   t think. It wasn   t like it was all about problems at  OSU or anything. That was included. The idea was to have a publication  that talked about important issues with opinions, and we also had humor and  art. We had a column that a guy named Glenn   I can   t remember his name   Quaid . It was titled,    Elijah, the Student    and it was written    We had a  picture of Kahlil Gibran, I think it was, as the supposed Elijah, and he would  do these humorous columns. They were really quite good, as I recall. It   d be  interesting to go back and read them, but we had that. We had an art section,  and Larry Wharton was the head of that. Larry, that was the most  provocative thing, actually, in The Drummer because Larry was very into art  that, very suggestive art having to do with female anatomy, although a lot of  it was abstract, figuring out what it was. He liked being provocative. That  was actually the most radical thing about The Drummer, probably, for that  time.  Peters Artists and cartoonists often are the, pushing the edge.  Stevens Yeah, and my wife or woman who became my wife wrote an article about, I  think it was a book that Ted, it was a review of a book that I think Ted  Sorenson had written. We did stuff like that. You can read it. I mean, it   s  just not, it wasn   t that, it was really tame.  24  Peters Her name?  Stevens Judy Stevens, Judy  Rohde  then. We met at The Drummer. Her roommate,   Carol Berger  from Bartlesville and her roommate, they were roommates  here. They were close friends in high school. Her roommate, Carol, heard  about The Drummer from somebody, and she dragged Judy over to the  office. I married Judy, and Jim Gundlach married Carol. (Laughs) They  were freshmen, and we weren   t. (Laughs) That was my last semester here  and her first.  Peters Ken Dahms and Bill Streck, how did you know them, and     Stevens They were in the student senate, and Ken was a poli-sci major, I think. I  don   t remember what Streck   I think Streck may have been pre-med or  something. I   m not sure. I don   t remember how I actually met them.  Probably just from   those of us who, I think especially with The Drummer,  The Drummer was really well-known on campus among a certain set of  people, people like Bill and Ken, and we were not initially friends. They  were more establishment, and that   s part of what I mean. There were people  who really weren   t inclined to rock the boat. They were serious people, and  they really were. They weren   t that serious about serious issues and stuff,  but they were really good students. That was their focus was school, and I  think initially they probably didn   t really   I don   t know if they looked  down on those of us who were activists or not. They certainly wouldn   t have  considered themselves activists initially, but they got drug into it. Hank  Hankla   s my best example because he was the IFC, Interfraternity Council  senator, and Hank, I watched him change dramatically.  He was really pretty darn conservative originally, and Hank went on after  that, practiced law in the DC area. He   s a real dyed-in-the-wool liberal  democrat who is   we   re friends on Facebook, and I feel politically and in  terms of core values and stuff, I think, I   m not sure that I have any friends  like that who I feel closer to in terms of our values. One of us would write  something, and then the other one would comment and like it. It was  amazing how often that happened, Boise City. I   ll see he   s still Facebook  friends with a lot of the people he grew up with, and they get into these  discussions, oh my God, because these are really, really right-wing people  who think Obama   s Kenyan. He   s still in touch with   Chic   s the same way.  Chic has stayed in touch with people like that, and I   ll see the same thing  happen there. He   s close friends with Jim Click, who   s a big auto dealer. I  think he must   ve been on the football team here. I think that   s how Chic  knew him, and he was one of  George W.  Bush   s top fundraisers, W   s.  They   re buddies that politically don   t have anything in common.  Peters At least they   re keeping the lines of communication open, though.  25  Stevens Yeah, yeah, and Chic   s great at that. He really is. He   s the best networker  I   ve ever known in my life. I   m a pretty good networker, but he   s really,  he   s outstanding.  Peters What drove Ken and Bill to contact John Kenneth Galbraith?  Stevens It was the speakers    policy. They were really upset about it.  Peters They finally reached a point where they   .  Stevens They wanted to dramatize it, yeah, and I mean, at first there was an effort  just to change, get change done internally, going through channels and all  that stuff. Instead of that having a good effect, it seemed to make things  worse. There was just this overreaction after overreaction, and then finally  people said,    Screw it. We   ve got to do something about this.    Who was it?  The AAU, whatever the, I mean, OSU was blacklisted.  Peters AAUP  American Association of University Professors .  Stevens Yeah, AAUP, yeah, because of this stuff. People wanted to help from  outside because they couldn   t get it inside, and they sure weren   t going to  get it from the state legislature or the regents.  Peters Well, and see, the state legislature passed a bill, I   m not sure what,  restricting use of campus facilities by certain speaker-types, which even the  attorney general said was unconstitutional, but that didn   t stop them from  trying to interfere with the activities going on here.  Stevens Yeah, right, yeah, and the really sad thing about this is the brain drain that  occurred for Oklahoma because of what happened here on campus. Those  people never came back, and I don   t think that that would   ve been true of a  lot of them. When all of those people, I mean, okay why, just a long list of  people, the honors students, faculty members, people who grew up here in  small towns and who were proud Okies left and, like me, vowed they   d  never come back. That   s not insignificant because it was a really smart  group of people and talented, and they went on to do great things  somewhere else, could   ve been here.  Peters You would   ve missed, then, the black student protest, which occurred a few  years later     Stevens Yeah.  Peters    the residence hall issues with the visitation and open-door, closed-door  policies.  26  Stevens I mean, that was an issue. I don   t know if we ever had it in The Drummer or  not, but that was certainly an issue. If you were a woman, you had your  purse inspected, and you couldn   t wear slacks in the library. In the residence  halls, men couldn   t go, there was a lobby, and that   s as far as you could go.  You   d call up, and the girls had to come down and the whole thing. I assume  that OSU now has mixed dorms and stuff like that. I don   t know. I mean,  everywhere else does, and amazingly, the world didn   t come to an end.  (Laughs)  Peters The women   s residence halls had different hours than the men   s residence  halls.  Stevens Yeah, oh yeah, absolutely. I think if you were a male you could live off  campus, but if you were a female, you couldn   t until you were twenty-one, I  think. Yeah, it was just   .  Peters That came after. You had left by the time Kent State happened     Stevens Yeah, yeah, I think that   s right.  Peters    because that was in    68.  Stevens I think so. I don   t remember when in    68 it was, and I don   t remember if I  was here. I certainly remember Kent State, but I don   t remember if I was  here or in Chicago. I think it might   ve been in the spring actually. Yeah, I  think it might   ve been in the spring. No, wait,    68. That   s right. If it was in     68, I would   ve missed it because I left here in January of    68.  Peters Looking back, do you think there were changes going on demographically?  Oklahoma was becoming more urbanized, and like you said, the regents  were still representing these rural, agrarian areas. Do you think with the  baby boomers coming in, more urban backgrounds, more people coming in  from out of state, do you think that had any impact on it?  Stevens I don   t think so because like I said, Hank was from  Boise City, Oklahoma .  The people involved in this were Oklahomans. Chic wasn   t, was from Ohio,  but Chic came to it late. I mean, he became a very important player. He   s an  interesting story because when we, like I said, there was this small group,  and we all knew each other. Then we started hearing about this guy who  would go in, he would wear a jacket and tie into dorms and debate people on  Vietnam. What? (Laughs) Being against the war, and that was Chic. He had  gotten involved with the debate team. Dale Stockton was the debate coach,  and he was a really, really interesting guy. Chic adored him. He became a  mentor for Chic, and incredibly, the OSU debate team, when they would go  to debate contests, their specialty was the war in Vietnam and the US should  get out, if you can imagine that.  27  That was OSU   s debate team   s specialty, and Chic was a really good  debater. He just started, he decided that he would take it into the dorms, and  he eventually became, I think, head of the speakers    bureau, whatever it was  called. He   s an extraordinary guy. He was from out of state. I mentioned to  you when we were talking earlier John Giancola, but he never was involved  in this stuff. I mean, I don   t recall anybody else. Ann Schneider, one of the  two people who got all that first rally started, she   s from a small town in  Oklahoma, and I think Beverly  Goodman , the other one, I think she was  from out of state. No, I think it was just the time and the   like I said, as  things escalated, people who were not interested in getting involved got  involved.  I mean, they might not have ever done anything like that. I mean, maybe Dr.  Kamm did us all a favor by challenging people and them having to rise to  the occasion. I don   t know. I think it was   obviously, everybody knew what  was going on on other college campuses, and the war was real, very real. I  think it was just circumstances, and I think there just were a lot of really,  really interesting people here all at once. There is a book. One of my  favorite books is a book by Taylor Branch. It   s actually three volumes. The  first one   s titled Parting the Waters, and it   s about, it   s America in the civil  rights years, Martin Luther King, civil rights years, not just about civil  rights. It   s an extraordinary, and he won all sorts of prizes for that. I read the  first volume. It   s a 1,000 pages long, and it was just, it was a page-turner.  (Laughs)  I remember one of the lessons I learned from that, one of the themes was  that change, major change only occurs when two things happen. One is there  has to be something in the way of an opportunity arises, and the other is  there has to be the right leadership to take advantage of the opportunity. You  can have the opportunity, but without the right leader, in this case, King, you  can have the right leader, but without the opportunity, I mean, King got  dragged into the civil rights movement. He never sought to be part of it. He  was just a preacher. I think that   s true about a lot of things, and I think what  happened at OSU was the coincidence of events taking place and the right  people being there to respond to it, whether it was Ann Schneider or Ken  Dahms or Chic Dambach.  Peters Margaret Brooks.  Stevens Yeah, I mean, all of them, it was just an, it was an extraordinary period with,  I think, extraordinary people. I really do.  Peters Okay, so you leave. You vow you   re never coming back.  Stevens Yes. Well, to live.  28  Peters (Laughs) What happened after you left?  Stevens What did I do?  Peters What did you do?  Stevens Well, I went to seminary and discovered pretty quickly that I really didn   t  want to be in graduate school.  Peters Why had you gone to seminary?  Stevens I was originally actually going to go into the Peace Corps. I had thought  about graduate school in sociology, which was my, actually the least  interesting to me, the Peace Corps and also seminary, really with the idea of  becoming a campus minister because of Carl Caskey and Vance Engelmann.  I was going to go into the Peace Corps, got accepted, had my assignment,  was scheduled to go for training, and then my draft board said,    No, no,  you   re going to be 1A, and you are going to get drafted.    I said,    Well, I   m  not going to get drafted.    I went to my second choice, which was seminary.  I had already had an application started. It was underway at Chicago  Theological Seminary. I finished it and got a full scholarship there and  moved to Chicago and battled my draft board for nine months because they  seemed to think that they could keep me from going to seminary, which the  law didn   t allow them to do, but it was a big battle that went on and on for a  long time.  I was in seminary and then got   left seminary after a while and did an  internship that was connected with the seminary and got involved in local  Chicago reform politics, which may sound weird, but that was my  internship. CTS was a very unusual seminary and stayed involved in local  politics for the entire time I was in Chicago. In that stream, I ended up  running Harold Washington, who, when he ran for mayor, I ran the  Lakefront campaign which was a white, liberal area, for him, and  was  involved in  a lot of campaigns before that but then went to law school in     73. First I worked at a folk music club, which was quite an experience  where we had all sorts of people. It wasn   t really just folk music. I mean, it  had people that no one   s ever heard of, but it also had Miles Davis. It had   .  Peters Folk?  Stevens Yeah, I know.  Peters (Laughs)  29  Stevens It had jazz, too, sometimes. It was mainly folky-type stuff. I don   t know if  you know anything about folk music, but if you do, Doc Watson played  there a lot. Arlo Guthrie played there. Linda Ronstadt played there, all sorts  of people. I mean, it was a very popular place, and it was fascinating. As a  life experience, it was a really cool thing, not exactly a career path.  Peters Sounds like an eclectic group of musicians played there.  Stevens Oh, very, very, very, and it was really fun and weird working there.  Anyway, I went to law school in    73, became a lawyer. I loved law school.  It was the first time that I ever really took being a student seriously, I mean  really seriously, and I was really good, number three, four student in my  class. I really enjoyed law school, but I didn   t like being a lawyer and ended  up going into nonprofit work, advocacy, a lot of it around housing issues,  some environmental stuff, and then ultimately ended up and worked for a  foundation and then ultimately ended up in Santa Fe as head of the local  United Way. I was there for fourteen years and then went to work for United  Way of America  leading  a project to help other United Ways do what  Santa Fe had done, which was to really dramatically change the nature of  what they were doing.  Now  the  system has undergone and is undergoing really radical changes  from essentially just raising all this money from corporations and feeding it  out to the same organizations every year and then going back and doing this  every year and very risk-averse, not wanting to offend anybody, to an  organization which is about trying to actually solve problems in the  community. That   s what it   s about. It   s not about distributing money. To do  that, working in a collaborative way with other organizations and leaders in  the community, we identify priorities and then working together to actually  try to figure out strategies that   ll work, measuring results, and the huge  change. We were doing that in Santa Fe, and some others were. Then United  Way of America changed and wanted to spread that. I went to work there for  a while, and then I did consulting work after that, pretty much doing the  same work but on my own with  local  United Ways and then retired.  Peters Our United Way campaign is going on right now. It should be finishing up  this week     Stevens Oh, of course it is.  Peters    but there   s much more involvement at the local level by the board  involvement with the organizations that are both benefiting from United  Way and the reviews that go through making sure that they   re doing what  they say they   re doing.  30  Stevens I used to know the head of the United Way here. I don   t imagine she is  anymore. It was a long time ago. I can   t remember her name.  Peters How did your experience at OSU change your life?  Stevens Well, there were series of experiences. As I told you earlier, the Wesley  Foundation stuff   when I came to OSU, without going into any details, I  was a mess. I mean, I had a father who was   my parents were divorced  when I was   I don   t remember them being together. I was raised by a single  mom working for Ford Motor Company with very little in the way of   resources , and my dad was a complete ass. He remarried several times, and  he had a daughter from his last wife who was an alcoholic. I used to go out  and spend summers in Santa Fe in  his  motel out there, and I found myself  becoming the protector of my half-sister from their wars, her parents, and  basically became a spy for the social service people. I started telling them  what was going on.  That last summer I spent up there was just, I mean, I was an emotional  wreck after all that. I really was. Then I came to OSU, and I was just   I  didn   t know where I was going. I was just really a   and found my way to  the Wesley Foundation, and Carl and Vance had all these different programs  going on. Vance had this thing called the    skeptic   s corner,    which he had  me go through even though I wasn   t a skeptic, where I started getting  exposed to ideas that I hadn   t really been exposed to, and it just kind of went  from there. I don   t think there   s anything in my life that ever happened that  was more important than that experience, and that   s what got me involved in  campus stuff. That led me to meet all sorts of other interesting people and be  confronted with interesting ideas.  Actually, there was a guy who lived in the basement of the Wesley  Foundation, and it was the janitor. His name was John Rapp, and John had  gone, he went to my high school. He was a year older than me at least. I  knew his brother, but I didn   t know him. He went to Yale, one of the few  people from my high school who went out of state. He went to Yale,  dropped out of Yale to go join the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party as  an organizer. People got killed doing that. John did that for a while, and then  he came back to Oklahoma and found his way somehow to OSU. He was  the janitor down there, and I got to know John. We   d get into these  discussions.  He was the first person to get me thinking differently about the Vietnam  War because he read a lot. He starts going,    Well, Ron, now actually   ,     very calm, and just a lot of experiences like that. I mean, I think I had a great  college experience. Most of it, though, was not in classrooms. I don   t think  that   s real unusual, but it was serious. I mean, it wasn   t partying. It was  serious learning that took place. I also got some from classrooms, too,  31  obviously, but it was a, I wish my kids had had that experience. They didn   t,  and I wish they had. They don   t have the same feeling towards college that I  do. Other than all the pain and stuff that we went through, it was, the college  years were really good.  Peters You said there are groups that get together periodically since then?  Stevens Oh, the Kindred Spirit reunions?  Peters Kindred Spirits, yes.  Stevens Yeah, yeah, we had, the first one was, as I recall, thirteen   it wasn   t any  particular time, just got this idea,    Let   s get the old group back together.    I  think the first one was thirteen years after I left, which would   ve been, what,     81 or something? I located people, said,    Are you interested? Let   s do a  reunion back in Stillwater,    and then they added names. We got together,  and it was really, it was so gratifying because everybody was doing good  stuff. They were all in some way. It may have been medicine, and most of  the others were, they were just doing public service, public spirit, improve  the world, improve lives kind of work. Everybody was, and it was very clear  to me that what had happened in their lives at OSU during that period had an  awful lot to do with who they became.  It was certainly true to me, I knew, but it was also true to them. It was really  gratifying. Bob Swaffar, incidentally, who was the, I don   t know how much  you know about Swaffar. He was a basketball player. He   s seven-feet tall,  and he   s famous because he was doing his laundry. His arm got caught in  the washing machine or the dryer or something, and it literally twisted it off  his arm. It was his roommate or some other jock who was a pre-med major  who had happened to read an article of this groundbreaking idea of when  you have a severed limb, sticking it in ice, and he did that. They, I think,  helicoptered Bob to OU or somewhere for surgery and everything. They  reattached it, and he couldn   t play basketball anymore. He can   t use the arm  very well, but it   s   .  Peters This happened while he was here?  Stevens Oh yeah. His basketball career was ended by that. He was the vice president  of the student body on a non-reform slate. It was the establishment slate, but  Bob, really interesting guy. He moved to Austin, Texas, and he got involved  with computer stuff. He   s a potter. He   s an Austin hippie. I mean, if you  look at him, you would conclude he is. We   re friends on Facebook. He   s  been in local films because he   s seven feet tall, he   s got a beard down to  here, and he looks like, he looks like, I don   t know. I think probably half the  town or at least around UT  University of Texas  know Bob or know who he  is     32  Peters    recognize him.  Stevens    because he   s just a character, a really smart guy, and just a really good  guy. It   s neat to have had those connections, too.  Peters What was that you mentioned earlier on? This is backtracking. There was a  group, Friday afternoon tea. What was that?  Stevens The reunions, when we did the reunions, we said,    Okay. Well, what are we  going to call it?    You could call it The Drummer, except not everybody was  involved in The Drummer, not just them. There was this, before I got here,  some students had put together a student organization called the Friday  Afternoon Tea and Glee Society known as FATAGS, and the purpose of it  was really to be an access point for Student Union rooms for meetings on  any subject that otherwise would not be able to get access. The name was an  ironic name or sarcastic, whatever, and it just persisted. I don   t know how  long it, I mean, it was there before I got here, and it was here after I left.  Different people, but they would keep it going.  We decided to call the reunion the FATAGS/Drummer reunion, and in the  second one, there were people who came to the second one who didn   t come  to the first one. The Internet, by then, was really helpful in finding people.  We had a bigger turnout, and it was again the same thing. Everybody was  doing neat stuff, and that   s when I got from Ken Dahms, he brought with  him these things that he had from his years at OSU, including the John  Kenneth Galbraith letter and telegram and the letter they had sent to  Galbraith with all of this documentation about what had been going on. It  represents the best history that there is of that period.  Peters I don   t have anything else, Ron. Do you have anything else you want to add?  Will you be meeting again with this group?  Stevens Oh, good question. Actually, Chic Dambach told me that   oh, the other  thing that has happened since that Chic told me, and it really just made me  so happy. There   s something on campus called Difficult Discussions or  something like that, and then Chic   s been part of it. He comes in, and he told  me that there   s going to be a scholarship that they   re going to put together. I  think it   s a scholarship that is going to be named after Dale Stockton and  Margaret Brooks, which is wonderful because both of those people, that   s an  appropriate vehicle, and he   s planning on having another get-together in  2017, which will be fifty years, wow, fifty years after those events.  Peters I hope you were considering inviting some of us to hear you talk with some  folks, if they want.  33  Stevens Oh, I haven   t. I mean, I did two of them, and I wasn   t going to do it again.  Peters Oh, you   ve done your time. (Laughs)  Stevens I mean, I   ll help Chic. I told him I   ll help him locate people and stuff like  that. I was happy that he was going to do this one because I just didn   t have  it in me to do another one, but I   m sure people will come. If you create it,  they will come.  Peters If you build it, they will come. Thank you, Ron, appreciate the conversation  today.  Stevens Thank you. You bet.  Peters I think we   re going to shut her down here.  -------  -------   
