 Finchum Today is April 5, 2016. My name is Tanya Finchum. I   m with Oklahoma State University. Today I   m in Alva, Oklahoma, Woods County, to interview Bill Buckles. This is part of our Cowboy in Every County project. So thank you for having me today.  Buckles You   re welcome. I   m glad to have you.  Finchum Let   s begin with learning a little bit about you, starting with when and where you were born.  Buckles I was born on June 1, 1941, in Shattuck, Oklahoma, at Newman Memorial Hospital. My grandparents and mother were good friends of the Newman family. Doctor Newman was the only doctor capable of delivering a baby at the time, in my mother   s opinion. Both my brother and I were born there. Later on, because my dad had been a schoolteacher, coach, principal, he retired from that and was a full-time farmer, and moved to Dacoma  Oklahoma  where I was raised.  Finchum So how many brothers and sisters?  Buckles I had one brother, who is deceased.  Finchum Older, younger?  Buckles He   s two years older.  Finchum So where did you go to elementary school?  Buckles Went to elementary school at Dacoma, graduated from Dacoma High School, which is no longer in existence. As a matter of fact, the last graduating class in Dacoma, I believe, was 1968. We had our recent reunion of the Dacoma alumni, and I think next   two years from now, the next alumni will be the last one that we have.  Finchum That   s kind of sad, isn   t it?  Buckles Yes, too many people are deceased.  Finchum Sure, so what year did you graduate?  Buckles Nineteen fifty-nine.  Finchum And did you have a favorite subject?  Buckles Math. My dad taught math. In fact, before I went to Stillwater, he tutored me because we didn   t have good math teachers in our high school. We had good FFA programs, we had good sports teams, but we didn   t have much educational opportunity.  Finchum How big of a school? Like how many were in your class?  Buckles We had the largest graduating class, to my knowledge, that had graduated there, and there were twenty-two in the class.  Finchum A few. (Laughter) Were you involved with extracurricular activities, like sports?  Buckles Yes. Most of our time was spent playing basketball, baseball, going to FFA trips (judging teams), anything outside of the regular school curriculum. It was good in that we met a lot of people on these trips, and networked with a lot of young people who I knew in college, later on.  Finchum Were you a member of FFA?  Buckles Yes.  Finchum So you had farmed somewhere in your family?  Buckles Yes, we were farmers. That   s all I ever wanted to do was be a farmer. Even when I went to OSU and started in engineering, I really wanted to come home and farm full-time.  Finchum So he taught school plus farmed?  Buckles Dad taught school and farmed and later was a principal at Gate, Oklahoma. Then he coached, and taught, and was superintendent at Dacoma.  Finchum So he would   ve had tractors, not horses?  Buckles When my father was younger, they farmed with horses and mules. In fact, my grandfather, James Buckles, and I   ve got some stories here about him. He sold horses and mules, and they trained them from young animals. So my dad never cared for horses and mules after that.  Finchum Too much work.  Buckles Yes, and they were hard to manage.  Finchum Well, what did he farm?  Buckles They farmed wheat. They raised mainly wheat, and then of course, they raised oats for the animals. They had grassland and raised beef cattle.  Finchum What were some of your chores?  Buckles The earliest chores I can recall were helping feed the chickens, of course, cleaning the brooder house and the chicken house. Especially as punishment for something I shouldn   t have done. Pulling weeds. As I got a little older, we started driving tractors when we were twelve. From then on, we were kept very busy. In the summer   Dad liked athletics, being a coach. He played sports in high school, and at Northwestern he played football. So he liked sports, and he wanted us to be athletes. My brother and I were not outstanding athletes, although we did play ball. Dad was a very intelligent person. He knew that I wasn   t getting the proper background to go to OSU and start out in engineering. He tutored me for about two years, with his own math books.  Finchum Where had he gotten his degree?  Buckles He got his bachelor   s and master   s from Northwestern in Alva,  Oklahoma .  Finchum So home is here?  Buckles Yes. My brother also got a bachelor   s and a master   s through Northwestern, although some of his administrative education was at OSU.  Finchum Where did your father meet your mother?  Buckles Dad was teaching school in Arnett, Oklahoma, in Ellis County. They had gone to a party. My mother was with somebody else, and Dad was with the local banker   s daughter. They got acquainted and decided that they had some things in common and started dating. The rest is history.  Finchum Did she go to college?  Buckles Yes, she was older than my father. At the time Ellis County had no high school, so her parents sent her to Winfield, Kansas. She attended high school and college in Winfield.  Finchum Why Winfield?  Buckles It   s a Methodist college, and my mother was raised as a Methodist. Also, my grandmother Richards came from Winfield.  Finchum Connections there. What was your mother   s name?  Buckles Lois Buckles. It was Lois Richards. My grandparents were Otis Richards and Belle Carper Richards. That   s my mother   s folks.  Finchum And were they from Oklahoma?  Buckles Originally, they were from Kansas. Also, the Buckles side came from Kansas. Both of them made the Run. Granddad Richards made the Run into the Unassigned Lands in 1889 and was in Guthrie. He was a very young man, he got sick and had to go back home, and he sold his homestead. Then in 1893, he made the Run into Ellis County. He settled there on the banks of the South Canadian River. Granddad  Buckles  made the Run from Kansas and settled in Alfalfa County in a little community called Ashley.  Also, his wife had a homestead close to his. He bought a relinquishment. He and my grandmother bought a relinquishment, and that   s where they made their home. She homesteaded, her mother homesteaded, and her brothers homesteaded in the same area in 1893.  Finchum Farmers, farmers, farmers.  Buckles Farmers, homesteaders. My grandfather Buckles was from a family of teachers too. My grandmother taught. I don   t know what their education was, but I could probably find it in some of the family lore.  Finchum They probably taught in one-room schools.  Buckles Yes, oh yes. As we speak, we   re trying to restore the Short Springs Schoolhouse, where my father attended, out in the Ashley area.  Finchum So is that community still in existence?  Buckles The only thing out in Ashley is an elevator, no other buildings, and then the little schoolhouse. It   s one of the, maybe two, of those old single-room schoolhouse still in existence in Oklahoma.  Finchum Definitely need to     Buckles Yes, we   re trying to keep it.  Finchum That   s neat.  Buckles My grandparents, parents, and brother, are all buried in the Ashley community at the Short Springs Cemetery, which is probably a mile, a mile and a half where my dad was raised. Billie and I own a quarter of land in the same section where the Ashley schoolhouse is   or the Short Springs Schoolhouse is.  Finchum Roots are pretty strong.  Buckles Yes, they are.  Finchum You mentioned you learned to drive a tractor when you were twelve?  Buckles Yes.  Finchum Did you go on the harvest?  Buckles We never   no, we never went on the harvest. Dad always kept my brother and I busy at home taking care of cattle and farming. During the school year, they were emphatic that we had to do well in school. They were certainly of the mindset that school comes first.  Finchum Describe the house you grew up in.  Buckles The house was a wooden frame house. I guess you   d call it a shotgun style. Course, it had plaster walls. It had a furnace in the center or living room area of the house. That   s all of the heat we had. Course, it was air-conditioned by nature. Later on, they built on to the house over a porch area, so that my brother and I had a bedroom. We had twin beds. No air-conditioning or no heat in that bedroom ever. My mother was a believer that we needed to have fresh air. So every night we slept with a window open. Sometimes snow was blowing in the window. She would also warm some irons, some little flatirons that people used to iron with, wrap them in towels. We   d have those at our feet in cold weather.  Finchum Sneak up during the night and shut that window   Buckles (Laughs) I was tempted to, but she checked every morning.  Finchum Did it have indoor plumbing?  Buckles Yes, it did. As a matter of fact, I know they put in the indoor plumbing after I was born, but I don   t remember ever not having that. We had one bathroom, but I also had the outside toilet. We kept it around, too, through the years.  Finchum Electricity came to the     Buckles We had electricity all of the time. Now Billie, my wife, didn   t have electricity until what?  Billie Nineteen forty-eight.  Buckles Nineteen forty-eight down in Southeastern Oklahoma. But we had electricity in Dacoma from the time I was born.  Finchum Dacoma, how big of a town?  Buckles I think while I was growing up around 300 population. It   s less than that now. There are no stores. The only thing we have is a co-op elevator.  Finchum And that was Ellis County?  Buckles No, this is Woods County.  Finchum Okay. They touch though, don   t they?  Buckles No. You   ve got Woods, then Woodward, then Ellis off to the southwest.  Finchum I need to learn my geography   Buckles We   re probably 120 miles from Arnett. My mother was raised down on the river southwest of Arnett, maybe fifteen miles.  Finchum Did Dacoma have a grocery store or movie theater? Anything like that?  Buckles Actually, when I was younger, we had two grocery stores, a cleaning shop. Of course, there was a pool hall, which I was not allowed to enter. We had a locker plant, a meat market, actually had two meat markets. Had two filling stations and, of course, the co-op elevator. Co-op was a big deal. The only thing that has grown in Dacoma is the number of churches. They had a Church of God and an EUB  Evangelical United Brethren  when I was younger, and then the EUB split into two different churches. So for a while we had three churches in Dacoma.  Finchum And 300 people.  Buckles Yes, but anyway     Finchum What   s a locker plant?  Buckles That   s where they processed the meat, and they kept it frozen in these little box-like things.  Finchum Individual families     Buckles Individual families would rent locker space and keep their meat in the locker. They didn   t have, people didn   t have freezers years ago. It was much more economical to keep them in the locker. Then it became, electricity became so expensive that lockers became obsolete. People started   if they wanted to have their own freshly butchered beef, they kept them in freezers at home, generally.  Finchum Would your mother make your clothes or did you have store-bought?  Buckles When I was younger, both. I remember she used to make shirts, and I was not real happy with those shirts. Mom was not a good seamstress. The shirts would be just like a stovepipe, straight up and down and they didn   t fit very well. They were out of flour sacks, so I really enjoyed store-bought clothes.  Finchum Hopefully not floral   Buckles (Laughs) Yes, sometimes the floral ones. Always had good clothes, jeans. Folks provided for us very well.  Finchum Did she quilt, if she didn   t sew?  Buckles She did not quilt, no. Mom worked constantly, cleaning, cooking, providing for all of us. She actually quit teaching when my brother was born. She substituted some, but she quit teaching because she felt her place was in the home, taking care of the family.  Finchum Had a large garden and canned and all that?  Buckles Dad always had a large garden, we canned, and then we always bought chickens. Every year we had those little chickens. Raised chickens and put up chickens in the locker. That was part of my job when I was too young to drive a tractor, helping my mother dress chickens and get them ready for the locker. My brother couldn   t do it, he couldn   t stand it. So I always got to do that. Whatever Jim thought was too distasteful, I got to do, his younger brother.  Finchum Would you get an allowance for helping do all this? Buckles We did eventually get an allowance. Usually that was because we would cut weeds, or grass, or something besides just ordinary stuff. Special things, we   d get an allowance. Later, when we were busy on the tractor and doing things, if we didn   t get an allowance, we were given a share of a tract of land, the harvest from the tract of land. That meant that we knew when there was a good harvest, we would get some good allowance. When there was a poor harvest, we didn   t get much. We learned early on.  Finchum What would you do with the money you earned?  Buckles I was a saver, and my brother was a spender. I would save it. I would buy a comic book about once a week. I liked to collect comic books and read them. Then I would loan my brother money, at interest. I guess I had the signs of becoming a banker even back when I was ten and twelve years old.  Finchum Did he always pay up?  Buckles He always paid me. In fact, he had a friend that got in a financial bind one time, and he had a real nice Winchester Model 12 pump shotgun. They came up to the house, and he wanted to sell the shotgun. He wanted forty dollars for it. I gave him twenty-five, and then sold it within two weeks and made about twenty dollars. (Laughs) So there again, I guess I was, early on, showing signs of becoming a banker.  Finchum And math already.  Buckles Oh yeah, math was always my strong subject.  Finchum If your mother was staying at home, was she a member of the Homemaker Club or the Demonstration Club?  Buckles Yes, she belonged to the Mount Zion Home Demonstration Club, and there was another one. Then she was active in the church. She was very active in the WCTU, Women Christian Temperance Legion or Union. She was an advocate of no smoking and no drinking, and I never did. In fact, I signed a LTL, Loyal Temperance Legion, pledge when I was a kid and I never broke it.  Finchum Not even on campus when you were in college?  Buckles No, I had no problem. I never was much to follow peer pressure, whether it was in grade school, high school, or college. Didn   t make me any difference.  Finchum What would the kids in the neighborhood do for fun?  Buckles Well, some of them partied on Saturdays. I didn   t, but we played a lot of sports. Both during the school year and then we had summer baseball leagues. I enjoyed that. My dad tried to make   we   d quit working in the field early in time to come in and play some baseball games.  Finchum What were holidays like? Christmas, Thanksgiving, July Fourth?  Buckles We generally had either family or some people who didn   t have, some neighbors who didn   t have any family, come in for a dinner. Exchanged a few gifts, nothing like now. It was a very festive time, plus the usual church activities that we always attended.  Finchum Any traditional foods your mother would fix?  Buckles My dad loved to hunt quail, and we did too. So we would try to have some wild game either on Thanksgiving, or Christmas, or both. She   d always have either a ham, or a turkey, plus quail or pheasant, whatever we had at the time. Usually it was quail, because that   s what we liked the most.  Finchum Not chicken because you had it other times.  Buckles No chicken. Although, she would sometimes have chicken and noodles. That was her specialty. She would make everything, the noodles by hand, and they were really delicious. When Johnny was in Harvard, one thing he asked for was his grandma   s chicken and noodle recipe. He wanted to make some chicken and noodles.  Finchum Someone in the family has the recipe?  Buckles I assume he still has it, I don   t know.  Finchum May have to share.  Buckles Okay. It was good.  Finchum Let   s fast forward, when you finished high school, did you contemplate going to anywhere else besides where you went?  Buckles All the time I was in high school, it was understood by my parents that I was going to OSU. I had no choice.  Finchum Why?  Buckles I had to go to OSU, and I had to major in engineering. I guess because my uncle Lyndon, Lyndon Richards, my mother   s brother, had gone to OSU. He had played baseball. He was a member of, I believe, Beta Theta Pi fraternity. He loved his time at Stillwater. He had become a very successful engineer. They wanted me to follow in his footsteps, I didn   t have any other choice. They said,    If you want to farm, you can always farm, but you need to take advantage of your opportunities.    I   d been a reasonably good student. They just insisted that was what I was going to do. So that   s what I did, being an obedient child.  Billie Tell her about how they took you to school.  Finchum Yeah, how did you get there?  Buckles Well, I was going steady with a local girl and my parents were afraid, especially my mother, that I was getting too serious. So they took me to OSU, let me out, and said,    We   ll see you either Thanksgiving or Christmas.    And I was on foot. They meant what they said, so I had to bum rides from some of my friends over there, and my roommate had a car. Everywhere I wanted to go, I had to find a ride, but it didn   t hurt.  Finchum Did you come back before Thanksgiving?  Buckles No, my girlfriend and her parents came over there. (Laughs)  Finchum Did you ever hitchhike?  Buckles No, I never tried that. I really had to work hard. Nobody will ever comprehend how many hours I studied trying to catch up. In fact, I had to take the first math course. It was considered remedial algebra. It was a Tuesday, Thursday, Saturday morning class, seven thirty in the morning.  Finchum Saturday?  Buckles Saturday. Yes, Tuesday, Thursday, Saturday. Engineering chemistry, engineering physics, I   d never had either in high school. One story that was interesting is they had an old chemistry lab in Quonset buildings, close to Cordell Hall. They   re not there any longer. Head of the chemistry lab was a lady by the name of Miss Lippert. She was probably 6   2    and weighed well over 300 pounds. I couldn   t even read my class schedule. Shows you how green I was. I got to her lab the first day about fifteen minutes late. They   d already met and dismissed. I walked in.    Who are you?    I said,    I   m Bill Buckles.       Where   ve you been Buckles? You   re late.    I said,    I   m sorry. I couldn   t tell exactly where this was, and I   m not familiar with campus,    which was true. She said,    You think you can waltz in here and grin and be friendly just like Wes Watkins and get anything you want?    Course, I knew who Wes Watkins was because he was president of our state FFA chapter. I said,    No Ma   am. I just didn   t know.    She goes,    Well, here   s the periodic chart. You have it memorized by the next meeting, and be here.    I had that thing memorized. I had no idea what those chemicals were, or what a valence meant, but I understood   I had them all memorized. That   s kind of the way the first year or two went. I memorized a lot.  Finchum They   re getting ready to tear down Cordell Hall.  Buckles Are they? Okay, and that   s where I lived the first two years.  Finchum I was going to say, where did you live?  Buckles  In  167 Cordell Hall, the first two years. A fellow from Carmen, he   d been a superintendent of schools and then ran an elevator at Carmen. I think he   d been a superintendent, maybe just principal, by the name of Don Rogers, was the dorm supervisor. His wife was a nurse, and they were great people. They knew me and kind of looked after me.  Finchum Did you have to work while you were in school?  Buckles I didn   t, I was very fortunate. I was able to work on the farm for very little, but my parents funded my education. I tried for scholarships, but they weren   t   if they were available back then, I didn   t know about it. I was fortunate that my folks had enough income that I wouldn   t have qualified for what was available back then.  Finchum Do much of your studying in the Library?  Buckles Very little. I spent most of my time studying either in my room or in the lobby of Cordell Hall, because they had a television set in the lobby. I did some in the Library, had to do some, had to do some research in the Library. But I was taking mostly math and science courses. I did have freshman composition. The only B I made as a freshman was in composition, the first semester, so there went my four point. I didn   t get along real well with psychology teachers. I had mentioned to one of them one time that it   s a theoretical science, and that didn   t go over very well. (Laughs) But anyway, I did okay.  Finchum When you weren   t studying, were you involved in any activities on campus?  Buckles Yes, mostly honorary fraternities. I was invited to a lot of fraternities because they wanted someone with a good grade point to help the average, but I didn   t join a fraternity. I was not inclined to drink or party, a very serious student. I went to   I joined Alpha Zeta. Phi Eta Sigma was an honorary freshman fraternity, scholarship. ODK, later years, and I guess that   s about it. There are about three of them that I joined.  Finchum Would you attend sporting events? Buckles Oh yes  I loved wrestling, football, basketball, I attended all of them I could. I especially loved the wrestling matches.  Finchum So you have some memories of Gallagher Iba?  Buckles I have real fond memories of the wrestling matches. It was probably the highlight of my college experience. The lowest point was, I think, my sophomore year I was taking the second course of physics, engineering physics. I had a professor by the name of Berg, and he believed in the honor system. He   d leave the room and all the books would come out and the crib sheets, and so forth. That was against all my beliefs, and I really struggled with that. Eventually he had to change, getting too many complaints. That was kind of a low point in my career. I just felt like he was not a quality instructor, and he wasn   t doing right.  Finchum Did you stay an engineer major?  Buckles I was in engineering for about three years and then got engaged. Like I said, all I wanted to do was come home and farm. I decided it would be better if I could teach and farm too, so I switched to education. I already had most of my math and science. Had to take all of the education courses. Later, my fianc  e was a year behind me, and she was going to teach. She was elementary. I was in graduate school, in the School of Mathematics. Taught, as I recall I taught twelve hours and took twelve hours on my graduate courses. I was terribly busy, and they paid me. I got  250 as I recall,  250 a semester. It might   ve been a month.  Finchum That broke the bank.  Buckles Anyway, it was more than I   d had before. It was  250 per some kind of period, and I can   t remember for sure which it was. At the time I was teaching, I was in the Classroom Building. Most of the kids would sit and watch them tear down the old school, or the old building across the street, where we   d had our speech lessons before, next to the Student Union. Can   t remember what that building was called, but a lot of demolition going on, and they didn   t listen to me. (Laughs)  Billie You were in ROTC.  Buckles Yeah, I was really   thank you, I   d forgot about that. I was really in to ROTC, Army ROTC. I was the Outstanding Cadet my freshman and sophomore years. I was scheduled to go into Advanced, and I got my eye hurt. When I went down for my physical they said,    You really can   t do what you want to do now. We can put you in the engineering corps or the missile program or something like that, but we can   t put you as a field commander or anything.    I decided I didn   t want to do that. As a matter of fact, that summer I had several visits from people with the missile program. I don   t know whether it was from the Air Force or the Army, I never met with them. They   d come to the house and talk to my mother and she   d say,    Well he   s out on the tractor.    They said,    We would like to have him join our program. He   s got a lot of math and engineering courses. He has this aptitude, because of his ROTC performance we   d like to have him in our program.    But I never did join that.  Finchum So you had some classes in the Armory?  Buckles Yes, all of our ROTC classes were in the Armory. I was a sharpshooter, I liked shooting the rifles. I enjoyed all that. You know, a country kid can do all that without any training.  Finchum And if you can do quail, you can do that.  Buckles Yes, if you can shoot quail you can   well, it   s a little different. I came home one year and they had a trap shoot down at a little community close to us. I won a ham for Christmas, shooting a rifle. Took my dad   s rifle and won a ham.  Finchum Were other   at that time, I guess, gym was required? Or physical education classes were a required part of OSU?  Buckles I didn   t have any phys ed.  Finchum You didn   t have any?  Buckles Yeah. Except for engineering and math and science, the only other courses I had, I had five hours of English composition. I had social studies, and I had humanities. That   s the only thing that I recall was required, besides math and science. I had, in my graduate program, I had advanced calculus under Dr. Agnew and she was an outstanding instructor. Either you made an A and a B, or you dropped out. We had a lot of people auditing at the end of the semester. I can   t remember any of the others    names, but she sticks out as being one of the best.  Finchum So you were there    59 through     Buckles Sixty-four, five years.  Finchum So the Student Union and the Library both were pretty new at that point.  Buckles Yes, they were. The Library had been added on to and remodeled, but the Student Union had dramatically changed during that time. Finchum Had a bowling alley in it then.  Buckles You bet, we   d go bowl. Course, I started doing that when I was in 4-H, little kid, in 4-H in high school, or grade school actually. Billie also attended 4-H there at OSU     Finchum Roundup?  Buckles Yes, the Roundup.  Finchum So you   d already been to campus before you actually got dropped off?  Buckles I   d been to campus. My first trip to OSU was when I was twelve in 4-H.  Finchum What sticks out from that?  Buckles The bowling alley, I   d never seen one before. I loved it.  Finchum Theta Pond?  Buckles I don   t think that made an impression. The beautiful buildings made an impression, but I just know that I never discussed going anywhere except Stillwater, with my parents ever. They just decided early on that   s where I was going, and that   s what I did.  Finchum Primarily for engineering.  Buckles Yes, primarily for the engineering.  Finchum Would they come over and visit, and go to a game or anything with you?  Buckles No. My folks were older. My dad   let   s see    41. I think he was thirty-six and my mother was thirty-nine when I was born, so they were older parents.  Finchum Did they come to graduation?  Buckles Oh yes, they were at graduation. You bet. They may have come over once or twice for some kind of an honors assembly. But that   s all I recall. Dad didn   t have very much extra help when we weren   t there. He was taking care of cattle all the time and farming. He was just very busy.  Finchum Couldn   t venture too far.  Buckles No, he couldn   t. We had registered Polled Hereford cattle all the time when I was growing up, and I enjoyed working with those. We showed them, and then we   d sell them at sales, various sales around. Dad   s herd was pretty well noted all over the United States. Even when I was in school at OSU, I would sometimes go on weekends and get the cattle ready. Get them trimmed up and go back to school on Monday, and he   d show them and sell them.  Finchum How would you get back and forth to do that?  Buckles At that time, I had a car, at that time.  Finchum By then.  Buckles Yeah. I had a car after that. I think I got a car maybe my junior year, start of my junior year.  Billie You might tell her about how all the land that was homesteaded is still in     Buckles The Buckles    land in Alfalfa County is still owned by the family, jointly. The quarter that my grandmother homesteaded is intact. The quarter where my great-grandmother homesteaded is there. The relinquishment that my grandmother and grandfather bought, lived on, is still in the family. Then another place that they bought next to it.  I will tell you that during the Depression they had it heavily mortgaged, and it was being foreclosed. My dad saw or heard that FDR had a new program to help save the farmers, and he was making direct loans from the federal government. Dad contacted whatever phone number was given, and they got a hold of the banker who was foreclosing the Buckles    land and told him to stop. They provided a loan, and that enabled them to survive and keep that land.  My granddad had also paid half down on a quarter close to the Ashley elevator, and he   d bought a quarter down by Dacoma, where we were raised. He lost both of those. My dad picked up the one and bought it. We still have that. In fact, my family has that today. The other quarter was lost. He lost his half down, and somebody owns it.  Finchum Still, managed to keep the bulk.  Buckles Thanks to FDR, they were able to keep it, yes.  Finchum Are any of them a centennial farm?  Buckles Yes, that farm   yes. The farm where my grandparents lived is designated an Oklahoma Centennial Farm. I   ve got the sign somewhere.  Billie Ellis County.  Buckles In Ellis County, we no longer own the surface. My cousins decided several years ago that they wanted to sell it. Because it was going to be difficult for my brother and I to manage it, we agreed to sell the surface. We both regretted it after that. Was a bad mistake, but the surface is gone. We still have the minerals. It   s producing minerals.  Finchum I noticed the oil rigs around here. Oil is big?  Buckles Yes, there   s been a lot of oil and gas income in this area. It   s down now because of the price. The activity is much less, because a lot of it is drilled up in the Mississippi lime. Probably won   t be much further development for a while, because of the huge quantities of saltwater that have to be disposed of with those wells. We also have the earthquakes to contend with.  Finchum I was going to say, have you shook much here?  Buckles Yeah, we   ve shaken a lot. I think the curtailment in the injection wells has helped some.  Finchum Haven   t noticed any lately   not as many lately.  Buckles You don   t notice it as much. We haven   t had the large ones. We had two that were almost four-and-a-half to five. Those really shook things. Caused some damage. Haven   t noticed any damage in this house, but a lot of people say they   ve had some cracks in their walls.  Finchum Scary.  Buckles Yes, it is. It   s real concerning. We need oil and gas. Goodness knows the people who invested in it need to get the income, but we can   t jeopardize peoples    property either. We have to be prudent with it. I think the Commission is being very prudent in their approach. I think they   re doing the right thing.  Finchum So graduation day, do you have any memories from that particular day?  Buckles Took a long time is all I remember.  Finchum Where was the ceremony?  Buckles As I recall, our ceremony was in the football stadium.  Finchum Outside?  Buckles Outside, yes.  Finchum And your parents came.  Buckles Yes, my parents came.  Finchum And you stayed around to do a master   s, at least a part of a master   s.  Buckles Yes, I did. I stayed another year while my wife finished her bachelor   s. Worked on a master   s, I didn   t complete the master   s. I taught school in Great Bend, Kansas, two years, and coached baseball. I could get  3,800 a year salary, starting salary, in Oklahoma, being a math teacher. In Great Bend, I got  4,800 plus another  1,000 for coaching. So   and it was only maybe 120 miles north. So I could come home on weekends and farm. That   s what we did for two years. I didn   t care for teaching, and my dad said there was an opportunity for us if I wanted to come back. We were doing pretty well with the registered cattle, and he needed me for that because he was not inclined to trim those calves and get them broke to lead and all of those things. He didn   t enjoy that.  I came back and we built a house down at Dacoma, got my first loan from Central National Bank of Alva. We had a production sale then about a year later. Had a great production sale. We sold into seven different states. The chairman of the board,  Gertrude Myers , sent her brother down, and one of the officers that I   d borrowed the money from to build our house, to attend the sale. I guess they were impressed because she sent word that she wanted to talk to me, the chairman of the board and the CEO of the bank. When Gertrude said she wanted to talk to you, you went up and talked to her.  She asked me if I   d ever thought about becoming a banker, and I said    No, I really haven   t.    She had me bring my transcript. I was real proud of that transcript. She looked at it, and she said,    Those are real good grades, but you didn   t take anything you could use.    It was that way the rest of my career with her. She offered me a job, and I said    Well, I   d like to go talk to my dad,    it was in the summer.    We   ve got to sow wheat, we   ve got to do some things. I   ll have to do some things to get ready if I   m going to be gone part of the time from the farm.    He said, just like he did when I was going to school,    You can always farm, but if you want to try this, go ahead.     It was just a fit for me. It was fun. I got involved in securities and different kinds of investments for the bank. We were a very conservative bank, and a lot of our depositors    money was invested in securities. I got to do that. Gertrude showed me her philosophy and sent me to all different kinds of seminars. I learned a lot. I learned a lot about oil and gas, because we didn   t have any attorneys in our town that were very familiar with oil and gas laws. I joined the National Association of Royalty Owners and went to their seminars and learned a lot about oil and gas and royalty.  In 1983, I decided I wanted to be president of a bank somewhere, whether it was Alva or wherever it was. I asked Gertrude permission to have time off to go to a banking school somewhere. Either Rutgers or Madison, Wisconsin, was probably one of the best. She said,    I think that   s okay. I   ll let you off,    but I had to pay my own way. I paid all of the airfare, I paid my own tuition. I paid for everything myself, but I told myself,    Yeah. You   re going to pay me now or you   re going to pay me later.    (Laughs) Not knowing for sure, but that opened up a whole new world too. I learned a lot in banking school. Met a lot of people from all over the United States. Of course, I was somewhat of a celebrity because I was from Oklahoma and Penn Square had happened. Nobody wanted to know anything about me, they just wanted to know about Penn Square. About all I knew is I   d read the book Belly Up, and I knew the names of the banks where Penn Square was doing business. Little did I know that some twenty-some years later I would marry a vice president from Penn Square and she can fill in the details. (Laughter)  Anyway, I did learn a lot in banking school. I was offered some really good jobs that would more than doubled my salary that I was receiving at Central National at Alva. I   d have to give up my farming and my Polled Hereford cattle. I just wasn   t willing to do that, because my whole life was land and agriculture. So graduated from University of Wisconsin Graduate School of Banking in 1986. That same year the chairman   s brother, who was president of the bank, passed away suddenly, and they made me president. I   m sure it was because I was prepared and felt very confident that I could do it, and it all worked out.  Later, I signed a contract, long-term contract and stock option, with the CEO that bound me for the rest of my career with that bank. I exercised that option, and the rest is history. I no longer have an interest in the bank. I   ve sold my interest to Tom Ward.  Finchum And you retired when?  Buckles I retired in 2007.  Finchum So almost     Buckles Almost ten years ago, nine years ago.  Finchum With over thirty years, close to forty.  Buckles Thirty-nine years in banking. Part of that time I was   because of the farming and because of my dad   s health, I was going in at noon and leaving whenever. I guess you would say I wasn   t full-time, although I was probably putting in forty hours. It was a little different structure, but I maintained the same title and the same responsibilities or more, even though I was arriving at noon. That gave me time to   if we had some help driving tractors or taking care of cattle, that gave me some time to get things done in the morning before I went to work.  Finchum Before it got really hot.  Buckles Yeah, that too.  Finchum In the    80s, the agriculture wasn   t doing too well, or the banking, so that was a double challenge, I guess.  Buckles That   s true. We really didn   t suffer like some of them. We had some years that were not as good as others, but we didn   t suffer the huge losses that closed some of the banks, because our management was extremely conservative. We were 30 percent capitalized. We had a hundred million in assets and probably had thirty million in capital, which was   well, one of the economists at OSU used to point us out as how not to run a bank, not utilizing the capital properly. But we slept at night too, and we didn   t lose the bank.  Was able to expand somewhat after I became CEO. We bought Woodward, we bought the old Bank of Woodward. That was a great move for the bank because I already had a lot of acquaintances out there, and it gave us a whole new area. Since I   ve left, they changed their name to Bank Central, so it wouldn   t be confusing with Central National of Enid. They   ve added two more   actually, three more branches. They added Enid, and Harper, and Anthony. The fellow that succeeded me is also an OSU graduate, Kyle Hughbanks.  Finchum Keep it in the family.  Buckles Yeah, kept it in the family.  Finchum Alva   s probably changed a lot in those times, that forty-year period, too?  Buckles It changed a lot in the last six or seven years because of the oil boom. We struggled getting new motels or anything new for years and years. Then all of a sudden there was a huge shortage of housing. We have three new motels. We have numerous oil-related businesses, although some, I understand, are getting ready to close. The land prices have gone extremely high. Minerals jumped in price, although the last year or so, I understand, they   ve rocked back quite a bit.  I   ve seen quarter sections of land sell ten years ago, where the oil lease itself, the bonus, paid for the quarter section. Just in oil and gas lease bonus. That   s what happened during the boom. People have to adjust again, because those days are going to be gone for a while. It   s just like around Stillwater; you have to deal with all of the adverse impact of that activity as well. We all have to live together, and you can   t prohibit it because you   re taking away someone   s valuable resource under the ground. Unless you compensate them for that, you can   t do it, legally. All of those issues have come up.  Finchum So a good time to retire?  Buckles I tell you what, it was the best move I ever made.  Billie You might mention our Royalty Owners Association.  Buckles Yes. I   ve been active in the National Association of Royalty Owners  NARO  since 1986. I now serve on the board of directors of NARO, Oklahoma NARO.  Finchum Thirty years, okay.  Buckles Yeah.  Finchum So you   re not really retired.  Buckles No, I take     Finchum Semi-retired   Buckles    care of numerous trusts, LLCs. Billie and I have a foundation. I   m active in the Methodist church. I   m lay leader and that requires that   if I remember, I attend all the committee meetings. (Laughs) I didn   t remember the one last night. I was thinking about your meeting today, I guess. Anyway, we   re very busy.  Finchum Are you connected with OSU in any way now?  Buckles Yes. I am a member of the Board of Governors, starting my second term. Billie and I have done quite a few scholarship contributions, also we contributed to a professorship, which is a matter of record at the Foundation. You can check on all that if you want to.  Finchum Sure.  Buckles Quite a bit of our money, lately, has gone to OSU.  Finchum How often do you go back to campus?  Buckles Whenever they have a Board of Governors meeting. We go   I think we   re going to go in April. They   re going   the School of Education is going to honor their scholarship recipients, and we have a deal that shows we   re invited to that. We   ll meet some of the people who have received our scholarship this year.  Finchum Future teachers.  Buckles Yes. Actually most of them are doctorate candidates, believe it or not. I don   t know how that happened. Our scholarship was originally set up to help those from southeastern Oklahoma and northwestern Oklahoma who didn   t have the funds to attend. Anyway, it   s okay.  Finchum We should back up and say how you two met.  Buckles You want me to tell it, or do you want to?  Finchum See if he gets it right.  Buckles I   ll tell it. We decided in the early    90s, we being Gertrude Myers, chairman of the bank and CEO, and me being president. We decided we needed to have some sort of an alternative investment program, besides just certificates, and deposits, and saving accounts for customers who wanted to invest in securities or stock. We didn   t have that. We had an Edward Jones that was competitive here and some other brokerages that were invading our area. I took the trust officer at the time to a seminar that was being held by the Oklahoma Bankers Association in Oklahoma City. Billie was one of the participants from the Oklahoma Bankers Association. She worked for the OBA at that time. She had been a banker, different places, was at Penn Square when it failed, and so she was pretty knowledgeable.  We listened to their program. Decided it might be something that we wanted to do, and that we   d like for the Oklahoma Bankers Association to bring their investment guru to Alva to present a program for Gertrude, the chairman, to hear. So I called back to talk to her, and she thought it was somebody from Central National of Enid. She didn   t even know about Central National of Alva, I don   t think. She was excited, and then kind of disappointed when she heard it was me from Alva. We set up a program, and she came out with their investment advisor, Art Stockton, with Stockton Capital Management. They presented a program for Gertrude and the trust department, and for me, in our bank. I   ll let her tell the rest of the story. It all depended on her.  Billie This is very personal, but as I sat there at the table   I had been a single banker for thirteen years. As I sat there at the table and we talked around it, I looked at Bill and I thought,    Hmm. He   s my type of guy, but I   m sure he   s married.    I had to go out to my car to get a document that needed signed. On my way out, as I walked through the loan department, I said a prayer. That God, if he wanted me to single then I would be content with my situation. But if there was someone I could love and that could love me in return, that that would happen.  We went on with our meeting and that night, he took this young man and me to dinner   Bill did. As we sat there, he informed us that he was getting a divorce. I thought,    I should not talk at all because I was already interested in this man.    So a year went by, I came up here several times on business, working with clients. After a year   we   d talked several things about personal things, but not seriously. A year later he asked me for a date, in Oklahoma City. He was going to be getting his car serviced. We went on the date, and one year from that date, we were married.  Finchum There you go. What year would that have been?  Billie It was    93 we got married.  Buckles Got married in    93.  Billie May 1, it   s coming up.  Buckles I   ll tell you how that happened.  Billie Oh, it was a funny story.  Buckles We were sitting   every evening we would have our officers    meeting, go over the loans. Our chairman loved to get all the officers in there and have this meeting about four thirty, mainly to keep us there. We   d go through the loans, review all the documentation, and security instruments, and so forth. Everybody was just antsy. One evening she said,    Well, we need to talk about Bill and Billie   s wedding,    because we   d been engaged for quite a while.    Okay.       Well, let   s see now. We had an examination here about three months ago, we probably won   t have examiners for several months. Harvest is going to be around June 1, middle of June, so we   ve got to stay away from that. How about May 1?    Now this is the chairman of the board, this lady had never been married by the way. I said    Well, that   s fine with me, Gertrude. I   ll call Billie.    I call her and she said,    That   s okay with me.    So Gertrude set our wedding date. She was quite a lady, brilliant lady. Finchum And never married?  Billie Never married.  Buckles She lived with her old maid sister, too.  Finchum The bank had been in their family?  Buckles Her dad bought into the bank before she was born. She was from a second wife. The story has it that Mr. Myers, her daddy, came here from Kansas and bought into the bank and then later bought out control. His wife died, he had two daughters. He married the housekeeper and had all these other kids, Gertrude, and Evelyn, and Dub  Walter D. Myers, Jr. , and John, and Lewis. Gertrude got the brains. Rest of them, not so much. But she was a sharp cookie. She had an MBA from OU, straight As, very brilliant lady.  Finchum Didn   t bother her hiring an OSU grad, being from OU?  Buckles No. She wanted to hire somebody who had ties here who wouldn   t leave her.  Finchum Loyalty.  Buckles Yeah. She said,    I run the biggest business school in Oklahoma, besides Northwestern.    Everybody she   d hired that had good credentials and background, if that person was not from here, they   d leave her in no time. We all had opportunities, because she was a good teacher. It was a very successful operation.  Billie She also didn   t     Buckles She didn   t pay very well either, but that   s another reason she wanted people with local farming ties. You   d have to supplement your income. But she was very supportive of me.  Finchum Was it typical for them to do a long-term commitment like they had you sign?  Buckles I was the only one. No, I was the only one   I   m the only non-family member, outside of a lawyer that got it through representing a divorce. He turned one share into over a million dollars, one share, from the divorce settlement. I was the only one that ever owned stock outside the family. She valued what I did.  Finchum Speaks to your character too. Buckles She told one of the heirs that protested it,    Why are you so hoggish? Bill is responsible for at least half of the capital in this bank. He   s earned at least half of it himself.    She recognized, and it was a way of rewarding me for being loyal and doing the best I could for the bank, and I did. So she made up for it.  Finchum Sounds like you were loyal to OSU, and the county, and to your job.  Buckles I   ve tried to be. Some things you can   t control and circumstances can be beyond your control. We   re seeing that in the Foundation at OSU, right now. Some people are not able to fulfill their commitments, financially. Some people might have plans to do things, and all of this downturn has changed those plans. It   s just    a lot of success or failure is based on timing. My success in selling my interest in the bank for a really good price was just the timing. Wouldn   t bring half today what it did eight years ago. Not half. That   s just the way it works, but I didn   t want to continue in an ownership position where I wasn   t in control. I wouldn   t have been in control, having retired as a CEO. I wouldn   t have controlled it. I just wasn   t comfortable with that.  Finchum Some people will be curious, too, as to why get involved with OSU, at this stage of the game?  Buckles Education   s extremely important to both Billie and to me. That   s probably the most important thing that helped Billie and helped me change my circumstances. Gertrude wouldn   t have given me the time of day had she not read some of those articles about my scholastic success or the ROTC awards. She saw those, and she mentioned them. I think she wouldn   t have paid me a bit of notice had she not done that. Course, it didn   t hurt to have the parents I had, too. She knew that.  But Billie put herself through the Graduate School of Banking at the University of Colorado, without a college education. That took some doing. Even though they   re what you would call    graduate schools,    they   re not easy. It   s not like a formal graduate school in a college, but they   re very intense, and you get a lot of information in those things. For example, at Madison, I attended with people who were accountants, CPAs, lawyers, and they agreed that it was just as intense as some of their courses in law school or accounting. Imagine what she faced not having any preparation, other than she had a lot of experience in a bank.  Finchum There probably weren   t very many women in the program, I wouldn   t think.  Billie No. Let   s see, mine was in    72,    73, and    74. I believe we had seven out of 150, seven women. Finchum Wow that   s     Billie And only about five of us, or maybe four, graduated. Very few officers, but however you had to be an officer to be accepted at a university.  Finchum That   s great.  Buckles But yes, education is important to both of us. Everything we do in the way of contribution is a joint decision. It   s all half hers, so she has to agree. We   re in agreement that education is probably one of the most important things, that and our faith, that we can do.  Finchum Doesn   t necessarily have to be OSU, just education in general?  Buckles Well, we contribute to Northwestern, because of where we are. She also contributes to Murray State, because it   s close to where she was raised. Murray State has entirely different financial circumstances and opportunities than     Billie Well, it   s a junior college.  Buckles It   s a junior college, but also they don   t have the same financial deep pockets down there that we have in this area.  Billie Murray State is in Johnston County, Oklahoma. As I understand it and something that I read recently, Johnston County is the poorest county in the state.  Finchum Southeast? Southwest?  Billie Yes.  Finchum Southeast, okay.  Buckles North of Durant.  Billie Near Tishomingo   in Tishomingo.  Buckles Yes, Murray State   s in Tishomingo.  Finchum So do you have a few things in your closets that   s orange, OSU orange? A few?  Buckles Absolutely.  Finchum A few. (Laughs)  Buckles We   ve got t-shirts, and Billie   s got some clothes that she can wear to the ballgames that are orange.  Billie Oh, in our closet. Okay, yes there   s some orange. Not many, but     Finchum At least one.  Buckles Yeah, necktie.  Billie A necktie.  Buckles I will tell you, I did not enjoy going to school at OSU. I worked day and night, studying. It was not a pleasant experience.  Billie But that would   ve been anywhere.  Buckles Yeah, it would   ve been anywhere. I had it in my mind that if I could make straight As or almost straight As that somehow, somewhere, someone was going to give me a big job and a good salary, and it   d pay off. That was the way I was going to improve my lot in my life. Probably the most na  ve person in the world, but that   s what I thought.  Finchum Well that was your motivation, too.  Buckles That was my motivation, I was very motivated. I also would tell some of the people with whom I associated that,    You may be smarter than I am, but I can work twice as hard as you can.    And I did.  Finchum It wasn   t that OSU was bad necessarily     Billie No.  Buckles No, they were great. It was a wonderful opportunity. It   s just that I didn   t take advantage of everything that I should have. Although I did enjoy football games, and wrestling, and occasionally a baseball game. Most of the time I     Billie But you got a superb education.  Buckles I got a great education.  Finchum All As but one?  Buckles No, I made some Bs in psychology. I think I ended up with my master   s program and all 3.95.  Finchum That   s nothing to sneeze at.  Buckles It   s not terrible. My son, though, graduated there with a 4.0, in accounting.  Finchum So how many children do you have?  Buckles I have a boy and a girl. Johnny is a professor of law at the University of Houston Law School. Tammy is a stay-at-home mom, has two daughters. She   s taking care of them, in Dallas.  Finchum And he went to OSU, did she?  Buckles She went to OSU, she actually graduated from Northwestern. She has a master   s from Cameron in behavioral science.  Finchum So they had a choice whether they went to OSU or not?  Buckles Yes, they did. Part of the reason, I will tell you, that Tammy went to Cameron was, she was not accepted in a master   s program at OSU. I don   t know exactly why, because she had good grades, but she wasn   t. So that   s what happened. That was a sore point for a while.  Finchum I can imagine.  Buckles They told her they wanted to be less provincial, and they had a number of foreign students who got master   s programs there. I don   t know whether that was a push or that was just what Tammy told me, but anyway. She was not accepted. My ex-wife got her doctorate at OSU, in education. So have a long history of OSU graduates.  Finchum Grandkids?  Buckles Yes. Billie   s grandson got his degrees at OSU. Let   s see, who else? Course, my brother did graduate work at OSU through Northwestern, in his master   s of administration, education. That   s about it. We have quite a history at OSU.  Finchum Do you come back for Homecoming?  Buckles Haven   t been back to Homecoming in thirty years.  Billie But we love the times when we come. We really do enjoy it.  Buckles We really enjoy it, and people are so nice to us. The people in the education department are great. Burns Hargis acts like he knows us. I don   t know whether he does or not, but I   ve been around quite a while so he probably does.  Finchum He   s always personable, no matter who it is.  Buckles He   s very personable, yes.  Billie Dr. Davis.  Buckles Robert Davis is really nice to us. He was acting dean, he may be again, I don   t know. Have they got a new dean of education, do you know?  Finchum I   m not sure.  Buckles I   m not either. Cici, she was very nice, I think that she     Billie Sissi.  Pamela    Sissi    Carroll   Buckles Sissi, Sissi wanted to get back closer to home I think.  Finchum There   s something about OSU that makes people loyal. Do you have any input on what you think that might be?  Buckles Yes, I do, and I see it more now since I   m not studying twenty hours a day. People are friendly, they   re accepting no matter what your lot in life. They don   t look down on you if you   re not the rich kid on the block or you come from a prosperous area. There   s a lot of people who come from farm areas and rural areas that are just like you. They have backgrounds just like yours, and I think that   s important. I know that my mother had a real bias against OU and told me she wanted very much to be part of the sorority scene when she went down there, and she was not accepted. That   s probably part of the reason it was understood I would go to OSU.  Billie A good thing in the end.  Buckles I think it   s because of just the friendliness of the University.  Billie And that comes through so much   well, my granddaughter wanted to be a nurse, and her mother was suffering cancer when they went down to look at OSU. The education department, Dr. Davis, arranged for like a golf cart type thing to take them from place to place and show the campus. They   re understanding. My daughter-in-law says regardless of where they went on campus, people said    hello.    If they asked where something was, the student, if it was a student, would just drop what they were doing and take them there. They didn   t say,    It   s that building over there.    So even my children that have University of Texas degrees really think Stillwater is special.  Buckles I think, without a doubt, Burns Hargis has made a big difference in the University. I hope if he ever retires, we get somebody who can carry on.  Finchum I hope he doesn   t  retire , but I know he will. I mean he   s getting closer.  Buckles I believe that from the last two Board of Governors meetings, he   s thinking about it.  Finchum Yeah, probably a couple more years.  Buckles I think he   d like to get a mansion built before he left. (Laughs)  Finchum Get the business building finished.  Buckles I really think he   d like to get a new house for a new president.  Finchum Oh okay, I didn   t know that was still being discussed.  Buckles Well, we haven   t heard lately. It may be a bad time to do it too, because a lot of the oil money   s dried up.  Finchum There   s a lot of building going on.  Buckles It   s unbelievable.  Finchum We came in    96 and it   s changed a lot in those twenty years.  Buckles You   ve been there a long time. Last time we were in Stillwater, we attended a city council meeting in behalf of NARO and listened to some pretty upset citizens. Of course, I   m on the other side, but I can understand that if this house had an oil rig out here a hundred yards, I wouldn   t like it. As a matter of fact, I have fought a couple of battles since I bought this property to prevent a well from being drilled in here. Fortunately, we were able to get Chesapeake to move the well locations, so I understand. To prevent it altogether, I don   t understand that. I certainly would hate to live in this world without oil and gas.  Finchum Compromise, it   s a good thing sometimes.  Buckles I think it is, but we can   t produce all the electricity we want with windmills and solar panels.  Finchum True. Buckles No way. I don   t want this place covered up with solar panels and windmills.  Finchum They   re popping up everywhere.  Buckles They are.  Finchum I passed a lot coming for this drive.  Buckles You bet, and there   s a lot more planned.  Finchum Really?  Buckles Yes, there   s one in Southernwood   it goes from about Cleo Springs clear out here west of Alva. Huge program planned.  Finchum Any on your property?  Buckles No, and there won   t be.  Billie Unless it becomes a law or something.  Buckles As long as I control it.  Finchum As long as you can say no.  Buckles Yes, as long as I can say no. I don   t intend to have any. I   d rather have an oil well. Okay, anything else?  Finchum Anything else you want to add before we close?  Buckles I appreciate you taking the time to come and talk to us. I hope you get something useful.  Finchum  Thank you for speaking with me today. It   s been a pleasure.   -------  -------   
