 Kite  We are in Beaver County at the Jones and Palmer Trail Museum. It   s  November 7, 2001, and Jennifer Paustenbaugh and Steven Kite will be  speaking with Velma Goetzinger and Pauline Curfman and Elizabeth Cross  and Beatrice Dyer with her daughter Louise Smith. I appreciate all of you  ladies taking time off of your day to come here and speak with us and to be a  part of this. I think it   s a very worthwhile effort and a great thing that you   re  doing this, putting these memories down on tape and paper to be saved forever  and ever.  You don   t realize how many years have gone by since we went through this  dust bowl deal.  Well, I guess it   d be 65.  That   s a pretty good guess.  Anyway, I thank you for coming out today and taking your time to do this. We  usually start these out by just going around the table and stating your name,  where you were born, and when you were born, and then we   ll go to the next  person and they can state that information. So if you   d like to say your name,  where, and when you were born, and then we   ll go on around.  I   m Velma Goetzinger, and my parents were Elmer and May Meisenheimer,  and they filed on land out northwest of Forgan, but when it was time for me to  be born my mother thought that she had to go back to Kansas to be with her  mother, so my dad took her back in a covered wagon, and I was born in  Kingman County, Kansas.  What year?  1907, June 30.  Well, I   m Elizabeth Cross, and I was born over there about five and a half  miles southeast of Knowles in a soddy house.  When was that?  5  Cross  Kite  Goetzinger  Kite  Dyer  Kite  Dyer  Kite  Curfman  Kite  Curfman  Kite  Goetzinger  Curfman  Kite  Curfman  Kite  1910, October 3.  Your parents    name was Meisenheimer?  Yes.  And Mrs. Dyer?  I   m Beatrice Dyer. I was born at Boyd, Oklahoma. I understand there   s not  even a piece of anything there now  laughing .  I was going to say, I   ve never heard of that.  It   s south and west of Beaver. I was born in    19, and my parents and my  grandparents all filed at that time, before I was born, they filed on land down  there. I had two sets of grandparents that filed, one out on the south and east  of Beaver and one south and west of Beaver, and that   s where I was born. Of  course, I didn   t know about it, but they said it was one of the biggest  snowstorms that we ever had. My dad had to get on a horse to go try to get the  doctor out there. Of course, I didn   t know about it. I was born in February,  Groundhog Day, and that   s just about it.  All right, well it sounds interesting. Mrs. Curfman.  I   m Pauline Curfman, and my parents lived in Beaver County, but the year I  was born they moved back to Missouri where they had both originally come  from. I was born in Foster, Missouri, May 1913. I was about six weeks old  when we moved back to Oklahoma, and I   ve lived here ever since.  So you   re not a native.  No  laughter .  Well, we have just about everybody in the same age group here, with Velma  winning the prize for oldest, 1907, and Mrs. Dyer is the baby of the group   laughter . Did you all grow up in a rural area? Was it a farm life for  everyone here?  I did. I   ve lived in Beaver County all of my life.  I moved in town after the second grade and I   ve been here ever since.  So you lived in town after the second grade.  Uh-huh.  Well, what would you say a typical day was like for you all growing up on the  farm, and if you can remember, before you moved to town? What was  required of you around the house or outside when you were young and  6  Goetzinger  Kite  Dyer  Cross  Kite  Cross  Dyer  Cross  Curfman  Goetzinger  Cross  Curfman  Kite  Curfman  Kite  Curfman  Kite  Dyer  growing up? Do you remember chores you had to do?  A typical day for me was my mother didn   t ever care about my washing the  milk separator and things like that, because she wanted all of that sterilized,  but I could wash dishes, and I could make beds. I had to help milk cows. It  was always my task to fill the kerosene lamps with kerosene and wash the  lamp chimneys everyday so we   d have good light at night.  Well, do those chores sound familiar?  Yeah, about the same. I used to have to get in the kindling to start the fire the  next day and gather the eggs and just whatever there was to be done.  Well I worked in the field and milked cows. I did a little of everything.  It seems like milking cows was always the most dreaded chore. Is that true for  you?  I haven   t milked in so long that I don   t know.  I dreaded that part. When I milked, I liked to set on my stool and get my head  in the old cow, and then I   d get lice in my head  laughter .  Well we had one cow that you had to hobble to milk, because she   d just kick.  They   d swish their tail and get in the milk pail. That was terrible.  We had one, but my dad always milked that one  laughing .  We had to put the hobbles on her to milk her, and then sometimes she   d kick  the bucket out from under your hands.  My mother raised turkeys for sale. I can remember not herding cattle, but  herding turkeys, keeping them in a certain area to feed and take them from one  field to the other.  Just like cattle.  Yeah.  Was herding them the same?  Oh, sort of. They were so slow getting around. You   d get aggravated and try  to rush them up, and that made them worse. It   s like with kids, you try to rush  them around, and you can   t do it sometimes. But it was kind of fun really.  Any favorite chores at all?  It was fun to hunt the turkey eggs in the Spring. It seems like they would  7  Curfman  Dyer  Kite  Dyer  Kite  Dyer  Curfman  Goetzinger  Kite  Goetzinger  Dyer  Curfman  Kite  Goetzinger  Kite  Goetzinger  Cross  Dyer  Goetzinger  Curfman  Kite  Goetzinger  sneak out some place. She knows that. She   s good at that. We did. We made  cottage cheese to feed the turkeys. Did you do that?  Uh-huh.  Yeah, she did that. We about all did the same thing  laughter .  So you   d make cottage cheese, and that   s what you   d feed turkeys?  Yes. We had milk and we had the cows. We   d make big containers of cottage  cheese and feed the turkeys. I don   t know, I guess other people did too.  Do you remember how you made cottage cheese?  Oh yeah, you just put milk on the stove and heat it.  Strain it, hang it out on the clothesline in a sack to dry.  Sugar used to come in cloth bags, and they   d use those sugar bags, put the  cheese in there and hang it on the clothesline until it dripped dry  laughing .  And feed it to the turkeys?  And we ate some of it too.  We ate it too. It was good.  It was better cheese than this you buy at the store; I mean cottage cheese.  I never knew about making cottage cheese that way.  Well, the milk had to be curded before they heated it and soured.  When I go home I   ll hang it up on my clothesline and see if I can make it.  No, you have to let it sour first.  It   s got to be a clabber of milk.  With this quick cheese that we buy now, you can   t do it anyway. It just  doesn   t work, does it? I try it doesn   t work.  No, it   s different.  This homogenized milk, would it sour? Could you use that?  My milk   s gone sour.  I don   t think it clabbers. I think it has to be fresh milk.  8  Kite  Curfman  Kite  Curfman  Dyer  Kite  Curfman  Goetzinger  Kite  Goetzinger  Curfman  Cross  Goetzinger  Dyer  Cross  Goetzinger  Cross  Goetzinger  Cross  Kite  Cross  Well what about the turkeys sneaking off to lay eggs?  They   d hide out in the bushes and you   d have to go gather the eggs.  Would it be like an Easter egg hunt?  We probably made a game out of it, for sure.  Well for one thing, we didn   t waste anything. Like she said, we used the sugar  sacks. We didn   t waste anything, did we? Of course, she   s older; she knows  more about it than I do, but I know quite a bit about it.  Using everything.  Flour sacks were saved to make panties for the girls and slips and things like  that.  Yes, those flour sacks; they made dresses out of them.  Do you have any of those left at all? Do you have any examples?  I don   t.  No, I don   t.  They had some pretty flour sacks though in the later years. Otherwise, they  just had a red star on them or something.  People dressed in white if they were, what we call, dressing up. They always  wore white. The first dress I ever owned that was colored, I was 18 months  old when my mother made it, and I still have that dress.  I had one of mine. I forgot. It was white, and my mother crocheted the top.  I   ve still got that. I forgot about that.  I   ve got one too. I was about three years old or four. I   ve still got one.  I was 18 months.  It wasn   t made out of flour sacks; it was just kind of made out of material.  No, mine was just made out of material.  It was kind of embroidery like flowers and stuff.  Was that a luxury, to have store bought material like that?  It probably was at that time. We didn   t know much about it.  9  Goetzinger  Kite  Curfman  Kite  Curfman  Kite  Curfman  Kite  Curfman  Kite  Curfman  Kite  Goetzinger  Curfman  I don   t know whether it was or not.  Well how did you end up in Beaver City and off the farm?  My mother homesteaded on a claim southeast of here twelve miles. Times got  bad, and we weren   t raising crops and we moved to town. My dad got a job as  a jailer at the courthouse. We just stayed.  From then on, you were a city girl.  Yeah, I was a city girl.  Were you jealous of the farm life or were you glad you were in the city?  I think we kids were all glad to move to town. We didn   t have the chores they  had to do  laughing , which we should have had probably. It kept us out of  mischief. I had four brothers and one sister.  Well now you   ve done it. What kind of mischief did you get into?   Oh, I don   t think I ought to tell on the boys, should I?  Well only if they   re not around   Well one thing that we did that was terrible; the place we lived had a row of  mulberry trees, and we   d go down and eat the mulberries and have mulberry  fights and all that stuff. Our clothes were all stained. Mom would get so  aggravated.    Can   t you find something clean to play,    she   d say. But we  didn   t know when we were eating those mulberries that probably we ate more  worms than we did anything else  laughing . To me now, that sounds horrible,  but we didn   t think about it then.  Well, what else did you guys do for fun and entertainment or mischief making?  We had horses to ride. We didn   t have cars. My parents, I think the first car  we ever owned, I was probably ten or eleven years old before we ever had a  car. My dad, he was the second man in our neighborhood to own a car. We  went back to Hutchinson, Kansas to visit one of my uncles, and so my dad  went to Hutchinson and bought a car. It was an Oberlin car, and of course he  didn   t know very much about driving it, but they took him out to the edge of  town and turned him loose. By the time he got to my uncle   s house, it was  after night, and the cars, back then, whenever you   d let up on the accelerator,  the lights would dim instead of being bright, and he ran into my uncle   s  chicken house  laughter    There were so many of us kids that my mother never did learn to drive. She  said she   d never get a chance, so why learn. We were out visiting my uncle  east of town one Sunday, and it came up a big rainstorm. We had a creek we  had to cross, and we got stuck. Dad said,    Myrtle, get up there and drive this  10  Kite  Curfman  Kite  Goetzinger  Kite  Cross  Goetzinger  Cross  Dyer  Kite  Dyer  Curfman  Goetzinger  Kite  Cross  Goetzinger  Cross  car while the kids and I push.    So she did and we got it pushed out, and she  said,    How do I stop it? How do I stop it?    She didn   t even know what the  brake was for or where it was, I don   t suppose.  Did she find it soon enough?  Yeah, I think my oldest brother ran up by the side of the car and told her what  to do.  So you had horses exclusively until you were ten or eleven?  Uh-huh. We lived about two miles from where our mailbox was, where our  mail was delivered. I used to ride a horse down there every day to pick up the  mail. When we   d go to Sunday school and church, the girls didn   t ride horses,  we usually rode in the wagon or buggy with the folks, but the boys would ride  horses to church. There would just be a whole line of saddle horses fastened  out there.  What about you two? Did you have horses up until then?  We rode horses after I was married. My son and my husband and me, we all  rode horses.  Well, I did too.  I   ve got pictures of them. We had a car, a lot of the time, we rode horses.  I remember my first year I went to high school, we had to go into town, and  my grandmother had a horse and buggy, and that   s how I went to high school.  Riding a horse.  Having horses, I don   t know. They were like cars now a days. All the young  boys, that was their pride, to see which one could have the classiest buggy. I  have pictures of my mother and all of them, and they   d see who had the nicest  looking horse and the best buggy, just like they do cars now a days.  With the fringe on top  laughter .  I rode a horse to school the first year I was in high school, but after that we had  a school bus.  Well, did you miss the days of the horse and buggy when cars came along?  Oh, we were glad.  In a way, only we liked our saddle horses, because they were really something.  I love to ride a horse.  11  Goetzinger  Cross  Goetzinger  Kite  Dyer  Goetzinger  Cross  Dyer  Cross  Curfman  Cross  Curfman  Kite  Curfman  I do too. I like to ride.  We had some good nice horses to ride, and we really liked them.  We did too.  Do you remember your horses    names?  Mine was Dolly.  One we called Babe and one we called Maude.  My son   s was named Socks.  My granddad had one that all the kids tried to ride him at once. His name was  Stats. There   d be kids from one end to the other on that poor little horse. That  was just our transportation was horses. We walked a lot back then.  Uh-huh, got a lot of exercise.  I remember one saddle horse we had that we all enjoyed riding, and one  Sunday, a girlfriend and I were to my place and no one else was there, and she  said,    Why don   t we go horseback riding?    I said    Okay, Ginger   s out here in  the corral.    We went out and saddled her up   first time I ever put a saddle on  her by myself   and we went down the lane to the road going west that we  turned on. We were going pretty fast, and the saddle turned. We didn   t get it  tight enough  laughter , and she and I both landed in sandburs or cockleburs, I  don   t know. We picked stickers for hours  When we got up, we just took  Ginger back to the barn and took that saddle off. My dad said,    That   s what  you get. You didn   t know how to saddle her, did you,    and I said,    Well I  thought I did.    We didn   t do a very good job.  The horse that my son rode was half Shetland. He was a little pony, and we  had to keep that horse out of the corral when we would milk, because that  horse would drink milk just like a cat  laughter   If we forgot to leave that  horse out, we   d hang the milk up in the corral on hooks, and he   d get in there  and drink it up if you ever left it in the corral.  My brothers had a little Shetland pony, and if she didn   t want to go, she  wouldn   t go. My older brother got her started one day, and he said,    You  younger ones just don   t know how to do this,    and all at once she just stopped  like that, and he went over her head. They said,    We don   t think we want to  learn how to do it either      Laughter   Well what about other pets that you might have had or other animals around  the house?  Oh, you always had dogs.  12  Goetzinger  Cross  Kite  Cross  Kite  Goetzinger  Kite  Curfman  Kite  Cross  Kite  Cross  Kite  Goetzinger  Kite  Goetzinger  Kite  Goetzinger  We always had a dog.  We had dogs, but my brother had a little calf. We raised that. It was just like a  toy from the time it was born. And he could ride it. It was a pretty little calf.  No unusual pets?  That was the most unusual pet we had.  That was pretty unusual.  Sometimes, like when a litter of pigs was born, there would be maybe one little  runt pig, and we   d take it for a pet, but we didn   t ever have animals in the  house. They were always kept outside.  What about in town pets? What did you have?  Dogs and cats. The boys always had to have a dog. They each one would  liked to have had a dog, but that was too many  laughter    Well you said you were born in a soddy. How long did you live in that?  I don   t know. We moved after that and went down to Tulsa and lived for  several years, and then when we came back, we had a frame house, so I don   t  really know. We went to Tulsa when I was little, and really, I don   t remember  much about going to Tulsa.  And you came back, and magically you had a good house.  We had another house.  Did any of you ever have experiences with sod houses?  I did. My parents, they lived in a sod house for almost three years before I was  born, and I lived in it about three years with them before they got a frame  house built.  Do you remember much about life in the sod house?  Yes, it was two rooms. It had a kitchen and table and all where we ate, and if  anyone came to see us, that   s where they sat was in there, and then all of the  beds were in the other room.  Have you been to see the sod house down by, what is it, Cleo Springs or Aline,  Oklahoma?  No. There used to be one between here and Woodward, but it has fallen down  now. And there was one right out here, a little one, in the museum yard. Is it  still there?  13  Kite  Goetzinger  Cross  Dyer  Kite  Dyer  Kite  Goetzinger  Kite  Goetzinger  Cross  Curfman  Dyer  It looked like a doghouse.  Yeah, it   s a small one, but it   s made like the other used to be, only the others  were larger. I don   t know if they ever made them more than two rooms or not.  I don   t know either.  It   d be hard to keep the top up, the lumber or the sod that they put on top. I  think they had to kind of limit that, because it would get too heavy. I wasn   t  born in a sod house, but my grandparents had one at that time, and my folks  lived down by Perryton, and the first house they built was just two rooms. It  was a cute little house. I   ve got a picture of it. But just two rooms, that was it,  and they weren   t very big. They were happy with it. When I was a baby it  was just like it was a mansion.  How long did you live in that two room house?  I think I was about five years old when we built a bigger house. Everybody  back then seemed like they were pretty well the same. One wasn   t so much  wealthier than the other one, and it seems to me like there were so many more  people, and maybe there   d be just one church. Well, I was born down here in  the Anthony district, and they   d just have a little church. Sometimes people  wouldn   t be able to all get in. There would just be more people than they had  room for. I remember that. And they had a pitcher pump, and I know one  Sunday some kids got out there and ran this old pitcher pump outdoors and got  dirty. And there it was time for church to start, and their mothers were upset   laughter . When I started school to the country school, they had pitcher  pumps. That was it, you know. You just didn't have electricity or anything.  Well what about other early houses you remember as children or houses that  you lived in growing up. Were they tiny things or normal looking?  The one that I lived in, it was four large rooms, and then an upstairs that was  just all one big room, but I had four brothers that always slept up stairs, and  my folks had a bedroom downstairs and I had one downstairs, and then we had  a kitchen and dining area, and one for the living room.  That sounds pretty spacious.  Well, it was larger than some around, but it wasn   t a large house really.  They didn   t have large houses really back then, three or four rooms. If you  had five or six, you   d think it was a mansion.  Yeah, we talked about the sod houses being two rooms. Niles    sod house that  they lived out west of town in was larger than that, wasn   t it? I   m sure it was  four or five rooms.  I think my grandparents    was larger. There   s a picture of it in the history  14  Goetzinger  Curfman  Dyer  Kite  Cross  Goetzinger  Goetzinger  Cross  Kite  Cross  Goetzinger  Cross  Curfman  Dyer  Curfman  Dyer  Goetzinger  book. I believe it was more than that too.  And almost everyone had a cellar, a storm cellar. A lot of people had a bed  down there, but that   s where we   d go if we had a bad storm.  That   s where we stored our home canned food.  You put all the canned food down there too. You canned about everything.  We had a neighbor lady, and laughed about her. She   d have a meal, and when  we asked what went in it, she   s always say,    Well if it   s not on the table, it   s in  the cellar.     Laughter  You canned about everything.  Was that a big job for you growing up, canning?  Oh, everybody canned. That   s the only way you really had to keep stuff, but  you didn   t have refrigerators.  Before they canned very much, like corn, my mother used to dry the corn. She  cooked it on the cob and then cut it off, and she   d spread it out on a sheet and  put it up on the roof  laughter  some place until it dried.  It wasn   t preserves; it was peach butter. She always had a big jar of that down  there. It wasn   t sealed or anything, just when we wanted to we   d just go down  there and fill up the dish  laughing .  They dried apples and peaches the same way.  So drying the food, they did that before they started canning? When did  canning start? I thought it was something everyone always did.  We canned all my life, I don   t know.  We didn   t all of mine.  Then they dried a lot of this stuff, but they canned ever since I can remember.  I can remember mine canning before we ever moved to town though.  They dried this stuff on the roof. I don   t think you could do that now, could  you?  I don   t think it   d be good now.  I don   t think you can put stuff up there and dry like they used to. Maybe  they   d butcher beef and hang it up in the windmill.  Or hang it in the granary or some place. The winters got cold enough that the  meat didn   t spoil. We   d just go out there and cut off what we needed.  15  Dyer  Cross  Kite  Goetzinger  Cross  Kite  Cross  Goetzinger  Cross  Kite  Cross  Kite  Cross  Kite  Goetzinger  Dyer  Kite  Curfman  Yeah, and you can   t do that now.  You   d just wrap up a sheet or something around it, and it kept stuff off of it.  So you think it was colder in the summer?  I think we had more snow back then than we have now.  Oh, I know we did. In the last few years, we haven   t had any  laughing .  So what do you remember about caning? Did you have a favorite canned  product?  Washing all those jars  laughter .  They had to put them in a big water thing and boil them to sterilize them  before you canned. My mother, I can   t remember that she canned much of  anything besides tomatoes and corn. My dad always planted pinto beans, and  we ate green beans, and then when the beans dried, he   d take them up to the  hayloft in the barn, and we   d tromp them out, and then we   d have brown beans  in the wintertime  laughing .  Mama used to make a lot of dill pickles. She made real good ones. We   d have  kids come stay all night with us, and we   d sit in bed and eat those pickles. She  wondered what was happening to them  laughter .  Were dill pickles a treat for you?  I liked dill pickles. I still do  laughing .  You   re not tired of them yet?  No.  What other things were treats that you guys would eat that was something  special that you wouldn   t get normally besides dill pickles?  Chocolate cake at my house, and homemade white bread. We   d come home  from school, and my mother, almost everyday baked bread, and we   d have  warm bread and butter and jelly.  I don   t know, I was very little when I learned to make bread. I was so short,  I   d stand on a stool to make bread. That   s why my husband said he married  me, because I could make good bread  laughing .  Good enough.  I remember one treat we always had. Mom always managed on the Fourth of  July to have strawberry shortcake and homemade ice cream.  16  Goetzinger  Kite  Curfman  Goetzinger  Cross  Goetzinger  Cross  Dyer  Cross  Goetzinger  Dyer  Goetzinger  Dyer  Kite  Dyer  Curfman  Kite  Cross  Oh, we had homemade ice cream every now and then.  Was that considered something very rare?  Yeah, we didn   t have it too often.  One time, my mother, we had to go to Liberal, Kansas to buy our groceries,  and my mom and dad were gone, and we decided we wanted some ice cream,  and back then we had what we called ice boxes that just held a big chunk of  ice. They   d always bring a hundred pound block of ice back, so we decided  we   d make some ice cream, and when I got ready to make it, we didn   t have  anything but separated cream. We didn   t have any milk, so I made it out of  cream  laughing .  It   s good though, but it   s rich.  Oh, you couldn   t eat it. It was like eating frozen butter  laughter .  My dad used to freight groceries from Inglewood, Kansas down to the places  between Gate and Knowles; it   s out in the country. There was a store there  and a post office. I don   t remember it, but I know they talked about it. They  did that with a team and wagon, and they did it for several years.  I was named after a post office. South of Beaver, there was the Beatrice Post  Office.  It was some of Beatrice   s relation that ran that store, Hostetter  Well, there was a Beatrice Post Office out west of where I lived.  Well that   s where I got my name  laughter .  Oh it was?  I was born at Boyd. One time when they were working on the history, and we  all came over to work on it, we talked about where we came from, and this  man was there by me, and he said,    Oh, you were born here? I thought you  came in with the oilfield people     laughter .    No, we didn   t have an oil well.     I never have lived anywhere but here. I   ve just been in Beaver County.  You must enjoy it to stick around.  Oh, I   ve been a lot of places, and I was glad to get back.  It   s a good place to live.  Well what is it about Beaver County that keeps you all here?  We   ve lived here so long we don   t want to go anywhere else  laughter .  17  Goetzinger  Kite  Cross  Goetzinger  Cross  Kite  Dyer  Kite  Smith  Dyer  Kite  Dyer  Kite  Dyer  Curfman  Dyer  My parents moved to the state of Oregon during the dust bowl days because  their farm practically blew away, but I was married at that time, and we had a  grocery store in Beaver. My family grew up here. My husband passed away  about 33 years ago, but I just still want to live here.  What about you Mrs. Cross? What keeps you here, or what has kept you here  for so long?  Well, I guess I just like it here as well as any place else I   ve been. I   ve been  here the biggest part of my life, not always. My husband   s been gone about 17  years. I   ve been doing pretty fair. It   s a pretty good place to live.  We were neighbors for years.  Yeah, we lived close together. It wasn   t even a half a block when you cut  across, was it?  How come you haven   t moved away?  Well, I guess I lived at Gate. I went to high school at Gate, and my husband  went to Knowles. He was out at Knowles School, and we just met and we   ve  just been here ever since  laughter . We raised our family. This is our oldest  daughter.  She turned out okay.  You don   t know  laughter .  We had a son that lives here. We have one son and two daughters. Our son  lives here in Beaver with his family. I don   t know. I just got through filling  out one of those grandma books. Have you seen one of those?  I don   t think so.  That was something. It took me several months to fill that. It   s where my  grandparents came from and my husband   s grandparents. One of my  granddaughters brought this to me. She said,    Grandma, I   m going to leave  this with you, and next summer I   ll pick it up.    And you know, it took me a  long time to get that all filled. It   s got a lot of history. We had a farm. My  husband was a farmer, and the first year he had the wheat out we didn   t raise a  peck. We didn   t have any.  What happened?  Worms. We had lots of failures. We had cattle.  You had some good years though, didn   t you?  Yeah, we had a few good years. They were all good. We didn   t have a whole  18  Kite  Curfman  Kite  Curfman  Dyer  Kite  Dyer  Goetzinger  Cross  Kite  Goetzinger  Dyer  Goetzinger  Curfman  Cross  Curfman  Dyer  lot. We had our family. But you know, Knowles and Gate used to be a long  ways apart, eight or nine miles, and I used to ride the old train. I stayed with  my grandparents a lot over at Gate and went to school. My parents lived in  Knowles, and I   d ride that train from Gate to Knowles.  Mrs. Curfman what hasn   t attracted you away from here?  Well, I don   t know. I guess when you lived in a place so long you have your  roots down pretty far. My husband was from Clear Lake, southeast of here.  He   s been gone 14 years. We had one daughter, and she lives at Lawrence,  Kansas, which is a long way off, but I have my home here, and I have a lot of  good friends, and it   s just home.  Even those dusty old dust storms couldn   t blow you guys away.  We couldn   t get away  laughter .  That was the year I was in high school, and we had to walk; we didn   t have  buses. I know we had to take a washcloth or some kind of a cloth and wet it  and put it over our faces as we walked to school. That would be mud when  we   d get to school.  When would you say those times started? You know everyone throws around  that term the dust bowl era.  That would have been the thirties.  The early thirties.  I brought some pictures.  All right.  I taught school in Beaver during the dust bowl.   Looking at the pictures.  That was bad.  I taught first grade, and when we   d let them go out to play; I had to put dust  masks on them. By the time it was time for them to come back in; we had to  clean the dust off of the desks  laughing .  Oh yes, it was bad.  Well we had to do our tables too, clean them off before we could eat.  You   d wake up of a morning and raise up, and where your head was on the  pillow was white and the rest of it was just dirt.  A lot of folks had dust pneumonia too.  19  Goetzinger  Cross  Dyer  Cross  Goetzinger  Cross  Curfman  Dyer  Goetzinger  Kite  Goetzinger  Kite  Cross  Kite  Cross  Kite  Dyer  When that happened, that just scared everybody to death. That was the worst  dust storm.  That was terrible.  It was unbelievable.  I had some more pictures, but I didn   t know where to look for them. I   ve got  so many pictures.  I have some of those some place, but I don   t know where they are.  Yeah, I had some more, but I don   t know where they   re at. Oh, I   ve just got so  many pictures that I don   t know what I did with them.  My folks were in the country visiting, and I was going from town to home, and  I could see it starting out over the sand hill, rolling in, and I knew my older  brother was at home. When I got to the house, I just made it in before it hit,  and I hollered    Cecil  Cecil,    and he said,    What in the world is wrong with  you,    and I said,    I think the world   s coming to an end      Laughter   Well I think a lot of people thought that.  Well it looked like it. My husband was out on the farm.  Let   s hear your stories one at a time about this big one that came in on April  14, 1935.  It was pretty black.  Mrs. Cross, what do you remember about that day?  My husband had been working on a windmill, and the wind came up, and it  was hard. He had the fan part on the windmill tied down. That wind broke the  rope, but he got down. Then my son, he was a little boy, and he was out about  a mile and a half north of town, and I wanted to go get him, and we went after  him. This was all coming up when we were going after him. It was black by  the time we got to where he was, but I got my son anyway.  You found everything all right?  Well, he was out to my sister   s, but I wanted him. I didn   t want him to be out  there by himself. I wanted him to be with me  laughter , so he was.  Mrs. Dyer, where were you when that big one came in?  Well, I was home. My husband was out; they were working cattle. He was  working with the Barbies. They worked together a lot. They were working  with cattle, and they had to get off, and they tied their horses up to the posts,  20  Cross  Kite  Cross  Curfman  Kite  Curfman  Kite  Curfman  Kite  Curfman  Kite  Curfman  Cross  Curfman  Dyer  Curfman  Kite  because the horses were frantic. Some of them were just scared to death.  Some of them were down praying. Nobody could believe what that was like.  You just can   t describe it.  The pictures look pretty scary.  How it really was is just something you can   t describe.  You couldn   t even see your hand in front of your face. Now that   s the truth.  Where were you when that one rolled in?  Well, I was at home.  In town?  Well, my parents    home. That was when I ran in and hollered at my brother  and woke him up, and by the time he got awake, it really had hit.  So you really thought the world was coming to an end.  Oh yes, I did.  What did you do to prepare?  Well, we thought we   d better save what dirt we could out of the house, so we  got sheets and blankets and hung them on the windows. It didn   t do a bit of  good  laughter . It came in all the cracks they could find. We didn   t have  electricity, so we lit some lamps. Pretty soon, you couldn   t even hardly tell  where the lamp was. You could just barely see a flicker of light, and then they  went out finally, because there was so much dirt in the house. It was really  frightening, I   ll tell you.  Light didn   t really do much good. It was just like a candle. It really wasn   t as  much light as a candle is, because there was just dust coming in the house and  everywhere just like it was outside.  My parents and the three younger boys were out in the country visiting. They  were on their way to Beaver, and they got out here to Ben Allan   s, six miles  east of town, isn   t it?  Something like that.  They couldn   t see to drive, so they pulled in where they could see the drive  way and parked behind their building, I don   t know if it was a garage or what,  and just sat there in the car all that time waiting.  Did you know friends or family that were trapped outside during that storm?  21  Goetzinger  Kite  Goetzinger  Dyer  Cross  Curfman  Dyer  Goetzinger  Kite  Goetzinger  Curfman  Kite  Goetzinger  Curfman  Kite  Goetzinger  Kite  My husband was outside. He was out at the farm, and they   d been out taking  care of cattle and all. He was, I think, either near or in the grove of trees, but  he didn   t see all this dust rolling in until it hit, and he knew that he still had a  hold of the horse   s reins, but he couldn   t see his horse  laughing . I was here  in town, and I was in my kitchen. It was on the south side of the house. I  thought it was getting kind of dark, so I went out on the front porch, and all  down along the river was this big old dust, just rolling. It scared me to death.  Birds were flying ahead of it, because they were trying to get away from it.  Were animals running in front of it or just birds?  Well I didn   t see anything but birds. I don   t know what the animals did.  Anyway, I went in the house and closed the door. I went to one of my south  windows, because I knew it was going to roll right over the house, and I  thought the house would probably roll too, but it didn   t  laughter . But I  couldn   t see anything. I don   t know how long that intense darkness lasted, but  it was an hour or two, I think. Wasn   t it?  I don   t either.  It seemed like a long time, but it wasn   t as long as it seemed really.  No it wasn   t. Thirty minutes to an hour, I think.  We had the dust in for weeks and months after that. I know I was in high  school. Desks would be all covered.  We had a lot of dust storms, but that was the worst one we ever had.  Would you say that was the beginning of the dust storms or was that in the  middle?  Oh, I   d say the middle.  The middle or there about.  Do you remember the first time you saw one?  No, I don   t know. There were so many of them.  They kind of crept up on you.  Yeah, and then hit you with that big one.  Clean the dirt out of the house one day, and the next day it   d come back in.  Well, when times changed a little bit, when the dust storms started coming in  and the winds and the crops went down, do you remember a time in your life  when you looked and you said, things aren   t as good as they used to be?  22  Cross  Curfman  Cross  Dyer  Cross  Goetzinger  Cross  Goetzinger  Kite  Cross  Dyer  Cross  Dyer  Kite  Dyer  Cross  Dyer  Goetzinger  Cross  Well, you know the government bought up all these cattle the people had too  and killed them.  And killed them.  We didn   t have any cattle; they killed them. They paid us so much. I don   t  remember. It wasn   t very much.  Seven dollars a head.  But it wasn   t very much.  It wasn   t very much.  And we had some good cattle, but killed them.  My husband and his brother used to go out, about the only thing that would  grow was sandburs or Russian Thistles, and they used to, I don   t know how  they got the thistles, but they used to make stacks of thistles to feed their cattle.  You mentioned the government buying out the cattle and killing them; do you  remember how you felt? Were you happy to get the money?  No, we cried.  No, we didn   t want to lose our cattle, but we didn   t have a choice.  There wasn   t anything we could do. It was just give them or take them. You  didn   t have any say.  That was right after we were married, and we were just trying to get started,  and we lost what we had.  How was it just getting married and just getting started right then?  It was rough  My husband worked for a dollar a day, and it was hard work,  working on a farm, on a ranch, the Davidson Ranch down south of Knowles,  and he got a dollar a day. We had a few cows and chickens and pigs, and we  had a garden, and that   s how you lived. You really did, or we did. Of course,  we didn   t have a business. We just lived on the farm. That   s all we had.  We did too, because we were married in    30.  We were married in    36.  I was married in    32.  It was a tough old world.  23  Dyer  Kite  Curfman  Goetzinger  Dyer  Kite  Dyer  Kite  Dyer  Curfman  Kite  Dyer  Kite  Dyer  Cross  Dyer  Goetzinger  Cross  Kite  There wasn   t any money, so many of the men just went away to work. They   d  go out west and work in the hay or spuds or anything.  Did you lose a lot of friends or family as times got worse?  Moved away.  People moved away.  Some of them died of what they called dust pneumonia.  Did you have friends die of it?  My brother was a little boy, and he made it through, but we had a hard time  saving him.  What were the symptoms? What was he like?  Well it was kind of like he got pneumonia. It was the lungs. It bothered the  lungs. I remember Dr. McGrew was here, and he left him, I don   t know  whether I should tell this or not.  Sure.  Well yeah, that   s what we   re here for.  He opened a place in his back. Of course, they didn   t have things to do with  then like they do now. He just made a slit in his back, and put a rubber glove,  like they use at the hospital, and put in there. People just had to use things. It  was just so different. He saved his life. He stuck that in there for drainage. I  know of a lady, Mrs. Boyer, lived across from us, and she didn   t make it. She  was an elderly. There were quite a few of them that didn   t make it through it.  Do you remember wishing that you could go away somewhere to get out of  here?  A lot of people did.  I never wished I was some place else, because I didn   t know where I was  going to go.  We probably didn   t have the money to go  laughter .  Didn   t have the money to go.  You had to stay, but then the government built these government damns. I  don   t know whether you know anything about them or not.  Wasn   t Optima Dam one of them?  24  Cross  Curfman  Cross  Kite  Cross  Kite  Cross  Kite  Cross  Dyer  Cross  Goetzinger  Kite  Curfman  Goetzinger  Dyer  Curfman  Dyer  Well, they built farm damns. They paid them so much, you know.  To be on their places.  You couldn   t use a tractor or anything to pull us up. They had what they  called a Fresno. I don   t suppose you know what it was.  Yeah.  They used horses, and they   d go in there and pull that and make those big  holes, big ponds. Now there was one still out there on Barbie   s, but I don   t  know whether it   s still there or not. They made a fishpond out of that. It   s  deep. They didn   t let everybody in to fish, but they stocked it with fish, and it  did have some nice fish. We were out there fishing, but I don   t know whether  it   s still there or not. It was out on John Little   s place northwest of the house.  That was government programs that did that?  Yeah.  Would you say that your families relied heavily on the government programs  during that time?  Well, we did on that one, because that   s all we had.  But they had to work for it. They didn   t hand it to you.  Oh yeah, they worked. Everything was done by hand. Of course, the horses  pulled the Fresno, but you had to work the Fresno handle to get the dirt in to  dig the holes. It was a lot of work, but it was work or have nothing.  I taught school in Beaver at that time, and I was supposed to get  75 a month,  but Beaver County was broke, and they couldn   t cash our warrants. There  were two or three people around over town that would discount our warrants.  What does that mean?  Take a percent of it.  Take a percentage of them. I didn   t ever do that, because my husband and his  brother had a grocery store, and my husband could feed me and support me, so  I just kept my warrants. I finally got the money on most of them.  Do you know who my first teacher was?  No.  Ada Kerns.  25  Curfman  Cross  Goetzinger  Kite  Goetzinger  Dyer  Goetzinger  Kite  Curfman  Cross  Kite  Goetzinger  Cross  Curfman  Goetzinger  Curfman  Is that right?  I went to school at Ada Kerns. She stayed at our place down there. It was like  a trailer. It was a cook shack. We had it down there in the trees. We   d go  down there and visit her.  But they wouldn   t issue warrants on the Beaver school district anymore, and  that we would have to go to this government program that was called the  WPA, a workman   s compensation deal. My husband was real proud, well I  don   t know if you   d say proud, but he didn   t want charity if he could prevent  it, and he said,    If you have to go on WPA to teach school, for heavens sakes,  quit,    so I did and started working in the grocery store  laughing , but we   d get  grocery orders. People would go to the county commissioners and get five-dollar  grocery orders, because they didn   t have any money, and they could buy  a huge box of groceries for  5.  What about other WPA programs? Do you remember feeling happy or mad  about that? Were you a pro-Roosevelt family or an anti-Roosevelt family?  Well they had food trucks that came in, and I know people in the country got  some food. I don   t remember just what it was.  We never did get them. My husband, Lowell, was so proud he wouldn   t. We  never did get any.  But some people did.  Did you Mrs. Curfman?  I don   t think we ever had any either.  Well, you had to come to Beaver to get it, and we lived way off out in the  country, way out there southeast of Knowles. We didn   t get any.  You didn   t get any food?  Well, I think you had to come into Beaver to get it.  Yeah, and it cost you more to come to Beaver than what you   d get.  I graduated from Beaver high school in    31, and was lucky enough to get a job  then at the courthouse, in the county Beaver County school superintendent   s  office. I forgot what you said you got, about  75or something. I got  62.50 a  month.  I finally got a raise to  80  laughter .  I don   t know. I guess I got raises eventually, I don   t know. I worked there  long enough that I should have.  26  Goetzinger  Dyer  Cross  Dyer  Kite  Goetzinger  Kite  Curfman  Goetzinger  Curfman  Goetzinger  Curfman  Kite  Cross  Curfman  Kite  Curfman  For a long time, I didn   t get any money out of them.  I remember my grandmother would come over here; she lived in Gate, and she  came over here and sewed, and they made clothes for people. My  grandmother used to do that. Of course, I was just a kid. I was in high school,  but she   d come over here and sew, and they   d make clothes for the needy.  I think they made mattresses too, didn   t they? Some government out there  made mattresses. You had to come to Beaver to make them, but you made  mattresses.  I didn   t know about that, but I know my grandmother made clothes. They put  her to make the buttonholes, because she could. She was a seamstress, did  handwork. I remember that. I just thought about that a while ago. Boy, that  was a long time ago.  Well did you have any other relief efforts in the community to help out needy  people? If you knew a family was starving or didn   t have enough clothes or  something, would people help out?  Well I don    think anyone in Beaver County starved, but they didn   t have a  selection of food. They just had what was     How did your food change when things got tight? Do you remember not  getting ice cream so much?  Cakes and pies.  You didn   t get any luxuries.  No, we sure didn   t.  No, and sometimes you didn   t have much meat. I know sometimes we would  brown flour to season beans with. Now it was pretty good. I mean it did at  that time.  It makes gravy better sometimes.  Does it? Maybe I   ll give it a shot.  Yeah, if the flour is brown, you make a lot better gravy, instead of white  gravy. I don   t like white gravy.  Oh, I like white gravy.  Do you remember sitting down at a table to eat and thinking, if I eat this one  more time.  I don   t remember that.  27  Goetzinger  Dyer  Goetzinger  Dyer  Curfman  Dyer  Kite  Dyer  Goetzinger  Cross  Curfman  Dyer  Cross  Dyer  Kite  Dyer  Kite  Dyer  Kite  I don   t either, because I was always glad to get what we had.  You never said,    I don   t like that,    or    I don   t want it,    like kids do now a  days. They   re so picky.  We didn   t have a choice. You either ate that, or it was nothing.  I don   t think anyone complained.  We had scrambled eggs and fried potatoes and brown beans, things like that,  and glad to get it.  And they   re still good.  It seems like people on the farm had enough food, but often times, everything  else was scarce, shoes maybe or clothes.  You probably had one good pair of slippers to wear to church, and you didn   t  wear them through the week either.  You wore the same dress every Sunday  laughter . You didn   t have a choice.  You didn   t have very much variety, but we got by, and came out of it all right.  I remember the homemade soap.  She mentioned, like I used to make a lot of homemade soap.  Well I did too.  Della Poorbaugh, of course was my neighbor, and her and I, we did  everything. We made soap, we made cheese, we made just like Velveeta  cheese.  We   re speaking with Della Poorbaugh tomorrow. We   re going to talk with her  tomorrow. She   s on our list.  Are you going out to her house?  She   s going to meet us in Gate.  She was the first baby born in Knowles, and that   s where we came from. Most  of our life, we lived in Knowles, and then seven or eight years ago we moved  our house over here.  Well, we talked a little bit about people leaving their homes and driving off to  hopefully a better place during the hard times. What about people that stayed  that went from town to town looking for jobs or food or handouts or things?  Do you remember experiences with hobos or tramps or things like that?  28  Goetzinger  Curfman  Goetzinger  Smith  Dyer  Kite  Smith  Dyer  Smith  Dyer  Kite  Smith  Kite  Smith  Dyer  Goetzinger  Kite  We used to have hobos that would come by and want you feed them a meal.  In the country more, you had that.  Well it was in town too.  We lived by the train tracks.  She can tell you good stuff. She   s a little kid  laughter .  Let   s hear some hobo stories.  The folks lived by the train tracks.  Out in the country.  The hobos would come and knock on the door and want something to eat or  want to do something so they could get some things to eat.  One time, there was a black man that came to our door, and he had several ears  of corn, and he wanted me to cook them. Well, he had been down to Kermit  and Lilla Dixon   s and stole the corn  laughter . Well, he didn   t steal it; he just  took it. He wanted me to cook the corn for him, but I didn   t. I was a little bit  leery out in the country. We didn   t have telephones or anything. I just didn   t  want to mess with him. I told him I was sorry, but he   d just have to eat it like  that  laughter .  Were you scared? You must have been fairly small when they were coming by.  Yeah, I was about four or five years old, but I can remember. No, I wasn   t  afraid of them. There was a salesman at one time that came out to see daddy,  and I got in the car and went with him. A kid nowadays probably would have  never showed up again, and I was probably very fortunate I did. Mama didn   t  know where I went.  So you were just driving with the salesman.  I just got in with him to take him to where daddy was, yes. I was very  fortunate that he was a good man.  Well, we didn   t have so many problems back then. Like Leah my  granddaughter the other day asked me something, and I said,    Honey, this is  like a different world.    It really is.  It   s entirely different.  Well, we   ve heard some stories about, not only hobos and tramps, but gypsies  as well traveling in the area. Were they out here in Beaver County?  29  Goetzinger  Dyer  Kite  Goetzinger  Dyer  Cross  Dyer  Curfman  Kite  Dyer  Goetzinger  Cross  Dyer  Goetzinger  Kite  Dyer  Goetzinger  Dyer  Curfman  When I was teaching school out at Turpin, Oklahoma, which is a little town  not very far from here, I used to always stop at the grocery store before I  would go to my apartment, and two or three times, gypsies would stop there,  and the lady and the man that owned the store, they   d say,    Velma, get behind  the counter and help watch those people.    You had to watch them, or they   d  steal you blind.  Well they used to come into town, I remember, and we   d all be excited, you  know,    The gypsies are coming     It   d be kind of like a parade bunch, or that   s  what I think I remember. I know they would always take things.  Would they be in cars or wagons?  They   d steal clothes and food and things like that out of stores.  Some of them were kind of a wagon.  A covered wagon, or something.  What about the medicine man that used to come to town? He   d sell a bottle of  medicine to cure all.  It   d help anything, wouldn   t it  laughter ?  Do you remember a medicine man coming to town selling his goods?  Oh yes, I remember that. All the little kids would say,    Oh, the medicine man  is coming,    or what did they call him?  Well, one of them sold Watkins products and one Raleigh products. I  remember that.  They used to come to our house all the time, it seemed to me like.  They   d come through town, and boy we   d all gather down there and go.  You   d buy vanilla and a lot of stuff like that from them.  Well I think Watkins is a little more reputable than what she   s talking about.  You   re talking about some kind of snake oil thing.  Yeah, this is a cure all.  We didn   t have any of those in Beaver.  We did over at Gate. We sure did.  I think we were lucky in Beaver, not being on the highway, because we didn   t  have all of that.  30  Cross  Curfman  Cross  Dyer  Curfman  Dyer  Kite  Curfman  Kite  Cross  Goetzinger  Cross  Dyer  Kite  Curfman  Dyer  Goetzinger  Dyer  Goetzinger  Kite  Dyer  Curfman  We weren   t on a highway; we were on a country road.  Well, they went from town to town.  From town to town, they don   t leave the road much.  Where I remember that mostly was in Gate.  Had a lot of traffic over there  laughing .  Yeah, there was a lot of traffic through there.  Did you ever know anybody that went out tramping, to be a hobo, a family  member or relative?  No.  Did most of your families take them in and give them food or make them do a  chore?  The Raleigh man used to stay all night a lot of times at our house. He drove a  horse and buggy. It seems like he always made it there  laughing .  They were just local people from some community around.  Yeah, they weren   t just off somewhere.  They were local people.  You knew them or knew of them.  Yeah, more or less.  These gypsies and all, I don   t know where they came from.  I don   t know where they came from, but they just lived in those wagons.  I remember they always wore a lot of jewelry and junk, just junk stuff.  Just things that they could pick up.  Well, I was thinking about the dust and the work that would cause for you in  the house and the cleaning and the laundry and the vacuuming and the  dusting, and all without electricity.  We didn   t have electricity.  Vacuums? We didn   t know what vacuums were then  laughter .  31  Kite  Curfman  Goetzinger  Kite  Cross  Kite  Cross  Goetzinger  Kite  Goetzinger  Cross  Goetzinger  Cross  Dyer  Your vacuum was a stick with a bunch of broomcorn on the end or it?  Yeah, straw down there  laughing .  Yeah, straw brooms. We had electricity, but we didn   t have a lot of other  stuff.  What   s your first memory of electricity? When I   ve grown up, I   ve always had  it. I can   t imagine plugging in a light bulb for the first time.  Well, our first electricity was what you called a wind charger. Did you ever  see one of those?  The windmill thing that charges the batteries?  Yeah, it had fans on it that went around and around that charged the batteries,  and this ran off of the batteries. We had a radio, and we had our house like  that, but you were pretty saving with it, because it wouldn   t take long to run  those batteries down. They were just car batteries.  My dad had a friend in Liberal, Kansas that sold little electrical plants for  farms. They were called Delco Plants in my day.  That   s probably what she is talking about.  No, she   s talking about a wind charger.  It   s on a big pole like a windmill.  This was a little engine type thing, and we had one-drop light in each room,  but that was the only electricity that we had in the house, but that was better  than coal oil lamps.  Yeah, it was a lot better.  We had a Delco, and I remember Lowell went to town, and he bought me an  iron that was electric, and when we left the farm, John Little came over and  bought that iron. You just didn   t have electricity. He got that at some filling  station out north of Laverne. It went out of business, and here they were  selling a Delco, and he went over and got it, so we had things pretty good. We  were just poor old kids, but he was a good manager. So we had this Delco,  and we had lights, and oh my land, we were happy. I remember the first time  we even had an icebox. Della Poorbaugh, you   ll see her tomorrow, she was  my friend, and we lived out there. The boys went to Dodge, her husband and  my husband, and they came back from Dodge and they brought these iceboxes,  pretty nice ones. They looked sort of like they do now, but of course you put  the ice in. My gosh, we made Jell-O  laughter . We were the happiest people  in the world just to make Jell-O  It was just terrible  laughing .  32  Curfman  Goetzinger  Dyer  Goetzinger  Cross  Goetzinger  Curfman  Goetzinger  Cross  Goetzinger  Kite  Goetzinger  Curfman  Kite  Goetzinger  Cross  Kite  Our first icebox was, I think, three shelves, and then you had ice in the top, but  it wasn   t wooden or anything. We had a big aluminum pan at the bottom and  one at the top, and it had cloth all the way around it. We put water in the top,  and it went down, and the air kept things cool in there. It didn   t make them  cold; it kept them cool  laughing  and it drained out in the bottom.  In here some place, I haven   t been in here for two or three years, but there   s a  plate glass case that we donated to the museum that was the meat case that we  used in our grocery store, and in the center is a square place where they kept a  block of ice, and then the meat was around it, and there was a pan underneath  that kept the drippings of the ice.  Well we had a well house where our windmill was, and they had this big  cement trough where the water ran through, and we put our cream and all of  our butter and all of our stuff in there.  That was at your home. This was in our grocery store  laughing .  Well, out by farms, they didn   t have phones either. No phone lines, no  nothing.  I can   t remember us not having a phone.  Oh, you can   t?  No.  We didn   t have a phone for years and years, because they   d never run a phone  line all the way out that way.  That   s the way we got the country news, was eavesdropping over the  telephone  laughter . We   d hear somebody   s ring  laughing .  Did you ever get caught?  No, they couldn   t tell. Like for my parents, it was two long rings. A  neighbors    parents    was a long ring, two shorts, and a long. We just knew  everybody   s ring, because everybody   s telephone would ring when you   d call  someone, so people would go listen  laughter .  Kind of a gossip line, wasn   t it?  Did you have to pick it up really quiet so they wouldn   t hear you listening in?  Oh, once in a while.  They probably all knew that you were listening though.  Probably everybody knew everybody was listening.  33  Goetzinger  Dyer  Curfman  Dyer  Goetzinger  Kite  Goetzinger  Kite  Goetzinger  Curfman  Cross  Curfman  Cross  Goetzinger  Curfman  Goetzinger  Curfman  You could tell when anyone took a receiver down to listen.  This one little old lady that lived on our line, well we didn   t have one, and  Lowell and Alan Poorbaugh, they built this line themselves, and this little old  switchboard they had in Knowles was just a little old thing, but they built that  up, and they were getting it all set up so we   d have ours, a long and two shorts,  and Alan was four shorts, and so on. They got it all fixed, and they were just  kind of checking it out to see if it was going to work, because they did it by  themselves, and yes, Mrs. Hopechap, a little lady that lived out there by  herself, and she was eavesdropping when the boys were doing this, and Alan  said,    Well my ring will be four shorts,    and she started laughing and she said,     Ah he, he, he, a flock of shorts      Laughter  We still laugh about that, you  know. That was really funny that you could even talk to your neighbor.  Sure.  Oh my, you could just write books, couldn   t you, about all of it.  The first radio that I ever heard, I was in high school then, and one of our  neighbors bought one, and it had two sets of earphones. Everybody couldn   t  listen; just two at a time could listen to the radio. They had two kids, a boy  and a girl in high school too, and they used to invite high school kids down to  listen to the radio, but just two of us could listen at a time  laughing .  What was your favorite thing to listen to or your favorite shows?  Oh, I don   t remember. That   s been too long ago.  Well, were movies an option for any of you?  No.  I don   t know when Beaver got their first movie.  South, way south somewhere. We used to get on them earphones, and I don   t  remember where it was.  Do you know when Beaver first had their movie house theatre?  My husband   s dad had one.  No.  I don   t remember either.  From the time I came to Beaver, they always had one.  We used to go to the show, I remember, on Saturday afternoon for a nickel or a  dime.  34  Goetzinger  Dyer  Goetzinger  Kite  Dyer  Goetzinger  Dyer  Kite  Dyer  Curfman  Dyer  Goetzinger  Dyer  Cross  Curfman  Goetzinger  Leonard and I used to always go to the movie on Friday night, because we  could go for a dime  laughter .  Well I tell you, a dime was hard to get back then.  Yes it was. Every dime counted.  Well, as you think back into those times, when life was a little different or a  different world, as you were saying, is there one thing that sticks in your mind  as being representative of that time or an image of those times that keeps  coming back to you or a story or an even that stands out in your mind from  those times?  I think the thing that I think about were our neighbors. Everybody was so  neighborly and helped. You don   t see that like it was back then. You get  together, and you bring your kids and I   ll bring mine, or we   ll go to the grove,  and we   ll have a picnic, or we   ll have a dinner.  Or they   d go help with the farming.  Yeah, they   d help. Of course, it   s just different now. Like our kids, they all  move away and get a job. They   re just scattered out. The family part, it seems  like to me, is it   s not really anybody   s fault; it just went away.  So for you, thinking back to that, the thing that   s highlighted or the thing that  you think of is the friendship and the family unit. That   s what stands out in  your mind during those times.  I don   t know. It was togetherness. Our family was     Close knit, weren   t you?  Yes, there was just that togetherness. Like I said a while ago, they had to  leave to get a job. It   s just not like it used to be. So many of them worked at  home. They   d work at anything. Or if the men had to go get a job, they would  always come back to home. They didn   t move away. I don   t know, maybe  you think that too. But now, the whole family goes.  A thing that I think has changed a lot is the morality standards.  Oh my yes   It   s terrible. But people don   t visit like they used to. People used to go and  visit people and stay all day and have picnics, but you don't do that anymore  like you used to.  They all stay home and watch T.V.  And they didn   t mention the word sex and all that or women being pregnant  35  Cross  Kite  Goetzinger  Cross  Kite  Cross  Dyer  Cross  Curfman  Goetzinger  Kite  Curfman  and all that stuff. We never heard that.  It was just visit and have a good time.  Those were hard times back then, but would you want to go back?  No.  And we used to have clubs, and my land, we had a lot of people in clubs. We  were in the same club, and we enjoyed it. We had a lot of fun.  What clubs were you two in?  The sewing club.  We had a sewing club, and we quilted. At that time, we could put a quilt out  in a day.  Yeah, we   ve done a lot of work. We enjoyed it though, because we enjoyed  each other.  When are you going to start coming to the center and helping us quilt?  Why don   t you come down to the Senior Citizens Center and quilt?  Well, what would you say is something that has carried with you from that  time that you   ve either learned or that has changed your life for the better or  worse because of going through that experience?  Well I don   t know that it changed my life very much, but when we moved to  town, we only lived a quarter of a mile from my grandparents, and I was kind  of partial to them or they were partial to me. I don   t know how to put it.  Anyway, granddad would come to Beaver on Saturday and buy groceries in  the wagon. If I could, I   d get him to come out on Friday so I could go home  with him that evening and stay for the weekend.  But this one time that I can remember, I never will forget. It was cold, and the  wind was blowing, and it looked like it was going to start snowing, and I said,     Is granddad going to come by and let me ride home with him today?    and  mom said,    I don   t know. It looks like it   s going to storm.    And here in a  little bit, he came. Mom didn   t say I couldn   t go. She didn   t say I could  either, I guess, but granddad said,    Are you letting her go home with me?    and  she said,    Well, I guess so. You   re older than she is. You can take care of  her.    Anyway, before we got home, it was about ten or twelve miles in the  country, it started snowing, and oh it was cold, and he had black quilts that he  had in the wagon to put over him, so he bundled me up good, and he got out  and walked so he could stay warm. By the time we got to their house, it was  snowing pretty good and grandma met us at the door, and she said,    George  Coberle, what did you bring that girl out in this storm for?     laughter . And  36  Kite  Dyer  Kite  Dyer  Kite  Dyer  Goetzinger  Kite  Cross  Goetzinger  Curfman  Goetzinger  Kite  Goetzinger  Kite  she grabbed me and took me in, and she had the oven, the cook stove in the  kitchen on and opened the door and sat me there and propped my feet and said,     You stay there until I tell you that you can get down     laughing . She really  raked granddad over the coals for bringing me out in that cold. It didn   t hurt  me a bit. I didn   t take a cold or anything, but grandma just thought he was  terrible to bring me out in that, but it meant a lot to me anyway to think he  thought that much of me to take me.  Well are there any last memories or events of that time that you   d like to share  with us? Is there anything that you   ve brought with you from that period? We  had an interesting story from a person that I was speaking with, but this  person could remember the very first time they ever tasted soda pop.  Oh, I can tell that  laughing .  And what a treat it was.  My parents and us kids were south of Beaver down here. There was a church  on the road that goes south there. Well, they were having a camp meeting in  the trees on down a little way from that, and we weren   t very big kids, and  somebody had brought soda pop that day. None of us had ever had any. They  had a little ice in this tub, and treated us all. I   ll never forget that. I talked  about that the other day, about the first soda pop I ever had.  Was it Pepsi or Coke?  No, no, it was a fruit, cherry or something like that. I don   t know. I can   t tell  you for sure.  They didn   t have Pepsis and Cokes  laughter    Who was it, Dr. Pepper?  It was just all fruit.  There was orange.  And cherry.  I know they had a cream soda that my mother was real fond of.  Do you remember the first time you ever tasted pop?  I don   t remember the exact incident. We lived 16 miles from Liberal, Kansas,  and about twice a year they   d have a big circus up there. They   d always take  us to the circus, and then we could have soda pop. We always looked forward  to that.  Do you have a soda pop story for us?  37  Cross  Kite  Cross  Dyer  Cross  Dyer  Cross  Dyer  Cross  Goetzinger  Dyer  Goetzinger  Cross  Dyer  Cross  Dyer  Goetzinger  Cross  Dyer  Cross  Well, I don   t know just what it was, but anyway, it was over there at Knowles,  the first soda pop I had. They used to have horse races, and it was kind of fair  like, out north of town. I think it   s a wheat field now. They had grandstands  and everything out there. That   s the first pop I ever remember having.  I can   t remember mine.  I think it was a strawberry or something like that.  I have a picture of Knowles, well one of the pictures of them, Main Street, and  they said that at that time it was the largest town in Beaver County.  You don   t have any pictures of out there when they used to have them out  north of town?  I remember when they had the horse races. They had a band.  Yeah, and they had a big grandstand, but it was out in there in that wheat field,  somewhere north of Charlie Smotherman   s, but I don't know where it was at.  Out there toward Parkers, yeah. Just think, it   s all gone.  Yeah, it   s a wheat field now.  Well I didn   t even know there was a Knowles or a Gate until I was in high  school and I played basketball and we   d to go Knowles to play  laughing .  Well that was a long ways off.  Yes it was.  Knowles used to be a pretty good-sized town, I mean for a small town. It had  drug stores.  I guess I have pictures with all the old cars. It   s Main Street, and all of the  buildings on both sides.  It had two hardwares.  Yeah, and a bank.  Well Beaver used to be larger than it is now too.  Yeah, and they had doctors over there and everything. They had a school,  A doctor and a millinery.  And they had a meat market. They had a lot of stuff, about everything you  could think of. Two barber shops.  38  Kite  Dyer  Kite  Goetzinger  Cross  Kite  Well, I think we   re about done with them. I think you ladies have lived  through a pretty spectacular time.  Yeah, when you get like this, that   s when I set around and think about it. I  don   t know whether anybody else does or not.  It   s really important that you   re sharing this.  Well if you can make a story out of all this, I would like to hear it  laughter .  Yeah, I   d like to read it.  I think it   d be a best seller  Well I appreciate your time.  -------  -------  
