 Kite  Usually we just start kind of asking biographical question like where were you  born and when and if you weren   t born here, then how did you get up here?  Well I was born in the hospital in Shattuck, Oklahoma. My mother had been in  labor 72 hours and they took a doodlebug from Spearman, that   s a little train.  The doctor   that   s the only hospital close   met us with his little, I called it a  bread wagon, and he took her to the hospital big ol    frame building and did a  C-section and then they came back the same way on this little ol    train, and the  train ran to Perryton, Morse, Booker, through there.  Well, she came to this country in 1901. She was seven when they got there and  then they moved up here. They had a store in Goodwell in 1910, a general  mercantile store. Then he was the deputy sheriff on one side of Texhoma and  the Marshal on the other at the same time. The depot came through an angle in  Texhoma and if they knew they were wanted in one state they would all come  down together and visit there and kind of toe that line but wouldn   t cross it if  they were wanted in the other state for something. He would arrest somebody  and they had so many trains to take them to Guymon put them in jail and come  back.  What a crazy existence  What year where you born?     26.  What   s your story?  I was born 1914, south and a little east of Hooker between seven and eight  miles. We lived in the section across from where my grandparents lived,  which were my dad   s parents, and I was born at their house. They even  papered their living room for my appearance (Laughs). Mother said that it got  so hot that you couldn   t even open the door for it would peel the paper, dry out  the wallpaper too much.  That was a nice thing that they did for you, for your arrival.  Yeah, it had to be because people might come to look  (Laughs)  So you were born just     5  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  I was born just south of Hooker between seven and eight miles. In fact it   s all  south except about a mile. On that corner is where my grandparents lived in  that section over there.  We just come from Hooker; we were up there doing another session.  That   s where a good part of my years were spent. Then in about 1919 we  moved to a farm farther south. We lived about 15 miles south and east of  Hooker actually if you know where Optima Dam is.  Yeah.  Oh it   s about, the second or third section to the north. There were only about  two houses north, within any distance of Optima Dam. There are not very  many houses there but we   re the one that   s where you came around the corner  that cut off everywhere closed up and has had dead corners going two ways  but goes up to a little rise. That place is where I grew up until I came to  Goodwell down here which was about August of 1936.  So you   ve just lived over this little triangle.  All of that time I just lived down here. Only except for about seven months out  of one year that I lived somewhere else. Other than that, I   ve lived all my years  right in Texas County, in the same area almost.  You moved from Shattuck to Texhoma is that right?  No. I was born in Shattuck. I didn   t intend to be; I intended to be born in  Spearman but     Things will be how they are. Where did your family go from there?  Spearman.  You traveled from Spearman to Texhoma or   ?  Yeah. When my mother died in 1933, I was just barely seven. My father was  NRA administrator in Spearman and you know that came to a halt about the  end of 1934 or early 1935. The Supreme Court declared it illegal.  Yeah.  So then he bought, he had managed the store in Spearman for Tiff Thomason  and Tiff had taken bankruptcy. So before Daddy was NRA administrator he  worked for Mr. Brilhart at the ranch as a cook. My mother had a beauty shop  and about 40 other things she did. Everybody had a big crop in 1931   a wheat  crop   when the market broke.  Yeah.  6  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  And so the dust storms didn   t start till the next year.  Do you remember 1931 as being the year when things started going down hill?  Oh, yes absolutely, because the people were buying tractors and starting to do  things in a big way. Tractors, you think of the price now as not being very  much but it was. They where operating on borrowed money so this was a real  good crop and a fairly good crop the year before. Texhoma and Spearman  both in 1926 was considered a boom year. That   s when Tiff Thomason had a  store in Boise City and other places. So after Father was NRA Administrator  then he bought, well assumed the indebtedness on the store in Texhoma. Tiff  had put it in his wife   s name and it wasn   t taken in the bankruptcy procedures,  so in 1935 Daddy fully owned the store. So summer vacations and holidays, I  was in Texhoma and the school year I was in Spearman. I was back and forth  and my cousin C.B. Dodson, Jr. was born two miles south of Texhoma and the  house that he was born in was in Texas. That was where he was first  registered and they resurveyed; now it is in Oklahoma.  (Laughs) Things get messy on that line.  Before he was born, this house was the old Hook place, they called it. It was  two miles from town. A lot of time in the summer Joe D and I, when it wasn   t  that busy in the store, we would go out there. They had drifts of sand where  they had blown up and we dug one of them out. It was a hog house; we just  thought it was dirt. It was this nice little cool   been a hog house and of course  Uncle Red Dodson leased the place; he didn   t know they were there. So we  dug, each one of us had one.  You each had your own hog house.  Yes. Yes. It didn   t smell bad I guess because they hadn   t had anything in it for  years and it was so dry that it couldn   t.  Yeah. I bet it was so cool and nice in there.  I was helping Aunt Buela Dodson one day, they had a pantry. It had been a  real nice farmhouse at one time.  They   re just left vacant at this point, right?  Well, it wasn   t that, it had been vacant before they had moved back out there  cause he had built a lovely home a new home in Texhoma; he had built in  1929, 1931 when the market broke. He hung on for a year and then they lost it.  So he was at the Demmit Ranch for a while then he was at the Hook place.  Living there he was farming that land basically trying to keep it from blowing,  and the pantry ceiling fell in from dirt. Then you had men coming for dinner  and Buela had the biscuits in the oven. They had a wood or a cow chip stove.  They evidently built the house around it because it wouldn   t go through any  door (Laughter). It was huge and so we aired out the house and got a scoop  7  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  shovel and got the dirt out of the eating area, where they could eat, and then  we took a whiskbroom, got it off the top of the stove. The beans where  cooking in the Dutch oven, big cast-iron thing. There wasn   t any sand in that.  We opened the stove and the biscuits were all right.  You had your food.  But it took Buela quite awhile to get that.  Get it cleaned up.  Get the dirt out of the pantry and the house. In the store we had great long  tables for the merchandise to be displayed on and we had cloth to cover it all at  night. If it blew during the day we didn   t even take them off; you knew where  your merchandise was and they would lift it up to take the pants and all or  whatever they were selling.  But I think the thing that sticks in my mind is the dust pneumonia that people  would die from and were sick with it and the number of kids that died. My  mother was a nurse and if the doctor was out on call they   d call her to deliver a  baby or whatever and stay with the sick and I know that there were several  children who died of diphtheria and at one time we had five families living in  our house. Spearman is not in line with anything. I could never figure out they  got stranded in Spearman going somewhere (Laughs). But we had five  bedrooms in the house and one bathroom. There was water up stairs we would  draw the water there wash our face and all. Mother and Lester Howell had  built a garage, huge, and one side of it was to be used for your washing and  soap making and she did some things with the lathe. She also did some pottery  with a lathe. We had clothes lines wires stretched over it like this. They had  gas in it two burner gas stove I guess to heat water for the washing. You had  your chicken battery the brooder or what you hatched out chickens. So people  would get stranded and we had another little old building out there that kind of  had a round top and part of it was a chicken house. She would start beans  cooking and had a little round kerosene heaters and would take them out there.  I know a family of four that was living that had one bed out there that had wire  springs.  Why did you end up with five families at your house?  Well they all weren   t in the house. One was in that one little building and  three of them where in this what had been built for the garage. They had closed  it off with sheets so they would a place to sleep. I guess they got stranded  there.  Your parents where just nice enough to take them in.  Oh yeah. I had a letter I tried to find it before you came up when Mother had  written my grandmother that if my daddy would quit bringing home families  and I would quit bring home every stray animal in Spearman then we   d be  8  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  doing pretty good (Laughs).  Well Misses Gilmore does any of that sound familiar to you?  No, not very. (Laughs)  Did you say that 1931 was when things start to go downhill for you out in  Optima?  You mean Hooker. We lived south out of Hooker. We weren   t at Optima.  Optima Dam, not Optima. Optima Dam was straight south really of where we  lived. They called it Optima, which has no bearings because originally the  dam was suppose to be built close to Optima. But it was never out there  because people didn   t want to have it there.  I always got confused with the town, the dam, and the wild life refuge. When  you   re driving through you see all kinds of Optima signs and I didn   t know.  You would, you would. It has nothing to do with the town of Optima. But  originally the dam was supposed to be at Optima but it wasn   t. But my mind  it   s all mushy those years of the    30s. I was young enough that it didn   t make  much difference  Yeah.  Now I was eight years old before I when to school because we lived about  three miles from school and nobody coming by our house said I could go with  anybody which would have meant that Mother and Dad would have had to get  me to school going and coming everyday. So they kept me back until they  would let my brother come to school. He was about 16 months younger than I  was. So he started school little bit younger then he was supposed to, just to get  in, and I was pretty old by that time. I went to that old Kneff school. They had  a country school, a two room country school which was a big school at that  time.  Yeah. Twice as big as most of them (Laughs)   Yeah. You bet, and that   s where I went to public school.  How did you feel starting school at eight years old? You must have been older  than a lot of them.  I was but that didn   t bother me. There were others in school after all four  grades were in one room. So you felt that you were all about the same age  anyway everyone in the room where about the same age as far as you where  concerned. No, that didn   t bother me. I didn   t know any better.  You grew up on a farm, in a very rural area.  9  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Berry  Kite  Berry  Definitely. Definitely. It was country, it was definitely country. The closest  neighbor would be at least, we had one neighbor was about a mile and a  quarter. We had one that was closer but taking the road made it farther away  too but there was not much going on. Nothing lived south of us except  somebody living right on the Beaver River that didn   t even come our way.  Their road was a different direction. We were the last ones up on the Beaver  River.  Did your family use horses?  Yes, definitely. When we started that   s all Dad had was Horses. Had your one  little lister and you had milk cows and your few chickens, you lived on a farm.  What were your chores you remember growing up?  Where we lived, after we   d been there a short time, my mother   s parents  moved a house close to our house and I had not started to school, as I  remember. Grandpa, at harvest time, would help with the chores because my  Dad was in the field all the time and my brother wasn   t old enough to help in  the fields and neither was I. There were just the two of us, the two kids. So  Grandpa would go with me and we would drive into the fields pasture and hunt  up were the cows where to bring them home for milking (Laughs) so I had to  learn to milk. Besides that all I had was to gather the eggs and things like that.  There was not much else   I was more a hindrance than a help in the house.  You almost learned to milk before you could read or write.  Well I didn   t learn to read but I did learn to count and learned my ABC   s and  things before I got to go school. I did that. So I had a head start for some  things.  Do you remember anytime on the farm when you remember that times weren   t  as good as they used to be? That money was a little tighter?  Well it was always tight. As far as I was concerned it was always tight.  Daddy had borrowed to buy that place when we moved out there and it was  always tight. There were times when he thought he wouldn   t be able to keep  the farm.  When I was growing up everybody was short of money. There where a few  people, like there always is, that had a little more than everybody else, but  nobody knew they were poor.  You grew up in not so much of a farming area.  Well my husband was raised four miles west of Texhoma. He started in the  Sunnyside school and he had to start when he was five cause his sister was five  years older and she wanted him to go and ride behind her on the horse. It was  all grades.  10  Gilmore  Berry  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  At least they let him go. They wouldn   t let my brother go until he was six.  I was on the ranch and my folks always had roomers and borders and my  Uncle Vernie Rosson   well he wasn   t really an uncle but that   s what I call  him   had lived with us until 1929. He farmed a lot of land eventually in  Texas County. He farmed all during the dust bowl and always wore a tie. He  couldn   t stand getting all that dirt to get down his neck. Not many people you  see driving a tractor wearing a neck tie.  No. (Laughs)  When I started we didn   t have anybody close enough so my brother and I, we  had a one horse buggy and we went the three miles. Can you imagine an eight  year old (Laughs) and a brother who was about to be seven but we had to go to  school in that buggy. In the second and third years when they changed  teachers at the school there were two sisters that taught there. One had the  lower room one had the upper room and they came and stayed with us that  winter and they were there the second and the third year that we went to  school. So at least Mother and Dad had somebody to go with us in that horse  and buggy. We still went with one horse and buggy to school everyday. When  they left, there was a neighbor girl that lived halfway between our place and  the school so we had to go by her house and pick her up and we would go with  her that was just a year and after that we were older and had had that buggy  and the horse long enough we knew what to do about getting there. (Laughs)  By that time we could even take two different ways once in a while   Just to break the monotony.  Break the monotony, yes   Did your family get any money for having the teachers stay at your house?  Yes, if I remember correctly. Well I don   t know. I   m afraid to say. But they  paid, yes, for their room and board.  You said that your family always had roomers at the house.  Yeah. We had it cause we had space and mother cooked a lot.  Seems like it was a fairly common way to make a little extra money sometimes.  Well yes, and Daddy was always bringing somebody home for supper. Lot of  people made it a habit of stopping by at meal time.  You must have had a good cook in the house.  I can remember we always had a huge bowl of dried apricots, a bowl of dried  prunes, and a bowl of peaches or apples always that was standard like salt and  pepper. Now think what a bowl of apricots that size would cost.  11  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Berry  Gilmore  Berry  Gilmore  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Yeah.  A lot of people, I went home with somebody one time and I came back and  said they must be in bad shape. All they had was sausage, worst biscuits I had  ever ate and white gravy and it was floating in grease and the only fruits they  had was prunes, which I didn   t like.  That was a sign to you that they were in bad shape.  Salmon was very common, sardines and salmon were.  That   s something I wouldn   t have guessed.  Oh yeah.  Well you had to have some thing you could get to because you didn   t have a  refrigerator or anything to keep meat.  Mrs. Gilmore, what was typical food like for you at your house?  In the Spring we ate chicken and then that was the most part you would have  and the left over hams that you had put up the winter before. You could eat  some of the hams and in the fall when it got cold enough we would butcher  one beef. You would hang that up on the windmill, to keep it cold, had to be  cold before you could butcher because you couldn   t keep it any other way and  you eat that for a while. Then you butchered a hog during winter time. You  get your fresh meat, make your sausages, smoke them. You could keep them  awhile. Mother got to where she would can sausage.  Did you ever can beef?  I think she did; I think she canned some beef too.  Well people would bring in     She finally ended up getting one of those pressure cookers. That   s when she  started putting up meat so we could have a change. She even canned chicken.  I had a lot of people bring us a quarter of beef for a permanent or something  and Mother would can it. I hated it.  You could give a quarter of beef for a permanent, is that what you said? So  they would trade food for a hair cut?  Yeah. We ate cracked wheat for breakfast.  Did you boil it down to the bottom?  Mother made a mock pecan pie. She would soak the wheat and then put it in  12  Kite  Berry  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Berry  Gilmore  Berry  Lemons  Berry  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Berry  Kite  Gilmore  like you would pecans in a pie and made it taste like it.  What about mock apple pie on the Ritz cracker box?  Yeah, but you didn   t have Ritz crackers except with tea or crumpets.  You saved that for special occasions anyway.  That would be a special treat? What else would you get as a special treat?  Something you wouldn   t get every day but you looked forward to.  The big thing would be when I was still in elementary school. Dad would go  into town and get a big box of marshmallows. There were ten marshmallows  in a box; boy would I stretch those marshmallows.  Mother made marshmallows.  Well we didn   t  I tried it one time and it was a wreck  How do you make Marshmallows?  Egg whites and sugar, powdered sugar.  My mom said that her treat was candy corn. When her parents would leave  for town they would bring back candy corn. They brought back a bag for all  the kids. There were five kids. She snuck off with the bag and ate all of it and  got sick and never could eat candy corn again.  Oh no   Did you ever eat one too many marshmallows?  No. Never did and I still eat marshmallows. My husband doesn   t care for  marshmallows; he doesn   t think they are candy or anything. Just like angel  food cake. It   s not cake, it doesn   t count. But marshmallows I have most of  the time I keep a package   this big package   and I still eat marshmallows     you wouldn   t believe by the chocolates you are eating  Well and the Cracker  Jack   s. That was important too the little box of Cracker Jack   s.  We got a prize.  Do you remember, would your parents bring back Cracker Jack   s?  Oh yes, that was special. We didn   t go to town unless it was some special  reason. When you went to town fifteen miles at that time it was all day long.  Besides, what do they want with two kids with them when they go to town like  that? They left us with Grandma and Grandpa.  13  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  I told my grandmother   she had gone out to California when the times were  real bad. She had a good job out there and she came to visit us one time and I  told her that mother was making me eat weeds and that I ought to go back to  California with her. It was some Lambsquarter.  What is that?  It   s a weed it grows out on the side of the road and you pick the weeds you  don   t pick the great big ones and wash the little suckers. I got in on washing  and picking and Dock when it grows up it has a wide leaf. I kind of like it.  Now it   s called Dock?  Dock. There were several plants you ate. Daddy as a kid in Tennessee they  always had, oh, it   s kind of papery tasting comes out early in the spring on the  creek banks.  break in tape     things like that that, they felt like they needed  fresh green stuff. I always looked forward when they had the first fryers and  the first corn on the cob.  Oh yeah.  And then if you were lucky you had strawberry shortcake for some event.  Then they   d have all the politicians talk. They come to NTN   that was    Next  To Nature.    It was oh, kind of a park. It had a fishing hole and all of that.  They   d have a horse tank, cakes of ice in it and watermelons and they   d do  what politicians do. They   d do their talking and if you listened to them then  you would eat the watermelon, you know. They would always have huge  watermelons   you don   t even see them like that anymore.  They would lure you in with the watermelon.  Well they would just serve them, to get people to attend. Everybody would  bring a picnic lunch we used to go down there and sing, fish and have fish  fries. And of course when times really got bad what little money men had they  took to Rattlesnake Inn out near the Holt community on the brakes near  Pringle. Not to far from Adobe Walls.  Rattlesnake Inn community?  That   s were you got your bootleg whiskey  Oh, all right.  And they had a slot machine in there. They sold it in half gallon jars. It was  real good quality. They never did have anybody come up with anything like  jake leg, or anything like that, like some of the others. The revenuers  practically lived down there, they never did find the still. And out on our place  in west Texhoma there was an old still and copper tubing. I was going to go  down and get it in the dugout but there were several rattle snakes down there  14  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Berry  Gilmore  Berry  Gilmore  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Gilmore  and I put it off. I was going to do it in the winter when they weren   t as active  and the thing caved in.  Did you have any experience with bootleg whiskey?  No not with whiskey. I was already, I don   t know if I was out of high school  or not, but we found a swimming hole one time after the water had been high  along the Beaver River. My brother and I and another friend and friends of  ours, they had a girl and a boy about the same age as us and we went to this  hole for swimming. We scouted around just doing the   it was close to the  Beaver River. I don   t even know where it was. I know it was west and toward  the river. We found an old dugout. There had been one there, we could tell. At  least we were old enough to know what it was. Never did encounter anything  with whiskey.  They would use old dugouts to hide where the still was.  It was something that wasn   t going to call attention to anybody and in these  big pastures; you didn   t have people out there.  People lived in them too. People still have them. When I got older we called  them scaredy holes.  We lived in a dug out for about a year on one of the places we lived. After  we   d been living, when I was born we were living in a house but we moved to  another place and lived in a dugout.  They were cooler in the summer and warmer in the winter.  That was too long ago. I guess I was four years old before we moved to the  farm were I grew up.  As young people growing up what would you do? Or even as teenagers, what  would you do for entertainment?  You didn   t say    I don   t have anything to do    or    I   m bored    because there was  always wash to do.  Doesn   t sound very entertaining.  Baseboards; you dusted baseboards. Then you took a little brush and you oiled  the furniture. They always found something.  Even on the farm there was always something to do regardless. It was my  job   when my brother and I were older, my brother and I did the milking. My  dad had arthritis so bad he couldn   t milk, so it was our job to milk and was my  job to keep the coal bucket full. It was my job to collect the kindling for the  next morning and see that the lamps were filled and the chimneys washed.  That was enough when you went to school too.  15  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Gilmore  Berry  Gilmore  Berry  Gilmore  Berry  Gilmore  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Well we had hands at the ranch. And at harvest time, my uncle took me up, he  had a lady there but she was slow getting around. I was eleven when I was  cooking for 22 harvest hands.  So you didn   t have any time for fooling around or any fun.  Oh, you could think of a lot of trouble to get in to.  You kind of look like a troublemaker.  Oh no, I   m shy and reserved.  Well we lived far enough away that I didn   t have much of a chance to get  mixed up with very much. Girls didn   t go.  Watercress was what I was trying to think of. That was Tennessee.  We lived far enough away you didn   t walk down. My mother talked of  walking to places three to four miles away, but I never did. And in fact there  wasn   t anybody, we had one neighbor that we would probably go to  sometimes maybe once during the summer we would go play with those kids  that lived a little over a mile away. Well we   d walk down there, anytime we  went you   d walk but then we didn   t walk that much cause most of the time we  were just at home. Now my brother, when he was older he, of course, would  get on horse and go places. But girls didn   t.  You were lucky. If Cousin Joe D wanted to go to town little more than two  miles out in the country Red says,    You know where it   s at don   t you.     Two miles out in the country, where we live 15 now.  I meant if we wanted to go somewhere. It was three or four miles.  Oh yeah you could, you could go sure. But no we didn   t have that opportunity.  I   ve gotten in to more trouble. Joe D and I we always played with guns but we  never did get into trouble.  Who was this Joe D? That was your?  Cousin, he was three years younger than I. But we got in trouble riding horses  when we weren   t supposed to. Or doing some thing on a horse we weren   t  supposed to. But we never did get into trouble with   pretty well were taught  that if you have a gun empty or if that it was empty, you didn   t point it at  anybody.  Right.  You might wind up an indoor tea kettle and my uncle didn   t discriminate if a  16  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Gilmore  bunch of kids did something they weren   t supposed to, it didn   t matter if it was  his kids or the neighbors. You all got a whipping. Every one of you, with a  belt.  Do you ever remember being taken out to the wood shed ever?  We didn   t have a wood shed. But I got taken care of  (Laughs)  What did you do?  Probably sassing back or something. I don   t know.  Oh if you sassed somebody, well that was it; you   d get blistered. I don   t  remember anybody who didn   t take a trip to the proverbial wood shed so to  speak.  Right sure.  Some more than others. But we didn   t have anybody telling us we were abused  either.  Yeah. How would you say that the dust storms and the    30s and the Depression  changed your life at all from the way it was? Did you notice any difference at  all, when winds picked up and things started moving around?  Oh yeah, it got so old. You know the continual blowing and the dirt. My daddy  had a lady friend that came down to Spearman probably before Easter; it was  in April. You read all about it in 1934, 1935.  1935.  It rolled in and you could see the glow of the light bulb but you couldn   t see  anybody in the room. I mean, that   s how thick the dust was. You tied wet  rags around your face to breath.  Do you remember the Black Sunday experience?  That was the time it had blown all week long. Now that was in 1935. I was  already in high school and it had blown all week long. You didn   t clean  house. You   d just brush it aside to go to bed. In the kitchen you kept the  worst of it out of the way but Sunday morning you woke up it was clean as a  bell you didn   t know it had ever blown. So you started out the whole house  from one end to the other. That was my job; we didn   t even go to church that  Sunday and shortly after noon we had the whole house cleaned up. Everything  had been brushed off the window sills and shook or whatever. All the beds had  been cleared and you got the floor scrubbed. At four o   clock you saw this blue  wall coming and you knew what it was because we   d seen them before. My  brother had gone to Adams in the car to see some of his buddies. They had  seen it in time I guess before we did at home but here he came driving as fast  17  Berry  Gilmore  Kite  Berry  Gilmore  Berry  Kite  Berry  Gilmore  Berry  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  as he dared barely made the car into the garage.  Well it caused static electricity it would affect the cars.  We was all standing on the front porch watching that coming in and when it  was just as close as we wanted to have it, we walked inside and shut the door.  Just as we stood there in the door and looked through that door, here was a  man   s face and it was some kid we knew. He had come from the other  direction. He said his car stopped and he started running. He ran as hard as  could. He aimed at our house and he made it just when it hit. They got there at  the same time. (Laughs)  How lucky.  You carried an old canvas water jug hanging from the bumper   the bumper  had two deals. You carried one or two with you in case you needed it for you  car or to drink or if you got caught in a dust storm. You always suppose to  have a bunch of rags with you. You pour some of this water inside your  Model-A and kept it tight around your face.  I don   t think we ever used wet rags; I don   t remember ever using them.  Well, My uncle had been to Spearman and started back to Texhoma and he  had Joe D with him. He had water jugs and on the front they were burlap and  had a cord of rope. Mother sent some rags along some pre jar drinking water  or something, couple of sandwiches in case they had car trouble, because there  wasn   t any filling stations from Spearman to Texhoma. The road was kind of  a pasture type road so a duster rolled up he used, had to tie those cloths.  Good thing his had that water with him.  Did you ever put brown tape around the windows all the cracks in them?  We didn   t have any tape. That   s where the rags went, that   s where the rags  went. Mother would stuff and would take something and stuff it     Stuff them behind the trim and then where the windows was we   d put this  brown tape. Well the wind, that tape would dry up and come loose and they  would go  Berry makes the sound of wind and dried tape flapping against the  house  talk about waking you up  Making your hair stand on end  But it  would make the most horrible sounds, like somebody moaning or something.  Did you ever get scared during the dusters at all?  Not especially. I just didn   t like them. I knew what they were.  You were a little older than her. She was scared. You were young   it would  have scared anybody I think.  18  Gilmore  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Gilmore  Berry  Kite  Gilmore  I remember one. I think I had just started elementary school. That wasn   t  actually the dust bowl years, but we had one that came in though one Saturday  and I had pink eye. That was one of the reasons that I wouldn   t have gotten to  go along with Mother and Dad to town but Leona and I were at home and with  my pink eye. We hadn   t even noticed that something was rolling in. I don   t  know whether Leona was outside and noticed and told me or if I accidently  happen to look out or whether things where getting dark but took out to  grandma   s who was maybe as far as to the end of this block down here from  our house. And it was pitch dark like that and Mother and Dad were in  Hooker. They didn   t get home until late that evening, because it was so black  they could see to drive home. But it wasn   t the kind from the dust bowl years  it was just one of those things that rolled in at that time.  It really didn   t scare me but it would wake me up.  Yeah.  But after Mother died my uncle Rupert had this German shepherd   it was a  grandson of Rin Tin Tin, a registered dog. They had had it north in Chicago.  They moved in to take care of me.  This is your uncle?  Yes it was my uncle   s dog. Uncle Rupert Vaught, he was a retired Navy man  and he had been with the police department in north Chicago. Things were  getting pretty exciting up there; he could be bought off so the mayor of north  Chicago was friend of his. He said he was afraid of things that were taking  place and that if he could come out to this country to come on. He came in  1929 which was a good year. The stock market hadn   t broke yet and he was  going into farming. So they were out on a farm not making anything and he  had a retirement so they moved in. It was my aunt   s, my daddy   s sister who  took care of us, so I don   t know when they   d let him out if he wanted out.  That was the deal. He could sleep with me if I let him out if he needed out.  Grandson of Rin Tin Tin. This most of been a pretty popular dog.  Well he cost  75 dollars from back in 1927, which was quite a lot of money.  It   s not a small amount right now   For a dog.  So I   d let him in. I   d just keep the screen unlatched and I   d raise the window  and push the screen out and he would come back in. So if I had him in there I  wasn   t scared of anything. You know, it didn   t bother me.  That brings up a good point   do you remember any pets that you had?  Oh yes, we always had, they weren   t house pets. None of them were house  19  Kite  Gilmore  Berry  Kite  Berry  Lemons  Berry  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  pets but we always had cats and dogs. We had a lot of coyotes; see it   s open  country, nobody lived south of us. So it was pretty open there. Plenty of  coyotes, Dad always kept some hounds, what you call hounds. Pretty tall  dogs, kept those around especially to keep the coyotes away because some  time at five o   clock you see a coyote coming to the chicken house.  Ready for dinner.  Ready for dinner. Got hungry. So then we had little ones, some we could play  with, cats and dogs.  My mother raised canaries she had canaries before she passed away. She had  a beauty shop. I learned how to count to 300 before I went to school   that   s  how many quarts of green beans you   d count.  You mother had a beauty shop and raised canaries.  We had goldfish in a little half barrel out in the yard. I had a registered white  Persian cat. It wasn   t one of these flat faced like they are now. She had blue  eyes and Mother used to use bluing on these women with white hair. You  didn   t have good detergent shampoo back then you had coconut oil or  something or something in it. It was real hard to get out and make your hair  feel good. She used vinegar and lemon rinses and she would use a little bluing  in the last rinse water with people who had real white hair. So I washed my  cat and I got a little too much bluing in the water.  I   ll bet your cat didn   t like that much   Tons of people coming by the beauty shop to see Anne   s blue cat and it took it  a long time for that to where off.  Several baths.  Yeah, or wait for all that hair to grow out or something.  We had a canary bird, too, for quite a few years. Kept him in, of course our  house, we didn   t have a lots of rooms. We kept him in the living room at the  west window. The door we used practically all the time was going out of the  kitchen. Well you couldn   t see the kitchen door from the living room. So  when we would have been gone several hours, as soon as we would open the  door that canary would call. He had a special call. We would say,    We   re  home Dickey,    and he would shut up. He   d know that he had company now.  We had he until Mother and Dad moved to town which was 1938 or something  like that. That was when they had, first got gas in to town or maybe they were  using oil stove, no it was the gas I guess by that time because the gas fumes in  the house were too much for that bird. It didn   t dawn on them that could  happen to that canary, that it couldn   t stand those gas fumes. Cause your  burner where open.  20  Kite  Gilmore  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Yeah.  Evidently that   s what got him.  Somebody gave my mother, you know a lot of people in town had milk cows.  Somebody gave my mother a mule and he limped and we called him Wimpy.  Mr. Whitson   s people, who had lived on his farm and farmed his place, had  moved somewhere. He had a great big garden that was fenced, with wood and  water from the windmill. So mother would take Wimpy out and do I think Ted,  my husband called it a sled, it was kind of like it. I would sit on it and she  would go up and down the rows. She raised an awful lot of stuff and we  canned it. Canned a lot of stuff.  At least 300 jars of green beans. (Laughs)  She had canned beef but Daddy, because I didn   t like it, brought me fresh beef  from the butcher shop.  A little treat. You mentioned your parent moved to town in 1941 or 1939.  It must have been 1938 because my brother got married and he moved on to  the farm. So Mother and Dad moved into town. Then when my brother went  it to the service they moved back to the farm until he came home from the  Army. Then they moved back into town again and never moved back to the  country after that. My brother lived on the farm until he died, which was in  1985. He died in 1985.  Wow.  My sister-in-law stayed there even after he died, which was about a year and a  half. She moved into Guymon. She was in Guymon only four months before  she died.  How old were you when you moved out on your own? Away from you parents.  Well I came here to Goodwell in the summer, in about August of 1936. That  was the year I graduated from high school. I wanted to come to college but I  didn   t get a job. At that time unless you had something, nobody had enough  money. There was just one girl that I know of in our dormitory that did not  have a job and she felt out of place because everybody had to work. I got a job  to get my room and board,  18.50 for a month room and broad.  That   s a good deal.  But that   s not when I started to school. When I came in 1937, since I didn   t  have a job at school, the Morison   s came and he was the president. They came  out, they were looking for somebody, for a girl to come and stay at there house  because they had a little boy that was about two and a half. They went back  and forth from Oklahoma City quite a bit and some times they had to go  21  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  someplace and they could take him all the time. They wanted somebody in the  house that would stay with the little boy and do housework. That was my first  job. I stayed there a whole year from August to August. Then I got a job so  could come to college. I moved in the dormitory and I had a job every year  while I was going to school for my room and board. The last year, the last two  years it didn   t cover my room and broad but by that time Dad made a little  extra money so he could pay the difference. Then when I graduated from  college I had a full time job.  What did you study in school?  Home ec (laughs); I have a degree in home ec and a teaching certificate in  home ec and to teach English and never did. I had a full time job in the  business office working full time, it was waiting for me. That   s where I was  working as a student full time. That was my school job and then I had this job  whenever I graduated I could work full time cause the girl that was doing to  secretarial work was getting married so I got to replace her. But anyway, I  worked there as a student for three years in the business office. I never used  my degree.  Did you live in town? How did you end up on the farm again?  I didn   t.  You stayed?  I   m still here.  (Laughs) Still working in the business college?  No. I worked nine years in the business office and then I moved. Mr. Magee  who was my boss in the business office had already moved to the president   s  office so in 1950 I moved in as his secretary in the president   s office. I stayed  there until I quit working, which was in 1974.  Wow. What about you and your first paying job?  Well my first paying job, I got 10 cents an hour and I worked for Mr. Smith  and I work in his variety store in Spearman. It was before Christmas and I   d  go after school and we would have to write when you got there and he took out  social security too.  Oh on 10 cents an hour. (Laughs)  So on Saturday, they didn   t close in the afternoons early like they do now, they  stayed open late. Basically, oh I   d wait for someone occasionally but put the  tricycles and wagons together cause I could do it better than the woman could  that he had hired. Then about, well, right before Christmas we had everything  together. That was my first job then I worked at the hardware during the war  22  Kite  Berry  Gilmore  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  and parts department for International Harvester. Walter Wilmeth in  Spearman, he owned the hardware and International Harvest Machinery.  What was his name?  Walter Wilmeth, he was a rancher there. He owned the hardware there and he  owned the International Harvester. It was a big building down on the corner.  Oh I   d come back and stay with my Aunt and Uncle Red and Beulah Dodson  at the store. In    47 they ran the store. I sold them the merchandise and bought  the building. So I worked in the store for Daddy on a commission from the  time I was eight. I did pretty good one year so my father docked me. A bunch  of cowhands came in and they had a pretty good sale so I made about ten  bucks that week in    38 or    39.  Oh my. I made  2 a week when I was working at the president   s office. I  mean not at the office but at the president   s house. I stayed with them that  year and I got  2 a week. And I was making money.  That   s the reason I got mine docked.  Yeah what did you say, a bunch of what came in?  Cowhands for the Ranch LX.  Yeah. They bought a bunch of stuff?  Oh yeah, they would buy   well we used to handle hats that would sell for a   100. Not during the Depression, mind you, but in the    40s. Then we had  those western suits that were Pendleton wools, Pendleton wool shirts. They  hadn   t had gotten to town in quite a while and we handled Lee   s, Levi   s, and  later on Wrangler   s. Work clothes we handled Pool and Dickey work clothes.  They were put on table stacks and then you looked for the length. I learned to  cut them off and hem them if they were too long.  Some these cowhands came in with money ready to spend? And you were there  making your commission?  Yeah, I was there waiting on them. And some of them bought some boots.  We sold Justin boots and Florsheim shoes. Some of them bought some boots  and some of them hadn   t drawn up their paycheck in some time. Anyway, my  father thought it was excessive salary for his daughter.  You would have gotten into more trouble. (Laughs)  So anyway we didn   t go with commission anymore. But I think 1939 is my  year that stands out in my mind that thing turned around.  Started to pick up a little bit.  23  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Gilmore  Berry  Gilmore  Berry  Gilmore  Kite  They started to pick up and we started to get rain.  Do you remember the first big rain storm?  Well we had rain back in the dirty thirties they didn   t come, just bang. What  little you got because it came so quick and then Spearman would have puddles  and when they would dry up it would curl up the mud in it. It was fun to be  barefooted and go up and walk in that.  Do you remember the first rain after a long drought? The reaction of the town.  No I really don   t. In the    40s there were snow storms. We didn   t see the  ground for weeks at a time. I remember I was going to Saturday morning, I  worked on Saturday morning too. Got to the front door and saw what we had.  I didn   t know it had snowed at night. Yes there where drifts between the  dormitory and where I worked. I went back in and put on my snow boots but  that wasn   t enough. I had to straddle drifts to get to the business office.  Sometimes I sunk down, would sink down clear down as far as I could slip  down. I could barely tell the angle from the streetlights, you know, where I  was supposed to go. The blizzard we had that night, that was already in 1940  or    41. I don   t remember which one it was.  But I remember an ice storm that we had before that time. That   s really the  first thing I really remember that it was wet but we had an ice storm here in  town. People who had their cars parked along the street there at the school  couldn   t move them because the tree branches where on top of them, hanging  down on them. At that time where we lived now, it was all open; there was no  housing. There was no gym there was nothing there on that side. The  president   s house was the only thing on that block there. On this side there  was nothing. Even the block across from the president   s house there was  nothing there. When I came here for that year, there was nothing there. It was  all still open, nothing had been built there. So they used that bare area where  just hills of just tree limbs they had piled up. That the first thing I remember  of really being     Did you ever go swimming at the duck pond?  Not often.  Well they had a pond they had dirt banks. They used it for irrigation. We   d  walk out to the college farm and swim in it. Wasn   t too clean at time and  that   s the reason they called it the duck pond.  Wasn   t built there (laughs) for swimming either.  Well besides the weather turning around, what other signs of good time do you  remember? You know thinking, we   re turning around we   re coming out of it.  What where things that lead?  24  Gilmore  Berry  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Berry  Gilmore  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Well you could even go to town from here to Guymon. Kids didn   t have,  when I was going to school, there weren   t cars. Very few kids had a car. Well  they   d double up sometime. They would take you and sometimes some of the  teachers would if they had a car. Not even all the teachers had cars but you   d  get to go to Guymon. You didn   t have money to spend. You just went.  Milton and Oralee England, he came back to teach at Panhandle State  University. They would arrange a trip to Guymon and would get the old bus.  It was pretty bad. I remember thinking it was bad even back then. They  would take everybody to the show. It cost 50 cents; you had to pay your way  to the show and so much of that went to the gas. Since they had to have adults  along, well usually Mr. Funk would always invite them in because they were  too broke to spend money on the show. Milton was teaching here at the  college.  Yeah I know them. They were real good friends.  So that was a sign that things where getting better? Being able to go to  Guymon?  Well you got out of town.  Yeah.  Of course I didn   t have any money and I didn   t go to Guymon very often  either.  What did you do once you were there?  Well you didn   t stay very long. You just went around and looking at what was  in town.  They used to have sewing rooms. It was kind of like the ladies got so much  pay and they would make shirts.  That was the NYA, wasn   t it?  Yeah, and they even had the sewing room afterwards for the starving  Armenians and the Appalachians. You know, kids that needed clothing. They  used that as an excuse to get it under another policy.  And they would pay the sewers?  The ladies, uh-huh.  You said your dad was the NRA Administrator.  Administrator until late 1934 or early 1935.  25  Kite  Berry  Gilmore  Berry  Gilmore  Berry  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  I   m guessing your family was on the Roosevelt side of things.  Well, Mother always had something going. She could do anything   she built  on to the house or she built a garage or fix a car.  Was that after you moved to Texhoma or was that while you were still in  Texas?  Well I can remember the ladies in the sewing room in Texhoma because they  get the material and use a whole bolt because you could cut more shirts out.  They were down in a vacant building there on what   s really Main Street of  Texhoma that runs east and west. This street that had all the buildings on it  when I was growing was Second Street.  I didn   t know about that.  They had it for other occasions. Then they came in when I was going to  college at Chickasha. They had the Red Cross come in right after the war  started. This lady wanted everybody to knit a sweater. She said so many  stitches. There was a small size, a medium size, and a large size and she said  so many stitches, then we   d go from there. If she said so many inches we   d be  better off. There is a giant roaming around Europe with my sweater on  probably today. The sleeves were this long and it was about this big around.  Sweater came to my feet and I made it just exactly, but she knitted so tight it  was kind of stiff. We made one of the scarves that they put over their head and  they would cross it back here and bring it around it they were here if it were  long enough. Mine was long enough. I can remember going over and taking  thread or something to them. On the Texas side of Texhoma, Ms. Ingham, the  Demmits, John Demmit lived there and the older Mrs. Roach and occasionally  they   d need thread. It was a good mile or half mile anyway. Daddy made me  the little delivery boy.  Mrs. Gilmore do you remember any New Deal programs going on? Are you a  pro-Roosevelt democrat or staunch republican?  I   m a republican now but I never got registered until I was in college.  So the New Deal didn   t really impact you?  No, living out in the country you didn   t get mixed up with a lot of things that  people did who were in town and where mixed up in it.  Did your father ever take advantage of some of the programs that were  offered?  No, never did. He didn   t think it was right. If you could get by and get  something to eat he didn   t think it was right to go with the WPA. He thought  that was to be left to people who didn   t have anything. He just didn   t believe  in it.  26  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Berry  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Berry  Well it sounds like you where able to get by all right.  Well I learned to save.  Yeah that is something you brought out of the experience.  That   s it, you never did know if there was extra money. There wasn   t extra  money. There was that one time when they had that big wheat crop. Dad  wanted to pay off on his land and they didn   t want to take it because they  would rather have the interest stretched out. So they could collect for more  years. Well right then it was all right so we got a new car that they put  together, it came in parts. It came to Hooker and they put it together, and he  drove out one day with a new car.  So that   s what he did with the extra money?  Because he had some extra money that he could do. He was going to pay off  the land but they didn   t want it then. We hadn   t had a car. We were still  driving one of these, I don   t even know how to explain it to you. You  probably haven   t even seen pictures of it. Fords is all we had. The first one  that I remember was those curtained.  Touring car.  Touring car.  Model-T or     Yes Model-T and we drove that for years and years. Being way out you  needed transportation just to go to town to begin with and then we had this  little sedan it had two doors and the doors were in the middle on both sides. I  don   t know how dad got in on his side, I don   t even remember but I know that  Mother   s passenger seat folded up so the four of us could get into the back.  Grandma and Grandpa and my brother and I would be in the back seat to go to  church. Dad would have his side and Mother had the seat that you folded back  to get in. That   s what we had until we got that green   and that was about  1929 when we got that car. I don   t know, that car lasted a long time before you  had money again where you could buy another car.  What other luxuries do you remember getting? Do you remember the first time  you had electricity?  We had electricity in Spearman but when we built our house out west of  Texhoma we used a generator for the power tools and we had it wired for what  was coming down the road. We did get it when we first moved in we started  the house in 1949 and finished it in 1951. But politics, Daddy and Mother had  to go see my first grade teacher. They came around doing a church survey.  They had the girls in six to seventh grade doing it. She asked what  denomination and she could hardly figure out the word. Well I said sometime  27  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Berry  Gilmore  democrat sometime republican. My first grade teacher was a big buxom  woman that wore these kind of glasses, and she sent a note to my parents that I  was too involved in politics. But we discussed politics from the time I got up  till we went to bed. My Granddad Dodson, he was republican. I just remember  one time, he was big, six-five and he was postmaster then. His son was  postmaster in Kenton. That was when according to your affiliation, when they  changed political parties you changed postmasters.  Right.  So he was republican and my mother democrat. Both of them loved to argue  and I can just remember I was three years old I remember him looking down  and he and Mother pointing at each other.  Arguing away.  That   s all I remember but my uncle Rupert Vaught, of course, he was all over  the world while he was in the Navy. He knew the politics and situations. He  said   something broke out, and he said they ought to get a bunch of the Jews  and the Kurds and pay them and send them in. He said they were the toughest  people on earth (Laughs) and the fightingest people, they can solve it.  You had some political debates going on at your house.  We still do   Mrs. Gilmore, do you remember the first time you got electricity?  I was already away from home when they got electricity there because when  electricity first came out that direction into the country they put it on our, the  west end of our section but it was too far away they wouldn   t let us have any  of it. It was too much line, it would cost too much. So our farm didn   t get  electricity until after World War II when they brought it in from a different  direction.  1945 or later?  It was about 19    they got it I think   Mother and Dad had moved back to  town already. My brother when he first lived there they still didn   t have  electricity as I remember when he moved out there before he got married.  There wasn   t any electricity, they had to wait. It had to be about 1941  somewhere around 1941, 1942. I don   t really remember because I wasn   t  there.  Right.  They did Hooker   s.  Well that   s when the line on the west side came, going to Hooker.  28  Berry  Gilmore  Berry  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Berry  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Berry  Gilmore  Well that was in 1947 or 1948.  Well that     Well I mean when they signed everybody up in Texas and Oklahoma. They  came out and they said that Hooker was better populated. They were going to  do east of Texas County first before they did the west part. We got ours out of  Rita Blanca because we lived in Texas before they got the lines into the people  across the road in Oklahoma. Rita Blanca in Texas served part of Oklahoma  until Tri State finally put in lines.  It would be hard to see the people across the road having electricity and you  not.  We didn   t see them. We were, like I say, we were pretty isolated.  Yeah.  Living out in the country.  What about running water?  That   s one thing other people might not have had. We had a windmill and it  had an elevated barrel that collected water. In summertime we had water  running in the house. Winter time we carried our water because it was always  frozen up. We had this big range that had one of these deals on the side, these  water deals. That was my job to keep that filled up. We had warm water  there.  To wash?  No, not to wash cause when it was washday that was done outside. We had  one of these, what do you call them?  Kettles?  Kettles outside. We had a washhouse which was also a one car garage. It had  a big kettle and that   s where the washing was done. That   s where Mother  heated up the water in one of those big kettles. She had a washing machine for  a while. Double deal whatever you call, it was round made out of wood mind  you, two of them. We had an engine there that in the summertime, if the wind  didn   t bring us enough water, we had to pump water. For the cattle we had to  keep, my dad ran cattle, it was mostly pasture there.  You had a pump jack. What they call a pump jack.  No this was one that had a lot of pulley   s and it run through the wash house,  right to the pump out there and then pumped it up and down. That same  engine would be belted to this washing machine at one end which would turn  29  Berry  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Berry  Kite  Berry  Gilmore  Berry  the washer.  Yeah, a dasher.  A dasher. If it didn   t do a good enough job, then you washed it in this. Then  you took the ringer and run them in to this tub to wash them some more. Then  you had another ringer and you washed and got them into the rinse water.  The automatic washer.  That was your automatic washer.  You   d have to hand wash them after that. (Laughs)  That   s right. (Laughs) Then you did all the starching and things before.  Wash day sounds like a mess.  Oh that day was a mess.  They had these big    ol black kettles. Mother made soap. They   d bring her  fresh pork because Mother made white lard and the ladies liked it for baking.  So they   d come and bring the fresh pork and mother would make the lard, the  white lard for their baking. I wasn   t allowed around that operation. I suppose  that they did it with lye, I don   t know. But somebody gave us a turkey one  year. Gave it to us probably for a permanent or maybe two permanents,  anyway, 45 pounds. He was old enough to vote no doubt. Mother parboiled  him all day long in this kettle out back. There wasn   t an oven in the country  you could get him in, but the kid that worked at the bakery, he roomed and  boarded our house or came up and stayed for different times with another kid  that was stay there. So mother made a deal with him. He put it on the bread  racks and it baked it all night. She took the broth and stuff and whatever and  made the dressing. People then, the clerks in your store, they couldn   t go  anywhere for Thanksgiving because they didn   t have any transportation.  Spearman didn   t have a bus anywhere unless you wanted to go to Shattuck on  that little doodlebug train. You stayed put and there were country kids that  lived with people in town and sometimes if the weather was bad they couldn   t  get back to their folks for Thanksgiving. So we always had all the bachelors  and old maids eating Thanksgiving dinner.  Back to that turkey. Was that turkey any good?  Yeah I guess it was there wasn   t any of it left. Of course they didn   t have any  of these sudden   turkeys you got had pretty good age on them anyway.  Did you save the juice for soup?  Well I don   t know what went wrong with that kettle. After my mother died,  there wasn   t any gold fish there wasn   t any birds. She painted oil pictures and  30  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  sold them at the Fox Drug in Borger during the Depression. We go over there,  that   s when Borger was wild; you don   t stay in Borger past sundown, cause it  was so wild. You know that was the saying back then. It was pretty wild but  velvet pictures were what they wanted her to paint to sell. They had this  moonlight and red sails in the sunset.  All the good stuff.  Yeah. People had and wanted and that   s what she painted.  Your mom sound like quite a woman.  She was.  Like a very enterprising person. So if you think back to the    30s, I think it was  a very monumental time for the American history, with the dust bowl and the  Depression. What in your minds stands out as the strongest memory from that  period, something to that to you symbolizes that period or an experience  you   ve had?  You see I really don   t really know very much time before the dust bowl hit.  But I thought that the way things were supposed to be. The thing that sticks  with me is the illnesses. A lot of people had T.B. and they didn   t ask you if  you wanted to go and if you had a wife and a bunch of little kids, they just  shipped you to Colorado.  Did you loose any family members or close friends to dust pneumonia?  Well Mother was in the hospital a couple of times with pneumonia. I don   t  remember if it was dust pneumonia or not. I had a friend, she was older than I  was and she   d pull me around in my wagon. When her mother got her hair  done, she got sick. I think it was from the measles or something. But then she  took dust pneumonia or what they took as dust pneumonia and she died.  And there were kids   some of them were scalded. My uncle Vernie Rosson   s  brother, Tom, lost two children, and he idolized his children. One of them  drowned; she was hanging up clothes and the child drowned in the big    ol  horse tank while his mother was hanging up clothes. Tom came to the house  and saw him floating. Then they lost another one, and I don   t remember what  he died of. So talk about losing children, and I think, how can you lose a kid?  I didn   t say anything about it.  So in your mind its deaths of people you knew and relatives that comes to mind  more clearly then anything else during that period.  Well I think what comes to mind is seeing the advancement of the drugs and  the availability of them.  Are you thinking about your most memorable moments?  31  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Berry  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Gilmore  Really that doesn   t ring a bell at all. I don   t remember hearing of anybody that  died during that time as a result of the dust.  Well what about what you remember? When you think of the    30s and you  would have been here at that time, right?  The upper    30s I was here the rest I was still at home.  Is the something in particular during that time.  No except just the dirt blowing all the time. Just the dirt blowing all the time.  Well that   s a pretty big thing.  Think the probably the camaraderie of people. You always took your extra  green beans or canned food and it might not be a turkey you might have two  fat hens to take some family that was really bad off. Tried to provide for them.  I don   t think they got all the food they wanted to get but a lot of people at least  in Spearman they would go to there neighbors and get there water from the  yard faucet they did have water in their houses.  You remember that kind of neighbor.  No. Living out in the country you didn   t, you were not conscious of  something like that cause everybody had his own windmill. You never were  with out everything you always had something to eat. There were a lot of  people that I knew that took off the California from a lot of other places.  Relatives that left, some came back and some didn   t.  Did you stay in touch with the people that moved out there?  The relatives we did but not the other people. Some of them found out that it  was just as bad there or worse than it was here, and we probably would have  been the same way except Dad had bought this land. He couldn   t just up and  leave he didn   t have money to get us anywhere.  You know the Costners. He   s a movie actor.  Kevin.  Kevin, his parents left and went to California and came back in a while and  were at Boise City, but they came from Texas county.  Yeah?  Yeah.  They lived here in Guymon when he went back to California.  32  Berry  Gilmore  Berry  Gilmore  Berry  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Berry  Then they worked out at Boise City some, then they went back to California.  There are still some Costners in Guymon are they?  Yeah there kin they   re all kin to each other but his parents were born and  raised in Texas county.  It   s just like going back to our farm, when Dad wanted to pay it off. They  didn   t want it. Then when the years got so bad and so hard and he didn   t have  the money. He didn   t even have enough to make the extra payment. He said  he went to town expecting to give it back to them, to tell them,    I don   t have it,  it   s yours.    They said,    We have too many of those if you can pay the interest  on your loan, we would rather you keep it.    He couldn   t make a payment but  he could pay the interest. We were milking cows. That   s what we lived on.  We were milking cows; my brother and I were milking as many as thirteen  cows before we went to school.  You shipped cream?  We shipped cream. And mother had chickens but we didn   t have any grain.  The grain cost more than what you could get for eggs. So that eliminated the  chickens. We lived on cream money until things got better and we had crops  again that he could do something about    He finally got that farm paid off.  He saw it through.  And it was there until my sister-in-law sold it in 1989 I think. It had it be    88  or    89 cause she died I think in January of 1989. She had just moved off the  farm for four months when she died.  Because you brother lived on it, right? Your brother and your sister-in-law.  Yes, My brother died in 1985.  What a great story.  So my dad got he farm paid off and he didn   t get to go to California when  everybody else went. (Laughs)  You know, that   s why a lot of people stayed. We got too many of them stay  and you can farm the next one. You know the neighbors land to keep it from  blowing. They had home demonstration agents that came and showed women  how to can stuff and use the cans if you didn   t have jars. You saved your cans  with your tomatoes or what came out of and then put the lid on it. Well, our  house had a big living room and they always came there to demonstrate. Well,  all we had extra when the time the lady came was okra. Well she canned okra  and that summer, I guess later that summer or the next summer mother kept  the dugout white washed. I heard something going boom, boom. And it set  off a chain reaction, all that canned okra blew up. You talk about a mess. Oh it  33  Gilmore  Berry  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Berry  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Berry  Gilmore  Berry  Kite  was a slick slimy mess. But they had a lot of good ideas a lot of people didn   t  know. We had chicken eggs and sometimes, when we had a bunch of extra  ones, I would take a paper sack, there would be a dozen or two, and I would  take them to town and sell them at the grocery store. I always bought a tomato  with them because tomatoes were expensive and you know eggs where a  nickel a dozen, I think or something like that.  I don   t remember.  They laughed about me. All the other kids when they got spending money they  bought candy but I always bought tomatoes. Fresh tomatoes.  If I got a nickel I got one of those long, they were that long and that wide,  Hershey bars.  That was your favorite?  Oh if I got a Hershey   s bar, it was stretched. I didn   t eat it all at one time.  It came in little squares with tin foil around it.  Which one would you like better Hershey bars or marshmallows?  Don   t make me choose  (Laughs) I did wish, I remember when I was a kid, I  was wishing I got sick. I wouldn   t be sick but I had something that the doctor  would order that I eat one Hershey bar a day. That would have been  wonderful.  Hershey, Hersheyitus.  Chocolate. I   m still bad. It   s chocolate, chocolate, chocolate.  I think were about ready to wrap things up. If you have any last thoughts on     Oh, I   ll probably have some when it   s all over.  I think it was hard on people but I think that the kids that grew up during that  time appreciated the good times that came along, possibly more than their kids  have learned to.  And if it helped them, what helped me at least was once they started to work  they could hold on to their money. You didn   t buy anything until you had the  money to pay for it.  And you learned to give a days labor for your salary. If you wanted a job you  know you got there on time and you worked.  Saved your money.  34  Gilmore  Kite  Gilmore  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Kite  Berry  Gilmore  Berry  I was lucky enough there I got one job and I stayed with it until I quit working.  That   s right, you started school and you worked full time and then you quit  working.  I quit working and I just went home and didn   t have to go out hunting a job.  First one I got, I was asked if I could stay. That was great. And it was at a  time when it was hard to find a job because I was wondering if I was going to  be able to find a job when I was graduating because jobs where scarce.  Well you know women were beginning to learn to do things that some women  had never done before. They were learning how to drive back in the dirty  thirties. They were learning to turn shirt collars and do sewing that they had  never had before and short cuts and I think it really kind prepared them for the  war when the husbands went off. We had a man come back, he had worked on  Hoover Dam and had some job that swing from the ropes and use the  jackhammer. Read up on Hoover Dam. They didn   t have unions back then.  The state would load you up in trucks and you worked about twelve hour shifts  and it was ungodly hot and it was good money, I mean, we wouldn   t think it  was good now for that kind of danger. They lost quite a number of people but  it was good money. He was sending the money to the, he would send one  check to his wife and one to the bank so they could have it and when he got  back, his wife was gone and his kids were scattered. The doctor had sent her  to Colorado to the sanitarium for T.B. and they had just farmed the kids out  with different relatives. It was up to him to find them. You know they didn   t  ask him or keep him well informed. But I remember he had to suffer. I  thought, you know, he ought to go sock somebody (Laughs) or something.  For taking his kids.  He did have the money in the bank, they didn   t go broke. We had, my folks  had  316, I believe, in the bank, when they closed the bank and it went broke.  It was a state bank I think.  You lost that money?  And that was a lot of money.  Yeah it is.  And lot of people did lose that money.  Like my Dad said that one time, he went to the bank. He didn   t have  50 but  he needed a certain kind of plow. He wanted to use and he could buy one. It  was still horse days. He had a hard time talking the banker in to loaning him   50 to buy it.  Oh they laugh and talk about Texhoma use to go in there and this old boy said  he was giving him a collateral, he was going to borrow  30 or something. He  35  Gilmore  Kite  so many chickens so many ducks so many turkeys well he said is that all. He  said I got the wife and kid but they are more expense than they are collateral  but you can put them on there.  That   s why he was borrowing the money, so that he   d have them.  That   s right. Well I   m through talking.  -------  -------  Additional information provided by L. Anne Berry  Entertainment in the Dirty 30   s  There were revivals, some were held in tents. There was a Baptist evangelist  called Cowboy Crimm. He preached in most panhandle towns in the summer.  He   d soon remove his coat, then his tie, then alternate stretching his  suspenders. The house my father roomed and boarded in was directly across  the street from the old Baptist church. The house was owned by Mrs. Viola  Coates Jones. Mr. Jones and I could sit on the front porch, and we had no  problem hearing Cowboy Crimm. There wasn   t any loud speakers back then.  The Assembly of God had a big tent in Spearman, and the preacher was a tall  thin lady. She wore a rather long black dress, and her hair was pulled back in  a bun. My close friend and I (we were eight) called them Holy Rollers, and I  thought, until Jewel   s mother, Mrs. Brandt, corrected us, it was sort of a  nickname. They had the best bible school. One man was converted once or  twice each year, but it didn   t last long.  The ladies society of each church sometimes combined and held all day  meetings. Each group brought food and repaired and made clothes and tie tack  quilts for the needy. It served a need and gave the ladies a chance to visit,  exchange ideas and patterns for aprons, embroidery, etc.  The Hazel Hurd Players came to area towns with plays and entertained. They  usually spent two weeks in each town. The group boarded with local people  and gave tickets to the programs as part payment for room and board. They  made a lot of friends with area people.  Civic organizations and churches staged mock weddings (men dressed as  females), plays, and music programs to raise money.  Music played an important role, neighbors would gather for sort of a jam  session. Someone always had a fiddle or guitar (or both), harmonicas, jugs,  combs, and wash boards were sometimes included. Mother and Max Lackey  played the piano. Lots of dances were held in barns, vacant houses, and  homes. The American Legion sponsored dances with bands from out of town.  Some of the groups gained a bit of fame (at least in the state or area).  When families gathered, especially if there was out of town visitors, the kids  36  were called on to recite a poem, sing a song, dance or whatever. Once, when  we were in Texhoma, a family from Boise City was there, the son played the  violin horrible    It was awful-at least my back bends, flips, and standing on  my head was not noisy.  We had stayed all night in Texhoma and left before daylight to go to a farm  near Boise City. Mother and two other ladies were giving instructions on rug  weaving (out of rags), uses for rolled oats, cracked wheat, and corn meal-mush,  and making bedspreads out of bleached and unbleached muslin. The  house was long, one and a half stories, with a long narrow porch, and two front  doors. It had two out houses-one for ladies and one for men. They had one  indoor bathroom in progress, but not completed.  School  Texas country schools went to the seventh grade, in Oklahoma, the eighth  grade. Those students living quite a distance made arrangements to room and  board in town. The girls usually helped cooking, ironing, etc. to pay for room  and board. Mrs. Jennie McDaniel (Earl McDaniel   s mother) had a small two-bedroom  house, and sometimes three boys stayed there. Even after the schools  could afford busses-the country students had assigned people to stay with in  bad weather. I think 1940 or    41 is when buses were available. I do not  remember a single time when weather prevented school. It was never too wet,  too much snow, or too cold for school.  Only single ladies were allowed to teach. The only married women allowed to  teach were married to disabled husbands. In late 1941, after the men teachers  joined the military, married women were hired due to the shortage of men  teachers.  Occasionally the school had an important program. It was usually in the  morning for students, and then a program at night for the public. The one I  remember was Admiral Byrd. After he talked, some of the others with him  showed the clothes and pictures of equipments, etc. After the program (it was  shorter for students) a collection was taken. I gave three cents. I   d saved for a  caramel sucker.  In 1939, the PTA moved a building in, and the students could purchase lunch.  Norene Roach was the first cook and manager. Until then, a lot of students  brought lunches or went home for lunch. In areas where there wasn   t a  country school, the parents school hired someone to run a kid hack   I didn   t take a sack lunch very often, and it had to have a lot of snow or be  very cold , that would be the day Mrs. Tuttle, the first grade teacher, had us  trade lunches. I   d wind up with hot spring sausage in two hard or soggy  biscuits. If I found out lunches were going to be traded, I   d walk home. My  uncles, Bill and Arnold Richardson, came back to Spearman in    30 or    31 to  help with wheat harvest-both were combine men. Uncle Arnold had been in  the Navy, and was the west coast Navy boxing champion in his division. He  37  taught me to box so I could take up for myself.  At school, girls played Jacks, and boys (some girls) spun tops (no sharp points  allowed), and marbles. No keepers were allowed. Mumbly Peg (with pocket  knives) was played, but lots of those knives were taken and returned at the end  of the school year. The boys were caught carving the desktops.  The Funerals  Sometimes the ladies didn   t have something nice to be buried in, so the church  ladies would gather and make a dress. Flowers were often (for spring and  summer) home grown. There were flower girls, littler girls that carried the  flower on sprays to the front of the church. The bodies (in caskets of course)  were put in the family   s front room, and friends would sit with the casket at  night and until the funeral. The widows then had to sew and do laundry for the  public, etc. to feed the family, as there wasn   t any government programs or  welfare. Neighbors and friends helped whenever possible with used clothes  and food.  Bessie Freeman Moore said her claim to fame was that she had the last  operating out house in Texhoma. In the early 50   s, she sold her two-story  house to Lloyd Knight, because she couldn   t afford to build a bathroom. She  reserved a small area of the property for a small house. Lloyd demolished the  old house and built a new brick home.  My mother canned half-gallon jars of brown (Pinto) beans just to have on hand  when unexpected company showed up. The beans, cornbread, onions, chow-chow,  and the ever present bowls of dried fruit made a quick company meal.  There were a lot of clubs. Home demonstration clubs served a need besides  giving the women a chance to visit. I remember my mother gave a  demonstration on candle wicking and making bedspreads out of unbleached  muslin. The home demonstration agent showed how to turn woven and shiny  men   s suits. Other programs were collar and cuff turning or replacing them  using the remaining good parts off old sheets or pillow cases, instructions on  tie dying or just dying old faded garments. All cotton fabric had to be washed  before sewing, because it shrunk, some more than others, using salt or vinegar  to soak fabric to keep it from fading.  Lots of dances were held in abandoned buildings, old barns, or even houses  where tenants had vacated. It was a great place to see the new or dressed up  feed sack dress and different ways to gussie up the dresses. Some had lace  collars that could be purchased on a large piece of paper. The collars were  basted on and went from garment to garment.  There were no hospitals in Texas County. The nursing homes were used for  delivering babies, serious illness, broken bones, etc. Mrs. Silvers insisted on  the babies wearing long stockings that were pinned to the diaper. Ms. Barton  had two small rooms for patients. If possible, some of the kinfolks sat at night  38  with the sick relatives. Mrs. Silvers was a round white haired lady, and Mrs.  Barton was a rail thin lady. Both did their best to provide needed care.  Women embroidered sugar sack tea towels in an effort to brighten the dreary  times.  Very few families had extra cash. It was poor, poorer, poorest families. The  poor and poorer tried to help the poorest with food and clothing. Christmas  baskets contained a fat hen, corn meal, home canned vegetables, and the  staples-canned salmon (it was cheap back then) canned tomatoes, molasses,  dried fruit, and carrots or turnips.  We had a neighbor who canned lambs quarter and little yellow bell tomatoes  together maybe for soup. There were picnics that took place on the plum  hunting trips (sand hill plums). I watched a syrup making or part of it. It was  made out of cane sorghum. A family in Boise City had a bucket of stinky  gourds by the outside wash stand. They could be used for soap.  Wind chargers provided electricity for radios and one or two lights. Coal oil  refrigerators were available in the late 30   s, and one of the things my Uncle  Red Dodson purchased in late    38 or    39 after harvest. The jugs for the oil had  to be filled every night. Kerosene cook stoves were used on most farms in the     30   s.  The newest invention most women wanted, if electricity was available, was a  Sunbeam Mix Master.  Kids sold Cloverine salve (a cure for lots of things) hoping to sell enough for a  bicycle. For every can sold, so many points were awarded.  All clothes and pillowcases were starched and ironed. Men wore BVD   s in the  summer and long handles in the winter. Women were cotton and rayon step-ins  and bloomers, undershirts, and knee length drawers in winter, and corsets.  Girls wore dresses to school and a harness for the long stockings in winter.  After I got out of sight (from our house) I   d roll the stockings down over the  top of my Roman sandals. It looked like I was wearing donuts on my ankles.  Women   s good (usually black) dresses were rayon crepe. If it got wet, it drew  up. A lady said she was walking to the church for her wedding with her maid  of honor, and a light shower came up. Her pink crepe dress was suddenly six  inches short in the front. When crepe was pressed, it never had an even hem.  Mother   s beauty shop in our house offered marcelles, finger waves,  permanents, and hair drying. Henna for red-coffee was added to darken the  color. The henna wore off in a month or two. Black was a permanent color  and bleach for blondes.  Health  The liver was blamed for lots of things. A sluggish liver called for a round of  39  calamine (no eating all day) followed by a big dose of Epsom salt, or a round  of caroid and bile salt pills. Constipation was another problem; castor oil was  the cure. Some kids got worms (pin worms) and received a round of  vermifuse. Quinine was still being used for fever. Boils and infected wounds  were soaked in hot Epsom salt water or packs (it still works). Respiratory  problems were treated with mustard packs, dry mustard and water paste under  wet towels. Vicks salve for less severe cases. The cure was often worse than  the sickness. My mother-in-law used kerosene for rashes and wounds. Head  or body lice called for a creosote dip.  One time the fire department was called when a neighbor saw what she  thought was smoke coming from an attic window. It was dust. The man of the  house was, or had made, home brew, and it started to blow up due to the hot  day.   
