 Kite  Wall  So you were born in Texas County?  No. I was born here at Ripley, in Payne County.  What year?  1916.  And then you went to the panhandle?  When I was three.  At three you journeyed out there. Do you remember how you felt leaving your  home? Do you remember the trip at all?  I don   t remember leaving here, but I remember a few little things. I was three  years old when we moved. I remember the Glass Mountains. I think they call  them the Gloss Mountains now.  I heard there was an engineer who came over and was surveying those, and  his name was Gloss and they just spelled it glass.  That   s about the only thing. Then I remember arriving there and a few little  incidents, like cutting my own hair.  How did you travel out there?  My folks had an Overland touring car. The wagon was a covered wagon. My  mother would drive the car on ahead and then stop and wait until daddy had  caught up with the covered wagon.  You had a car and a horse drawn wagon?  Yes. Some of the times Mama would ride the wagon and Daddy would drive  the car. We children, there were four of us when we left Ripley and went to  the place out by Goodwell. As I said earlier, my youngest sister was born out  there.  5  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Burley  Wall  Burley  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Do you remember where you rode mainly? Was it in the car or the wagon?  I don   t know that I could say I rode mainly in either one. We changed off. It  suited us, I guess. When we returned to Payne County, three years later, we  moved the same way.  With the horses and the wagon and the car.  And we would sleep in the wagon at night. We had bunks, somehow. That   s  how we slept in the wagon at night.  Kelly, I wanted to say to you you   re free to interrupt and question. Don   t think  you   re stepping on toes.   Kelly Burley of KOSU radio joins in as an interviewer   Well, I got here a little late, you may have already answered this, but what  precipitated your family moving to Goodwell from Payne County?  My daddy was 42 and my mother was 29 when they married, so my daddy had  been in the race here in    91, and took the farm right on the edge of Ripley.  Some time later he had gone out with someone to the panhandle. He loved it  out there, so he bought a quarter section southeast of Goodwell. The folks  lived there for the first year they were married, and then came back to Ripley.  Then we moved out again.  What did he love about the panhandle?  The story is that his brother said,    But why do you like it out there?    and  Daddy said,    Oh, but you can see so far.    My uncle said,    But what can you  see?     Laughter   It does seem odd, today, thinking of somebody trading their quarter section  near Ripley     He kept that, it   s still in the family.  So he didn   t have anything to lose by moving out there. He still had his land  here.  No, we still had the farm.  You didn   t stay very long out there.  He had heart trouble, and it was too hard on his heart, the elevation I guess, so  we had to come back here.  Did you rent that land out or lease it?  6  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Burley  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  We rented it out. He sold that then in 1948, I believe it was, and kept the  minerals. We still have the minerals. He also had bought another quarter  section and another 40, so that we had 360 acres.  The minerals, is there anything on there that   s a natural gas or oil?  Gas.  Do you remember when you came back, you were a little older then, you would  have been six; what were your feelings about leaving the panhandle?  I was excited about coming back to Ripley. I could remember a little bit about  it because we talked at home about our friends back there, so I was kind of  excited about coming back. I had had a year of school at the little Frisco  country school.  Tell me about the Frisco school.  It was a mile and a quarter east of our house. We either walked to school or  drove a buggy, my older brother and sister and I, after I started to school.  Years later when I was back out there the school had shrunk. It wasn   t nearly  as big. My grandpa, who was a teacher, came out two different terms. He  lived with us there and taught school. He was my first grade teacher. I was  scared to death of him  laughs . In school we had a washstand at the back of  the building with a pail of water and a dipper, which everyone used.  One of the things that impressed me so was, I was just printing, as we had been  taught, but I saw those older children at the blackboard writing  cursive , and I  thought, well I can do that. I wrote    the   , t-h-e, and I thought that was  beautiful. I never printed after that.  We had, I guess they were box suppers or pie suppers or something at the  school at times, and we   d put on programs. At my first appearance on stage I  recited    Mary Had a Little Lamb.     Laughter   To thunderous applause, no doubt.  I   m sure. I was embarrassed.  Did you have the programs at school often?  Not too often, no.  Do you remember what other people did for the program?  No.  Laughter   Only your    Mary Had a Little Lamb.     7  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Yes. That was about all I could handle right then.  When you moved out to the panhandle what kind of living conditions did you  have there? What kind of house did you have out there?  My daddy had built a house when he and Mama went out there right after they  were married. It was a frame house, three rooms downstairs and a big room  upstairs. I guess we were unusual and ahead of our time. We had an attached  garage.  That   s not something you hear of very much at that time. Usually they just had  a barn that they would put the car in.  At Ripley we had the car shed out a little ways from the house.  It makes sense, you know. You wouldn   t have to get out in the weather to get  to the car.  Who went any place though? Very seldom did we get out and use the car. I  guess we would generally go to Goodwell, which was five miles, on Saturday  for groceries. Guymon was twelve miles away, and that was an experience, to  get out and go to Guymon.  Do you remember, as a child living out there, going to Guymon? Was it an  adventure for you?  One thing I remember, I was walking ahead of the folks down the street and a  young man approached from the other direction. I would step aside one way  and he, we just changed positions back and forth before we ever got around  each other   Laughs   How old were you when that happened?  I suppose I was four and a half or so.  And that stuck in your head this whole time   dancing with that guy. Do you  remember things at the time you went out there; that you had three brothers  and sisters?  Yes. I had an older brother, an older sister, and a younger brother when we  went out there. My younger sister was born in April of 1922.  Do you remember any of the things that you would do for fun or the games that  you would play when you were out there?  At school we would play tag or Annie Over.  Can you explain the rules for Annie Over?  8  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Burley  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Burley  Wall  You just throw, oh how did we play that   you throw a ball over and say,     Annie over      My mom used to play that with me, and I   m thinking she cheated me a little  bit  She always used to catch the ball and come over and hit me with it.  Yeah, it was something like that.  Everyone else I talked to just said you had to touch the people with the ball.  She took it a step further, huh?  She slapped me in the head with it  So tag and then Annie Over. Do you  remember anything else you would do for entertainment?  I suppose the boys would play some ball. I can   t remember playing a whole  lot at school. We had neighbors with children that we would visit, several  different neighbors. I guess us girls would play dolls. Somewhere there   s a  picture of some of the children at our place one Saturday afternoon, and they  had a picture of my sister and I with our dolls on the front porch.  So you moved back to Ripley in    23, right? You must have been a little sad  that you were leaving friends.  I think most of them had moved. There were people who came and went. I  can   t remember, although we did write for a time. We did keep in  correspondence with   Lucy Jordan was my age, and we exchanged letters a  few times after that. I can   t remember that it saddened me to leave.  Do you remember feeling happy to get back to Ripley?  Yes.  How long did you stay in touch with people from the panhandle that you  knew?  Not too long. There were one or two families that the folks kept in touch with.  The folks who moved on to our place when we left, we kept in touch with  them. In 1932, my brother went back out there, and immediately married one  of the girls that we had gone to school with. It was her sister and husband who  had lived on our place there.  Had he been in touch with that girl at all?  No.  Did you have any chores?  I can   t remember doing chores out there, but I probably gathered eggs and  9  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Burley  Wall  Burley  things like that. Of course, I did the dishes and did a little cooking. I   d stand  on a chair at the stove and stir the gravy. I   d make custard with the pan down  on the chair. I remember I got the eggs beat and Mama was going to pour the  milk in. I thought I   d catch a spoon full of milk, and of course, it splattered  everywhere.  What do you remember eating when you were out there?  The lady who stayed when my sister was born, cooked up a whole big bowl of  guinea eggs, and she wouldn   t let us kids have anything else until we ate all  those guinea eggs. Prior to that time, guinea eggs had been a treat, but that  cured us  We had meat and potatoes and gravy and oatmeal. One year while  we lived there my daddy came back to Payne County, and he and his brother  went to Arkansas. He brought back a load of apples. He filled the back seat of  the car with apples. That was wonderful.  Fresh fruit was a good treat for you all.  Yes, it was.  I can imagine. When you moved back to Ripley, did your dad continue to  farm?  Yes.  Did you go to school in Ripley?  Yes.  How did your life change when you moved back to Ripley? Do you remember  taking on more responsibility?  I remember that I was a little intimidated at such a big school, such a big class.  We always had the dishes to do and kitchen to clean up. I helped milk quite a  bit, not all the time, but I helped milk. Sometimes I   d have to pitch hay when  they were putting hay in the hayloft. I   d have to pitch it back. I helped with  the garden and laundry. In 1933 my mother was appointed postmaster at  Ripley. I worked in the post office then, and kept house at home. I got out my  old diaries today. The first one was given to me for my 18th birthday,  November 3, 1934. As I was reading through that, in    35 I did an awful lot of  house cleaning and scrubbing and cooking and washing.  In your diary you were talking about how much you enjoyed doing that?  Just a few little lines, but I   d say,    I did this and this today.    Some days I   d  say,    I sure am tired.    I worked in the post office during my senior year in  high school.  What did you do in the post office?  10  Wall  Burley  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Everything that needed to be done, sort the mail, put it up, sell stamps, money  orders.  Did you already know everyone in town or did the post office kind of solidify  that?  I knew everyone in town, but of course there were two rural routes. I knew  their names, but I didn   t necessarily know all the people on the routes.  Do you remember things you would do in Ripley when you were a little older  and had free time?  One of the things we children really enjoyed during the summertime was  laying out in the front yard and looking at the stars. Mama would tell us about  them. We would play that    When I go to California, I   m gonna take       and it  would start with an    A    and the next one on down the line. You had to keep up  with whatever all the ones prior to you had said.  See who could remember the longest string.  Sometimes one of us would start a story, we   d just make up a story, and stop  right in the middle of something. Then the next one had to pick that up and go  on and weave into the story what they wanted to. We never thought that that  was a learning experience, but I see it was now. We liked to do things like  that. We had lots of paper dolls and made up stories with the paper dolls and  the families of the paper dolls. Part of Ripley is built on my daddy   s  homestead there, so we were right there at the edge of town. We always had  friends up or we could visit them.  You mentioned playing    When I go to California,    and that kind of brings me  to the dust bowl period. I guess you would have been about 16 or 17.  Along about 15 or 16 when the dust bowl started. I remember we had one  wind and dust storm when we lived down by Goodwell. What I remember  about that is it was very frightening. The wind was blowing so terribly, and it  had just turned black. My grandpa said he was going upstairs and hold the  house down  laughter   I took that seriously. That   s the only dust storm I  remember during those years.  That would have been in the    20s.  That wasn   t the usual thing then. That was different.  You said that your brother moved back there in    32. That would have been  right at the beginning of the worst time in that area   s history.  Yes, he and his wife lived there on the place during really bad times.  What was his name?  11  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Burley  Wall  Burley  Wall  Kite  Wall  Burley  Wall  Kite  Wall  Preston Shoup.  We   re going to be talking to people in the Goodwell area in two weeks.  Of course, he   s 89 now. He lives in Arkansas, and has for many years.  Would it be a good thing to mention his name or a bad thing?  It wouldn   t matter.  I didn   t know whether that   d open some doors or shut them.  There   s probably some of the Murray family still there. That   s who he   d  married. Now they   ve divorced; they were just married three years.  Do you think the dust bowl impacted your life in Ripley?  Yes, it did. We had the dirt rolling in there from the west. When they   d have  a bad dust storm out there, we   d still have it rolling in back here.  And what did that look like?  It didn   t look like it did out there, but it was just big clouds of dust coming  from the west, sifting into the house.  Did you know how bad it was out there at the time?  Yes, we did because of our connections while we were out there. My daddy  wasn   t getting any rent from the place during those years.  That was my next question. Did he just let them have it?  They were supposed to be paying on crop basis. If you didn   t raise anything,  you didn   t pay anything. He finally came to the conclusion that probably he  should have been getting a little rent, but he didn   t.  Did he ever go out to check on the property?  No. He went out once. My brother and his wife came back for just a little  while, and Daddy took them back out there. Then my daddy and I went out in  September of    34, right after I had graduated from high school and my brother  and his wife had a baby. Finally I said to Daddy, as we drove mile after mile,  looked like it   d just been burned, and I said,    Why did they burn off all this  land?    Daddy said,    That   s sun burn.    It just looked like all the pastureland  out near there had been burned. There just wasn   t anything out there.  So you were here during the     The worst part of the dust bowl.  12  Kite  Wall  Burley  Wall  Burley  Wall  Burley  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  The worst part of the dust bowl, and the worst part of the Depression really,  too. How do you feel your life changed when times got a little tight money  wise? Do you remember it changing?  I remember when the stock market crashed. My daddy had some money, not  very much, but some money   it looked like a whole lot to us then   and he  lost every bit of it. I thought,    Well, we never saw it anyway.    I thought at  first,    It won   t ever matter to us, we won   t be affected.    Of course, we were,  just like everyone else. There were many people around Ripley who just  didn   t have anything. The saddest thing that I saw in all those years was a  family in town in Ripley who got put out of a house onto the street, just moved  out onto the street. I don   t know what finally became of them, but I know they  just lived out on the street for a while.  Did the bank just repossess their home?  They were renting.  How did the town react to that? Did somebody take them in?  I don   t know what happened. I knew my daddy to hire a man who wanted  some work to go in the timber and cut wood, not that daddy needed it, but the  man wanted to work. Then I saw him turn around and sell that wood to people  who needed to buy wood. He sold it for less than he paid the man.  Then I realized that in both instances he had allowed the people to keep their  dignity. On the one hand, the man had worked for some money. On the other  hand, the people had bought the wood. That was the kind of man my daddy  was.  For a lot of people, dignity was all they had.  Yes. They were eager to work, not for a handout, but to work for something.  Do you remember a lot of people coming through the area looking for work or  needing help?  I remember panhandlers coming through a lot, even before that. Even before  the Depression there would be young men going through the country,  stopping, wanting to sleep in the barn or wanting something to eat. Mama  always fed them, and talked with the young men whenever they came by. We  were off the main road then. After 33 Highway was put in, the road past our  place was not the main road to Cushing anymore, so we got less of that sort of  traffic.  Do you remember any people coming through that weren   t treated so friendly  or weren   t desirable?  I don   t know that we encountered any.  13  Burley  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  But you weren   t afraid of any of the panhandlers?  No. Those were the days when you weren   t so scared of things.  Did you know people from Ripley that moved out, that couldn   t make it  through the Depression and headed out somewhere else?  I can   t, right off hand, recall. I know that there were people who did, but many  people went to California. I don   t remember any in particular. After I was  married, and I was married in December of    35, I knew more people then who  went west to California. One of the girls I graduated with, she and her  husband went to Idaho and stayed there.  Did you lose any good friends or close friends in Ripley when they moved out?  I don   t know that I had any close friends that moved away.  How did you meet your husband?  He graduated from Perkins in 1931, and then his brother came to Ripley to  school that fall. He graduated in    32 in the class with my sister. We just got  acquainted with the group there. Some of them, his cousins had started  coming to the Christian Endeavor in Ripley. They all lived between Ripley  and Perkins. Actually, Verlin went with my older sister a little bit, but she  didn   t really want to go with him.  So you picked up where she left off  laughter ?  Well, some time later. It was a blind date, only because we knew each other.  A friend of mine was dating a cousin of his and told him to get a date for  Verlin and for his brother. There were three couples of us that went out on my  18th birthday, and I never went with anyone else again   Laughing   He was about three years older than you, right?  Five.  Five years. Was that a big age difference at the time?  No. After all, my daddy was 14 years older than my mother. 13 years I guess.  When you went out, what did you guys do?  We went to Cushing to the show a lot. That was the usual thing, go to the  show. Occasionally we   d go to a street dance. They had street dances during  the summer down at Ripley. Bob Wills would be at Perkins sometimes. I  couldn   t dance, but I liked to go, even though my folks didn   t want me to.  Do you remember going to Bob Wills    shows in Perkins?  14  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Burley  Kite  Wall  Kite  Burley  Kite  Burley  Wall  Burley  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Yes.  How were they?  They played for dances there. It was great.  I   m a big Bob Wills fan.  Are you?  Oh, yeah. I go down to Turkey, Texas every year. They have a big Bob Wills  celebration down there. He lived in Turkey. All the old guys get together and  make a lot of noise.  They were on the radio out at Tulsa for a long time.  KVOO?  My mom had a crush on Tommy Duncan. What about you?  No. I don   t know that I had any crushes on any of those.  She said he had ugly teeth. She had a big crush on him, and then when he  smiled she wouldn   t.  That ended it for her huh?  Yeah, until he   d close his mouth again.  Do you remember any of the shows or movies?  Shirley Temple shows. I read about some of them here today when I was  going through the year. Here, on March 21, 1935, I wrote,    dust dust dust.     The day before I had written,    dust still settling.    Then, the next day,    it  sprinkled.     You probably really liked that. Rain would kind of clear the air a little bit.  Yes.  Florence is looking through her diary for shows she may have seen.   I have to find a Saturday night. I never went to a show that Saturday night.  What   s your entry for your wedding day?  I may not want to tell you   Laughter   We   ll leave the room and you can say it into the microphone.   The following is Florence   s journal entry for her wedding day.   15  Kite  Wall  Burley  Wall  Burley  Wall  Burley  Wall  Burley  Wall  Burley  Wall  Burley  Wall  Kite  Wall  Worked until three p.m.   that was at the post office. Married  at six o   clock at the Christian Church in Perkins by Reverend  Walter Fiscus. Not bad at all.  I remember during the ceremony I thought,    Gosh, what if I don   t like being  married?    Then I looked at Reverend Fiscus, and his nose was crooked, and it  kind of tickled me  laughing . Anyway, I got past that then.  These are some funny entries.  The next day, Sunday, I wrote,    Still married.     Laughter  Okay, here   s one  time we went to see David Copperfield. I know we went to Shirley Temple  shows.  How much was it to get in?  I suppose probably a dime. I remember one time Verlin just had a quarter.  He probably sprung for popcorn and soda or something.  I don   t think so, no. Not much of that, lucky to have the quarter.  When did you start that diary?  The first of January of    35.  How long did that continue?  This one was five years and then this one is five years. I think there was a gap.  And you wrote in it daily?  Yes, you know, just three or four lines.  That   s really hard to do, to continue to do that day in and day out. Sometimes  life gets in the way. I wish I had done something like that.  See, there were times I missed.  After you married, did you live with his parents for a while?  For a while, I stayed at home because I was keeping house and working in the  post office both. My folks needed me. Then we lived in a little bitty shanty,  two little bitty rooms. The furniture we had, mostly Verlin made. He made a  kitchen table, kitchen cabinets, and built a box-like thing on the wall for a dish  cupboard. He   d taken an old car seat and made, I guess we   d call it a love seat  now. I upholstered it and covered it in cretonne. I had a little dressing table  made with a couple of orange crates with a top across and cretonne curtains  around it.  16  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  What   s cretonne?  Well, it was a cheap and flashy cotton material. It was usually a big flashy  print, just a cheap material.  I saw you   d written on there about your feed sack clothes.  Oh, yes. That was one of the mainstays, was using feed sacks or flour sacks.  You could make some really cute things out of them. I remember one year, in  the home demonstration club's dress review, there was a category for sack  dresses. I know I had made myself a suit out of unbleached sacks. They were  heavier than flour sacks. I had entered the dress review with that.  How late in your life did you wear feed sack dresses?  After we went to Hooker, then you went and bought the feed sacks. I still  made some of my dresses and shirts for my little boy and dresses for my  daughter, who was born in Texas County in    44. You could get some prettier  sacks than you could material even.  Do you have any of those feed sack dress at all left?  No. Who would have ever thought they   d want to see them again?  I   ve never seen one before. I don   t think I   ve ever seen one.  You might have seen a bunch and didn   t know it.  So you moved back to Texas County then.  My husband and I moved back out there in    43. We had friends who had  moved from the Guymon area back here for a while. We made real good  friends with them, so when they went back home to Texas County, they told  Verlin,    Come harvest, you should come out and work in harvest.    Of course,  the Depression had lifted then, and this was starting the war years. That   s how  come we went back out there. He went out and worked for a gentleman who  farmed just vast acreages. He liked Verlin so well that he wanted him to come  and take a full time job, so we went out there and he worked for this fellow.  Do you remember when the Depression started to fade and more prosperous  times came back? Do you remember anything in your life in Ripley changing?  Do you remember being able to do something different, or any changes at all  when better times came through?  Since my mother got the job at the post office it eased for us better than it did  for other people, I think. I thought about this a lot. I never thought we were  poor, but I can look back now, and we were. I felt very secure because we  owned that place at Ripley and that place at Goodwell, and we weren   t poor.  17  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  When you say you look back now and see that you were poor, what do you see  that tells you that you were poor?  Poor by the standards of today, I guess I   d say. We didn   t really go without.  We had to do with less. That was the way it was, and we did it. I don   t know  if you read on this or not, but I had written down, remembered this. After  Verlin and I were married he said,    Well, I can promise you this, we   ll never  miss a meal, but we may postpone a few.     That   s a good way to put it. You   d also written on there    ceilings caving in.     Out there at Hooker.  So in    43 he gets a job helping that guy.  Yes, helping him with ranching and farming.  Once again, you packed up to head out to Texas County. What did you think  about that?  It was a great experience. Verlin had never lived away from his parents. Well,  I hadn   t either. I hadn   t lived away from Payne County except for three years.  It was a little daunting and a little exciting. At that time 330 miles was a long  way from home. That   s about what the distance was.  How did you travel out there the second time?  When Verlin and I moved out, we had a truck. We had gone out with our  pickup load, and then brought Henry   s truck back. We moved the rest of our  things with the truck.  Where did you live?  14 miles northwest of Hooker.  So you were getting pretty close to Kansas at that point.  We were three miles from Kansas. Hugoton was just north of us, and Liberal  was east of us, farther than that, but it was east of us.  We were going out to Hooker at the same time we had to do our Goodwell/  Guymon tour. We were also going to Liberal and seeing some people there.  I   m sure we   ll be going right by your place.  Well, the house is gone now. It was sold where we lived. At Hooker, the  house was sold and moved off of the place.  What kind of house did you move into in    43?  18  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  It was a little four-room house, wood.  Better than the first house you had.  We hadn   t lived there all that time. We just lived there a few months, in that  shack. Then we moved to a rented place. Later we bought ten acres and  moved the house on it ourselves. That   s where we were living when we  moved to Hooker.  The house that you moved to in Hooker was purchased and moved off?  Yes, some years after we moved off. It   s not there now.  There   s another thing I wanted to talk to you about. With a lot of people we  interview, there   s a lot of house moving going on. Like you said, you moved a  house onto ten acres and people bought your old house at Hooker and moved  it off. A lot of people we talk to talk about they   ll buy a house and move it to  their land, or their house was bought and moved off. I didn   t know all that  house movement was going on. Would they move it with big trucks, I guess?  I don   t know. We weren   t there. We didn   t own that. The man that Verlin  worked for provided housing for his hands. That was the house on the place  where we lived.  So what was life like your second time out there?  We arrived just shortly before a terrible snowstorm. It snowed and snowed  and snowed. We were snowed in all winter, but Verlin had to get out and  work. They had moved 600 head of cattle down to Optima on a 6,000-acre  pasture. Then came this storm. They had to try to get through to haul feed to  the cattle because the pasture was covered up. The cattle all lived through the  winter. After spring came and they moved them back home, they just started  dying like flies. They   d used all their strength through the winter. They lost  an awful lot of cattle that way. I don   t remember what your question was     I don   t either. I think I was talking about moving houses  laughter . I said  what was your life like the second time?  Richard and I were there by ourselves an awful lot, and I had never burned  coal. As I said, I can   t rightly say I burned coal that winter, I just tried to. For  heat and also for cooking. It was a nasty winter. One day I thought, well I   ll  toss a little kerosene in on that coal and get it started burning. It exploded   Richard was standing right behind me. He was not quite three years old. It  singed off his eyebrows and hair, and it did me about the same way I guess.  You never did that again.  I didn   t do that again. I just was cold. You talked about the dust in the house.  Judith was born in August, after we had moved out there in the fall. It was the  19  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  next spring I guess. She was several months old, and one afternoon I wanted  Richard to take his nap. He wanted me to put Judith on the bed with him. He  wouldn   t lay still   he   d just roll from one end to the other. He wasn   t going to  sleep, so I had gone in and picked Judith up off of the bed. I had not much  more than gotten back in the living room when the ceiling fell, the plaster  ceiling, right on the blanket where she had been lying. The attic was just full  of dirt, and the walls. Between the outside wall and inside wall too. It was  just from the years of dust storms.  We had one pretty good dust storm that first spring we were there. It was the  only dust storm we had in the six years that we lived there. I was trying to iron  that afternoon, and I was having a terrible time keeping the dust off of things  that were ironed. The neighbors came up and he said,    Well, what do you  think of this?    I thought,    Well, I knew when we moved out here that they had  dust storms, so I just as well get used to it.    That was the only one we had.  That was in forty what?     44.  They were still blowing around that late. Here   s a weird question, but it   s one  that I   m interested in. Do you remember when you first got electricity?  I remember when we first got a wind charger, which was electricity for us.  We got a wind charger, a six-volt one, here before we left to go to Hooker.  We had a little light hanging down from the ceiling. We thought that was  great. After we went to Hooker, we got a twelve-volt wind charger. They  didn   t get rural electricity out there until after we left.  Which was when?     49. The place we had bought here at Perkins, from Verlin   s aunt, the electric  lines were just then going past that place. In    49, we got electricity here at  Perkins.  What would you run with the wind charger? Did you have a light bulb or two?  Yes, just light bulbs.  No radio?  Yes. I   m not sure whether we ran the radio off of that or just off of another  battery. We used to just have a battery radio.  So you would hook up the batteries to like a windmill or something like that  almost?  The wind charger is   you know what a wind charger looks like don   t you?  20  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Yes. How tall is it?  You can get them in different heights.  In my mind, I always just thought that it looked like a windmill.  It looks something like a windmill, not exactly. Sometimes they were just on  top of the house, fastened on the roof. The one we had out there, of course you  didn   t have to put it up very high out there to trap wind, I suppose it was 15 to  18 feet or so, something like that.  Then it would be connected to the batteries, and then you   d connect the wires.  Yes. The batteries were in the basement. We got gas though. I just had to  battle with coal one winter  laughing , and then there was a gas well drilled on  the section where we lived. They put a gas well down in the center of the  section, and then all four quarters shared. We could have gas by doing the  piping ourselves.  So you got natural gas?  Yes. We had a kitchen range and a heating stove and, most wonderful of all, a  refrigerator. It ran off of gas. I thought,    The first thing I   m going to do is  make ice cream.    It didn   t turn out too well. It didn   t make ice cream as  easily as I thought it would, but that was really uptown to have a refrigerator.  Up to that time you would iron with     Flat irons. Well, I still did because until I got some real electricity, I used the  flat irons.  Did you ever see those gasoline irons?  I   ve seen them, and my mother had one, but it never was very satisfactory with  us.  It looks dangerous to me.  That   s right. I think so.  Going through the dust bowl and Depression era, what are some things that  you take with you today from that period?  Frugality. It made me very frugal. I knew some people who, when times got  better and they raised their children, indulged them because they said,    I don   t  want them to go through what I had to go through.    I said,    It never hurt me to  do without, and it wouldn   t hurt my children not to have everything.    And  save. You ought to save because you may need it someday. I think  compassion for others who just are in bad financial conditions and are needy.  21  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Do you do work for people like that? I guess the way you see those people is  changed because of what you went through. Is that what you   re saying?  Yes.  Frugality, compassion   anything else that you think has left a mark on you or  any other things that you carry with you?  We made our own fun. In school, we   d have hay rack rides. We walked a lot  to go to things. Skating parties. We found pleasure in simple things, I guess.  What was a skating party like? Would you go to a skating place?  Sometimes you   d go to a roller skating rink, but this was later. It   d be ice-skating.  What about the hay rack rides?  Well, one of our classmates would bring the hay wagon and team and meet us  down at the river bridge, and we   d go up and around on the bluff some place  and have a weenie roast. One time, one of the boys had very thoughtfully  brought along some grapevine, and we all tried to smoke grapevine  laughter .  Let me tell you, that   s not easy to do. I couldn   t do it.  I   ve heard about people doing that. You   re the first person I   ve met that   s  tried it.  I tried it along with everyone else. We   d hike out to Ghost Hollow and have a  weenie roast.  How old were you when you went to Ghost Hollow?  That was when I was a junior or senior in high school, 16 or 17.  This isn   t what I intended to talk to you about, but I   ve heard a little bit about  Ghost Hollow, just enough to make me curious. What is it?  It   s just a place down off the river road there that   s kind of spooky. I guess it   s  kind of spooky because of all the stories we   ve heard. There was supposed to  have been a man hung there, I think it was. On this particular class party that  we went to once, I don   t remember whether it was one boy or more than one.  Anyway, he had a gun with blanks, and was shooting it around. Something  frightened one of the girls and she started running, and that stampeded you  know. And someone shot off that gun, and she said,    Oh I   m shot     Let me  tell you, that got our attention. She wasn   t, she was just kidding, but we were  all fired up on ghost stories already.  And there you were at Ghost Hollow.  22  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Yeah.  Laughs   A person has come in here trying to find information on Ghost Hollow, trying  to find if we had any information on it. We don   t, but we do now, thanks to  you.  I couldn   t say just exactly where it is. I couldn   t find it.  Is it on the north side of the river?  Yes.  On that east-west river road somewhere.  Of course there   s a new bridge out there since I finished high school, but the  way the old bridge was, you   d go across it from Ripley and turn right, go down  the river road, and then somewhere off down there to the left was Ghost  Hollow.  That   s where the ghosts came out. You mentioned several things that stuck in  your mind; your first trip to the panhandle, you remembered that guy in  Guymon, and different things. Is there one thing in your mind that when you  think back to the thirties and the dust bowl period, is there one image or  experience in your mind that you always think about or that stands out more  than any other? When you say the thirties and the dust bowl, what image  comes to your mind immediately?  Just the dirty thirties.  Well, is there anything you   d like to mention that we haven   t spoken about?  I don   t know that there is.  Could I take a peek at one of your diaries?   Laughs  Yeah, it   s kind of foolish, kind of silly.  I bet you are so glad, though, that you did this, when you look back.  Yes. For years I could prove my point because it was in my diary, dates and  so forth.   Reading  Worked in the flower border.  This started in 1940.  pause  This covers when I got married and when our  first baby was born and died. Then that one would cover when Richard was  born, our second child, and going to Hooker.  Your first baby died?  23  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  She was a blue baby, and just lived one day. She was born in    39.  I was just reading about you making ice cream.   Laughs  We raised everything we ate back then. My daddy had fruit trees, so  if we didn   t have fruit I got fruit from over there and canned.  One of the things that always amazes me is laundry, the task of doing laundry  during that. Some people we talked to actually boiled water in big pots.  We did it outdoors, but my grandma did  boil it in big pots . When I   d visit  her, she   d build a fire under a big black pot and boil the clothes in it, but we  would wash the clothes out, put them in the boiler with soap and boil them,  and then we   d punch them. Did you ever see a puncher?  That metal thing you     Yeah. And then take it out and scrub it on the board and then put it through  the rinse water and hang it on the line. One of the first times I washed after we  moved to Hooker, I had been in the habit here if things weren   t clear dry I   d  leave them out overnight. I left sheets and towels and things on the line over  night out there, and I never saw them again.  Laughs  A windstorm came up  in the night and took them away.  Somebody in Woodward got all your clothes.  They probably did. By then I had a gasoline motor washing machine.  Those seem to be big improvements.  Yes, they were, but they could be so hard to start sometimes. You couldn   t get  them started and keep them going.  I tried to understand how you start those. There   s a handle?  You push down like that on the   you know, kind of like you start a  motorcycle.  Okay, that makes sense.  Do they still start motorcycles like that?  Yes. And I   ve always seen those pedals that you use. That makes sense. Once  you got the gasoline powered washer and it started, the laundry was easier.  It was much easier, much easier.  I can   t imagine doing laundry by hand. What else would you be doing? It   d  be a full time job, I   d think.  24  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  It was a full time job on wash day. It was a full time job on the day you ironed  because, gosh, we ironed everything. Then you might spend another day  patching, mending. That   s why I really appreciate a lot of the conveniences  we have now. At home, when I grew up at Ripley, we did have running water  in the house, but it was just cold water. It ran to the kitchen sink. After that  then, you had to pump and carry the water. I   ve done it all.  Well I   d like to thank you for coming in and talking with us. I think this is a  really important project that we   re working on here.  Well, it   s interesting to me. I like to remember those things.  This is just kind of like an oral version of your diary. In 20, 30, 40 years  people can come back and listen to your tales. I just want to say thanks for  being a part of it.  Well I   m glad I could be. I often say that the people who talk about the good  old days, the thing about the good old days is we were young then. That   s  what made them the good old days.  I have to agree with you. The stories I hear about people   s experiences  doesn   t make me want to go back there. It was more simple and less  complicated.  There were some things that were good. Of course, there were a lot of good  things about it, but you   ve got to take the whole bundle. You can   t pick and  choose about what you take. I think when I raised my children it was a  simpler time to raise a family, a better time. They weren   t faced with a lot of  the choices that children have now a days, and the things they are allowed to  do.  If when you get home or any time really, you can think of any more stories or  things you want to talk about   usually what happens to me is I   ll get home and  think, oh I should have asked that question.  That   s one reason I wrote a few things down there to jog my memory. One  thing that I don   t know if you noticed on there because I had it on another part  of the sheet was the old chain letters.  No, I didn   t notice that.  Well, you know about the chain letters?  I   ve had some sent to me.  The first that I know about that they started   this was during the Depression     you would get a letter from someone and then you were supposed to send it on  to so many other people and send a dime to this one who sent it to you. Then  when these others sent it to other people and all, they sent you the dime,  25  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  theoretically. In the post office, people would come in and buy enough stamps  for those that they were supposed to send to. They wouldn   t be sending that  dime  laughter . It was a dead give away by how many stamps they bought.  Did you ever send a dime back to that person?  I never did do any of that stuff. No. I thought that was a scam, and of course  it went from ten cents, from bad to worse. It didn   t stay at ten cents.  If you can think of anything, just give us a call, and we   ll call you right back.  There   s the old medicine shows that use to come through town.  All right, through Ripley?  Yeah, they   d have medicine shows come through there every once in a while,  and everybody went to the medicine show.  So what would it be like?  They   d have some kinds of entertainment, and I can   t remember what kind of  entertainment they   d have, but they would hock their medicines, all these  medicines. They just cure anything, anything. One time, somehow or another,  we had some of their snake oil that was supposed to cure everything. My  younger sister had a bad earache. Mama and Daddy weren   t at home, so us  kids were going to doctor her. That nearly drove her up the wall. It about did  her in, it hurt so bad.  Would the medicine show people be in wagons or in trucks?  Trucks and things. They   d bring their backdrops, I guess, and all. I guess  they   d have give-a-ways of some sort, too. It would draw big crowds.  I guess I have heard of the modern day medicine show like that.  I   ve not heard of anything like that. I don   t think they   d be allowed to now.  Right, how old were you then?  That would be when I was in high school.  So early    30s, is that right?  Yes. Late    20s and early    30s.  What did you think about Bob Wills when you first heard him play?  I thought he was wonderful.  26  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  Kite  Wall  I don   t know what I   d give to go back and see him play. It   d be something big.  What a character he was.   Shouting  Take it away Leon   Laughs  Of course we had our own little  fame there from Ripley, Billy McGinty. When Otto Gray took it over then, I  knew all those people that were in that.  Did you ever go to their dances?  No. Back when I was a child, pretty young, during the summer, I don   t know  if this was every week or what, but I know sometimes we   d go down and they  would play. There was Billy McGinty and Guy Messcar and Ules Moore and  Frank Sherrill and Paul Harrison and I think some others, but they   d just play.  The gazebo was sitting downtown some place then.  Well, all right. I   m afraid we   re taking a lot longer than I told you we would,  but you   ve got some good stories. I could talk to you for a long time.  I thought of something else, and my age is showing I guess; I forgot what it  was.  -------  -------  
