 Lemons  What we   ll do to start is let each of you introduce yourself by telling us your  name, when you were born and where you were born, and then we   ll start  talking.  I   m Garnett Hale. I was born south of Mutual on July 16, 1913.  I   m Faye Moore, and I was born east of Camargo on the Duncan place on a  Sunday morning, October 24, 1915. My maiden name was Ralston.  My maiden name was White.  I am Olive Ray. I was born April 18, 1916 four miles south of Vici. And my  maiden name was Stewart.  I   m Louella Coulson, and I was born one, one, and one-one, January 1, 1911 at  Fairview, OK. I was Louella Cathey in the first place, before I married Floyd  Coulson.  Is everybody welcome to your meeting? I want to see what you people did  during the storms.  She lived in Liberal, Kansas during the storms.  Was it bad up there?  Was it, it would get so dark the chickens would go roost.  That   s what they did here   One evening it was so bad the storm picked the rocks up and my husband was  going out to milk, and it hit him in the face so badly, the cows went unmilked  that evening. And it was so bad that the dirt would pile around the fence post  as tall as the fence post. Yeah, I lived through it.  And what is your name?  5  Cunningham  Lemons  Ray  Lemons  Coulson  Hale  Lemons  Ray  Hale  Lemons  Ray  Cunningham  Coulson  Moore  Ray  Coulson  My name is Faye Cunningham. I was born December 3, 1911 up near  Herrington, Kansas. I   m eighty-nine. You know when the dirt would get so  bad that the hospitals have to put sheets up on the windows; you know it   s  pretty bad.  Well would you all say you all lived in a rural area or did you live in town?  During the dust bowl I lived both, I was married in 1934 and then I moved out  onto the farm in    36 and lived out there a year. Then moved to Enid, so I lived  in both; in Enid it wasn   t too bad but the year I lived out on the farm it was  horrible.  Maybe you could take turns telling us what a typical day was like, it didn   t  have to be a dust storm day, just like in the early thirties what did you do when  you got up?  Milk the cows.  I was married in 1930 and my oldest girl was born in 1932, and it was so dusty  when I put her to sleep I had to almost everyday put her on the bed and put  pillows up and put a sheet up over the top of that to keep the dust off of her.  That must have been hard having little kids during those days?  And two, you would wash their diapers and put them on the line and they were  awful.  Couldn   t tell you washed them.  What about you all, what was a typical day like?  You knew it was going to blow before the day was over almost, it closed some  roads. If anywhere there was a wheat field close to the road especially if it  was on the south side of the road it closed the road in the county.  Every morning we would get up and think it might be nice, but just in a little  while they call it    northern roller   . There was a roller coming in.  You could see them, you could see them coming.  The worst one was on a Sunday evening.  Yeah that was Black Sunday. That evening I went with my sister-in-law. She  said    I must gather my eggs.    We saw it coming, it got there when we were in  the chicken house. The men had gone and taken the children and went into the  house. We hollered at them and they hollered at them we was following their  voice to get to the house because we couldn   t see anything.  That was on April the 14th in    35. We stood out by the cistern just north of the  6  Hale  Kite  Hale  Lemons  Hale  Coulson  Ray  Hale  house, and just watched it coming in. When it got pretty close, we went in the  house to light the coal oil lamps, but you couldn   t see the light. It was just so  dark. The chickens went to roost. It was just awful. I had a baby in    32, and  like she said, you   d have to put stuff over the crib to try to keep the dust off of  them. My neighbor, they lost a baby with dust pneumonia at that time, at that  same storm.  I went to Liberal, Kansas to visit my father-in-law, and he lived in a little two-bedroom  house, and that was the first night I was there to stay all night. About  four o   clock, it was so dark that he lit the coal oil lamp and sat there and read  the Bible. I didn   t know what to think about that for a while. It was so dark,  and Leo had gone to take a tractor out to the country for some company. It  was just like a fire; a light would go by the windows like this. There was no  electricity, and the wind went to blowing. Now that was dust. I said,    Oh,  Dad Hale, the roof blew off of that house over across there.    He said that it  did and told me to get the baby and crawl under the bed, so I did. I didn   t do it  right away, but there was a brick house just on the west side of us and it blew  that house all to pieces. I was worried about Leo then, but then it got lighter.  The wind quit blowing and we got a little light so we could see. We had forks  and mattresses and everything in our yard. All it did to our house was break a  little bit of plaster right in the corner. Our little old house stood. After a  while, he was so far out of town with his tractor on his truck, and it hit so bad  that it killed the cars. He had to walk back to town. I looked up and there he  came with his hand in his pockets. I was just bawling. I was afraid, and he  said he knew I was all right. We just had everything under the sun in our yard,  from forks to bedclothes. It killed the lady that was on the west side of us.  That dust was always bad at four o   clock in the afternoon. You couldn   t see  nothing.  It blew the brick home down?  The big brick home on the west side of us. It was a new house, and it killed  her. The house on the south of us, it took the top off of it.  A pretty fierce storm.  That was my first experience there. That was Liberal, Kansas, and they had a  tornado. It was dark at four o   clock.  They were the good old days, but I don   t want to live them over.  We moved to the farm in    35, and we didn   t buy any chickens, but they  farmed. They put out a crop, and I put out a big garden. We didn   t raise  anything. Before we moved to Enid, we took a trip. We went through Fort  Supply and out through the panhandle, and then south to Canadian. There was  nothing but fence posts and bare ground. There wasn   t a blade of grass. There  was nothing but cow chips.  We had a beautiful garden. We had about everything, and it was so nice, then  7  Lemons  Hale  Ray  Hale  Ray  Lemons  Hale  Lemons  Hale  Lemons  Hale  Coulson  the grasshoppers came in.  Before we talk about the grasshoppers, what were you growing in your  garden?  Oh, we had everything. We had a beautiful garden, and then grasshoppers  moved in. We lived out here on John Poulson   s house. There were a lot of  trees, and then grasshoppers just moved in. They ate all of the leaves and ate  the garden. You   d look at a fence post, and you couldn   t tell the fence post.  There were great big old grasshoppers just thick.  And that was what year?  That   s when Vestal was a baby, and that   s when we went to California. He  was born in    36.     36 was a bad year. That was a hot year and a bad year.  So you guys moved to Enid when it got bad, and you moved to California?  We went to California.  How long did you stay in California?  We were there for about three years, and built a couple of houses. That was  during the depression. People were living behind signs and under the bridges.  I had a brother and sister there. We stayed with them one week. Leo got a job  the next day after we got there. Everyone told us they   d been there so long  and they hadn   t got a job. He went down and put in for a job and got a  carpenter job. He didn   t do carpentering, but he got a carpenter job. He came  home, went and got him some stuff, and made him a carpenter box and bought  all of the tools he had to have and went to work. There was no place that you  could rent. He said if I had one of these big trucks, he   d make a trailer house if  he had a place to set it. My brother Ralph told him he could set it under one of  his trees if he wanted. So he bought one, and we got this real thick ply board  and made that all new. We got some furniture and moved in there. Then we  bought a couple of lots and built a house. I never got to live in it because we  rented it right straight. Then we built another one. When we left it, we sold it.  Leo wanted to go back to Oklahoma. He said it was the easiest place to make  a living.  So he was working in California, but still decided to come back?  Yes.  We lived up on a hill all this time, through the dust storm and everything. We  were married in    27. We had two little boys, and this little girl was born in     32. She was fun. We had to sure watch about the dust coming in. We had to  cover her cradle and everything. We put her through it without pneumonia. I  8  Hale  Lemons  Ray  Hale  Coulson  Hale  Coulson  Hale  Lemons  Moore  Lemons  Moore  don   t know how, but it was during the depression too. When I had this little  baby, the mama was supposed to stay in bed about ten days. We hired a lady  to work for us, and we had to pay her two dollars a week. When it came time  for her to leave, we didn   t have the two dollars, so we had to sell a pig. I sure  wouldn   t want to live in those old days again.  No, I wouldn   t either.  What was fun?  We played croquet if the nights weren   t too bad, because they had a croquet  set down at the Methodist church here in town. If the weather wasn   t bad,  we   d come in and play croquet every night with the people in town.  My youngest girl, we lived out here on a little place southeast here.  Everybody was hard up you know. It seemed like everybody was. She was  getting big enough that she needed shoes. I told Leo that we needed to go get  Rosalee some shoes. We didn   t have anything but our little dab of cream and  eggs to sell. He said we   d see what we could do about it. He went off out in  the pasture and took Rosalee and Vestal. I didn   t know where he was going.  He came back, and he had four big old skunks. It was the prettiest thing. He  had killed them. He knew where there was a skunk bed. He dug them out and  killed them. At that time, they were a pretty good price. They   d clean them  and put them on a board and stretch them. They were the prettiest things. He  got the all fixed, and we came up to town. He sold them and got her a pretty  pair of white shoes that buttoned up the side. It was lots of people. We   d go  on. If you had a blow out and ruined a tire, you went on the rim. That   s the  way it was.  But you didn   t have a car.  No. We got a car when we got married.  We did too. Floyd had a car when we got married.  But everybody was the same. We   d come to town and come up the hill here to  Vici. There used to be a big hill out there. But you wasn   t the only one that as  going on a rim if you had a flat.  Well what was going on with you and your family?  Well, just about the same. I can   t think what year it was, but we raised  turkeys. When we sold those turkeys, we bought us a new pickup. We paid  for it with what those turkeys brought. That was in 1938.  Do you remember how much you paid for it?  I don   t know. It seems to me like it was  2,400 or  2,500. We lived up on  Crick, so it was a good place to raise turkeys and we had our milk cows and  9  Coulson  Lemons  Coulson  Moore  Hale  Moore  Hale  Ray  Kite  Ray  we had pigs. But before we moved up there, why we were living just a little  ways west of where the Camargo Cemetery is, on the north side of the road.  Then we moved back up in the Crick. I know when our youngest boy was  born, we were at my folks    and they were down on this    And we had a baby  bed and we always had to keep his sheets stretched completely over it to keep  the dust out.  We put wet gunnysacks over the windows when we saw a dust storm coming  in. I had made some real heavy quilts out of wool pieces right after I was after  I was married and that   s what we hung over those west windows in our house,  and the west door too. It seems like that   s where it came in most of the time.  Most of it came in from the northwest. We never did take them off. It made  the house awfully dark. We didn   t notice it so bad her in town, but we did out  there on the farm. But then you   d move those quilts away from the windows,  and they   d just be full of dirt and dust. I didn   t have children then.  Did any of you that had children ever have to comfort your children in any  way? Were they ever scared of the dust storms? It was dark in the house and  the wind is blowing.  I didn   t have children during that time.  You lit the kerosene lamps. There wasn   t much light. And really, mine wasn   t  big enough. As long as Mommy and Daddy were around or Grandma and  Grandpa, they were content. But it was bad.  That   s about all we had were lamps, coal oil lamps. Nobody had electricity  then.  I know Bill was talking here in this, where he went to go get the cows and  whatever it was that was growing, he said that there was electricity that went  by on the top of that and it killed it.  That   s the way it done.  We decided in August that year, 1936, to move to Enid and see if we could get  a job. It was 118 degrees that day on the thermometer when we got out there,  when we come to the house that we rented. I don   t know, we didn   t have air  conditioning in our car or at our house or anything. I don   t know how we  survived that heat that year, but it was a hot summer.  How did you end up back here from Enid?  We moved back here in town and took over the Magnolia business, the  Magnolia oil business. My husband sold wholesale and his dad ran the station,  and then after awhile he went back in the store. His dad was the store operator  here, grocery store. He had traded it for this farm. That   s the reason that we  moved out there. He had traded for that farm that year. He traded his stock  out of his store for that farm and Elmer and I moved out there. Oh, it was a  10  Moore  Ray  Hale  Cunningham  Ray  Lemons  Moore  Ray  Lemons  Ray  Moore  Hale  Ray  Moore  Lemons  Cunningham  Ray  Moore  terrible thing. Then we did good after we moved back to town. We bought a  house and we   ve run that Magnolia wholesale here for thirteen years after we  moved back in    37. That   s when Stewart, my son, first child, was born.  I remember too when the government offered to buy all the cows that we  would sell them for three dollars a head; now that was awful.  And we canned meat.  Yes. I canned a lot and about all we had to buy was sugar and coffee and salt  and stuff like that. I canned everything. We canned our meat, our beef, our  steak.  It tells here that a big fat hen would bring a dollar.  When we moved to Enid, we had a lot of that canned beef yet.  You said that they were buying the cattle for three dollars a head. Do you  remember anyone saying this is ridiculous?  My husband and my dad both, they wouldn   t sell our cows. Some way they  were gonna manage to take care of them, and they did.  My dad had so many cattle that he would feed and he butchered a lot of them.  There were five of us children. He divided that up, and we canned it.  Do you still can meat?  Do I still? No, but it was good meat. You cut it in chunks.  We   ve got the freezers now and that   s where it all goes.  Sticks of sausage and fry it a little bit, you know, and put it in these big jars put  a little lard on it and pick a sausage out of there.  That beef. And then we   d take it out of there and roll it in the flour fry it and  that was good, canned beef.  You guys can   t imagine that, can you?  The first time someone told me that they used to can meat; I had to ask how  they did that.  We put it in quart jars.  We just cut it up in chunks and pressured it.  We   d get those big mouth jars and I made the steak, would fry, brown it a little  and then pack it in there in lard. Then we would cut it up, cube it up and that  11  Lemons  Ray  Kite  Ray  Lemons  Moore  Hale  Ray  Hale  Lemons  Ray  Kite  Cole  Kite  was good to make open up and make noodles and throw some potatoes in it.  Oh it was good meat.  What was your favorite food? Evidently you like canned meat a lot, but what  was your favorite food?  I   m a vegetable person. That   s the reason that I planted a big garden when I  moved. Of course, I was raised on a farm. My husband wasn   t, but he learned  to love it. I still raise my garden. I still can. No I don   t can vegetables so  much anymore. I only can some green beans for my daughter. But I did back  then I canned all the vegetables    til they got a locker here in town because we  didn   t have a refrigerator, so you couldn   t keep anything. You don   t have to  can anymore because now we have freezers.  Freezers have taken over canning.  All I ever can now in vegetables is tomatoes and green beans.  Well let   s say it was a special event like somebody   s birthday or the Fourth of  July. What would you have to eat that was different then?  A birthday cake.  We   d always have a birthday cake.  Homemade ice cream. Chicken, we always raised a lot of chickens.  I remember the first time we had wieners when I was a kid. We went in a  wagon with mules. I stopped and told a neighbor to come down for supper  because mother had bought some wienies, and we were going to have kraut  and wienies for supper. I remember when they first got peanut butter out too.  I remember all of that.  I hope you had lunch, we   re talking about food.  Another little interesting thing about going to Enid, my husband got a job at  the dairy. He drove a one-horse cart and delivered dairy products. That was  something that he really enjoyed. It was something that we had there. They   d  come right to your door and brought you dairy products.  We have a story about Jell-O, is that right?  I was telling my kids, I might have been a backwoods kid and didn   t know any  better, but we didn   t have Jell-O when I grew up. I can   t remember the first  that I ever ate, but I know I was thrilled to death when I got my freezer. We  could only have Jell-O in the winter.  Hold on a second, we have new comers. What   s your name?  12  Cole  Kite  Boyd  Lemons  Cole  Lemons  Boyd  Cole  Boyd  Coulson  Boyd  Cole  Ray  Cole  Ray  Cole  Boyd  Cole  Bertha Cole. And Verla is my neighbor and friend.  And what   s your name?  Verla Boyd. June 23, 1910.  And how old are you? Everybody else told us how old they are.  Oh, well I   d never be ashamed. All you have to do is look at me.  Laughter   My birthday is January 11, 1912.  Well, our next question, I   ll direct it at the two of you that just came in, what   s  your fondest memory of this time in the 1920   s and 1930   s? Just prior to the  depression and dust bowl and during. When you think back, what makes you  think, that was all right.  My fondest memories or just memories?  It was probably about your first baby, Verla. It was probably along about that  time.  Well, he was born in thirty-one, and the storms were thirty-four?  Yeah, thirty-four and five.  Well, I remember when they were talking on the radio.    It   s coming now,  everybody get ready, it   s going to be here     We hung some wet sheets over  the one room where the baby was. In a little while, it began to get dark. The  chickens all went to roost. We lit the lamp, and it rolled in just as dark as  could be. When I went to go back in the bedroom, my quilt was so covered  with dust that I couldn   t even tell what color it was.  I got my kids over by the cellar cave. I thought the world was coming to an  end, when this big black thing     That was Black Sunday.  A cellar wouldn   t have helped me. I was scared to death. That was in what,     35?  Yeah, that was    35.  The chickens, like she said, they went running for the chicken house. They  thought it was like night. I guess I went back in the house, because I didn   t go  in the cave  cellar . It was just me and two babies.  That was the year we lost two babies with the dust storm, too.  That   s what was so frightening because people were dying. We lost a little  13  Boyd  Cole  Ray  Kite  Ray  Moore  Lemons  Moore  Hale  Moore  Cole  Cunningham  Coulson  Boyd  Hale  Lemons  niece in our family she was probably two years old. I went through the house  swinging wet towels. I was just swinging all around the house trying to clear  the air.  Another thing I remember, the drawers and everything blew full of Russian  thistles. When we got ready to go, my husband said we   d have to hang a chain  on the back of the car, or we   d probably catch them on fire going through  them. I remember him tying that chain on when I got ready to leave.  It was terrible. We didn   t know if it was ever going to end. How far was our  range in between?  It was terribly dry in    36, I remember that. And I think the winter of    35 was  one of the coldest winters. It was a terribly cold winter. All of the water  mains in this town froze. We were living in town then. We were out of water.  That   s when they had to put all new mains in. It could have been that they  weren   t deep enough, but it was a terrible winter here in this town.  Hot and then cold.  Hot and then cold. Yes, it was a cold winter especially, through January and  February that year.  I think the year thirty-five was when the grasshoppers were so bad. I know my  husband would get up at four o   clock every morning and go down and put the  poison around, just at the edge of the cotton. When they   d come out, well  they   d eat that before they would go to the cotton.  Did it seem to help?  Yes it did. That was the only way we raised cotton that year.  It was    36 when the grasshoppers got our place. Bessie was just a baby and  they got to our garden.  It was the finest dust you   d ever seen. Your bed and your dressers and  everything were just covered.  It was fine like face powder.  And you couldn   t dust it off of yourself, it just hung over.  We learned to get by with what we had.  And hoped for better.  Everybody was about the same. Nobody had anything; we were all hard up.  What about other people who left? Did you know people in town that left?  14  Cunningham  Hale  Cole  Hale  Coulson  Lemons  Ray  Lemons  Ray  Hale  Lemons  Hale  Ray  Cole  Hale  Moore  Hale  Cole  Hale  There were people that left, but I can   t remember.  Oh yeah, a lot of people left.  We lived out at one place twenty-four years. We rented it, but we never did  leave. We stuck it out.  Well, we all stuck it out.  No, we didn   t. We went to Enid for two years.  What did you do in Enid?  I told you, he had that dairy route  That was in Enid, okay.  That was in Enid. He ran that for a diary. It was Wiebel   s Dairy then, but  Gold Spot bought them out. He drove that one horse, and that horse would  just stand while he delivered. He sold ice cream and cottage cheese and milk  and cream. They   d load him up of a morning, and he   d drive all day over Enid  delivering the dairy products.  Nobody had electricity, so we didn   t have a refrigerator. We were glad when  we could get ice.  Whenever you did get electricity, what was the thing that you were most  excited to have? Was it a refrigerator, or was it something else?  An icemaker.  A bathroom. That was the first thing that we put in.  I was going to say the first time we had an indoor bathroom was in    63,  because we lived on those rented places and they wouldn   t put it in. We got a  chance to in    63 get a place with a built in bathroom and boy I was celebrating.  Out here on the highway, we got an icemaker that held a hundred pounds.  We   d get a hundred pounds of ice and put in there.  We got our first electricity in 1940.  We didn   t have electricity then; we just had an icemaker.  I know it was shocking when that old cream separator sat there and that milk  just went on through, and we didn   t have to turn that crank.  Laughter   Oh yes, we all separated; milked cows and separated.  15  Cole  Ray  Hale  Ray  Boyd  Hale  Lemons  Boyd  Coulson  Boyd  Kite  Coulson  Kite  Coulson  Ray  Hale  Ray  We all just stood there, I can see it now, milk running in there.  The lights were the main thing.  When they got electricity, I guess that was probably the best time in our life.  When we got electricity that was the main thing, the lights. It was    51 when we  got our electricity for the first time. We moved from town to farm in 1948.  We lived west of town and the electricity line was later getting there than it  was east of town.  I think I got it in    43. Of course, my husband helped build the line, too.  It was    42 when we got electricity. We tried to get on with OG E, and then  that other one, whatever it was called. We told them which ever was the first  one to come around was the one we were going to take. OG E came first. It  wasn   t a few days later until the other ones came. We sure were glad.  What was that story you were telling, that your husband is helping set up the  electricity and was going door to door?  Well, we were trying to get the highline to go by our place, to go down the  road, so him and a neighbor went all around trying to get people to sign up.  You had to pay fifty dollars. Some of our neighbors couldn   t pay fifty, so they  paid their fifty, and we got it to go right by our road. He helped wire all of the  houses and everything to get it down through there. That was in    43. Luella,  didn   t Elmer wire for you?  I   m not sure honey. We lived out there, but that old man we rented from  wouldn   t put electric in, so we lived without it until we got a chance to move  where there was some.  They just lived over the hill from us.  And that was    51?  That was in    51.  Is that the latest we have electricity coming in is    51?  I think it was about that time.     51 or    53.  We got ours in    42. You lived over on the farm. You surely got pretty close  then.  We didn   t move back to the farm until    49.  16  Kite  Ray  Kite  Moore  Lemons  Moore  Lemons  Moore  Kite  Cole  Hale  Lemons  Ray  Quite a variety there. We have    42 and    53.  We were out there a little while before, so it could have been in the early    40   s.  Some people became more popular than others at that time, I guess.  When they came around to see who wanted the electricity, they ran the line  down where there were the most people on this mile. We had quite a time  getting on, because the Shaffer   s and the Hallmark   s didn   t want electricity.  That was four townspeople, so we kind of had to wait. They put electricity in  the church. They had to do the church and one other place and then we could  get it. At that time, we were living in a boxcar on our farm and our lights were  put in it.  Really?  Our house had burned in 1940. After the dust storms, we moved over by  Camp Creek. We moved during January, and a big snowstorm came. This  was the first snowstorm that came all over. Now we had a big one that came  in    38 that just stranded everything. When we moved, a snowstorm came. My  husband went to get the cows in that morning, and I don   t know what  happened. Anyhow, he built a fire, and the house burnt. We lost nearly  everything there. They decided to move a boxcar in, and we could live in that  until they could get a house, so that   s what we did. We used the boxcar for a  place to store feed for the cattle and pigs and it is still in use.  What was it like in this boxcar?  Well, it wasn   t the best, but it wasn   t the worst either.  Did you make Jell-O in your refrigerator when you got electricity?  Just as quick as we could. I got this little powdered stuff that would make ice  cream. You stirred it up with it. Then I learned to make my own, and I got all  kinds of compliments. I had a lot of separated cream. I   d take the potato  masher   I didn   t have a mixer yet   and beat it with that potato masher. You  took it out, dumped it out. It was really good piled up. One of our friends  came by, a young boy, and he said he   d never turn an ice cream freezer again.  Yeah we had the old kind that you had to turn all the time, but then we got  electricity and we didn   t have to turn it.  Do you ever remember any tramps or hobos coming through town?  Oh, the first year I was married, we lived right across from the railroad track. I  fed many a hobo. I guess they say they tell each other. I fed many of them  breakfast or dinner or something, and I always let them set out on the north  step. I   d cook them bacon and eggs.  17  Hale  Lemons  Ray  Cole  Ray  Lemons  Ray  Moore  Ray  Hale  Cole  Hale  Cole  Kite  Cole  They would come to your door and want something to eat; we   d always give  them something to eat.  Did you ever have them do any work for you?  No, never did. Just fed them. My mother had an uncle that was a hobo. When  I was a child, he   d come to our house and stay. I thought hobos were just fine,  because Uncle Jess was a hobo. So, I fed them all.  We were afraid of them.  I wasn   t afraid of them. I   d even ask them to come in the house. They   d say  no, no, that they   d eat outside.  Do you ever remember any women that were hobos?  No, we never did have any women. That was the first few years I was  married, before we moved to Enid.  I don   t think women were as daring as they are now.  We had quite a few that would ride the railroads, you know, ride the boxcar.  This one lady just opened her shirt and stuck some peanut butter right down in  there. You know what an impression that made on a kid like me.  My granddad ran a store, and he was the first one that I ever knew to get it   peanut butter . He scooped it all out in little trays. It was the first that I   d  ever heard of. He was really advertising his peanut butter.  I remember when I first time we got it  peanut butter . We went to Mutual,  and mother bought one of these paper things like that that they put meat in.  She got that full, and she mixed up some for supper with syrup or sorghum of  something. That   s what we had to eat. After supper, she said,    Garnetty, you  stack the dishes, and I   ll wash them.    That   s what she called me, Garnetty. I  got in there, and I found this other peanut butter. I went in and asked her if I  could have some more peanut butter. She told me to eat all I wanted. She  thought I   d eat it without syrup. I got me a spoon, and I ate that peanut butter.  About two o   clock, oh, I was sick. For years, I couldn   t stand to look or smell  peanut butter.  People could sample it if Granddad was there. My grandmother ran the post  office, and we got our mail there then. It stuck in the roof of their mouth.  I never heard of peanut butter being such a big treat before. That   s a new  story.  It was back then. All of those things were treats.  18  Hale  Cole  Hale  Moore  Hale  Boyd  Ray  Moore  Boyd  Cole  Ray  Hale  Ray  Cole  I remember when we got bananas on the stick, you know. We always had  Christmas where we had all of the family and grandkids and kids. That was  my folks that I   m talking about. Mother bought a big stick of bananas, that   s  what we all got for Christmas. We hung them up, and we   d go pick us a  banana off of there. That   s what we all got for Christmas.  I   ve got this little write-up, you all have heard this, of all the things we use to  do with out and what we do now, I heard those before.  We got flour in a printed sack, and we made dresses out of that.  We made our dresses and I made my boys shirts out of that. They were just so  proud of them. They   d go with their dad to town and pick the sacks that they  wanted for a shirt.  We made all of our clothes.  My sister made her little boy, out of those little salt sacks, his underwear. Ruth  made them not even a ten pound sugar sack, a little salt sack. You could take  those ten pound sugar sacks and sometimes you could leave the letters out but  if you didn   t they had to go ahead and wear them. They had to wear their little  shorts made out of ten pound sugar sacks.  I made a quilt the first year that I was at Enid. I made a quilt out of Bull  Durham tobacco sacks, and sugar sacks. I dyed the tobacco sacks and the back  was white feed sacks. I still have that quilt. It   s about worn out, but I still  have it.  I remember the last chicken feed sacks that I got; I got three and it was blue  and white striped. I just loved that dress.  We   d watch real careful when we got chicken feed, so we could get three  sacks to match so we had a dress.  Sheets took five  feed sacks .  Window curtains.  I had dress shoes. I had a dress for Easter made out of the flour sacks. I took  fresh tomatoes that we raised out of the garden that we sold to make grocery  money. We took them and sweet potatoes up to Ray   s Grocery, to buy me  some new shoes and a hat for Easter, and then I had that dress made out of a  flour sack.  It wasn   t just a grocery store; it was a general store, it was a general  merchandise then.  When you got that stuff all starched up. Those shirts     19  Boyd  Hale  Boyd  Coulson  Hale  Coulson  Boyd  Coulson  Cole  On top of that, you took your silk stockings and dye them and made a corsage.  Lord, we liked to have never had silk hose. I remember, Enid got the first silk  hose that I ever heard of. I had a sister-in-law down there, and I saved up  some money. They were expensive, and I gave her the money and told her  that the next time they got some in to get me some. I never did get any. The  first time I wore some at church, I got my first ones and wore them to church,  and somebody didn   t think I had hose on. They kind of got after me, and I told  them that I   d got these new hose, like they wear now, and I had to pull them  out to show her. That was her mother  points to Boyd .  Well, mother had them old cotton hose. Now those hoes they wear they can   t  have a bit of warmth in them.  I need to go to the nursing home.  Well I have to go to the nursing home, too. I   m staying until three, but it   s not  two yet.  I have a daughter that   s 62 years old in the nursing home, and she   s never  walked a day in her life.  Is her birthday today Luella?  Her birth date is July 23, 1938. When she was a tiny baby, she was premature,  she just weighed three pounds. When other babies her age at a few months old  begin to do things, she couldn   t do anything. She could hardly hold her head  up. We knew something was wrong. Even though she only weighed three  pounds, we thought that it could be something natural. We took her to Doc  Lloyd at Taloga, and he told us that she had Spastic Paralysis and she   d never  walk in her life. She never did. He told us we were very fortunate that it  didn   t affect her brain, because a lot of them it does. Then she   d be a  vegetable. We took her to a children   s hospital, and I forget how long they  kept her. They sent us to a place where they do therapy in Norman. They  thought they could teach her to walk. They put braces on her and kept her  three years, and they gave up. She couldn   t use those little legs. That   s where  she learned to crochet; she was ten years old. Now she crochets some of the  most beautiful afghans and things that you   ve ever seen. That was a terrible  experience. This Dr. George, at Norman then, after they kept her for about  three years, he told us that they were going to have us send her to Okmulgee to  a rehabilitation center. He said that down there, even though she was in a  wheelchair, she could learn to be a secretary or a telephone operator or  something like that. We took her to Okmulgee, and she was only there for  about six months. They called us and told us that she couldn   t do any of that,  because she had a jerkiness. She didn   t know when she was going to jerk or  anything. It isn   t so bad now, but it was then, and they couldn   t teach her to  make a living for herself.  She   s a wonderful little girl. She   s beautiful and friendly.  20  Coulson  Lemons  Kite  Cole  Kite  Cole  Kite  Hale  Moore  Hale  Kite  Cole  Kite  Cole  My oldest son is 73, and he was three years old and a lively little boy. We  were in the drug store at Vici one day, and he danced around to the music they  had in there. He was a really live-wired little boy. We took him home that  night, and he had a high fever. We took him to two different doctors, and  neither one of them knew what was wrong. They thought it was something  with his stomach and gave him some pills. Monday morning, we decided to  take him down to this old Dr. Lloyd at Taloga. We gave him a bath and were  getting around to go to Taloga, and my husband asked our son if he wanted to  go out and use the bathroom before we left. He said,    Yes, but you   ll have to  come with me, because I can   t walk on that one leg.    That scared us to death,  but we took him on down there. He had polio. They called it infantile  paralysis then. He   s 73 though, and he has a fine wife and family and has a  limp. He always has, but he   s made a wonderful life for his wife and family.  I   m real proud of my family. I only had eleven   Laughter  But three died at  infancy. Okay, I   ve got to go to the nursing home.  Okay, well thank you for visiting with us.   Mrs. Coulson leaves.   Your grandfather had a store in Cestos, is that what you said?  Yes. The post office was in one part and the store in the other. They sold all  of the food. I got to go there, and that was the first time in my life that I had  all the candy I wanted. Just before my first year of school, they let me go stay  a week, Mom did. I got all the candy I wanted.  What was your favorite candy there? Do you remember having a favorite?  Oh, it   s always been chocolate.  That   s hard to beat.  We didn   t have much candy to buy. We used to make taffy, that what they call  it, you pulled, you know.  Clothesline taffy.  And we had our own apples. For Christmas or something, you had been good  to get a little dab of candy.  There   s not much in Cestos anymore.  Have you been over there ever?  Well, we   ve driven through it about twenty times.  I think it was a fairly good-sized town. We got our mail from there after we  moved in.  21  Hale  Cole  Kite  Ray  Cunningham  Kite  Ray  Kite  Cunningham  Lemons  Kite  Moore  Kite  Hale  Moore  Ray  Moore  We learned how to make candy. We finally got recipes to make candy, that  was good.  We got our mail and had a post office. There were quite a lot of people  besides. I don   t know about the stores. We didn   t go over there very much,  but I asked Mrs. McClary   Mable   where it began and ended. She told me  that a lot of it is right there were Cully and Opal Cathey live. I didn   t ask her  anymore.  Did the town burn? Did a lot of it burn?  No, people just moved. They moved most of the town to Vici.  When they brought the railroad in, it was supposed to come out there, but it  didn   t. And Lenora and Taloga, but it came to Vici and then to Camargo, so  even from Woodward down a ways, they had some of the grade graded up to  do it when they decided to go this other way.  And then Cestos moved to here, basically.  Yes, basically all the big businesses, the bank, in Cestos at that time they  moved to Vici.  We drove through Camargo before we came here, and we were surprised to  see how big it was. But I guess it was because the railroad went through  there, and that   s what made it.  It has always been big, they use to have cotton gin too.  We saw that they had a building that was a motel.  Yeah, the Black Hawk Motel.  They had two. They had one on the west side of the street that was two  stories. Then Mrs. Restorff   s was on the east side. They were pretty busy.  Yes, a nice size town.  They have a show down there about where the flower shop is. We could send  the kids to the show for a quarter. On Saturday, we always let the kids go to  the show.  They had lumberyard then, just across the street from the one hotel. Down the  street, south, there was Long Bell Lumber.  There used to be two big grocery stores there. We traded groceries there.  When the Camargo girls first started playing ball, they played in this Long Bell  Lumber. That was where the only gym was. It was all cemented. It wasn   t  22  Ray  Moore  Kite  Cole  Kite  Cole  Moore  Boyd  Hale  Lemons  Ray  Kite  Boyd  Hale  Kite  Ray  Hale  Ray  Hale  Ray  quite as wide as an ordinary court would have been, but they used that for a  number of years before they got the new schoolhouse.  I can   t remember coming to town in a wagon. My dad bought a car when I  was two years old, and I don   t remember coming into town in a wagon.  I went my twelve years to school there at Camargo.  Camargo? When did that school close?  Oh, let me see. Butch graduated two years out of it.  He graduated from Camargo?  No, he graduated from Vici. He graduated out of eighth grade at Camargo.  They just had the first eight grades there for a while.  We didn   t have any transportation into Vici, the high school, in those days.  You either had to board in town or not go.  We got our first new car when I was thirteen. You didn   t have to have a  license or anything. I drove my folks to Arkansas to see my grandpa when I  was thirteen. It was old dirt roads, you know.  Were you a good driver?  My dad drove a car when I was two, so I don   t remember coming to town in a  wagon.  So you couldn   t go to high school unless you stayed in town.  No, there were no buses or anything that ran through the country in those days.  I went one year here, and I came up and lived in Vici with my aunt.  Huh, it   s almost like going to college now.  Ethel went to college. She went one year to high school here at Vici, my older  sister. She went to Alva and got her teaching certificate. She was a teacher.  I remember my sister-in-law taught school.  You can read that can you? It   s about the old washdays.  Is that what was in the paper?  No, it was in Capper   s Weekly. I remember a lot of that. That   s it. I wanted  them to read it. I remember a lot of that. I experienced a lot of that when I  23  Hale  Cole  Moore  Cunningham  Kite  Moore  Boyd  Moore  Boyd  Lemons  Ray  Hale  Ray  Lemons  Ray  Moore  Boyd  was a child.  I   ll say the homemade soap, that   s what we   d done.  I remember coming to town when we had to sell a bunch of pigs. We put the  sideboards on top of the ordinary wagon and leave a little crack between them  so the pigs wouldn   t smother. I was taking some music lessons. I only took  twelve, because that   s all my grandma could afford. Anyway, I got to come to  town. I was with my dad up on those sideboards and a spring seat. Those  spring seats sat up farther. There were just two horses, but sometimes they  drove four horses if they took a load of wheat to town.  And don   t leave out broomcorn.  I remember that when I was a little girl, part of it  What about your broomcorn stories?  Did you ever get around broomcorn?  Did you ever pull any broomcorn?  I had to help my dad haul it in, I   m telling you that was the itchiest stuff you  ever    Between two stalks to keep the brush part of it in the dirt then after it  lay there so long, you hauled it in. That   s what I helped do, was haul it in.  Boy, it did make you itch and burn when you picked it up.  I think we need to have you read that on our tape.  I got that out of Capper   s Weekly. It just reminded me of the old days on the  farm.  We washed on the board and boiled our clothes on the stove.  I wasn   t very old though, until mama got one of those swinging washing  machines. Oh, how I hated those things.  A swinging washing machine, what   s that?  It was a half circle, and it had a bar up there. You put your clothes in there  and your suds, and you just went this way and this way and this way and this  way.  You did it by hand. When I was old enough, I had to do it.  I was thankful to get one of them. I didn   t have one with my daughter. I used  the rubbing board. When Roger came along, we got one of those.  We were really thrilled when Maytag came in with a motor.  24  Ray  Boyd  Cunningham  Boyd  Cole  Boyd  Cole  Boyd  Lemons  Boyd  Ray  Moore  Ray  Hale  When we had our eightieth celebration here, we had one on display. I wasn   t  too old when Mother got a Maytag that had a motor on it. But you know,  sometimes it took hours to get that thing to start.  Oh, if you flooded it. Crank it and crank it. I can tell you dozens of women  that has called Elmer    Come start my Maytag, come start my washing  machine, it won   t go.    It was awful easy to flood.  It didn   t take long to wash after you got started.  If you ever got the thing a going. I remember real well when Granddad and  Ma seen me washing on the board. He said,    Come on down to the house and  wash on that Maytag.     I did a lot of work going in when they were new born babies, a dollar a day.  I worked for five dollars a week.  Took care of the mothers, they stayed in bed for nine days back then. And took  care of the baby and mother, and cook the food, I don   t know how in the world  we did it. It was winter, February, and their clothes would even freeze, with  all those little girls, and those socks.  And little panties and all of this.  What kinds of home remedies did you use? Like if your kid had a stomachache  or an ear infection, what kind of things would you do?  If you had an earache, your dad smoked in your ear.  Yeah, your dad blew smoke in your ear. I can remember one time, I had the  croup, and they tried several things, but they finally gave me some kerosene  and sugar. That cut that lose. I thought I was going to die. I was glad to  swallow anything to try to get that out of there.  My mother would render the lard out of the skunks that the boys caught and  skinned. She would render that out. Then she would mix it with, I don   t  remember if it was turpentine, or what. But that   s what they rubbed on your  chest when you had a cold, mother swore but that. If we stepped on a nail,  course we went bare foot in the summer, and steeped on a nail; then it was to  the kerosene can that we went.  That will do it. It will really keep you from getting an infection. I   ve stepped  on many a nail.  If you had a sick stomach, you   d take some soda and mix it, and they   d make  you drink that.  25  Kite  Cole  Lemons  Cole  Ray  Hale  Cole  Moore  Kite  Moore  Hale  Cole  Hale  Moore  Ray  Moore  Boyd  Kite  Ray  Kerosene would clean out the wound?  All confirm.   It   d take the soreness out. If you didn   t put anything on it, it   d stay sore a lot  longer. It   d help take the soreness out.  I   ve heard kerosene   s good for something else. I heard it   s good for getting  rid of bed bugs.  All confirm.   We never had them, but my grandma, one of them, she caught them all of the  time.  I never did see a bed bug in my life.  We bought a baby bed off of the lot one time. When we got home, we found  out that it had bed bugs. Boy did we have a time getting them killed.  We got them in the summer. They hibernate in the winter.  We bought something; I don   t remember what, while we were living in the  boxcar. Most of our furniture had burned, so we went to this sale. I thought  we were never going to get rid of them. Every morning, I would strip those  beds down and go over them with a kerosene rag. Did you ever sleep on a  straw tick?  I   ve heard about them, I never saw them.  That   s what we had.  We   d make this tick pillow.  It   s like a big old pillowslip, only it fit the whole mat  When they thrashed     The best of that. We didn   t get the chaffy part, but we got the best of it.  That   s what we slept on. They changed them about every year.  I slept on feather beds; that   s what we had.  Mother would go into the old straw tick and go out and we   d have some new  fresh straw and fill it in.  Our bed would be that high that night  laughter .  Whatever was available.  My mother always raised lots and lots of chickens, so we had feather beds. I  hated those old feather beds. They were warm, but I hated to make the bed.  26  Boyd  Cole  Cunningham  Moore  Cole  Hale  Moore  Ray  Moore  Boyd  Cole  Moore  Ray  Hale  Ray  Cole  Moore  Hale  Kite  I think mother   s the only one that had a feather bed. The rest of us had straw  beds.  You just picked all of those nice soft ones.  They   re telling about picking the old goose.  That   s what I was thinking about.  We never used chicken feathers, but I learned to later. We never made pillows  out of chicken feathers.  No, we used goose.  Goose feathers were the best.  Yes, goose down.  We   d take ours and hang them up by their feet up in the barn and put a sock  over their head. If you didn   t, they would just pinch you. You would pick  these little feathers off under the wings. We made out pillows out of that.  When we got enough, we would start a feather bed.  There were still plenty of down on their breast.  We picked them in the wintertime.  Every six weeks I think we were supposed to.  Mother made all of us down pillows. I still have a feather pillow, I   ve got  three, I got two small.  I am allergic to them.  I am too but I still got some others after that.  I just got rid of my feather bed. It was a big nice one. I was tired of it. I had  three grandsons that lived right down the road from me. They never would  sleep on the feather bed. I thought it was a shame that they couldn   t sleep on it  for one night just to see what it was like.  We did for a while, until we got the geese. They were such mean things to do  anything with.  They   d get after you when you were out in the yard if they could. They   d run  and peck you on the legs?  So you   d hang them upside down and pull their feathers out, and then they  were mean to you? Hmmm?  27  Moore  Boyd  Cole  Kite  Cole  Moore  Cole  Moore  Ray  Cole  Moore  Ray  Cole  Ray  Cole  Moore  Ray  Cole  Moore  They would bite you in the ribs.  We couldn   t blame them when you   d pull their feathers off  laughter .  I believe the biggest of all things that have been in our life time, I haven   t rode  all these things, but we   ve gone from horse and buggy to the sky for travel.  We went from horse and buggy to space.  That   s a pretty big change.  Big change.  Horseback, we went horseback a lot.  We girls didn   t have a saddle. Papa made us a cinch that went around the  blanket. We didn   t have any stirrups. We rode double.  We used to go to church every night by horse. And most of us, if we had a  boyfriend or girlfriend, we rode two.  You went riding. We used to go riding on Sunday afternoons after church. A  bunch of little neighborhood kids would get together and ride horses.  In the fall, we   d head over to the persimmon patch over this way. I don   t  know where now; we just got on our horses. They   re about this big around  and only have four seeds in them.  They   re good.  After they freeze.  After they freeze, otherwise they   re ewww  shudders .  They   re puckery.  We entertained ourselves. We went sleigh riding.  We did too. One time out north of our house, we had a tractor. I don   t know  how many of the kids    sleds we had, and the last one got a scoop shovel.  This Christmas, I went out to Joe Krows   . He took his grandkids with his little  mower. They sled all afternoon in the snow  This winter, at our house, my married grandson took two or three of his  cousins with the old saddle horse. Everybody was laughing and hollering.  Did you see the Dennis the Menace in the paper today?  No is heard.  He had  this dog, and he had a box in front of the dog. The dog was tied on to this little  old four-wheel cart. His little friend was setting in there, and he said,    Joey,  28  Cole  Lemons  Cole  Hale  Ray  Hale  Ray  Cole  Cole  Ray  Kite  Ray  hold on, because I   m turning the cat loose.    He had the dog fastened to the  wagon.  When the dog took after the cat, we really got a riot.  Well, how would you say that each of you have been changed by your  experience of living through the dust bowl? What about that has made the  most lasting impact?  We never wanted to have it happen again. I think for me, a great big  thankfulness. A lot of thanks.  We were just so glad when we got over that.  We had it awfully bad here in the fifties. In the fifties, when it was so dry and  all, most of our dirt came from Texas. You could see it. It was kind of like the  dust bowl again.  You could see it coming.  You can see it coming, it was terrible. It was dry in the fifties.  A good year after it let up here, we went to Colorado, and my, it was much  worse out there and in Guymon. I   ve never seen anything like it. There were  posts were there was just that much sticking out of the ground. There were  tanks, where it was almost up to the tank, stock tanks, you know the water  tanks. There were many, many houses, but there was nothing there. There  was nobody there. It was just nailed up, dilapidated, I couldn   t believe it.  That was out around Guymon, I think when we were coming back, and a storm  came up. There was a plowed wheat field just on that side of us. My land, it  was just terrible. I was just scared to death. All of the sudden, it looked like  one big old wide fire across the road, just thick. What it was, was meeting cars  with the dirt between us. We finally both stopped and just set there. I had  never seen anything like that. It wasn   t a blaze, just that reddish fire look. It  was the reflection of the dirt between the lights of both cars. It sure was  frightening. I never did like that country.  A girl died of pneumonia out there too. My sister lived there, and she thinks  it   s a wonderful place. It sure has changed. They set trees, they learned about  conservation. That has been a wonderful thing for us. The government got in  and helped the farmer. None of them had the money for the equipment or  anything else. We   ve got the terraces and the ponds and set lots of tree rows.  Out west, there weren   t any. Out there in Guymon, it   s flat.  It   s flat; there are no trees. There was nothing, but now the grass is coming  back. During the depression and the bad years, there was nothing.  If you talk to people in Guymon, they say that Boise City had it worse.  Yes, and Colorado said they had it worse. That   s where a lot of the dirt during  29  Lemons  Moore  Hale  Lemons  Ray  Boyd  Moore  Cole  Moore  Ray  Moore  Lemons  Moore  Moore  the dust bowl came from, the dirt that grayish white.  Do you remember any WPA programs coming in? What kinds of programs,  and what was that like?  They built cement bridges. They built some of them, they   re still standing, but  they never did put the road around them. We had a little country schoolhouse  there that the WPA came in and put new siding on. They put a swing up.  They did quite a lot of stuff around there. When they did it, it was done to  stay. That   s amazing. Now, with all of the technique we   ve got, it isn   t that  permanent.  Didn   t they build this town house?  City Hall?  Yeah, I think so. I think they helped build the first streets too.  The WPA came right into my house. The road was right back there, and it was  nothing but solid gyprock. They just had to blast it and blast it. They   d call  and tell me they were going to blast and to get my children all in. That  gyprock would just fly all over everywhere. They would just time and again  tell me call your children in because we are going to blast again today. It   s a  good road, thought there now, they got it all out and it was solid rock when  they started into it.  What was it they had for the younger ones?  The CCC?  Yeah, the CCC. I don   t know that they were down there so much.  They did something to Boiling Springs at Woodward.  Yeah, Boiling Springs. They come back each year for their reunion, the ones  that worked there.  Did you have friends or relatives that worked for the WPA program?  When I was a senior in high school, we always went to Lost Lake, southeast of  us down there in the edge of the mountains. There was quite a CC camp there  that was working on that.   All reply that they don   t recall knowing anyone that worked for the WPA.   I went down there my senior year, and those CCC guys were working down  there. Of an evening, we all went to a lake. I can   t think of the name of it  now, but we all went there and skated. They had a big skating rink. Believe  you me, that   s how we learned to skate. Those guys were good. They weren   t  30  Ray  Hale  Moore  Ray  Cole  Ray  Lemons  Moore  Kite  Moore  Cole  Hale  Cole  Cunningham  Cole  Ray  Cole  very much older than us.  That   s one entertainment that we used to have when the kids were little here  were roller skating rinks. We   d load up a bunch of kids and take them.  At school, we had a goal to play basketball. On Friday afternoon, we   d go  over to the Sibel schoolhouse and have a basketball game. And we   d have box  suppers. You   d take a box, you know.  We haven   t had any since we haven   t had our country school, but we had box  suppers. Everybody wanted the most loved girl or most beautiful girl.  The boys that wanted to buy their box, boy they   d raise it up. We   d have  friend chicken, and we   d fix good things to eat.  Nobody ever chose me as the most beautiful girl.  I got to be freshman queen the first year that I started at Vici school. I got to  be high school queen; I was a freshman girl.  Well, we have royalty.  We went to church on Sunday night in Ellis County. We rode horses. There  would be a few cars there, but the kids all rode horses. The WPA had done a  lot of work on that schoolyard too.  In Ellis County?  Yes, in Ellis County.  It   s unbelievable when you think back how we got along. We made our own  entertainment and everything. The men in our neighborhood got a baseball  game made up out in our pasture. The married men would play baseball.  They   d play horseshoes.  They   d get together on a Sunday afternoon, and that   s what they   d do. We  talked to one another back then. We visited a lot. We didn   t have television.  No telephone.  Not even a phonograph.  Your family sat down at the table, and they visited and talked. Families don   t  do that anymore.  Mine don   t very often do it but they   ll still say,    Come in and sit down at the  table    but I know my kids, somebody would be working a little later.  31  Ray  Hale  Boyd  Hale  Ray  Boyd  Hale  Cole  Hale  Cole  Hale  Cole  Lemons  Kite  Yeah, they just eat and run.  We didn   t have much to play with. Swings and an old tire maybe. We   d roll  it. I got so I could walk those old iron barrels pretty well, and we   d play hide  and seek. That   s just about all.  Did you walk on stilts?  No, I didn   t.  Yes, I did.  I did too.  I had a big old swing though. It was just one rope, and the rope was about like  that. I put a barrel out here. I   d lay out here, and I   d get a hold of that with  one hand. I   d go all the way around and land back on that barrel. Things like  that is all we had to do with. I remember my first doll and doll buggy. Mrs.  Espy got it for me. She taught school.  Oh, she taught your school? Where at?  Pleasant Valley. It   s just straight north of Donald Moss   .  She taught our school.  She   d ride a horse, and come to school on that horse.  It was pretty good times I guess.  Is there anything I left out?  I don   t think so.  -------  -------  
