 Lemons  We   re going to go ahead and start now that everybody is comfortable. So that  we can kind of keep track of who says what when we go back to type the  transcript of this we   re going to have each of you state your name, where you  were born and when, so that we have that right on the beginning of the tape.  Okay, I   m Norma Gene Young. I was born March 26th, 1925 in Texhoma,  Texas.  Were you really?  When I was 11 months old I was smart enough to get out of that state and  move to Oklahoma  (Laughter)  What   s wrong with Texas? (Laughter)  You   re an import.  Well I guess you get to be number two.  Betty Jane Garrett, and I was born August 26th, 1925, in Buffalo, Oklahoma.  Just a little bit after I was.  Elizabeth Hinderliter, and I was born May the 28th, 1922, in Great Bend,  Kansas.  I   m Margie Moore, and I was born April the 4th, 1925, in Great Bend, Kansas.  When did the two of you, your family move to Oklahoma?  1929.  We   ll have you describe just a typical day, like when you got up in the morning  what did you have to do, what kind of chores in the 1930   s dust bowl time  period. So just an average day, any time during that time.  5  Young  Lemons  Young  Lemons  Young  Lemons  Young  Lemons  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Lemons  Garrett  Lemons  Young  Lemons  Hinderliter  Moore  The first thing my family did, Mother finally got me out of bed, but every  morning she cleaned house. Not too much, just dusted and shook the dirt out of  the curtains, and that sort of thing. If she had hung up wet sheets over the  windows, well she took those down and shook them out, and we went on from  there. But I remember that everyday.  What kind of daily chores did you have in your house?  I didn   t do a darn thing. (Laughter)  Well that   s all right.  I had to practice the piano two hours a day sometime.  Lots of musical families we   ve talked to in this area.  Yes, that   s right.  How about you, what was your typical day like?  Practically the same, eat breakfast, go to school. But I did have one chore, and  I had a little paintbrush and a dustpan and when the dirt did blow awful hard,  that   s how I dusted out the windows.  That   s right, I had forgotten that.  The little paintbrush, and you could hold that dustpan right up against it.  Yeah.  And to this day, I have a paintbrush and a dustpan.  Do you really?  Yeah, and when I dust mop the floor   .  Would the two of you say that you grew up in a rural area or and urban area?  Well it   s Boise city, would you call it urban or rural?  Well were you on a farm or in town?  No, in town, all of us, all four of us.  All four of you, okay, were you guys dusting windowsills with paint brushes?  Well I don   t remember, do you?  I probably didn   t do anymore than I had to.  6  Hinderliter  Young  Hinderliter  Garrett  Lemons  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Lemons  Hinderliter  Moore  Hinderliter  Young  Hinderliter  Moore  Hinderliter  Yeah, me too.  Well I remember at school, when we   d get there, everything would be clean  when we went in, and I guess the teacher dusted off the desks. But several  times a day, we   d first write our name on the desk, but you would just  completely wipe the dirt off the desk maybe four to six times a day, because it  would just get filthy. Those huge high windows, we were on the west side of  the old red brick school building, and boy that dirt would come in those darn  windows.  Were you guys ever in the old rock building?  I remember one day when a storm came after we   d gone to school and of  course they didn   t have lunch programs in those days, neither did they have  lunch meat, not too much of it   Bologna, that was about the only lunch meat I  remember. But anyway, it was so bad that my mother fixed a lunch, and had  my father    I called him Uncle John   they adopted me   bring the lunch to  school and she didn   t have very much to put in it. We kept peanut butter on  hand, of course Mother made her own jelly, but we always had plenty of eggs,  so there were egg sandwiches and peanut butter, and enough of that if anybody  else wanted any. I can remember it was a big sack.  So your mother would pack enough food for you to take to school to share if  you needed to?  Not generally, but the storm hit after I was in school and we couldn   t get home  for lunch, no school lunch programs.  They didn   t let school out for anything.  No, well I used to walk home.  We walked home.  About how far were your homes from the school?  Well ours was only about two blocks.  Yeah, two blocks, we were real close.  My house was a mile. Early, but later we were about, what ten blocks?  Yeah, ten blocks.  I remember walking backwards to home, wasn   t it? Against the dust  So it wouldn   t be in your face?  Betty was talking about they didn   t have school lunches, but there was one  7  Garrett  Hinderliter  Lemons  Hinderliter  Young  Hinderliter  Young  Hinderliter  Young  Garrett  Hinderliter  Lemons  Garrett  Lemons  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  time in there that they did have in the old rock building.  Oh really, I   ll be darned.  Yeah, cause I got to help serve it, so I knew. For all the children in the country,  and the government sent out this canned meat and stuff like that, and we  served that and had bread.  About when was that, do you know?  Well it probably was about,    34 or something around there.  The building was down by that time though, that old rock building.  No, they put the new one up in    35 didn   t they, or    36 because I was a  freshman in high school when they moved it.  Oh the new high school they did, yeah.  Well it must have been    33 then because anyway, I know we had school  lunches for the people in the country.  Well I was thinking maybe when the Depression was so bad in the cities in    29  and    30, could that have been when they started, the government was sending  food?  Sending food, yeah.  Well I was a little older than that; I was probably ten years older.  Well were there any other kinds of like, community, like your lunch program  you were talking about, to supply, to supply things?  For the needy?  Yeah, anything like that in Boise City?  Well the churches certainly figured in   that would be the only organization I  can think of that really went out and provided.  We didn   t have a welfare program here, no.  No, but I   d say the churches and just by word of mouth, because if you knew  someone who was in need, as small a community as ours is, we would know  about it. People would begin to do things, bring food in.  During a dirt storm, of course, a woman across the street from the Methodist  church looked out, and on the top of the steps, big long steps, there was kind of  a big cardboard box sitting there and she wondered about it, but she didn   t do  8  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Lemons  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  anything about it and the second day it was there.  Was it that long?  Yeah, it was there all night, the janitor of the church came out the next day and  he saw that box there and looked in and there was a newborn baby in that  thing, and it was alive and just wrapped in     Swaddling clothes. (Laughter)  That   s true, and this woman across the street always felt so guilty because she  hadn   t gone over there and looked in that box, but nobody ever knew whose  baby it was.  What happened to the baby, did he take it?  Yes, some people down in Oklahoma. The preacher at that time, Brother Eaton  I believe, they wanted it, but they were older people and their kids were  grown, so they let someone down in Oklahoma have it.  Well it must have been fairly warm that night.  It must have been, I don   t remember.  I don   t remember what time of year it was.  It was just an old blanket around it, nothing to identify the baby.  Of course no hospital.  Oh, yeah.  We had a doctor, old Dr. Hall.  Yeah, and they got the doctor to look at the baby.  Sure, and old Doctor Hall was here until he died, and drove a funny little old  car, and people looked out for him in the car because you never knew where he  was gonna drive. (Laughter) Probably on the wrong side of the street. And the  museum here will have, I think the bag of the old Doctor Hall.  Yeah, his grandson brought it to us.  You already have it now?  Yeah, and this old man, I was kind of scared of him. He was a cross between  an ogre and Santa Claus. He had a white beard down to about here, and he  wasn   t too friendly, he was a real old man by that time.  9  Garrett  Young  Lemons  Young  Garrett  Hinderliter  Young  Garrett  Young  Hinderliter  Young  Lemons  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Moore  Yes, he was ancient.  Probably, and too, before he died, or before he left here, his grandson was  driving him around, Harry Junior, was driving him in little old Ford Coupe in  the year they had to go.  Did you ever have the doctor come to visit you at your house or anyone else in  your family?  Yes, they always did.  Yes, they always did, they always came to the house.  We had one that lived just a couple houses down from us, remember? Doctor  Holler?  Who Doctor Hall?  Holler. Well Carl Holler was our judge, and I saw him.  Yeah, he sent some stuff for the museum.  Oh, well great.  Some Sunday School stuff.  So you all went to school together and I was wondering, what kind of school  activities were you involved in, or what did you do for fun and entertainment  when you were?  Margie was a basketball star. (Laughter)  They didn   t have money particularly, they didn   t have money for a music  program period, and one of our homeroom teachers Mrs. Porter loved music.  She had snappy black eyes and she ruled, but she started a band.  Well let   s see didn   t Goodfellow start that before? In high school.  No, I was in fifth grade.  Oh, were you?  Yeah, I was in grade school.  Well I   ll be darned.  Did you play in Miss Porter   s band Margie?  I don   t think so.  10  Young  Garrett  Moore  Lemons  Hinderliter  Lemons  Garrett  Young  Lemons  Moore  Young  Garrett  Moore  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Moore  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Hinderliter  I did, clear through high school.  When did you start the French horn?  Oh, about 8th grade.  Did you play an instrument, everybody play and instrument, too?  Clarinet.  Clarinet. How about you?  Saxophone.  Baritone.  Boy, you have the whole band right here. (Laughter)  All I had to do was go    pa pa.     Yeah, I went    ump   .     Ump pa pa, ump pa pa     I carried the melody.  Well I couldn   t carry a tune. (Laughter)  But we had two fellows, one of them was in our class, the other one was older,  their parents played for dances. And those guys, I don   t know if they ever had  any kind of training, but they could play anything. And these two boys played  with their mom and dad. That family made up the music for the dances.  Yeah, Mother and Dad and two older sisters and then the two younger brothers  and they could play it everywhere.  What did Mr. Miley play?  They   d play every Saturday night.  Did he play the fiddle? I think he played the fiddle.  I think he did, Betty.  And Mrs. Miley played the piano, and the two boys played saxophones, Elvin  played a little one.  Yeah a little alto.  And sometimes Verle played a drum.  11  Young  Kite  Young  Garrett  Young  Hinderliter  Young  Garrett  Hinderliter  Garrett  Young  Lemons  Young  Hinderliter  Young  Hinderliter  Young  Garrett  Young  Hinderliter  Garrett  Yeah that   s true, he did.  What were their names, Miley?  Yeah.  Part of that family lived here until just last year.  Yeah, they were a farm family and always     That probably helped them survive, that music.  Yeah.  But those two boys in the school band added an awful lot because the rest of us  didn   t know anything and those boys had experience. Elvin still comes back,  the one that was in our class, and we see him at least once a year, but the rest  of the family is gone.  Are both girls gone?  Well they   re on and off, the family broke up after the father died because there  was a fight about the farm.  One of the girls is still alive.  Do you remember any of the songs, what kind of songs did you play in the  band, what kind of music did you play?  One of the tunes in Miss Porter   s band was the Bunny Parade. (Laughter)  I don   t remember that.  I   ll never forget   oh that was so insulting, here we were at least, what ten  years old, and playing about bunnies. (Laughter)  I bet you played it though.  Yeah, we did.  There was not a class for this; it was just those who were interested.  Those whose parents made them go.  Yeah. (Laughs)  Yeah we came about an hour early to school in the mornings and Norma  Gene   s father was musical of course and was connected with music for years  and I think he was the one who found that e-flat alto saxophone for me, from  12  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Lemons  Young  Moore  Young  Garrett  Moore  Young  Moore  Young  Moore  Young  Moore  Young  Lemons  Garrett  Lemons  Mr. Cornwall at Clayton.  Yeah and Daddy had several instruments that had been with the county band  earlier.  Maybe I played one of those, I don   t know.  Well could be, I don   t remember either.  But anyway, that   s how I got my horn.  Yeah.  Do you guys still play every once and a while?  I play records. (Laughter) I can   t even play the piano anymore.  They still sing.  No, I don   t, I croak, she sings. I don   t even sing.  Yeah, I do.  I never did get to sing. Of course that teacher told me to keep my mouth shut  and don   t say a word. (Laughter) She didn   t think I could sing very good.  What teacher was that?  Mrs. Godley.  Is that right? Good grief.  Yeah when we were in high school in the choir at the church she says,    Marge  just open your mouth, but don   t say a word    (Laughs)  She was something else.  Well every time we go to church I feel real bad about singing. (Laughter)  You couldn   t sound any worse than the rest of us.  Well so you all lived in town?  Yes.  What kind of things were going on in town and people dealing with dust storms  and stuff in town? We   ve heard a lot of people talk about living in the country  and different things you would have to do with the farm, get the animal in and  stuff like that. What were you doing in town?  13  Hinderliter  Young  Garrett  Young  Hinderliter  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Hinderliter  Moore  Hinderliter  Mostly playing, huh. (Laughter)  One celebration I remember well, it was May Day,    May Fete   , they called it,  we had it in the old gym down there, they were gonna have a May Pole.  Yes, I remember that yes.  I think there were two poles in the gym floor and a dirt storm came up before, I  mean it had blown all day I guess, but it just kept getting worse and worse and  we were sitting in the audience and here were the May poles down about 50  feet away, I guess, and the girls were circling and these were big girls      I  didn   t get to be in it.    (Laughter)  I did. (Laughter)  Dad-gummit, anyway they were doing a good job but we could barely see  them, the dirt got so thick in there, and everybody was used to it, we just sat  there through it.  We did have a picture show, and Mr. Phillips ran it, and we had, maybe it was  the worst dust storm, hit Sunday afternoon?  Yeah that was the April 14, 1935.  All right and I was at the picture show. I can remember they didn   t quit; they  just kept running it, and finally     Just to keep people there.  Yeah to keep everybody there, and finally Mr. Montgomery who was in the  bank with my father, just lived right behind the picture show, and he came in  and he had two kids there, and he got me. I believe the telephone never did go  out, because my folks had called him to take me to their house, and that was  great. We all held hands and we just had to go, not even half a block, but my  older brother was there that day and he headed for home. The only way he  made it to our house   which was many blocks   he crawled in the gutter. Well  it wasn   t curb and gutter then; he crawled in the ditch.  And he could tell where he was by when a street crossed when he could tell.  How far he   d gone, but that   s how he got home that day. Do you all remember  what you were doing that day?  I do. We decided, we had a farm out east and Dad decided that he wanted to go  out and see, I think it was wheat   probably April   so we were out there.  Beautiful day, beautiful day, it was just beautiful.  So we were out there on the lake, about that old lake out there, and we could  14  Young  Hinderliter  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Lemons  Young  Garrett  see that rolling in, so we just turned around right there and we came back  home and stayed in the house till it was over.  But you got home before it hit?  Yeah, we got home before it hit.  Well at my house we had company that day from another town, Woods and  Wadleys from Kerrick and various ones, and my granddad and an employee of  my dad   s and the fellows, it was such a beautiful day, all the men decided  they   d go out to the airport and fly around. So they did; airport was west then.  I don   t even remember the airport out there.  Yeah it was on Francis Lane just beyond the railroad track, to the left hand  side of the road and Ben Summer   s place out there.  Okay, yeah.  So they were out there, there were six or seven men, I don   t remember how  many, and that darn storm hit and it rolled in and it was   I know people have  talked about this   it was so black you could not see your hand right in front of  your face, it was awful.  Well that   s why my brother had to crawl.  Yeah he couldn   t see any distance.  He couldn   t see the ground.  And we didn   t know whether the guys had seen that thing coming.  If they were in the air.  Or whether it had hit while they were in the air, but they didn   t get in. Now  this was just, just barely west of town just across the railroad say and they  didn   t get home 'til nine o   clock that night. But they had landed when they saw  it coming, got inside the hangar, and some of them got in, inside the cabin of  the plane. They finally got home and one of them was hanging his head out  trying to see the ditch and say,    Go to the right or left.    (Laughter) Oh, boy, I  was glad to see those guys when they got in.  I bet.  But now the three of us were just 10 years old at that time, so we weren   t, I   ll  speak only for myself, I wasn   t smart enough to be really, really scared when  that thing was coming in.  I wasn   t either.  15  Hinderliter  Young  Garrett  Hinderliter  Moore  Garrett  Hinderliter  Garrett  Hinderliter  Garrett  Hinderliter  Garrett  Moore  Young  Garrett  Lemons  Garrett  Hinderliter  Hinderliter  Garrett  Lemons  Garrett  Some people thought it was the end of the world.  And for a few minutes there I guess they really thought it was when it hit.  Well it sort of boiled.  Yeah it did.  Oh yeah, it just rolled in.  As it rolled it just looked like water, you know when water boils?  Yeah.  What is it, a tempest in the teapot?  Yeah.  That   s kind of what it was like. That was frightening but, I had no feelings of  fear at that time.  No I don   t think any of us ever feared those kinds of storms.  Everybody was in the same boat.  Just thought it was part of it.  Sure, it had happened practically everyday for most of our lives.  Never had it been quite that bad.  What about your parents? Did you remember your parents being frightened at  all or worried about this? Well you were at the movies so they were probably  worried about you, because you weren   t home   Yes.  No, I don   t remember, they weren   t. We were all together in the house.  Just put sheets over the window.  In fact during that time I had no feelings other than love and security, and I  think we all were that way in our homes.  Yeah, why do you think that was, do you think it was just the time or?  I think all of our mothers and fathers knew that they were doing the best that  they could. Where else would we go? My family couldn   t see any advantage of  going to California. I   m sure yours couldn   t either?  16  Young  Garrett  Hinderliter  Young  Hinderliter  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Hinderliter  Garrett  Young  Lemons  Garrett  Hinderliter  Garrett  Hinderliter  Young  Garrett  Heck no.  Our roots were all here.  Well that   s it, you all had ties here.  Yeah, well all of our dads had jobs. Her Uncle John was in the bank. And your  dad had farmland and was a mechanic at the Ford Garage.  He was a mechanic  He was a mechanic at the Ford garage, and my uncle ran that garage at that  time so.  My dad had the newspaper here, so everybody was okay, we weren   t hungry,  we weren   t having any problems.  Not really.  Nobody worried about clothes or anything like that.  However I do remember this and I think perhaps it   s stayed with me. We did  live very frugal, we ate pretty common food.  Yeah we did.  Which would be what? What would you consider common food?  Well of course, being this part of the country, we always had beef, always had  eggs and cream that we bought from people that came in from the country. Our  grocery store at that time, we could call the grocery store, and they delivered.  Mother would decide she   d have something for lunch and she   d call and     They would bring it.  Yeah, they   d bring it, and Mother didn   t work, she was just at home, but that  was part of the service.  Well you might have been like the rest of us, just had one car and your uncle  had the car.  Sure, yeah.  Yeah, right, I can   t remember any fear at that time. We used to have home  demonstration agents. What are the men called that were that? County agents  were the men, but they had a woman who was a home demonstration agent  and she   s the one who organized all of the clubs for the farm women. Our next  door neighbor was the home demonstration agent and she was a widow, had  two sons, and her mother kept house     17  Young  Hinderliter  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Hinderliter  Garrett  Moore  Young  Garrett  Hinderliter  Moore  Garrett  Young  Garrett  You weren   t in the county band, were you, when Daddy organized it again? I  think I was about a freshman in high school then, but that was one thing we  did, you weren   t in it were you? I guess I was the only kid in it, because my  daddy made me. But we   d meet every Monday night in the courthouse, in the  courtroom and gosh, people would come from Keyes and you know Harry  Wilkinson.  We had it outside when the weather was nice, remember?  Yeah and we   d give concerts outside a lot when it was decent, but there were  people from all over the county would come, and it was a brass band, just like  the old time gay nineties Sousa marches and that sort of thing, and it was fun.  In a way, it seems to me that this generation has so little time, and I never  remember growing up being pressed for time. There was always time to do  everything.  Yeah that   s true.  And I guess we made our own entertainment, roller-skating on the sidewalk  around the square.  Around the courthouse yeah.  We did that so much that it was decent when a bunch of us would go down in  the summertime.  That was more fun.  Oh yeah that was fun, that   s what I was gonna say, that roller-skating.  That was one good deal.  It was so great.  We played baseball.  Yeah, and I supposed to take piano lessons. My mother was a great sewer, she  could just sew anything and so she sewed for this lady that gave piano lessons  so we could have piano lessons, and I was supposed to practice. When mother  would go to town to get groceries, I   d go outside and play baseball. (Laughter)  Anyway I was at Margie   s house one afternoon and the piano teacher was to  come, she also taught in the school.  Who was it; oh, Mrs. Esmay.  And somebody knocked at the door and Margie yelled out,    Come in if your  nose is clean,    and there she was. (Laughter) Do you remember that?  18  Moore  Garrett  Lemons  Garrett  Hinderliter  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Hinderliter  Moore  Lemons  Young  Hinderliter  Garrett  Hinderliter  Garrett  Lemons  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Hinderliter  Garrett  Hinderliter  Yeah. (Laughter)  Oh my gosh, we just knew she   d take it out on us at school.  And then what happened?  She came in all right.  She was kind of grouchy anyway.  Yes, she was old, yes she was always grouchy.  She didn   t scare me because, my daddy and her, they played together.  She scared the tar out of me.  And I was used to being around her.  Yeah, when you were taking piano lessons she   d scare you.  I wonder what made me say that. (Laughs)  You must have thought it was gonna be somebody else.  Yeah.  Must have thought it was Norma Gene.  Probably because she   d say that, that Margie was sweet. (Laughter) Most of  the time.  Except this.  Yeah except this.  You mentioned earlier one of the treats that you had was popcorn balls, what  other kind of like snacks would be like real special treats?  We didn   t buy them in the grocery store. We made homemade fudge.  We made homemade ice cream. I got to sit on it while somebody turned it.  Turned the crank.  Yeah and cookies, Mother made a lot of cookies.  Oh yeah, your mother was a good cook.  Yeah.  19  Garrett  Hinderliter  Young  Garrett  Hinderliter  Garrett  Hinderliter  Garrett  Hinderliter  Moore  Young  Moore  Young  Lemons  Young  Garrett  Lemons  Moore  Hinderliter  Moore  I bet your mother baked bread too.  Her favorite thing   no she never did bake bread, but her favorite thing to  make was stew back then, you remember that?  Well there was always meat though. Well at the news office people who had  gardens, and most of them who lived in the country did have gardens, they   d  bring in vegetables or sometimes a chicken to exchange for a subscription to  the paper for a year. So we had food.  And the chicken tasted different.  Oh sure.  The chickens we ate were free range, and it was just a different flavor.  They were killed fresh.  Like you would kill a chicken in the morning and fry it up for lunch. It didn   t  sit some place for a long time.  Frozen two or three times.  Let   s see, we had a garden behind the house.  Did you? I   d forgotten that.  When mother wasn   t looking we   d go out and pick something we wanted and  eat it. (Laughs)  Yes, Cordy and Lester had a garden, and she   ll tell you I   m telling the truth, I  do not like tomatoes, but Dale and I would go out in that garden and Cordy  would say,    Don   t bother those tomatoes, they   re ripe.    So the first thing we   d  do is pick a tomato and sit there and eat them.  You didn   t even like them?  No I didn   t like them, but his mother said not to so we had to do it. (Laughter)  Had to try it.  What else was in your garden?  Oh we had radishes.  And onions, I remember onions.  Onions.  20  Hinderliter  Moore  Garrett  Young  Hinderliter  Young  Hinderliter  Young  Moore  Young  Lemons  Young  Hinderliter  Garrett  Hinderliter  Garrett  Moore  Hinderliter  Moore  Garrett  Young  Moore  I don   t remember having spinach in it  There were carrots, just carrots and onions.  Did you ever put things in a cellar to keep? Now my grandmother on the ranch  did, like especially carrots and parsnips and turnips. They   ll keep a long time if  they are in a fairly damp cool place, and she put stuff in the cellar.  One thing we used to do   we weren   t supposed to do this   your dad had  wheat stored in your garage out there and we   d get out there and play in that  wheat   it was deep.  Oh you could sink clear down in that.  It was kind of dangerous to do it.  Well I   m sure it was.  Your mother would have skinned both of us if she   d have seen us out there I  suppose. And one time you took an umbrella and jumped off the garage.  Well I thought it was a parachute. (Laughing)  Yeah, I know you did. So that   s the sort of things we did. (Laughs)  It   s a wonder you   re all here   Yeah right   And paper dolls, we had a lot of paper dolls.  Oh yes, paper dolls, and made clothes out of construction paper.  Oh yeah.  Yeah, and that was fun.  Then we used to have   well, she and her friends would have, oh like they  were in the movies and they   d have plays and stuff.  Out in the garage.  Out in the garage.  Oh and dress up.  I was in one once, I remember being on the witness stand.  Yep, yeah. (Laughter)  21  Garrett  Young  Hinderliter  Garrett  Hinderliter  Moore  Garrett  Young  Lemons  Young  Garrett  Lemons  Garrett  Hinderliter  Young  Moore  Lemons  Moore  Garrett  Hinderliter  Garrett  Yeah but mother and your mothers probably did too, would let us have some  old dresses, dress up.  Oh yeah.  Yeah dress up.  And if we could get some high heels.  Uh-huh  Yeah. (Laughs)  And a hat.  Yeah, gotta have a hat.  What would you pretend, you were movie stars?  Yeah.  Oh yeah.  Or what were you pretending to be?  Yeah, because we   d been to picture shows so we knew.  Jean Harlow was a favorite.  Oh yeah.  The way I got to go to the picture show, we didn   t have any money, but I  ushered so I could get to see the show.  Was that your pay for ushering that you got to stay for the movie?  Yes.  My husband lived out in the country but his folks felt like picture shows   they  were very staunch religious people but also believed in good education. Mr.  Garrett had studied to be a Baptist minister but he was very poor at raising  money and he was advised at school he   d make a poor minister.  Oh, forever more.  So he taught school, but they thought most movies were educational and  they   d see that the boys, if they did their chores they   d get to go to the movie.  Well they went one afternoon and they had 10 cents left over and Johnny and  Miller after the movie, they walked to the drug store, and of course Johnny  22  Hinderliter  Garrett  Lemons  Garrett  Hinderliter  Garrett  Hinderliter  Lemons  Young  Hinderliter  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Hinderliter  Lemons  knew that meant an ice cream cone for both of them. There was some guy  wanting money, a tramp wanting money, and Miller gave that guy the 10  cents. And Johnny said,    I nearly cried all the way home,    and they lived  several miles in the country.  Speaking of tramps, I remember many times fellows would come to the back  door, but there was no fear of it. I never remember being afraid of these  people. They   d come to the back door and the man would say,    Do you have  some work I could do for a meal?    And mother never turned them down. Now  it might not be at meal time and if it wasn   t why she   d fix bacon and eggs and  pork and beans.     Yeah or a sandwich  Or a sandwich, they never left without something to eat, but they always did  something, too.  Yeah, what kind of things did she have them do?  Trim a tree, rake in the yard.  Yeah, pick up trash around.  Pick up trash. Our garage never held the car, it just held stuff, and so lots of  times   and we had a basement in our house and lots of times stuff in the  basement, she   d have them carry and things that would be too hard for mother  to do and my dad did nothing around the house, so really she probably was  tickled for someone to come by. (Laughs)  Yeah.  Do the others of you have memories of tramps or hobos?  Yeah, we lived on the north edge of town and just a block from the highway  and we had a lot of them come round.  We didn   t have too many then where we were.  But we never had any fear from those people.  No.  It wasn   t like today.  And gypsies they were just a curiosity, nobody ever thought anything about  them.  Tell me more about the gypsies, I   ve heard lots of people talking about being  out here, and I think that sounds so crazy when you think of them being in  23  Hinderliter  Young  Garrett  Young  Hinderliter  Lemons  Garrett  Hinderliter  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Lemons  Garrett  Young  Garrett  panhandle Oklahoma.  Yeah, they did they just came through and they would mill around town and  all.  Yeah, and the women all wore long dresses and full skirts, and the men now,  they didn   t dress too differently I think a scarf around the neck maybe.  They must have just gone from town to town.  They had dark skin, I think they were Hungarian or something.  Yeah I think so.  How did they travel we   ve heard some different versions?  Wagons. Old cars.  Old cars.  Yeah and old trucks.  My brother had a car, a Mormon 16-cylinder car, and they found it in a garage  in Campo. It had been driven very little, and so he and a bunch of his buddies  got the car and got it to running. It had little jump seats between the front seat  and the back seat. We went to a swimming party; he took about ten of us.  We really thought we were living in that thing.  Ten of us, he drove us to the swimming pool, now he was eight, nine years  older than me, and this car took many people to dances up at Cleason City in  Colorado.  Oh yeah.  Well it only made about three to four miles a gallon and they carried the gas  tank, the fenders came out on the car and had lights, and then it dipped down  like this and had a space here and they carried the gas tank in the middle of the  lights there because there were not too many filling stations, and had to fill her  up.  So how far are they driving to go to the dance in Colorado?  What do you think, 50 miles?  Well I   d forgotten. I never could go, we couldn   t go we were too young.  I couldn   t go, but I heard about it  24  Young  Garrett  Young  Hinderliter  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Lemons  Moore  Hinderliter  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Hinderliter  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Wasn   t it east of Campo?  Of Walsh.  Well maybe Walsh, I don   t know.  That   s quite a ways isn   t it?  I think it was kinda up in the Walsh area.  It was probably what 40 miles?  I was gonna say 50, 40 or 50 miles.  Well something like that.  Oh it was a big deal.  Well A.B. always went.  Yes, I know. (Laugh)  He was my uncle who lived with us some, and all the guys, they went to  Cleason City every time you turned around.  Well did any of you know people who did leave for California?  Yes.  The Lewis    and the Kelly   s.  That   s right.  What about Donald Cox? I think they went to Washington.  Yeah, they went to Washington I believe.  What about, where did Hollers go from here?  I have no idea.  I don   t know, Doctor didn   t live too long after they left here.  No.  And then Mrs. Holler died.  But I saw Carl Holler; he was visiting the Skelly twins.  25  Young  Garrett  Young  Lemons  Garrett  Lemons  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Moore  Lemons  Hinderliter  Garrett  Young  Moore  Young  Garrett  Young  Yeah.  In New Mexico.  Yeah.  These people that left, did they have contact back so that people knew what  was going on with them?  What happened     Yeah.  Yeah, in most cases.  I don   t remember seeing people like The Grapes of Wrath.  Oh no.  I mean the story of The Grapes of Wrath. Do you?  In those days, I never saw, an old car with a bunch of mattresses on the top,  and that   s what you think of in The Grapes of Wrath, and we were ready to kill  John Steinbeck incidentally after that book was written.  Well that was back in eastern Oklahoma wasn   t it?  Well you bet it was, the southeast part of the state.  Not here in the good old panhandle was it?  So would you say that the dust bowl times could be called the    the good old  days    then?  Well as far as we were concerned, now I don   t know about the grown ups then.  Certainly comforting memories of the dustbowl days, because as you can tell  from all four of us, there was love and security. I don   t think we wanted for  anything.  No we didn   t.  And there wasn   t this violence that you see.  That   s true, yeah.  No, no.  You said something about Margie   s mother sewing for other people, well my  26  Garrett  Hinderliter  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Moore  Hinderliter  Garrett  Hinderliter  Lemons  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Lemons  Hinderliter  Young  Garrett  mother didn   t sew for other people but she sewed for the family all of the time.  So we had plenty of clothes, and plenty of food somehow. So, no big  problems.  Lots of times  Everybody had about the same.  Mother would hang a quarter of beef in the garage in the wintertime, and we   d  go out and cut off meat to cook for supper. I believe our winters are milder  than they used to be.  Oh, I know they are.  Because I think we went through periods, months of just continuous freezing  temperatures or else, well to begin with, we had ice boxes, we didn   t have  refrigerators, and the ice man came by every day. Did you folks have one?  Yes.  We got a chunk of ice everyday, that   s how we kept our milk and our eggs and  butter, but we wouldn   t have been able to hang a quarter of beef in the garage,  not now, it wouldn   t keep.  Didn   t we have some chickens?  I don   t remember whether we did down there or not. Dad did later.  We had pets.  We had a cow; I remember that.  What kind of pets did you have?  I had a cat.  No, we had dogs, always dogs.  And then the boys in the family all had dogs.  Do you remember any unusual pets, or having heard some story of a person  having pet prairie dogs, or a pet coyote, the family had?  No, we didn   t, just a dog and a cat.  My mother was pretty tolerant but I don   t believe she would have put up with  a coyote. (Laughter)  They did hunt though.  27  Hinderliter  Young  Hinderliter  Young  Hinderliter  Garrett  Lemons  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Hinderliter  Young  Hinderliter  Young  Hinderliter  Garrett  Lemons  Hinderliter  Young  Hinderliter  Garrett  Lemons  The guys you mean?  Oh, daddy hunted a lot.  Yeah, and remember those rabbit drives they had?  You know, my dad never did go on those rabbit drives.  Yeah, I remember those. Dad used to go.  Did they club them?  Were you there to see the rabbit drive? What did you think about that kind of  thing?  Not much.  Didn   t bother you?  No, it didn   t bother me. Lots of country people ate rabbits. I can   t remember  that we did; did you ever eat rabbit?  No, mother wouldn   t have rabbit in the house, thought they were just not  clean, and diseased.  Yeah, we didn   t eat rabbit either.  But they had cook books, the home demonstration clubs, that they passed out  and they had rabbit chili and rabbit stew, and all those things in that cookbook.  Yeah, well people in the country probably did eat them.  Well they were pretty bad then.  They were bad here.  What about bed bugs, did you guys ever have any experiences of bed bugs?  Yes, we did. The first night we moved down here we put beds up.  Oh my, what a welcome.  Yeah, wasn   t it though? Next morning we woke up and you were just covered  with these little old bugs. We didn   t even know where they (Laughs).  Oh goodness.  What   d they look like, I don   t even know?  28  Hinderliter  Young  Hinderliter  Young  Moore  Hinderliter  Young  Lemons  Hinderliter  Garrett  Young  Hinderliter  Garrett  Lemons  Moore  Kite  Garrett  Young  Moore  Garrett  They were just little old, I don   t know, they   re not very exciting.  Flea were they, or bigger.  No, a little bigger that a flea, kind of strange I think, I can   t think of anything  right now.  For crying out loud.  Kinda round aren   t they?  Yeah, kind of a round, and I know it just took mother forever to get that  cleaned out, cause you didn   t have all these insecticides and things you do  now.  Sure, yeah.  What did she use to try to get rid of them?  Kerosene.  Oh, my mother washed one of her brother   s head in Kerosene cause he came  home with lice. It   s a wonder she just didn   t burn him up. (Laughter) But she  got rid of the lice.  Marietta Forman told the worst story about bed bugs I ever saw out there at  Felt or some place. I don   t remember the details, but it must have been awful  to get rid of those things.  It was terrible. You just put your bedding out everyday.  In the sun, fresh air.  It might have been Mrs. Foreman   we talked to her   that was telling me they  would put skunk oil on the bottom of their feet to prevent colds. Does that  sound familiar to anybody? (Laughs)  No, never heard of that.  Me neither. (Laughter)  Garlic around your neck.  Yeah, I   ve heard of that.  Skunks, ugh   But my grandmother fixed cough syrup with, she   d slice onions and put sugar  over it, and it would make a juice. I don   t know if I quit coughing because it  29  Lemons  Garrett  Hinderliter  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Lemons  Hinderliter  Lemons  Hinderliter  Garrett  Hinderliter  Lemons  Hinderliter  Lemons  Hinderliter  Garrett  tasted so bad (Laughter) but that   s what she used for it.  You didn   t want to take it anymore, probably  (Laughs) That sounds awful.  Yeah.  Oh, we had Dr. Drakes.  Well at some point, it tastes so horrible and after it goes down even, then  you   re afraid to cough.  Well yes, the fear.  Yeah.  I know little babies that have problems with diaper rash and stuff, you   d take  flour and scorch it on a frying pan on the stove and use that for powder,  supposed to have healing.  Huh, well I never heard of that, I   ll be darned.  You mentioned Dr. Dreggs is that right?  Drake.  What is that?  Well it   s a cough syrup.  It was alcohol probably.  Well it could have been, but oh it was nasty, it really was, and if mother would  get a bottle of that you   d quit coughing right quick.  Did she buy it here in town?  Yes, at the drugstore.  What was Christmas time like? Do you remember any vivid Christmas  memories as a kid?  Well we usually went to our grandmother   s for Christmas. Yeah, didn   t we,  practically always, up in Kansas.  I remember the Christmas I got my bicycle, the folks put it behind a chair and  draped coats over it   I didn   t find it for a long time. (Laughs) Oh, and then,  we loved to ride our bicycles, and we   d meet, sometimes at the courthouse,  and ride out to the overpass.  30  Young  Garrett  Young  Hinderliter  Moore  Young  Garrett  Young  Moore  Garrett  Lemons  Garrett  Lemons  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Yeah, that was the only hill around, so we   d go to the overpass.  Yeah, don   t you remember riding?  Yeah, sure.  I remember when mother used to hide those dolls, we had a big old wardrobe  and it had a rim around it, about that deep and she   d stick them up there, and  of course we   d check it out right quick. Oh we knew where it was. (Laughter)  Year after year she did that.  Well Christmas was always big at our house. I was the only child, but my  mother   s younger brother and younger sister, their mother died, so they were  in the house for Christmas.  They lived with you, a good deal of the time.  Part of the time, and my grandfather too. Then all, a whole bunch of other  relatives would always come in, it was a big deal, Christmas was great.  Always had a tree, always.  And they were fresh trees, they weren   t these artificial.  That   s right. Have you been out to the Kenton area?  We just went yesterday, that was the first time I   ve been out there.  That   s where we got our trees, out in that part of the country.  Oh really? What kind of things did you use for ornaments? My mom always  talked about stringing popcorn and berries and things.  Mother had some old ornaments and it was great to get them out every year.  Well they used to   now when I was six years old we went to Lubbock one  time, and my grandparents lived down there at that time, and boy the newest  thing that year was lights, but in different shapes, and there was one of Orphan  Annie and Sandy, different ones, and then we had one that was a cross. I can   t  think of others, but I hung on to those darned things. After they burned out I  hung on to them for years because I just hated to let them go. But they didn   t  make those things very long.  If one light went out, all your string of lights went out. They had no double  wires. Then you had to go through all the bulbs to find out which one was  burned out.  Yeah, sure, oh mercy.  31  Lemons  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Hinderliter  Lemons  Hinderliter  Young  Garrett  Lemons  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Was there a community celebration at Christmas?  Well the school always had a program and the churches always had a program.  I can   t remember that the community as a community had one particularly.  Yeah, you bet both of them, no. But we started getting Santa Claus down from  the North Pole, by the middle thirties I think.  He   d hand out sacks of candy and you always got an orange, and candy. Came  in on a Saturday usually.  Yeah. They flew him into the airport.  Saturday was a big day, that   s when all the farmers came to town.  Yeah, Saturday was    the day.     My mother would tell us that they got oranges sometimes for Christmas and  that was the most wonderful thing in the world.  Well it was, you didn   t have that much fresh fruit back then.  Well when did you realize as a kid that maybe all these dust storms were going  to end? Was it when it rained or after that?  Oh, it rained during dust bowl days.  Yeah, it would flood every once and awhile, maybe four inches in a night, and  then the next day the dirt would be blowing again. Because it rained so hard,  oh boy. So I don   t know, we just gradually got out of it I think.  It just gradually came out.  Do you remember as a kid hearing your parents or the people in town talk  about Franklin Roosevelt or the New Deal?  I was just gonna say, my father was very, very conservative and of course I  know that those programs helped our people to survive. But he   d always say,     I hope I live long enough to know if they   re able to ever not have a program.     Because he felt like, once you begin something, it would never stop.  Yeah, and he was right.  And he was right, it hasn   t stopped.  It   s gotten more, worse all the time.  He felt like it might have encouraged people to continue in businesses that  were not economically feasible, I mean if it couldn   t support itself, it shouldn   t  32  Lemons  Hinderliter  Moore  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Hinderliter  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  exist. Well that   s not a very compassionate way to look at things. As I   ve  grown older, I   ve thought about that a lot. That was my parents viewpoint on  it.  How about you guys, do you remember anything any political talk in your  family?  Not very much. They weren   t very politically oriented, were they?  No.  Well, I can remember my dad admiring Franklin D. Roosevelt to begin with,  but by the time he was gone, Daddy had changed his mind. He didn   t think  that fellow was so hot after all.  Well it seemed like they didn   t reward people who did do without, who did  hang in there. Yet I know that as our population increased, there were some of  these people that had to be taken care of. They did have the bread lines.  Yeah, but that was one thing, we never saw a bread line out here, never saw  one in my life.  Because the county took care of itself; the neighbors took care of themselves.  Yeah, the neighbors took care of each other.  But it was small enough that we were able to do this. Our churches did a lot  more charitable work in that day.  Locally.  Locally.  Yeah, instead of sending it to Africa or some places.  Well we did.  It   s true, real true.  Another thing, now the woman who lived next door to us did my mother   s  ironing, in trade for a subscription to the newspaper.  Yeah, a trade off deal.  A lot of things you could trade off.  Yeah.  Once in a while, mother would sew for Helen, but not often, she was too busy  33  Garrett  Young  Moore  Hinderliter  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Lemons  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Moore  Garrett  Moore  supplying Cecelia and me with clothes, I think.  Yeah that political thing, I   ve thought about a lot and then OETA had so many  programs on that period of time and I was never in the big city to see how  terrible it was in the big city.  Yeah, no we weren   t in need, right.  We hardly ever got to go to Amarillo.  No, not in those days.  Well no, no.  No after the Depression was over, my mother practically lived down there.  Of course, Amarillo is our shopping area, certainly not Oklahoma City.  Yeah 120 miles.  Like 350 saved approximately. So in country communities I can see that they  had a different philosophy.  Oh yeah.  Very definitely.  So how would you say that living in Cimarron County, living in the panhandle  of Oklahoma, living in Boise City during that time, how do you think that  that   s affected you now, something that maybe has changed the way you look  at things and you still carry that with you?  Frugal.  Who   s frugal? (Laughter)  Who saves cool whip cartons by the dozen? (Laughter)  What kind of watch do you wear? (Laughter)  I don   t know, I just changed it this morning. What is it, I can   t see.  Like around the house, like even plastic bags, if they aren   t dirty you save  them and reuse them; you wash them out. I think we picked that up in our  households. I see my family today. My family never bought anything on time,  we either had the resources to get it or we didn   t do it.  That   s the way with us. We didn   t have the money, we didn   t get it.  34  Young  Garrett  Lemons  Young  Garrett  Young  Hinderliter  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Lemons  Young  Garrett  Hinderliter  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Hinderliter  Young  Garrett  Lemons  Yeah, me too.  I don   t know how a bank survived with that kind of thought, because they  made their money loaning money. But really we lived that way, we were  conservative. I think another thing, we learned to be strong and self-sufficient.  Do you guys agree that   d be the same kind of things you would say that you  see in yourself now?  Yeah.  And not ashamed of the way we live. Oh, we all lived the same.  We didn   t know anybody that was really any better off than we were.  That   s right, it was equal everywhere.  Yeah, I think it   s colored our lives tremendously.  Yeah.  I don   t see it in my children though.  Yeah. (Laughs)  I don   t either.  Well you know.  Well sure, different times.  But this is our fault.  Well the other thing being too, if nobody had anything, what was the desire to  have it for? You have to maintain a certain level with your contemporaries.  But we spoiled our kids. I   m speaking only for myself. (Laughs)  Well you   re right, we all did.  We all did  Dad-gum, they never wanted for anything and that   s the wrong way to raise  kids.  Yeah.  Well, if you had to pick just one image in your mind, what would you say  would be your most vivid memory of living through the 1930   s and the dust  35  Young  Hinderliter  Moore  Hinderliter  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Hinderliter  Garrett  Hinderliter  Lemons  Hinderliter  Lemons  Kite  Lemons  Young  bowl? What   s the first thing you think of when someone says the dust bowl?  I think of that Black Sunday.  I just think of the same, Norma Gene.  Uh-huh.  That stands out more than anything.  That Black Sunday and I think of another thing, I did this quite often: around  the basement windows were little trough things built up so that when it rained  the water wouldn   t come in and there were some little old beds there that were  probably flower beds, but of course you didn   t have enough water to have  flowers. But there was always a bag of wheat or something, grain of some sort  and I had a great time during the afternoons when the wind was blowing  terrible. I   d go out and make little plots and plant that wheat, and gosh it was  great to see it come up, but I   d go out and water it everyday.  I   ll be darned.  Yeah, and it was protected from the north so that the dirt would blow over me,  it was a neat place to play. I had a great time by those windows. I don   t know  how my parents survived, I think about maybe hardships we had and how do  they compare with that, but I also think about World War II, how did my  parents survive having all of their young men sent away. It must have made  them stronger.  Yeah, I guess.  And maybe they did worry, but I think our parents felt like one day it would  stop, the dirt would stop, and then we   d pick up the pieces, didn   t we, that   s  the way your dad always acted.  Yeah.  Your dad was a mechanic right?  Uh-huh.  One of the stories we heard was about a car being sold, so I don   t know if  you   d know about this or not, but they said that these people came to town to  buy a car and they traded one cow or two cows?  Yeah something like that.  For a car, they traded cows for a car.  I   ll be darned.  36  Hinderliter  Lemons  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Hinderliter  Garrett  Young  Hinderliter  Kite  Lemons  Kite  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Hinderliter  Young  Garrett  Hinderliter  Young  Garrett  Never heard that.  Yeah, well we hadn   t either so I thought I   d ask.  Well just recently we know a lady traded some lots in town for a new car.  That   s right, Helen Mackey.  Some building, Helen Mackey.  Oh she did?  Yeah, the bank had wanted to buy those lots forever.  I doubt if your Uncle Homer would have traded a car for a cow.  No, I don   t think he would have at all. I don   t know what he would have done  with it if he had.  When they went to buy their cows, they went to the Chevy Garage.  And bought their cows from them.  From the Chevy place cause they knew the people had traded in a couple cows  for the car.  Clarence Snaps.  He was a real nice fellow.  And he was a trader.  Yeah, he was.  That was just characteristic of his personality.  He was a real fine guy.  Well did they have a farm at that time, Clarence?  Yeah, I bet he did.  I think so.  They probably went to the farm, cows.  Yeah.  Well we haven   t told you any horror things, have we? (Laughs)  37  Lemons  Garrett  Hinderliter  Garrett  Lemons  Young  Lemons  Garrett  Young  Lemons  Young  Moore  Young  Hinderliter  Young  Hinderliter  Moore  Garrett  Moore  Not really.  We haven   t frightened you have we? (Laughter)  They could live through one too, I bet.  Well sure.  That   s what always strikes me. I see those pictures of that big storm roll in, I  think how could you not be scared? And I hear the four of you and lots of other  people say, oh that was just our lives.  We were used to dirt storms and it was just another one, till it hit and then we  realized it was a bit much.  Yeah. (Laughs)  A little worse, and bigger than any of the others had been.  Yeah, bigger than the others.  Do you remember another, maybe not a series, but dust storms later  happening again?  In the fifties.  Fifties, yeah.  Boy, it was a time.  I remember that, we lived out on a farm in the fifties and it had got bad down  there.  Yeah, we didn   t have any black ones and it didn   t blow dirt every day, but they  didn   t make any crops either, no crops.  Let   s see, we lived on the road below Sutton.  We live out on the highway.  Going to Stratford.  Going to Stratford, but then we had a bad snow storm one time, and there was  two buses stuck out there, and so I had been to the grocery store the day before  the snow storm hit and the next morning I got up, they sent a train out and  picked up the ladies and took them back to town, and all the men were still in  the buses stalled, and they came walking up to my house and they were hungry  and they said,     Feed us,    so I let them come in. They had about 30 people,  and one kid, that Thompson boy, he was parked behind and he got stalled. He  38  Young  Moore  Young  Moore  Young  Hinderliter  Moore  Garrett  Young  Moore  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Lemons  Garrett  Young  says,    I   ll go out to the chicken house and get some eggs.    So he brought the  eggs in.  I   ll be darned.  And I was cooking them one at a time, and this one guy says,    Scramble    em  woman, it   s a lot quicker.    (Laughter) He was so hungry   He wanted it, how long were they out there?  I don   t know, it was about a day, or no, two days, it was terrible.  Well that   s what I was thinking.  You had bought a ham right.  I bought a ham, so I had plenty to feed them.  Is that the storm that came in from the north and covered the houses?  Yeah.  Yeah.  It was in March.  Yes.  March 23, 1957.  I thought that a building had been blow up against the north side of our house.  Every once in a while it would be light enough, and this came in with the dirt  storm.  So this is that    snuster    they were talking about on the display over there?  Yes, and it came in with the dirt storm, the dirt blew before that snow came in.  Once in awhile it would get light and I could see this object. Let   s see, that  started Friday night, Saturday, and all day Sunday and Monday morning the  sun came out. It was a snowdrift that was higher than the very top of our  house, and our car was buried underneath that. It was the funniest thing, it  blew up and it had this great big snow pile and it had sort of a tunnel was  blown around the outside of the house. We could go out our front door and my  two kids, the boys, could walk around, and there was snow all over the top of  them and they could just walk around outside the house.  Well we got out our south door and got to the car, no electricity of course, so  we didn   t have TV, but radio wouldn   t work. Bob went out to the car and there  was just a dry place around the car. The wind was so strong but it just piled the  39  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Lemons  Young  Hinderliter  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  snow in various places and it was, oh, three feet away from the car, the snow  was deeper than the car was. But he   d get in the car and listen to the radio and  he   d come back and tell us. (Laughter)  I   ve got pictures of that, I should have brought them, but it wasn   t dust bowl.  Oh yeah, we   ve got great pictures.  Oh yeah, you just walk from the snowdrift right on the roof of the houses.  Oh yeah, man alive.  They had to drop food by airplane and helicopter.  Yeah, they thought we were freezing to death, they dropped blankets, Red  Cross did. Oh mercy, that   s quite a deal.  Well I   m glad you talked about that because I   d seen those pictures over there  of the snuster, we   re like    What   s a snuster?    (Laughter)  Yeah, yep, and it was late in the year, March 23rd, for a snowstorm.  For that kind of a snow.  But that snowstorm had so much wind, lots of places would just be bare, no  snow at all. It would blow it and then when it   d hit something then it would  begin to pile up and you   d have bare spots and then you   d have one as tall as  the house, a snowdrift.  Mrs. McDonald who lived on West Main Street, in that little house there, an  old lady and she was by herself and she suddenly realized after a couple of  days she was completely covered up. (Laughter) I mean, there was snow  everywhere, and she couldn   t see out of a window or a door or anything, and  she got panicky, she was a dear little lady.  How did she get someone to notice her?  Well she said she screamed for quite awhile, and then she realized nobody can  hear me with the wind blowing so much. So she just settled down and decided  somebody would find her after a while and sure enough they did. They dug her  out about Monday afternoon I think, (Laughter) it was just down the way from  the newspaper office so we knew what was going on. But right in front of her  house, there was a snowplow that the old boy gave up the ghost on that, he  couldn   t go any further.  And so the snow covered it up.  Right.  40  Hinderliter  Young  Garrett  Moore  Young  Garrett  Moore  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Moore  Young  Hinderliter  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Moore  Young  Moore  Garrett  People were stranded in the courthouse.  Oh yeah, they were everywhere.  But I hadn   t realized that you fed the bus people Marge.  Oh, yes.  I had forgotten that, good grief.  Good thing you got a whole ham, wasn   t it?  Yeah, good thing I had plenty of food, and those eggs out in the chicken house.  Well and then, I believe those guys lied to us, because after they got them all  off the bus and got them in the Legion Hall in the basement of the courthouse,  they called some of us around town to go down there and feed those guys,  which we did. (Laughter)  Well, free meals.  I remember one guy wanted some hot chocolate.  You didn   t feed them hot chocolate? (Laughter)  I probably didn   t have hot chocolate.  We didn   t have any chocolate there in the Legion Hall for crying out loud, and  they sent me down to Coley   s, a block away, in all that snow.  Through that snow.  To get the hot chocolate.  Yeah, to get some chocolate for him.  Well, Ovaltine.  No, he had to have Hershey   s cocoa.  Well, if they could get anything free why not take it?  Well, sure yeah, well he got his hot chocolate.  I was glad to see them leave, the bus take off. (Laughter)  Well of course you were. You were more concerned about feeding your  family.  41  Hinderliter  Moore  Kite  Lemons  Young  Kite  Garrett  Lemons  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Kite  Well one of them was out to our house. Roger, remember?  Yeah.  All I was thinking was the asphidity question, hanging this thing around your  neck.  Black beads of some sort.  I   ve heard of it but     That was something else that we   ve never run across.  Well they, there was one question here, you wondered where our parents   my  grandparents, my grandfather came from New York, and he came to Prospect.  Really?  Oh sure, and the other grandparents came from Ohio, they were both school  teachers and his father died and left him a little money and he put it in a strong  box and took a horse and buggy and I think the first place they stopped where  they spent any time was around Dodge City. He loaned money out of the back  end of the buggy from his lock box, and he spent his life establishing banks  over Oklahoma and parts of California, and then he   d sell them.  He had a bank established in Buffalo and Oklahoma. They had one of the first  cars, what was it called? Anyway, they drove that old car from Buffalo out  through here, they were trying to get to La Junta, Colorado where you could  catch a train and go to California. No roads, particularly, but there was a  railroad track over the Cimarron River and they drove the car over the railroad  track. Then when they came back they came down back through this area and  grandfather said,    You know, there needs to be a bank here. There   s so much  area here that nobody is servicing,    and so there was and old hotel here, The  Margo Hotel     What year was this, do you remember?  Well it must have taken several years to get the petition through so it must  have been about 1912.  After statehood anyway.  Yeah, because their petition had to go through the state and spent enough time  here. They had to get so many names of people who said that if they had any  money they   d put it in the bank, and they finally, after so many days, they got  enough people to say they would do that, so then they went to the state capitol  and that   s how that started.  The most interesting story of how people got here that I   ve heard yet.  42  Garrett  Young  Hinderliter  Garrett  Young  Lemons  Hinderliter  Young  Hinderliter  Garrett  Hinderliter  Garrett  Moore  Hinderliter  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Young  Garrett  Lemons  Garrett  Well, that   s how they came.  Why did your folks come down here, because of the farmland, did they come  down to farm?  Yeah, Dad broke out a quarter out east, he   d come down the year before, they  knew the Foreman   s, Ellis Foreman and he came down and farmed some with  Ellis and then he bought that quarter and broke it out.  That   s what brought them.  Oh and something   she wouldn   t tell you this I   m sure   she and her husband  live in an adobe house.  Yeah.  That   s stucco.  It was a nice house, but gosh, it   s been there for years hasn   t it?  1925.  How about your gas bill? They   re supposed to be so warm.  Well it wasn   t too bad.  It wasn   t too bad.  Boy, we   ve been having gas bills down in Stratford.  But one thing you want to do, you never want to let them cool off, you want  them to stay steady.  To keep steady so you don   t turn your heat down at night? Those houses that  are built with the adobe, the windows have a ledge about like this.  Yeah.  And in recent years the people that have lived in it went in and put glass  shelves and set pretty bottles or crystal will turn purple. Have we talked too  long?  Hey, here come the experts   Have we bored you completely?  Not at all, thank you so much for coming in and talking with us.  How neat it is to get together with friends.  43  Young  Lemons  Garrett  Lemons  Moore  Lemons  Young  Garrett  Moore  Hinderliter  Garrett  Right.  Before you take off I do want to tell you what will happen next, that we will  take these tapes back to Stillwater, and we will transcribe them, you   ll get a  written copy of what we talked about today. It will come to you, we   ll probably  have to send it to Phyllis and have her send it to you and then you can look  through it, read through it, make sure you know that we haven   t put something  down that you didn   t say or if you know if we spelled somebody   s name wrong.  Are you afraid we   ll sue you? (Everybody laughs)  And then after that you send that back or get a hold of us and we   ll make the  corrections and you   ll get a final copy too. Each of you will get your own copy  and then Phyllis will get a copy.  Oh that sounds great.  But if you think of anything else that you want to talk about that you forgot to  mention or you get home this afternoon, wait until we come back, we want to  hear the story but we   ve gotta get it on tape so get in touch with Phyllis and we  can give you a call so you don   t have to pay for the long distance call but  yeah, you can get a hold of us that way and thanks so much. I hope that this is  kind of fun.  Yeah it is.  Well it has been pleasant to reminisce.  Yeah, it was great.  Yeah we enjoyed that.  Thank you for the opportunity.  -------  -------  
