 Lemons  Nobles  We   ll go around and let each of you state your name, when you were born, and  where you were born to have you all identified on the tape, and then we   ll get  started with the questions.  I   m Merle Taylor Nobles. I was born August 10, 1920. I was born on a farm  three miles east of Keyes.  I   m Lorraine Styles Livingston Palmer, and I was born October 17, 1921 about  nine or ten miles east of Keyes on the farm, at home.  I   m Ora Hagan Burns. I was born March 9, 1912 in Trinidad, Colorado.  I   m Mildred Hammontree Williams. I was born on the farm, four miles west  of Keyes; however, Keyes was not here  laughter  in January of 1918.  Well Mrs. Burns, we   ll start with you since you were not from Keyes, and we   ll  come back to Keyes in just a second. How did your family get from Colorado  to Keyes?  By covered wagon, I don   t remember though, because I was only about two.  If you were two, that would have been in about 1914. And the rest of you lived  in Keyes your whole life, I guess.  Out in the country and in Keyes.  We lived on a farm out east of Keyes. My mother and daddy homesteaded it  in 1906 out there, and that   s where I was born. We moved to town when I was  four-years-old. We built a house here in town, and I moved to town when I  was four-years-old.  Okay, so would you consider your upbringing to be more urban or more  rural?  Well, at the time we built our house, it was the only dwelling house in the  town of Keyes  laughter . It was the first one that was built in the town of  5  Lemons  Williams  Lemons  Nobles  Lemons  Nobles  Kite  Nobles  Lemons  Palmer  Lemons  Palmer  Lemons  Palmer  Lemons  Burns  Lemons  Burns  Williams  Lemons  Keyes.  How about you? Would you say you had a more rural upbringing?  Yes. I was born four miles west of Keyes, and I grew up there. Then I got  married and lived in Keyes. I moved up a step   Laughter   Moved to town. So those of you from the Keyes area, and you too when you  moved to Keyes, what did your father and mother do? Were they farmers, or  did they have a business? What did they do?  My father worked for the Star Lumber Company until he retired.  What did he do for them?  They sold lumber and hardware stuff, didn   t they?  I saw a Star Lumber sign in the museum. They had a big advertisement for  Star Lumber.  There   s a Star Lumber Company in Boise City, there was a Star Lumber  Company here at Keyes, and there was a Star Lumber Company down at  Elkhart, and my dad worked for the one here at Keyes.  How about you?  My parents were farmers.  Did they have mostly crops or cattle?  They had both, but mostly crops.  What kind of crops did they raise?  They raised wheat and raised milo and raised feed to feed the cattle. They had  cattle also, but it was not a ranch. It was a farm just with cattle on the farm.  How about you?  My dad was a farmer and raised about the same thing her dad did. He had a  few cattle too.  Do you remember the house were you grew up and what it looked like?  Oh yes, I remember it well.  Yeah, I had my whole life story in the Boise City paper, all about our house.  So what was it like?  6  Williams  Lemons  Williams  Lemons  Nobles  Lemons  Nobles  Lemons  Nobles  Lemons  Nobles  Lemons  Palmer  When my dad first built the house, it was just a two-room house with an  upstairs. I was born in that house. We girls had a bedroom upstairs. Nothing  was finished up there; you could see the nails and the black paper and all that  in the ceiling. Anyhow, that was our bedroom up there. My parents    bedroom  was actually in the living room, because we just had a two-room house, and  then our kitchen and dining room were together. It wasn   t very long until my  dad built two rooms onto this house. It was really a nice big house then. We  had more room. Of course, we didn   t have a bathroom. Then we felt like we  had a lot of room.  How many people lived in the house? You and your parents and how many  siblings?  I have two sisters and one brother. There were four of us. My brother was  younger, and then my sisters were quite a bit older.  Sound familiar? What was your house like?  Well, it   s the same house that   s out here on the farm now that I own, and  we   ve got the original patent on that land, where Mother and Daddy  homesteaded in 1906.  How many rooms are in the original house?  Three.  How many people lived there?  Four.  Four of you all together.  Four of us, Mother and Daddy and Margaret and me.  The same sort of thing?  Well, sort of I guess. My parents, this was the second marriage for both of  them, and this was my dad   s homestead. They all homesteaded about the same  time, about 1906. We had four rooms. Do you know what black tar paper is?  Well, that   s what the house was covered in on the outside. I can remember it  really well  laughter . And then in 1928, my folks built a house here in town,  and we moved to town. We brought two milk cows; this is Keyes city limits,  and some pigs and some chickens. We had a chicken house and a place for the  pigs and a barn for the two cows. We milked cows and fed pigs and fed  chickens. We had eggs and milk and cream and pork to eat. There was  grassland about two blocks south of where the house was built, and that was  fenced. My dad fenced it, and he took the cows down there of a morning after  he milked them and let them graze on the grass. Of an evening, he   d go back  and get them, milk them again, and shut them up in the barn all night, and then  7  Burns  Palmer  Burns  Palmer  Lemons  Palmer  Lemons  Palmer  Burns  Palmer  Lemons  Palmer  Lemons  Burns  Lemons  Burns  repeated it.  I didn   t realize all that.  We sold milk for 10 cents a quart. This was during the dirty thirties. I can   t  remember how much we got for eggs. I want to think 15 cents a dozen, but  I   m not sure. I just can   t remember that, but I remember 10 cents a quart for  milk.  I remember paying eleven cents a dozen for eggs.  Well, we may not have gotten 15 cents. I don   t really remember how much we  got for eggs. We were fortunate though; we were a lot better off than a lot of  people. We had our own milk, our own eggs, chickens, and pork to eat. We  had lots of gravy too and butter.  So what was the best thing to eat? What was your favorite thing?  My mother made everything taste good whether it did or not. She would tell  me how good it was   Tell you till you believed it too, huh?  I believed my mother. I was the only child of this marriage, and I had two half  sisters and a half brother, and the youngest was 16 years older than I was.  Were you spoiled?  I imagine  laughter . I imagine I was spoiled, don   t you? My mother took the  spoiling out of me, because she believed in punishing me. It was a hard thing  for her to keep me in control. Her other daughter was lady like, and this  daughter was a tomboy. I climbed the windmill. I did everything I wasn   t  supposed to.  So would that be something that you would get in trouble for, climbing on the  windmill?  Oh yes, I got a lot of them, but I went back and did it again. It was so much  fun. Not now, I wouldn   t get up there for a lot of money now, but it was fun.  How about for you?  We lived in a two-room dugout.  What was that like?  We had the same things you had, cattle and chickens and pigs and everything,  lots of cats and a dog.  8  Lemons  Burns  Lemons  Burns  Lemons  Burns  Lemons  Burns  Lemons  Palmer  Burns  Lemons  Palmer  Lemons  Burns  Lemons  How long did you live in a dugout?  Well, I was probably about four when we moved there, so I might have been  five. I was a sophomore in high school when they got a house.  Oh, so for several years. And how many people were living in the dugout?  Five.  Oh my gosh, can you imagine? You must have liked each other. So what was  a typical day like? You   d get up in the morning; you   d eat breakfast, and then  what would you do?  Well, we always had cows to milk, chickens to take care of, farm work to do.  In the summertime, we always had a garden and had to work in the garden. I  hated it then, but I enjoy it now.  What was your favorite chore? Something that wasn   t so bad that you might  not have minded doing.  Well, I used to have to herd cattle a lot, and I guess that wasn   t too bad   How about any of the others of you? Something you had to do that you  thought was all right.  I had forgotten about it. I rode a horse, and the only way I could get on that  horse was to go in the barn where the stanchions were and climb up on the  stanchions and get on the horse. I rode that horse all over that area out in the  country. One time I went after the mail, and it was probably about three-quarters  of a mile from my house, and I slid off of the horse when I was  getting the mail out of the mailbox, and I had to walk and lead the horse back  to the barn to get back on it  laughter .  I had trouble getting on a horse too. We   d get the horse to get its head down,  and they   d throw a foot over its head, and when it would raise its head up, we  would go through it backwards and we   d have to turn around and then  forwards  laughter . If a fence was handy, you could climb up on the fence  and then get on.  Do you remember the name or your horse that you rode?  Nelly.  Nelly.  Major.  Major. Major seems to be a popular name for pets then.  9  Burns  Lemons  Nobles  Lemons  Nobles  Lemons  Nobles  Lemons  Nobles  Palmer  Nobles  Lemons  Nobles  Lemons  Nobles  Well, that was the old man that lived very close. When he left, he gave my  sister and I that horse. Well, he gave it to Mother, and that horse was born  then. We thought that was the most wonderful horse that there ever was. He  wasn   t very pretty; really, he was an ugly horse  laughter .  Well Mrs. Nobles, what was your least favorite chore that you had to do?  I lived in town. I didn   t have any chores I had to do.  You didn   t have to clean up your room or wash dishes or anything?  No, my sister was older than me, and she was the one that did most of the  housework. I was like Lorraine; I was a tomboy  laughter . I followed my  daddy everywhere he went.  Well, what did your neighbors do? You lived in town, what did the people  living around you do? We know your dad   s working at the lumber company.  There wasn   t anybody living very close to us. I don   t know what. It was  about four blocks, I guess. The closest house would be about four blocks from  where we lived. We weren   t allowed to go out across the street or anything  when I was a kid, unless we asked mother. If the ball rolled across the street,  we just had to leave it there until she   d let us go get it  laughter .  What was she worried about? I would think that there weren   t very many  people that would be on the roads.  Well, the Millers, Alfred Miller, were the ones that lived the closest to us, and  they had a whole house full of kids. I don   t know how many exactly, about ten  or something like that. They always managed to come down to our house and  play  laughter . I was usually the one that had the ball and the mitt and the bat  and stuff to play baseball with.  Yeah, we were talking a while ago, you know Merle   s father worked for the  Star Lumber Company. He worked for a salary. Of course, it was not a lot,  but money went a lot farther then. A dollar went a lot farther than it does now.  He had a salary, where most people depended on what they could eek out of  the land, which was nothing during the dirties.  Well, we always got a quarter a piece for allowance every week.  What would you spend your allowance on?  I usually saved mine, and I   d go up to my sister and make her pay me double  back. She liked to buy lipstick and rouge and stuff like that, and I didn   t.  That   s pretty funny, using your allowance to make money  laughter .  We had a real dark green International pickup, and he always took us to school  10  Palmer  Nobles  Lemons  Palmer  Lemons  Palmer  Nobles  Palmer  Burns  Palmer  Lemons  Williams  Palmer  Williams  and went and got us at lunch time and took us back to school and then at four  o   clock he came back and got us and brought us back home.  Now I walked back and forth to school, dirt and all. Sometimes you   d put an  old red bandana over your nose and leave just enough room to see. There   s  been many a time where you couldn   t even know where you were. Merle,  don   t you remember when we had play practice and somebody would have a  car and they   d be taking us home, and we   d be clear out of the town down  Herman Miller   s corner? We didn   t even know where we were. Did you not  get in on that?  I don   t guess I did. I don   t remember us ever getting lost at night.  Did they get lost in the dirt; is that what happened?  Yes.  How   d they get back?  Well, you just kind of stop and figure out where you were.  And sometimes it would let up.  Oh yes, it didn   t blow just where you couldn   t see 24 hours a day. I started  working in the grocery store when I was in the sixth grade. The people who  had the grocery store rented an apartment from my folks. I worked there all  through high school. Boy, did I make some money. 25 cents from four  o   clock of an evening until ten o   clock of a night, and 50 cents for all day  Saturday. Then I got a raise. It was 50 cents on weekdays from four o   clock  to ten o   clock, and on Saturdays I got a dollar.  You were rich then, weren   t you?  I was rich. I bought all of my school clothes; I bought all of my books, even  bought some groceries. Ora   s husband used to bring in 30 dozen crates of  eggs every week. I remember back.  I was going to ask what it was like the first time you saw a dust storm.  Well, it was in 1933.  Was it    33?  I thought it was. Anyhow, I lived out on a farm all my life, until I was  married. We had visitors for dinner on Sunday, and there was a double funeral  in Boise City. It was this Grandma Shaw, and then her grandchild, which was  probably a year old, and they had their funeral at the same time. When the  funeral was over, just like any other time, everybody goes and gets in their car  and they start leaving. They were taking these bodies to Vici, Oklahoma for  11  Lemons  Palmer  Williams  Palmer  Williams  Nobles  burial, and so this is the direction we come to come home. We lived 12 miles  now but then it was probably 15 miles because we didn   t have any angle, we  didn   t have any railroad down here. We started out, and we saw it in the north,  just a low line of real dark, it looked like clouds, and it was then the middle of  summer. Boy, it was just moving up so fast, those dark clouds. The first thing  we knew we were just way up here.  By the time we were out of Boise City probably five or six miles, that cloud  was almost on us. The hearse, they just turned out of the middle of the road  into the ditch, which was level, and headed south and stopped. All of the  funeral cars did the same thing. Well, we were a little bit behind them, and we  saw this house off the road about a quarter of a mile or something, so we just  decided that we   d go down to this house. It was Emily and Edna and Ms. Ford  and Mom and I. We pulled right up to the door, and this was just almost on us,  black. We pulled up there and knocked on the door, and this old man came to  the door and we asked if we could come in and stay until the storm was over.  He said,    Well, there   s not anybody here but me,    and we told him we didn   t  care. We all filed out of that car and went in that house.  He was staying there taking care of that farm while the people were gone. I  guess he was an old bachelor. When we all went in, he lit his lantern and went  out to the barn and stayed out there all that time  laughter . He didn   t even  stay in the house with us. We stayed in that house, and it got so black that you  couldn   t even see the window. You couldn   t tell the window from the side of  the wall. Anyhow, late in the evening, real late, with our lights, we could see  the side of the road enough to get on home to our place out there, and it was  night. That was the first black dirt storm that we had here. It surprised  everybody, even though we had wind and dirt, but we   d never had anything  roll up like that. Have you seen pictures of it?  I   ve seen pictures of it, and I can   t imagine sitting there and not being  completely terrified.  It just boiled over and over and over, didn   t it?  Anyhow, I don   t know how long the funeral people sat there, but we stayed in  that house for a long time, even though the old man didn   t really want us to   Do you remember who that was or what place that was?  I used to remember their names, but I don   t know. That house moved away,  and you can   t even tell now that there was ever a place there.  Well, that first real black dirt storm we had, I was out at Grandma Taylor   s and  she lived about five miles out of town. I usually spent every weekend out  there with her, if I could. She put a quilt over her dining table, which was one  of those big brown tables like everybody used to have, and lit the lamp and set  it under there and set the cookie jar under there and put me under there   laughter , while she went out and got her chickens in and everything. As soon  12  Lemons  Palmer  Lemons  Burns  Palmer  Burns  Lemons  Palmer  Lemons  Palmer  as she got them in, she crawled under the table with me. We stayed under  there until that storm was over  laughter .  Do you guys remember Black Sunday?  Oh, you bet. We had just gotten home from Elkhart. My nephew and I had  gone to Elkhart, and we were baptized that day. We had just gotten home, and  here this thing was boiling up, you know. It looked like rain; it looked like it  was going to rain. My dad went out to put the car in and get the chickens in  and all that, and before he got back to the house from putting the car in the  garage, you couldn   t even see your hand in front of your face. It was just  black, black, black. He had to stay out there until it came and let up just a little  bit. He didn   t know where the house was. He couldn   t even see it. We had  electricity. We probably had all of the 40-watt, maybe 25-watt bulbs, but you  couldn   t see it. It was terrible, terrible.  How about for you?  Well, I didn   t see the Black Sunday, but after we came back, we went out  doors and could see one coming. It was just kind of rolling along there. We   d  watch it until it got pretty close, and then we   d run back in the house real  quick. After a while, it was real black, and it   d start to rain. Even though it  was raining, you couldn   t even see your hand in front of your face.  It rained mud, didn   t it?  I guess so; it was too dark to see.  So how did you deal with these dust storms coming all of the time? What  would you do to prepare for one, and to clean up after one?  Well, you waited until it was over to clean up, and then you knew it would be  right back there again  laughter . Our house was pretty new, because it was  built in    28, but we still got dirt. Merle was talking about how they didn   t get  much dirt, but it seemed to me like we got quite a bit. Of course, I was the  only one, besides my parents, that got in on a lot of the cleaning up of the dirt.  You   d clean up, and usually the main thing was that you   d have to always  wash the table and everything. You didn   t keep anything on the table that  wasn   t covered. I think my mother used a tablecloth to cover the whole table.  Even then, you   d have to wash the dust off of the table before you could eat,  but we always ate. It was not nearly as bad for children as it was for parents,  because they were going through the financial strain, and kids don   t appreciate  that. As long as there   s something to eat, something to do, play games and  happiness, that   s all kids need.  So what were kids doing to entertain themselves? What were you guys doing  for entertainment and fun?  It seems like we were always doing something.  13  Williams  Nobles  Lemons  Burns  Lemons  Nobles  Palmer  Nobles  Palmer  Nobles  Palmer  Lemons  Palmer  I know what I did; I played the piano.  After supper nearly every night, we played music. Daddy played the French  horn, Mother played the guitar, Margaret played the piano and I played the  violin. In the summertime, we   d set out on the front step and play, and by that  time, all the neighbors around would congregate and listen to us.  How about for you, what did you do to entertain yourself?  Well, let   s see, there were three of us kids. We played games a lot. We played  checkers and dominoes and Tiddlywinks   I don   t know whether anybody  knows what Tiddlywinks are or not   and jacks and things like that. Later on  my brother had gotten a baseball and a bat, us kids would play ball, there were  just three of us so we couldn   t do much so we would bat and try and catch it.  I guess you guys played baseball too, with the neighbor kids next door.  Well, they weren   t what you   d call next door but we played baseball. I always  got included because I had the equipment.  Laughter   When Keyes got a little more populated, we got together more, because there  were a lot more kids.  How old were we when Mother made us those yellow Easter dresses? Do you  remember?  I don   t remember for sure.  I know you said that was the first homemade dress that you   d ever had   laughter . Me and her dresses were just alike, and they were yellow.  Merle and I grew up together and went to school together and graduated  together. I even was cupid. You remember it Merle  laughter . I told them I  would be cupid if the marriage lasted, but if it didn   t last, I had nothing to do  with it  laughter    So tell us how did cupid do his work?  Oh boy, I made a 4-H trip, and this was still some dirty times then, to  Stillwater. Her husband, which was not her husband, she didn   t even know  him then, he went with us on that trip, and I met him then. I   m the one that  had the date with him that night, and he brought another boy. Merle and I  were running around together, so I gave her the other boy. He took me home  first, and then he took Merle home. The poor boy that Merle was with sat in  the car all that time that he was in the house with her, and the next day at  school Merle said,    Oh, I really like him. I hope that you   re not upset about  it.    I remember that she was worried. She was probably afraid I was going to  be mad  laughter .  14  Lemons  Palmer  Nobles  Palmer  Nobles  Palmer  Lemons  Nobles  Palmer  Nobles  Palmer  Lemons  Palmer  Lemons  Williams  What did you do when the four of you went out on that first date?  I don   t know what we did. We never had any money. We didn   t go anywhere  to spend money, did we?  The first time I went with Gordon, we went to Boise City to the movie.  Yeah, but that was not that time.  No.  That was when I went with Gordon, and what was that other boy   s name? It  wasn   t Taylor, was it?  How long after this date swapping did you marry your husband?  Well, that picture over there is our 50th wedding anniversary picture.  Well, they got married pretty dang quick   No, it was about six months or so. We got married the first day of January  1939.  And we graduated from high school in    39, Merle and I did, so see, it was  pretty quick. It was love at first sight for both of them. I like Gordon real  well. He was a good friend, but I didn   t have aspirations of the future with  him. We were good friends. I thought it was kind of neat.  That   s a great story.  Yeah, I was glad to be able to be cupid, especially since it lasted   Laughter   How about you; do you remember how you met your spouse?  It seems like I knew him all my life. When he was a senior in high school, I  was in the seventh grade, so there was nothing going on there. When he was  in high school, he had another girlfriend that he really almost married, but she  moved away to Arizona, and he didn   t get her. Later on, he started dating me.  I don   t remember how or when, but I think the first date I had with him   and I  hadn   t ever gone with anyone   oh, I had gone with two or three guys that my  sisters knew through teaching at their schools. When he came up to me, I was  out in the pasture, on the horse, after the cows on our first date, because I had  to go get the cows, and I didn   t start out on time or he came early or  something, but anyhow, he drove up in his    28 Chevy and I was out there.  Anyhow, I got the cows in, and then I got in and I got ready, and I suppose we  went to the show; I don   t know. A lot of times, we   d go down by Lake  Willow Bar and sit there and sing. He   d sing, and I   d sing, and we   d sing, and  sit there and make love  laughter .  15  Palmer  Lemons  Palmer  Williams  Palmer  Williams  Lemons  Williams  It didn   t take a lot of money then to go on a date, did it? I had a date with John  Key Venada for three months. His uncle was going to loan him the car, but he  had to get enough money to put the gas in and get the movie tickets. I think  we had that date three months before he got enough money to do all that   laughter . I remember that.  How much did it cost to go to the movies?  About a dime, I think.  When I was a senior, my folks planned on me going to college, but I didn   t  plan on me going to college. I had had enough school. I thought, boy, if I  could ever get out of high school that was all I wanted. I wanted to get  married. Ardath, my cousin, was going to college over at Goodwell. My folks  let me go over there and stay with her. We called it lot of housekeeping; you  had a little two-room apartment up above in this lady   s house. I actually  finished high school at Goodwell, but I don   t ever mention that. I just go  ahead and say I graduated from Keyes. Anyhow, I went to Goodwell. I think  they thought that would maybe kind of separate me from Lloyd, but it  probably made it worse, because he came over there. After I graduated from  high school in May, we got married in August of    37.  I remember one time, and I don   t remember if it was Herman or Cody that I  went with, with Lloyd to see you. I don   t recall that we did anything particular  except to gather and talk and visit. That was the main thing that people did  then, wasn   t it?  When he came over there one time, my cousin Melvin came with him, because  Ardath was Melvin   s sister, so they stayed kind of late in our apartment. We  fixed our food and everything. The most awful dirt storm came up, and it was  bad. It just looked like you couldn   t see across the street, so they just stayed  up in our rooms, which was against the rule for girls to have boys up in their  room after certain hours. We tried to be quiet, because it was really late. It  must have been after twelve o   clock at night, and that dirt quit blowing a little  bit, but we didn   t want this lady to know that the boys had been up there, even  though one of them was her brother  laughter   They tip-toed down the stairs,  and our bathroom was at the foot of the stairs for everybody in that house, and  there were a lot of bodies in that house  laughter . One went down and slipped  on out real easy, and then the other one went down. The car was pretty close  to the back door where they went out, and they pushed the car out into the  street and down the street before they ever started the motor, because they  didn   t want to get caught. We didn   t want to get caught; they wouldn   t have  had to suffer any. Anyhow, we made noise tripping down the steps to go to  the bathroom, as usual, but it was very late at night, so I don   t know whether  she ever woke up or not. We were kind of afraid of her.  Do you know if she ever knew about that?  No, she never knew  Dirt storm days.  16  Palmer  Lemons  Williams  Palmer  Nobles  Palmer  Nobles  Palmer  Lemons  Nobles  Burns  Nobles  Palmer  Kite  Palmer  Nobles  Palmer  Nobles  Palmer  Nobles  Palmer  There were very few bathrooms back then too. We had the path. Have you  heard of the path?  Yeah.  Out to the outhouse.  The outhouse, the path. In the winter, it was so cold to go out there  shudders .  You didn   t go unless you just absolutely had to, and in the summer, I was  always scared of spiders and bugs. It was bad. I remember that outhouse.  Spiders won   t hurt you. I used to play with spiders all the time.  I know you did, but I didn   t like them. We didn   t have the same likes   laughter , did we Merle? I didn   t like the spiders, and I sure did not like the  snakes.  They won   t hurt you. They might make you hurt yourself, but they won   t hurt  you  laughter .  I don   t intend to give them a chance enough, and I still don   t intend to   Do you remember when you first got indoor plumbing?  Well, we had a bathroom in our house when they built it.  Did you have the fixtures?  Yeah, but we had to have a big five-gallon can under the stool part. Daddy  usually emptied that every morning.  An outhouse.  You had an indoor outhouse.  Yeah, an indoor outhouse.  Well, that   s what we used. He   d carry the bucket out every morning. Don   t  you remember us having the bathroom, Lorraine?  Well, I guess I don   t. I probably didn   t even know what it was.  We had a bathtub and the lavatory and the stool.  We had the bathroom without any fixtures, when the house was built.  We put the fixtures in when they built the house.  It was a lot of years before we got indoor plumbing.  17  Nobles  Lemons  Burns  Lemons  Williams  Palmer  Williams  Palmer  Williams  Palmer  Nobles  Williams  Palmer  Williams  Palmer  Nobles  Palmer  Of course, you had to carry your hot water from the kitchen into the bathtub.  Mrs. Burns, do you remember when you first got indoor plumbing?  Well, it was a long, long time. I   d been married quite a while before we had it.  I guess it was when we were at Grand Junction. We went to Grand Junction  and lived there one year, and then we had it. Then we came back and finally  had it on the farm. We lived in Keyes 20 years then back to the farm.  How about electricity? Do you remember when you first got electricity?  I do  Well first, actually, we had what they called a wind charger. That was  just like electricity to us. That   s just your own little private thing. As far as  the electric line going out there that was     It was in the late forties.  Exactly, it was after I was married. All you had was either your own; however  you did it, your coal-oil lamp or your gas lantern. We used to have a gas  lantern, and we had what you called a Rayo Lamp. It made a kind of a white  light. It was not that bad.  Aladdin Lamps.  Aladdin Lamps, yeah.  That was a good light.  I had Mother and Daddy   s Aladdin Lamp when I moved to town, and my son  wanted it, so I gave it to him.  Lenny   s got   out at the farm   my sister, my folks, while Emily had it also  hers, and I told her, I told Dena the other day that I was going to tell Lenny  that I wanted the lamps. It doesn   t matter that much.  It   d be nice to put it in the museum.  Well, yeah.  I don   t know what happened to the folks    Aladdin Lamp. It would be nice,  because nobody has seen them, except that era. Well, when we moved to  town, we had electricity, but it didn   t run much. Where it was generated was  down there where the Phillip   s Station used to be. Do you remember that?  Gabriel   s.  I can   t remember when we first got electricity. I know when we first lived in  town we used lamps. I don   t remember when we got electricity.  We got electricity in    28. We had one plug-in in a six-room house. That was  18  Lemons  Williams  Lemons  Williams  Lemons  Williams  Palmer  by the ironing board. The ironing board was built in. We rented the basement  at that time to the people that ran the T.M. Deal Lumberyard, competition to  where her dad worked  laughter . They had moved here from Hutchinson.  My mom was a country gal. This lady was a city gal. Mom was going to iron  one day, and you know how these plug-ins that screw into where a light bulb  screws in? That wouldn   t go into this plug-in. So my mother had to go down  stairs and get Ms. Koontz to come up there. She pulls that off, and then plugs  the iron in the plug-in  laughter . We didn   t know. That was the first  electricity we   d ever had, and we didn   t know. Kind of a funny thing about  that, my dad always gave the pigs the dishwater. Of course, they lived in the  basement, and there was no water out down there. We did have water in, but  they had to carry it out. I remember him telling Ms. Koontz, the lady that  lived there, to just save her dishwater and he   d carry it out to the pigs. Bless  her little heart, she strains that dishwater so good. She took all the good stuff  for the pigs out of it. He saw that it was pretty good water. He told her she  didn   t have to strain that and that we just gave it to them like that. The country  gal came to town and learned about town ways, and the town gal came to the  country and learned about country ways.  Well, talking about the dirty thirties and the dust bowl, did anyone in your  families leave? Did any of your neighbors or friends leave Oklahoma?  Yes, my grandparents walked off. The sand was piled so high around the  house, sand drifts. They were kind of like snow drifts only higher. They  loaded up all they could load in an old car, and I think a little old trailer. They  had one son that was still at home. He   s ten years older than I am. They went  to California and left it all. The land went back to the state or something.  Then they sold that state land years and years later. That   s when my sister  bought that. There was a lot of state land here, because people just went off  and left it because they couldn   t make anything and they were down in spirits.  My folks didn   t leave. My dad would have left. He would have gone back to  Arkansas though, and Mom said,    No, we   re not leaving; we   re going to stay  here; we   re going to make it sometime.    That was her spirit; regardless of  what happened, we   re going to stay, so they stayed.  What did your grandparents do in California?  Oh, they picked fruit. They had two sons and wives too who also went out  there. I don   t know that they all went together, but in time, and they went up  around Sunnydale, up in there where they have fruits in California. They  picked fruit.  Did they stay in California or did they eventually go back?  They stayed there most of the rest of their life. My grandmother passed away  out there. Then my granddad came back here and stayed for the rest of his life.  That wasn   t too many years that he was back there, maybe eight or ten years.  Well I remembered them real well, but I   ve been here forever   19  Williams  Lemons  Williams  Palmer  Burns  Lemons  Williams  Palmer  Burns  Palmer  Burns  Lemons  Palmer  Williams  Palmer  We thought that was awful when they just left. They had a pretty nice house,  too. It was a lot better than the one we had, and it had more rooms in it.  Nobody lived there for many years.  Did anybody else in your house move into it?  Not until Emily, then my older sister, when they had what they called the land  sale. She bought that place. She lived there all her life. She passed away  about when she was 90. She stayed out there even after her husband was gone.  In her eighties she lived out there alone, and boy, she didn   t mind that. She  loved that. I   m different; I wouldn   t have ever stayed out there all night by  myself.  Ora stays out, way out from town, by herself too. You don   t have very close  neighbors anymore either, do you?  No, I don   t.  I guess you like it though. Why do it if you don   t like it?  I think when you   ve lived there all of your life, that   s what makes the  difference.  I think we were out there sometime during the day that her husband passed  away. I   m sure her kids had planned on moving her to town or something,  because she said,    I   m staying right here; this is my home.    Do you remember  telling us that?  I think I do.  I remember you said that, and she   s been there  laughing .  And I   m going to stay there.  Did you know other people that left?  I had two friends whose parents moved to Ponca City, Oklahoma. They came  back after things settled down, and they lived here.  The Wilmonts left and went to Arizona. The Kincaids left and went to  Arizona. Well, there were different people who lived on out down southwest,  like the Brewers.  A lot of them, I did not know then, because you did not know the people,  except the ones you could almost put your arms around. I don   t remember  anything being said between my parents about leaving. I never considered the  fact that we might, so I don   t believe they ever said anything. I would have  surely been worried that we were going to move.  20  Williams  Palmer  Lemons  Palmer  Williams  Lemons  Williams  Palmer  Williams  Palmer  Williams  Palmer  Lemons  Palmer  Williams  Palmer  And you know Charlie and Nona, they took their family and moved to Delta,  Arizona and lived there for two or three years, and then they came back.  Everybody that left, practically, came back, didn   t they?  Well, do you remember as you were growing up and living in this area, other  people, tramps or hobos, coming through town on their way somewhere else,  and what was the reaction to those people?  You fed them.  When I was a young kid, I would be so scared when I saw them; we used to  call them a paddy or a hobo. They   d usually have a little sack over their  shoulder with what they had in it, which wasn   t much. I guess it was clothes.  They   d come and knock on the door, and they   d want to know if you could  give them something to eat. You   d give them something to eat, and they  would walk on down the road. I was always afraid of them  laughing .  Did you ever have them do any work around the house for their food?  I can   t remember that we did. I think we   d just feed them, and they   d go on  down the road.  I remember one time that gypsies came through. We were still living on the  farm then. My dad, he farmed with horses, and he had a sled that you put a  barrel on the back, and then you   d fill that barrel with water. That was my job.  I wasn   t very old, but I   d drive that horse and take that water up to wherever  he was working, and he   d water the horses. One time, I was up there, and my  dad saw gypsies coming. He told me to get back to the house as quick as I  could and to tell my mama that the gypsies were coming  laughter . Boy, did I  go  laughter   I bet there wasn   t a drop of water left in that barrel  That horse  and I went. Now that   s what I was afraid of.  Yeah, I remember them too.  Well, they   d steal things.  Yeah. They   d slip around, and some of them would be talking to you and the  other would pick up anything they could.  They   d steal chickens and anything they could get their hands on.  How did they travel? Were they on horses?  They had wagons didn   t they?  I was thinking old cars even.  Yeah, but at first, the ones we saw when we lived on the farm, they had  21  Burns  Palmer  Burns  Palmer  Burns  Palmer  Williams  Palmer  Burns  Palmer  Kite  Palmer  Burns  Palmer  Burns  Palmer  Burns  Palmer  Lemons  Palmer  wagons with a thing over the top.  Covered wagons.  Yeah, kind of like covered wagons, only they weren   t covered wagons; they  were more like wagons that we used on the farm. That   s the way I remember  it, but you probably remember it better than I do.  I don   t remember when we rode in a covered wagon. I was too young to  remember that.  Yeah, but do you remember the gypsies?  No, I don   t remember the gypsies. I was too far away, I guess.  I must have always been in the middle of everything.  On a more traveled road than hers, probably.  Well, that might have been, and you lived off of the road a ways too. Where  she was raised, there used to be a town there named Goff  Golf . There was a  post office there.  And a store yeah, my daddy could have told you all about that.  That was pretty interesting.  G-O-F-F?  Uh-hum. My parents, this was before they were married, but they each had  their own homestead. They   d go there and get water  Golf Creek .  A lot of them had no well so they hauled water from our well.  That was before my time.  It must have been because a lot of folks hauled water from it.  That was probably the only well in the country.  It must have been, because lots of kids came in and got it.  It was quite a ways from where my mother lived. It was a cattleman   s well  and it was older than Goff or the state of Oklahoma.  Well, does anything stand out in your mind that made you think that suddenly  things were a little bit tougher than they used to be?  We didn   t know any better. We didn   t have a used to be. I didn   t have a used  22  Williams  Palmer  Nobles  Palmer  Lemons  Palmer  Lemons  Palmer  Burns  Williams  Palmer  Burns  Palmer  to be. I was pretty young. I was seven when we moved to town, and that was  in    28. And the dirt storms started; you think it was    33? I couldn   t remember  whether it was    33 or    35.  I wouldn   t swear, but I had in mind    33.  Well, you probably remember. I   m not sure, but I was thinking    35. Anyway,  kids that age don   t have a lot of remembrance of times past. I remember that  we ate good and went to town every week, when we lived on the farm. I  always had candy and pop and I always had this and that. I guess I was  spoiled  laughter . Really, there was only me.  I guess I was spoiled too, because I didn   t very often do anything I didn   t want  to do  laughter . They never did make me mind very much, being the  youngest one in the family.  My dad didn   t; I never could do anything wrong to him, but my mother made  me mind. I   m thankful that she did.  If you don   t mind saying, what would be your punishment? You said you   d  climb up on the windmill and get in trouble, what would happen?  I   d get a spanking.  Did they ever make you stand in the corner?  I don   t think that was hard enough on me.  When I was a kid, you got a spanking and that was it.  At home you got a spanking. At school, you might have been standing in the  corner for something.  Boy, I remember the first day of school. I didn   t know a living soul in Keyes,  and I went to school. I was seven years old. I went to school, and a girl, Roe  Jean Hughes, do you remember her? She was sitting in front of me. She  turned around and was talking to me. I never opened my peeper. I never said  one word. I was so scared. I   d never been in a classroom, and my mother and  my sister were both teachers. I   d never been in a schoolroom. I didn   t know.  I could read and all that kind of stuff. I read out loud, and I got in trouble for  that. I got in trouble for Roe Jean Hughes turning around and whispering to  me. I got put in the broom closet. She got stood on the outside. There were  spiders in there too, Merle   Laughter   She would have enjoyed that.  That was scary. I never liked that teacher. My kids all had her, and they never  knew this story as long as she lived. They wouldn   t have liked her if I had told  them. My kids all went to school to her. I was so scared; you know it   s scary  23  Lemons  Williams  Palmer  Williams  Burns  Williams  Burns  Williams  Palmer  Nobles  Palmer  Burns  to take somebody out from the country and move them into town and put them  into a classroom. I   d never seen so many kids in all my life. I told her about  that, and she never remembered that. I told my mother when I got home, and  my mother never said one word against that teacher. She never said anything.  I know she went and talked to her. My mother never told me, but I know she  did. As I knew my mother, she wouldn   t have taken it setting down. Never  did she say one word against that teacher. I didn   t like her, but I went to  school to her.  Well, is there anything that sticks out in your mind as the end of the hard  times? When did things get better?  Probably when it started raining. During those dust storm days, we had very,  very little rain. When it came a time that it started raining again, it came back  like normal.  And raise wheat.  And maize. We raised maize when we just had horses. I can remember when  my dad and I think Emily helped us too, cut that maize head off with a knife  and throw it in the wagon. That was how they harvested that, and they had a  thrashing machine or something to get the grain out.  I did some of that too, and pulled broomcorn.  We never did have broomcorn. We never did raise any.  That was up in Colorado around Campo.  A lot of people north of here had broomcorn. They made brooms. They   d  harvest that, and that   s what the brooms were made from.  You know, when I went to Stillwater to the 4-H Roundup down there, we  stopped somewhere and went into a caf   and ate dinner. It probably cost 15  cents. One of the things we had, we had some green, and they were growing  Russian thistles. That   s what they were. Nothing grew out here. We didn   t  even have Russian thistles then. Nothing grew green, because there was just  no moisture. Down there, they were growing, and they cooked them. From  what I remember, they weren   t bad; they were pretty good. Did you ever eat  any?  Not that I remember.  Well, that   s the only place that I ever had any, but I remember that.  I remember one time I went to Spadlin   s with my folks, and Eldry wanted me  to stay, so we had little thistles for dinner. That was the first time that I   d ever  eaten Russian thistles and once in a while we would put some down in the  cellar.  24  Palmer  Burns  Nobles  Lemons  Palmer  Nobles  Palmer  Burns  Palmer  Nobles  Palmer  Lemons  Palmer  Williams  Palmer  Williams  Lemons  Palmer  Nobles  Palmer  I never did ever see any green thing growing that I can remember during that  time.  That was a little before the dust bowl. I was a little younger.  Most of them wouldn   t survive if they had to live like we did.  I wouldn   t if I had to eat Russian thistles.  Well, don   t knock it.  And Lambsquarter is good. She used to plant that in the garden. Mother  always had a pretty good-sized garden. She canned lots of stuff.  Well, during the dirties, you just couldn   t raise anything.  It looked like a desert, didn   t it?  Yeah, it was a desert, wasn   t it? The sand would just blow away. Mildred was  talking about how the sand was blown way high on that house. I remember a  lot of that. It would cover fences up. Maybe then tomorrow it would come  from a different direction and blow some of them out.  It really did.  That   s not a fairy tale, is it?  Well, what was the impression in your family of FDR and the    New Deal,     and how that was supposed to help the people in the panhandle of Oklahoma?  Do you remember any talk from your parents or in town?  Wasn   t Hoover president then?  Yeah, Roosevelt, yeah.  They had the WPA.  Yeah, the WPA was one thing to give men jobs.  Did you know people that worked on WPA projects?  The high school that I graduated from was a WPA project. It   s still standing,  but it   s been condemned.  The only thing that I remember about Roosevelt was that he came to Amarillo  when he was campaigning one time. I told Daddy we had to go down there so  I could see him. It was the only president like that that I   ve ever seen.  I don   t even remember that. See, I never went.  25  Nobles  Palmer  Nobles  Burns  Palmer  Nobles  Palmer  Lemons  Nobles  Palmer  Lemons  Palmer  Burns  Palmer  Williams  Palmer  Lemons  Palmer  Just me and Daddy was the only ones that went. He took me down there, and  Roosevelt was in a wheelchair. He was out on the observation thing on the  back of the train. He was setting down in the wheelchair. I got to see him, and  I   ve still got a campaign button that they passed out down there that day, a big  old blue one about this big that said Roosevelt.  Isn   t that neat? You need to present that to the museum with a story. They  would like that, because that   s really something.  He figured that was the closest that I   d ever be to seeing a president I guess.  Most of us never did see one at all.  That was nice. I didn   t ever know about it. I wonder why you didn   t throw  that up to me sometime.  I imagine there would have been several that would have liked to have went if  they   d known he was going to take me, but it was just me and him that went.  I probably wouldn   t have had the money to have gone.  So was your dad favorable towards Roosevelt, or was it just because he was  the president that he wanted you to see him?  He was just the president. He thought that that would be the closest I would  ever be to seeing a president, which it has been. They had people that went  around through the crowd and stuff that passed out those little campaign  buttons. It   s about that big around about the size of a quarter. They were dark  blue with    Roosevelt    printed across them.  That was neat. I didn   t know I knew a celebrity   Laughter  That was neat.  Well, how do you think you were personally affected having lived through the  Depression and the dirty thirties?  I think it made us stronger.  Tougher.  Able to handle obstacles.  Big problems.  Yeah, problems. It wasn   t always a life full of roses. We   ve had a lot of  thorns. It made you appreciate the good times more.  Well, is there anything that we didn   t touch on that you want to talk about?  We talked about a lot of things that you didn   t intend to touch on   Laughter   26  Lemons  Nobles  Burns  Nobles  Palmer  Nobles  Palmer  Nobles  Williams  Palmer  Williams  Well, we talked about a lot of things that we didn   t even think of, because we  didn   t live through the dust bowl.  That picture up there is a picture of my granddaughter. She was an All-State  softball first baseman. She   s also in the Softball Hall of Fame in Virginia.  The team that she played on was called the Sooner Dusters, and they played in  Detroit, Michigan. They won the World Title that year, and that   s why she   s  in the Hall of Fame.  Which one was that? Whose girl?  Doug   s girl. We always called him Douglas, until he went off to college, and  then they shortened it to Doug. Now, he   s Doug to everybody  laughter .  They have a way of doing that, don   t they?  She   s in Chicago right now getting her master   s degree.  That   s great.  She   s supposed to graduate in December.  I didn   t mention this, and I don   t know if this pertains to anything you   re  doing, but when I grew up, even after I was married, in my family there was a  lot of music. We always, from the time I can remember, we either had a pump  organ or a piano. Almost every Sunday afternoon, there would be people who  would come, the ones who sang. My dad would say,    You   d better come over,  we   ll have singing this afternoon,    so there would be several people who  would come over for the singing. He would get out his Stamps convention  books, and we   d have a singing many Sunday afternoons. That   s what we did  when I was young, and even after I was married he still did that. It was neat, I  think. I still have a lot of music in my family with my grandkids and my great  grandkids. Of course, I just have four greats though. They   re all little  performers. They performed last night for me.  Oh, I bet that was so sweet.  Yeah, my granddaughter sings beautifully. It was really a nice thing.  -------  -------   
