 Kite  Young  We   re at the home of Marilynn Young in Woodward, Oklahoma. It   s  November 6, 2000. I   m Steven Kite. So how long have you lived in this area?  My father moved here in the fall of,    28 I believe it was,    28 or    29. I went to  kindergarten and all through high school.  Right here?  All those years.  Where did your parents come here from?  My parents were married before that time, and my father was always trying to  earn money. He was an abstractor. He could get a job wherever he wanted to.  That deals with land titles; is that right?  Yes, making those legal papers, and he also worked in a bank. He never  seemed to make as much money as he wanted to. They went to California for  a while. They drove a Model-T car that my mother had won selling  merchandise at a general store in Kiowa, Kansas. They drove to California in  this car. I   ve got a picture of it, and my dad used to laugh and say,    We   d stop  all the time to get milk for Marilynn and water for the radiator.    And you did  that in those days, the filling stations weren   t so close together. He was out  there about a year, year and a half, and decided to come back. He went to St.  Joe, Missouri too, and worked in an abstract office. Then he got an agency for  the Maytag washing machines. He had half the state when he first got it.  That was here?  Yes. He realized, the roads being what they were, he couldn   t handle half the  state. He couldn   t set up little dealers everywhere he needed to, so he cut it  back, and he had that until right before he finally retired in 1960, I guess it  was, but it made a good living.  He finally got the money he was looking for?  He invested it in land was his profits. He was an interesting man. He had  5  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  always been so sorry that his parents had not   they had homesteaded at this  town of Benkelman, Nebraska   that they hadn   t kept the land. He thought  that was a mistake on their part. But hindsight is always better judgment.  Twenty-twenty. But you know, land is a good investment.  Well his grandfather knew what he was doing, and they tried to homestead  once, and they had to put a house on it. I don   t remember all the rules, but you  have to do so much improvements every year. They would be out there on the  weekends, on this little acreage. They were building a house. One weekend  when they came back, the roof had been stolen.  Stolen?  Stolen. That was very discouraging. They didn   t stay to bring in the land.  What year was this?  I don   t know. I   d have to look up her records.  So was that your grandparents'?  That was my grandparents. They were pioneers in Benkelman, Nebraska. We  drove through it once.  And then your parents.  My parents, my mother was raised on a farm that my grandfather had  homesteaded in the run. He didn   t get the land, a widow lady had beat him to  it. So he came back a few weeks later and bought it from her.  Was this the Cherokee Outlet run?  Yes. The land is still in one of his descendants, which is nice. It   s a 100 year  farm.  Is that around here?  No, it was up north of Alva, between Alva and Kiowa. I doubt if you   ve ever  heard of Kiowa.  I get up in there quite a bit.  Okay. It   s a neat little town.  You ever heard of Dear Head and Aetna?  I   ve heard of it, but I   ve never been there.  There   s nothing there anymore.  6  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  That   s one of the interesting town names.  I drove through there about 15 years ago. There was an old school building,  and that was it. It was abandoned. Then I drove through there about two  years ago and even it was gone. So Deer Head, if you   ve heard of that you   re  doing real good.  Interesting names.  So your family, then, had a farming background?  Well my dad never farmed. He invested in land. He never could hit a nail  with a hammer, I don   t think, but he could see the potential. He was a good  book keeper. And he enjoyed that. He had a farm up at Kiowa, but that   s  leased and all. He never actively farmed. He   s a good man, but he was not a  farmer. He knew what should be done, but he had to hire all his work done.  That   s smart rather than trying to just plow on with something you weren   t  going to be able to succeed at.  Well when you don   t know exactly how to fix a tractor or fix a plow. All  farmers have to be repairmen.  So he said enough of that. I   m going into the abstract business.  Well he could always do that. He had several different lines of business.  I   m going to ask you, if you don   t mind, what year were you born?  I was born in 1922 in Kiowa, Kansas. At the time my dad was working at the  bank there. I don   t have it out, but at the time he worked at the bank the  treasurer could sign some kind of a cashiers check, and I have one with his  signature on it.  Your dad   s?  Yes. I thought it was nice of him to think ahead far enough to see that that  would be an interesting keepsake.  I don   t know him, but he seemed to have a sense of vision.  I had it on the wall, and the sun has faded it, so I put it away.  You can buy film that you can put over that   s UV resistant.  But I didn   t know that.  Well that   s kind of new. A lot of people don   t know that. So then when they  7  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  moved here you were     It was before I went to kindergarten. At the time I went to kindergarten, it was  a private kindergarten on the north side of town, and it was run by Mrs. Lawn.  Her son is the one who painted the artwork in the rotunda of the museum. She  wrote a book later on about her pioneer days in Woodward. She came here  with here husband. She had been raised in the south, and she came here in a  wagon. She talked about fording the river in a wagon. He was a lawyer here  in Woodward, Mr. Lawn.  We tried to get into the museum. It was closed today.  It   s closed on Mondays.  We didn   t know that.  Most museums worldwide are closed on Monday.  Well you live and learn  Laughs .  Yes. If they   re closed any day at all that   s usually the day.  Well Joyce at the museum was so helpful in helping us to get names and  introductions and come out here.  But that book that she wrote is a real good description of the early days in  Woodward. She was a darling little lady.  Did you have any brothers or sisters out here?  My cousins called me a spoiled only brat, and I tried to live up to it.  You might as well if they   re going to call you that. So as small family living  out here then, you and your father     We had lots of relatives up at Kiowa. Every holiday my mother and her  brothers, we were either up there or they were down here. I never felt an  absence of relatives.  An extended family. That   s good you could have it so close. Did you live in  town? In what you   d call a residential area?  The house is still here. When they first came to town they lived in a rooming  house until they could find some place, and that house is down on Texas.  Then they rented a house to have a house instead of just a room. Then they  bought a house, and it was at 715 Walnut. The people have taken good care of  it. It looks nice. Later on, quite a while because I graduated high school from  there, they bought another house. You know how people upgrade.  I   d guess this is an upgrade from your 715 Walnut.  8  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Well this was a three-story house. It had a basement and two bedrooms  upstairs. One room that was not finished off at that time, but it had been  plumbed for a bathroom, which was unusual in those days, to have a bathroom  upstairs. Anyway it was a good house to be in when the tornado came, and  that   s where we were. There was no damage. This part of town really was  harmed.  You   re talking about the late     The    47. This house, this area was a pasture at that time. Only over there on  Hillcrest to about where Oak comes into it were there any homes. The rest of  this is all new since 1947.  Kind of a blessing, I guess. If it had been here it wouldn   t be here. Would you  describe your house that you grew up in? The house on Walnut, did you live  in it from the time you were born?  Until I was about four or five is when we moved there. I remember I had  chicken pox or something, and the little girl next door did too, so we got to  play together even though we were sick. It had one bedroom upstairs and two  bedrooms upstairs. At that time nobody had air conditioning. One of the  reasons my father came south was he didn   t like the Iowa winters. He   d been  raised in Iowa. Despite this little ten-year trip to Benkelman, he was raised in  Atlantic, Iowa. He didn   t like that cold weather. We had a coal stove in the  basement, one of those furnace things that you shoveled coal into. Every fall  the coal truck would come and deliver all this coal. I remember I thought it  was interesting.  It would pour it down a shoot into the basement.  Yes, to a special room. My dad wasn   t terribly fond of putting the coal in the  furnace either. I must not have been over eight when he put in a gas furnace.  I thought you were going to say he had you down there  Laughs .  No, but a gas furnace. We used the registers that were already in the house for  the coal furnace, which were on the floor.  That ended the coal shoveling.  Yes, and was much cleaner.  I remember it seemed like those old coal furnaces put out a lot of soot and a  lot of dirt and dust.  They did. Daddy really liked that furnace. He thought it was so neat, he could  push his finger and the house would get warm.  Was that a fairly luxurious convenience when he had that installed? Had many  9  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  people gone to gas at that point?  You know, I don   t know. I just remember when he did it and how much he  enjoyed it. The friends I had, some of them had lovely homes, some of them  didn   t, but those were friends regardless. That didn   t seem to be important.  Would you say that you were in a mid-level financial position?  I would think so. One winter, I do remember this because I was in school. We  spent the whole winter evenings in the kitchen. That was the only room we  heated, the kitchen and the bathroom. We slept upstairs, and didn   t heat those  rooms because of the Depression.  It would get expensive to heat those.  That was the only room that we used electric lights, to save money.  At that point he working with Maytag, right?  Yes. He didn   t sell many of them. He traded things for them. With the man  across the street, for one winter they had their offices together. I can   t  remember what that man did. I think he was some kind of an electrician or  repairman, but I don   t know what.  You were pretty young when the Depression really came on.  I was between, let   s see banks were closed in   was that    28? I kind of think it  might have been. We came here before the bank because my mother had  36  in one bank that closed and didn   t open up. She   d begrudged that.  And she lost that?  She lost it. We had a next door neighbor who had been cashier of that bank,  and he lost all his money too.  And he even worked in the bank.  The thing that was sad about it too, the man who had owned the bank, Mr.  Stine, he had invested the bank   s capital in some bonds that proved to be good,  but because they were German bonds, the word German     That was World War I.  Two. It was before World War II. I don   t know what ins and outs were, but  the bonds proved to be good, but it didn   t do any of those people any good. It  didn   t do that little man any good either. My husband   s talked about that. The  German bonds were good, but the government didn   t recognize them.  So away the money went.  10  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  It was Roosevelt was the president that closed all the banks for three days  while they got their affairs in order.  Right, the bank holiday they called it.  I think there might have been a little politics there.  I think so. Just like anytime something happens that   s big like that.  That little people out here can   t do anything about.  Did your mom ever trust banks after that?  Yes, but she also trusted keeping it in a sock or something under the bed. For a  long time, people didn   t trust banks.  Well I guess  36, if you had to lose something that was      36, you could have lived on it for two or three months. By that I mean eating.  A family could have eaten.  Did your mom work?  No, except at home, but that was pretty good work.  That was poorly phrased.  I know what you mean.  So your mom was always around the house when you were growing up, before  you went to school and everything? It was just you and her then and various  relatives.  And her friends and my friends.  Do you remember, we were speaking of entertainment and what you would do  for fun during that time period when money might have been a little tight.  I usually got to go to the movie once a week, which was 10 cents. It was 10  cents here, and it was 10 cents up at Kiowa. At Kiowa we always got 10 cents  to buy candy with too. They had a really great candy store.  So you get 20 cents, and you get a movie, candy, and a good time in town.  It was interesting. The movies were 10 cents whether you went on Friday or  Saturday or Sunday, and I wasn   t allowed to go out at night.  It was matinees.  11  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  That was when they had, let me see if I can get it right. The two brothers who  had the picture show business here in Woodward. The Terry   s were their  names, Ben and Dwight. I guess business was bad on Wednesday night for  going to the movies, so they instituted some kind of a giveaway on Wednesday  night, a jackpot thing. If nobody won it, which you had to be present, then it  would build up. After it would build up a few weeks they   d really have pretty  good business.  I bet it was packed. Do you remember how big the jackpot was? Was it  10?  It would start out that way, but it would get up to be maybe over  100, and  that   s a lot of money.  And it was 10 cents to get in.  For me. For adults it was 25  cents .  A 25 cent ticket to win 100 bucks; that   s a good deal.  If it had built up, and it did now and then.  Do you remember any of the movies that you saw? Do any come to mind at  all?     It Happened One Night.    That was one of the first, they called them talkies.  It was a good movie. Another thing Terry   s did to encourage people to come  to the movies, he would take his own movie camera, 16-millimeter, and go up  and down Main Street and tape people, and show them in the movies. Of  course people enjoyed seeing themselves. They have been a nice historical  item to have here in Woodward. His son showed some of those about a year  ago. We sat around and tried to name people because of course, he hadn   t  made a listing with each roll of film with the names. He was wondering if  there was any way to get a grant or get some help because it would be neat to  have it at the museum with the correct names.  Yeah, and it   s just a slice of life. You could get a picture of who was here and  kind of what they looked like.  And their clothes.  That   s something important that most people wouldn   t think of.  And the automobiles that they were driving up and down the street.  What kind of clothes they wear is always interesting, I think.  Well people were so dressed up. Men as well as women, but most men and  women wore hats, in the daytime, all the time.  12  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  I have to tell you, I   m glad that   s gone  Laughs .  I think it would be strange too.  You   d be so conscience of what you   re wearing.  Hats and ties.  So what else would you do for fun when you were young? Games you   d play?  That   s when Monopoly became so famous and important. It was so cheap and  it was a board game that was interesting. Adults could play it along with kids  and enjoy it. I remember Monopoly games set up in different houses at times  that would go on a couple weeks before it was over. You   d go after school  and play Monopoly and finish it off later on when somebody had won all the  money.  It is a long lasting game.  That was a popular game. In the summer time we went swimming out at  Crystal Beach.  Could you describe that a little bit?  It was lots of fun. At that time, we would walk out there. It was still hot and  all that, but it didn   t seem so hot because the temperature when you   re young  and the temperature when you   re old is a different temperature. I don   t know  that I could ever get my kids to walk out to Crystal Beach, but we  she and her  parents  did it a lot.  How far would you say that was?  Well it hasn   t changed.  I don   t know where it is.  Oh well, have you been by where they   re putting up Crystal Christmas?  Yeah.  Okay. We swam in that lake. The lake hasn   t moved. I   d say half a mile.  There used to be a beach and slides?  Yes, there was a sand beach and a wonderful slide. I   d wear out a bathing suit  every summer, and so did everyone else  laughs . And there was a diving  platform with both high and low and lifeguards and a raft out   not to far out     but out to swim to, and picnic tables.  13  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  So families would just go out there for the day, for the weekend, a Saturday?  For the evening.  It   d keep you cool during the summer.  It was a neat place to have picnics. Kids swam in the evenings as well as all  day. For  3 I had a season ticket to swim. That took care of having to pay for  it. Otherwise I think it was 10 cents a swim, but I   m not real sure about that.  There was a family that ran the swimming pool and the concession stand that  lived in a house that was close to Crystal Beach. They were hired by the city.  So you would have a season pass, and that was basically your summer  entertainment. You would just head out there or to the movies or play  Monopoly.  And we played all the other card games that were around.  I   m trying to figure out how old you would have been when the dust storms  started.  Well that would have been    32, I presume.  Yeah, up through the late    30s.  As I remember, I was around the fourth grade.  Can you remember your first memories of a dust storm? What were you  thinking when you first saw one?  Only that the dust was blowing. I never thought of it too bad.  I   ve seen pictures of them.  They look a lot worse than they are.  They scare the bejesus out of me right now.  That   s not what they look like. The pictures made them like pictures in a fog.  Here, they were not that fogged looking. You wouldn   t be able to see the blue  sky, but I don   t know. It   s just like being poor. It didn   t seem so different. I  didn   t know that they hadn   t had them every year.  It was just something you kind of grew up with.  And they were only in the spring, as I remember. Sometimes they would come  with a violent   a lot of wind, other times they just seemed to drift in. It was a  phenomenon.  14  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Do you remember the first time you saw that happening?  No. It was just like weather.  So nothing unusual in the household, like dust coming in?  Oh the dust, it upset my mother. Every time in the afternoon or evening, she   d  go around and wipe off the windowsills and doorways. In fact, they, my  parents, installed weather stripping in about the second year around the doors  and the windows, and that helped. Little pieces of felt tacked along.  That kind of kept the dirt out?  It sure did help. Windows nowadays are built so much tighter. We have such  good windows compared to what those poor people had, even with the weather  stripping.  I   ve lived in some old houses. That wind will come right through.  You could feel it.  So I can imagine how much dust would get in. So you were saying the wind  and the dust     That was the worst part. None of this really affected me as a child. I just  remember my mother and father complaining about it. I didn   t have any kind  of allergy or asthma. The dust didn   t make me cough. I think it would  nowadays because I do have allergies.  I wonder if your physical health now could be     I don   t think so because when we moved to south Texas, which certainly had  no dust, that   s when the allergies started. It was all the dampness, I thought.  Oh, it   s just Texas. Did you have any extra chores to do because of the dust in  the house? Do you remember sweeping at all? Did you have to do any extra  cleaning because of that?  I got to help her wipe out the windowsills. Sure, but then I had to do that  anyway. All girls did housework.  You mentioned that you had some friends that were perhaps less well off than  you.  I did. I had friends whose mothers worked, like they had a beauty shop in their  home and things like that, but it didn   t seem so outlandish.  Do you think, as a child, you were oblivious to all this stuff going around you?  15  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  I sure was. I was not aware at all of any kind of class distinctions.  That   s the magic of childhood maybe.  One of my friends had a household where they had a live in maid, but it didn   t  seem like they were any better off than anybody else. I should have connected  it, but I didn   t.  So you had friends that basically lived in the kitchen, then you had another  friend that had a live in maid. You were in the middle.  It didn   t seem to me that they were really any different. She might have had  more clothes, but it wasn   t that apparent.  So the dust bowl, in your mind, wasn   t that big of a deal when you were a  child.  It was a dreadful thing for the farmers who were involved in it, and a lot of  people did lose their land and go to California or some place I guess. Part of it  was because of the homesteading that they had done in the early days. They   d  plowed up land that was not suitable for being plowed up. It was a hard lesson  to learn, and that   s what it was, a learning lesson.  I   m sure your father depended on some of those farmers for his business.  The reason he did so well in the Maytag business is because the Maytag  company came out with a gasoline powered engine that ran a washing  machine, a washing machine that could be kept on the back porch of a farm  house. Most women were able to start it. It would run. They could wash their  clothes easily. Before then there was no way except by scrubbing.  They were the first ones to really come out with an easy-to-use reliable  washer.  With one that worked. There were some other washing machine brands that  did that, but not as, and I   m sure I   m indoctrinated, but it was an excellent  brand. In the early    50s there was somebody who came through this part of the  country making a government survey on the type of people that lived out here.  It turned out, at that time, there were so few people of any other racial   we  didn   t have Indians. The Indians kind of stopped down in Seiling, they don   t  come up here. It was before we had any Mexicans except two or three families  that the railroad employed. There were no others, no black people. I don   t  really know why. I think that   s why they were making the survey. Well there  weren   t jobs. This guy visited us one evening. He said he was so amazed. In  every farmhouse when he stopped everybody had a Maytag, 100 percent  Maytag.  Probably your dad   s.  16  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Yes, because it was such an aid to women. They could use it even in a house  that did not have electricity. They could use it in a house that did not have  running water. It   s hard to explain to somebody what an important  advancement it was for these people who lived out here. So many of them did  not have electricity or running water. We had them in town.  You had electricity and running water in your house?  Yes.  Out on the farm it   s a totally different story.  I didn   t know anybody who didn   t. Everybody in Woodward had it at that  time. I remember hearing about when the rural electrification came in during  Roosevelt   s time. There was a special time when people who had it were to  turn it off and all turn it on again at one time.  What was that about?  To signify.  Oh like turning it off, and everybody     The light coming. It was another wonderful event.  Wow, I didn   t know about that. I knew about his rural electrification projects.  I didn   t know about that.  I had read that, now whether or not it   s true, I don   t know. I think it would just  be so wonderful if you weren   t use to it.  I know on television it always says that the Maytag repairmen are lonely  people.  They are.  It   s interesting to hear the perspective of the dust bowl as told from a 10-year  old   s eyes.  The wind blew. It blew, blew, blew, but it always blows out here. If you   re  going to live here, I don   t know how you get use to it. I   m not use to it now.  It   s blowing hard today.  I don   t like the wind.  Okay, I have a question for you then. Why are you still here?  Because this is where our assets are. My husband has a farm that his  17  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  grandfather, while he didn   t homestead it, he came down here from Nebraska  with a herd of goats. My husband   s father. We still have it, and he hopes to  apply for and get recognition for a 100-year farm next year.  So he came down from Nebraska with a goat herd. Would that be 1901 or  1900?  I presume it would be.  That   s an interesting tale right there.  He landed up some place up by Fort Supply for a year or so before he got this  place. When he came to the farm, we still have the farmhouse that his  grandfather put in. They enlarged it once, and they enlarged it by bringing  another house and attaching it. If you stick your head up in the attic you can  see the two different roofs.  How funny.  I think so too.  It   s something you wouldn   t do today, just stick two houses together. There   d  probably be some legal reason why you couldn   t do it.  I don   t know about that. Anyway, the house at that time faced the north  because the road went along that way. Indians would come by, and his  grandmother was able to help them sometimes. She could, you know not  everybody went to the doctor. Then the railroad came along, the Katy railroad,  and they put up a track. That took away the road to Woodward. Then they  were on the inside of their acreage. Then a new road was put in. Then new  road is what is called Lakeside. It   s out here by the edge of town. I think  that   s so funny that the house now is on the inside of the farm, and when it was  originally built it was on a road to town.  Yeah now it   s tucked away back in there.  You can hardly see it from the road.  You were mentioning the Indians coming along and being helped. In my mind  I was thinking of like hobos or tramps, kind of itinerant people moving around.  Did you have any of those?  Well my mother, we lived just a half a block from what was the highway  through town. Eighth Street used to be the highway where now it   s Ninth  Street. It moved over a block. And there were. We lived on the edge of town  at that time. The town moved out. We had not only hobos, but the gypsies  used to camp just about two blocks away.  Gypsies   18  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Gypsies. Mother would always feed the hobos, but she always got a little  work out of them  Laughs .  Yeah some people have different attitudes towards that. They   ll just want to  feed them and get them on their way, or, like your mother, they   ll feed them  and tell them okay you better clean out the chicken house or leaf raking.  Or work in the garden or pull weeds, something like that.  So you remember having men around?  But they wouldn   t be there but over a couple of hours.  Right, just looking for work and a sandwich.  She would always fix a great big plate full.  Do you think your house had a reputation among the hobos as a good place to  stop in?  I think so because the woman next door wouldn   t feed them  Laughs .  That   s an odd time. When just knocking on a door asking for a meal was  something you would do.  Whether or not they went down to the train and hitched rides I don   t know.  I   ve always thought of hobos being near railroads and not really near a  highway, but we had them.  Do you remember any of your friends, friends families, or losing friends  perhaps by them moving out, pulling out and moving to other states?  I   ll tell you what happened to the people that lived on the other side. When I  was in the second grade this woman and her husband and three children moved  into this house. She had a job; she was going to be the second grade school  teacher in the Woodward school system. They moved here from some place  south, and I should know but I don   t because she was from a large family. He  couldn   t find work. One Sunday noon he goes out in the garage and shoots  himself. And left her with these three children to raise. One of them was my  age, and then two older ones. They never had a car. The oldest boy worked in  a shoe store from the time he was old enough to work, but he was not allowed  to have a car. That was just fine. He went with a girl who had a car. It  affected their lives.  That   s an actual loss right there.  Yeah, and within a year, if he   d waited longer, and not become so  discouraged   but there was an attitude at that time too. The school  19  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  administration did their best not to hire a schoolteacher if there was a man also  teaching school. There were no two teachers in one family, or two incomes.  She had a job. He wasn   t a schoolteacher. He didn   t have that kind of an  education. I don   t know what he would have done. I was too little to know.  It kind of says something about the attitudes of men working that   s changed a  little bit today.  A lot. They talk about how it takes two families to support a family, two wage  earners. There was a long time when a woman had to have a real important  skill to keep a job if her husband had a paying job.  Otherwise they wouldn   t have two wage earners there. I wasn   t expecting that  story to come out of my question. You never know. So you grew up here, then  went to high school here, and graduated. You met your husband here in  Woodward.  His father was a lawyer, and worked. He was county attorney, and then later  on county judge.  His father was?  Yes. He never had a law practice of his own, not an independent law practice.  Did your husband grow up in this area as well? Was he born and raised here?  Yes.  Do his images or remembrances agree with yours at all?  His are better than mine, about individual people and a number of things.  Do you mean his memory is better or more fondly     He remembers being hungry and things like that that I had no memory of.  Is he older than you?  Two years.  So not that much.  His family just wasn   t as well to do. They lived on this farm out there. It   s a  neat farm, in the fact that I think it   s the oldest house in Woodward County  that   s been maintained all those years. We maintain it too. It   s handy to have.  Jim has cattle, and in the wintertime it   s a good place to get in out of the cold.  There isn   t a thing in that house that   s plumb, the doors, the floors, the walls.  I guess that   s to be expected from an old house like that. Well it sounds like  20  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  you were able to scoot through that time with little hardship.  I had no suffering. Jim   s family had chickens and eggs and milk. They had  cows they milked and all that. I didn   t know him in those days. I didn   t know  him until high school.  There   s a book out about the Depression era, and it   s called We Had  Everything But Money.  That   s just about the way of it. When you think, and I   ve got a cookbook and  it says you buy fifteen cents worth of round steak. It tells of this elaborate  casserole.  And that   s the recipe, fifteen cents worth of round steak?  Fifteen cents worth of round steak. Today you wouldn   t get a piece of fat.  No, there wouldn   t be much meat in that casserole. Well I have maybe one  wrap up question. If you think back in the time period that people considered  the    dirty thirties    of the dust bowl and Depression, what memory or  memories, to you, stick out in your mind? Is there one thing in particular that  you remember more vividly?  Those are just childhood memories. I can   t imagine them being any different  memories if I   d lived in California where the weather was perfect.  Even if you had no tragic memories, is there something you remember fondly,  or some aspect of your childhood that sticks out. For instance, one man I was  talking to said that his family was poor, but he said, when he was in first grade  he remembers it being so hot out here. His dad splurged and bought them all  a big tall ice cold bottle of orange soda pop. That was the first time he   d ever  had a drink of that in his life. He remembers that to this day.  Isn   t that nice.  Something that sticks out in your mind as being special or interesting? Maybe  the lack of something like that is a good thing.  My dad liked to travel, so we went to the World   s Fair in Chicago.  Well there you go.  And I saw Sally Rand.  No way  I know who she is.  I didn   t see her in Chicago, but my cousins got to see her. We would go to  visit my grandmother in Iowa and we   d come back by the Maytag office in  Kansas City. My dad loved to go to Vaudeville. My mother liked to go  21  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  shopping. I much preferred going to the Vaudeville with Daddy, and we saw  Sally Rand.  Fan dancer, right? I believe that   s what she was known for.  Yes. We saw her, and we saw two or three other people that went on to  become movie stars. It was a beautiful dance. It was so dark, I   m not sure that  very much was exposed.  That   s funny that they would let you in, or they wouldn   t think anything about  you going in. How old were you then?  I have no idea. The World   s Fair in Chicago   I   ve got a little memento out at  the farm.  I should know when that was.  Anyway, all my relatives went. We went one year and then they went another  time. We did it all as cheaply as possible. I know they rented an apartment,  and all of them stayed in this one apartment, three kids and two sets of adults.  We stayed in a hotel downtown and then we stayed with a friend of mother   s  in an apartment.  That was in Chicago? On the way back through you went through Kansas  City.  Yes. We got to go to the zoo in Chicago. It   s still supposed to be a good zoo.  We did that every year, through to Kansas City. When I was twelve years old  I could walk around downtown Kansas City and knew where I was all the  time. We stayed in a hotel there.  I was wanting to talk to you a little bit about when your first job in Woodward  was.  I worked for my dad. He had a furniture store along with the Maytag. That  darn furniture always needed dusting. I did that and simple book keeping.  Were you paid at all or did he just make sure you got enough food?  I don   t remember particularly getting paid, but I probably did.  Maybe you earned your movie and candy money.  I wasn   t on an allowance. I probably was spoiled that way. I really don   t  know how much money I was allowed each week, but I did go to the movies.  Even when I got to be twelve years old, and the movie, by that time, had gone  up to 35 cents.  Well now that   s getting up there.  22  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  From 25 to 35  cents .  It   s funny how now they have bargain movies that are a dollar. They   re  coming back down again.  I know. In New York City they   re  6 and  7 and  8.  All right, do you remember anything about your parents    politics at all?  Yes, yes, yes  laughs . That   s easy, and that   s another thing that my dad was  so strong about. I   ll tell about my grandfather in Kiowa. He disliked Mr.  Roosevelt so much, and he   s the one that brought in daylight savings time, he  refused to ever change his clock.  He was such an anti-democrat, anti-Roosevelt. What about your father?  My father was a republican. Mother was a little bit of a democrat, but I think  more to tease him than anything else.  It seems like during those times you either really loved Roosevelt or you  despised him.  Yes. I remember we had a radio, and I remember we listened to all his  speeches.  Was your dad back there yelling at him?  I don   t know. My parents had friends who had different philosophies, and  they wanted to keep the friends, so people were polite to each other about the  politics.  Politics is one of things that you don   t discuss over the dinner table.  It   s rather hard to change somebody   s mind.  So the Depression era and the environmental factors didn   t cause your father  to change his way of thinking. How did he feel about the WPA and the  welfare?  You know, I don   t know how he felt about it, and yet I know people who it  really saved them.  You were fairly young.  I was too young. He was able to make a living without having to resort to that  kind of, so that part was lucky. And my relatives at Kiowa were too.  You mentioned that you remember one winter when you kind of centralized.  23  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  When we stayed in this kitchen.  Was that just that sales maybe had slowed down, and he was kind of  economizing a little bit?  They had to have. They had to have done that. When the relatives came on  Thanksgiving or Christmas then we heated the whole house, but not any other  time.  And you remember just the once.  I just remember it the one year, but it could have been two years. I don   t  believe it was, but it could have been.  In a child   s mind you probably didn   t associate that with anything in  particular.  It didn   t, because some friends that I visited, they would do the same thing. It  was common.  With the price of natural gas coming up, I might do the same thing this year.  Are you married? Could you do that?  I   m not married, just me and my dog, we   ll be in the kitchen. Well I think that  runs through our questions, at least the ones that I think would pertain here.  Can you think of anything else?  You know some people would put up damp clothes. When you said preparing  for dusters, by covering the worst windows with a damp cloth to catch the  dust, and it would.  Now I would guess, in that aspect, that it would help your dad out that they  were always getting their clothes dirty. They   d be buying some Maytags.  I never heard of any signals from animals.  Sometimes people said that their animals would act a little differently if there  was a storm approaching.  I can see where they might. I was reading an article the other day where some  dogs are able to tell when a person is going to have an epileptic seizure.  I saw the same thing. It was on television.  I think that   s a nice thing. I hope they can find more of them. And then it says  how do you feel about the era today   well, if they had those plowed up fields  it would be the same thing.  24  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Kite  Young  Some people who lived right in the middle of really bad ones had reoccurring  nightmares afterwards.  We were a few miles away from where the really worst area was. I can just  remember that big cloud up there. It wasn   t anything to be scared of.  Sometimes the dirt would come in without it being windy.  Just settle in, filter in.  Just the dirt came without the wind.  Bad or not, it seems like an odd time to live through.  Well, anybody   s childhood has got some interesting memories.  -------  -------  
