 Kite  V. Bockelman  Kite  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  Kite  B. Bockelman  Kite  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  Kite  Well, you kind of know how it works from last night. We just kind of ramble  around and hit on what we hit on. So let   s start out with biographical  information, with your name and where and when you were born.  May 14, 1924, Vernor Bockelman.  Where were you born?  Straight south of here in this county, in Beaver County, Oklahoma. I was born  out there in the house. They brought a doctor in there to get me. I was kind of  bruised up, on my head. Then I had another head injury  laughter . One of the  neighbors told my mother, he said,    He   ll never be all right.    Of course, you  could kind of see that I   m not all right  laughter . But I did overgrow that one.  I was born in Wichita, Kansas. My parents divorced when I was nine months  old, and when I was eighteen months old, my mother handed me over to my  grandmother. Shortly after, she and my step-grandfather were married. He   d  had a disastrous first marriage; both of them had and both had raised families.  She was forty and he was fifty, and here I appeared on the scene.  What year was that?  I was born in 1927.  We   ve heard a number of stories of divorce and separation since we   ve been  here.  That   s kind of surprising when you think about it. It was something that was  very uncommon at the time.  In those days, it was a little uncommon.  Right.  My grandma was divorced in    25.  5  Paustenbaugh  Kite  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  We were just saying on this trip we   ve heard a number of people talk about  their parents or grandparents being divorced, and we were just kind of  surprised, because it wasn   t a real common thing at the time.  Were you ever aware of any stigmas being placed on you, like oh, that   s the  divorced family or anything like that? If you got divorced, even back in the  fifties, people were like oh, you   re the divorced lady or your parents are  divorced.  I never had any feeling that way. The feeling that I always had was that I was  really special, because I had doting grandparents. We didn   t have a whole lot,  but I was really, in particularly, the idea that here was this step-grandfather  that thought so much of me. He   d raised a daughter from his first marriage,  and he was an old timer for sure. He had come to Kansas in a covered wagon  when he was five years old from Missouri, and he had all those stories to tell.  He lived in the era of Wyatt Earp. He had some stories that he   d heard, but he  was raised around Pratt, Kansas, between Kingman and Pratt in a little place  called Cairo and Cunningham. His father had bought a relinquishment   again  a sod house   and he could relate stories of the early days, because about age  twelve or thirteen, he herded cattle out on the Kansas prairie by himself.  People would hire him. They   d send a few head of cattle, and he   d herd them.  He lived in a line shack. He did his own cooking. His mother would come out  in a team and wagon about once a month and bring him food and staples to  cook. He went home one day from herding the cattle about evening time and  this old man was out in the yard cleaning this iron skillet with sand, just  scrubbing it. He gave granddad a lecture. He said,    Young man, if you don   t  start keeping this skillet clean, your mother   s going to come out here and find  you dead some day of food poisoning.    He   d never thought of anything like  that. It was mainly bacon or something like that that he was cooking. As long  as he was able, he always helped wash the dishes. I   ve seen him just scrub the  bottom out of a pan  laughter .  Now he would have been born in the 1870   s?  1878. His father traded goods out of Kansas to Camp Supply when it was a  fort, and would leave the family up there on the prairie. Granddad, he always  just idolized his mother, and he said the father would leave about one day   s  supply of wood for her and that was it. We always had a wood pile, which  Vernor can verify, in those early years. That was one of their pastimes. He  and granddad cut wood, wouldn   t you?  Mostly me  laughter .  We had piles as high as the ceiling all the time. That was before the days of  butane and electricity.  He was going to make sure that never happened again.  Made sure it never happened to my grandmother. He adored my grandmother.  6  Paustenbaugh  Kite  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  Kite  B. Bockelman  Why I called her Doe, I don   t know, but that   s what we called her.  Okay, well that answers one question I had.  Do you think it   s that relationship that helped instill in you a sense of history  or love for history, to hear those stories?  Uh-huh, because Granddad, he was a master storyteller, just a master. He  could tell Vernor a story, and two weeks later tell him the same one, and he  never changed one word  laughter . Vernor might go to sleep, and then he   d  trap him.  Now how long did your grandparents live?  They died in sixty-four and seventy-one. She died first.  So your grandparents lived be almost a hundred years old.  Ninety-three. You   ll find his stories in the book, my granddad   s stories. I will  tell you one story about him. He didn   t want to come to Oklahoma at all,  because when he was a boy, he saw the Run of    89. He saw farmers leaving  that good Kansas land, and in    93, he also saw the second run, which was the  run in the Cherokee Strip. He saw them leave, and to him, it was just a bunch  of no-gooders that had left. Through a long series of circumstances    Well,  his first wife and he divorced, and the price of the divorce was all of his rich  land that he had acquired in Kansas that a lot of those people had let to come  to Oklahoma. She got every acre of it. He just walked out clean with nothing,  and he started over. During that period of time, he worked on the stockyards  in Wichita, Kansas as a commission buyer, cattle buyer. Eventually, he and  my grandmother then got married. They got married at Canadian, Texas. He  had gone down there and leased a ranch and was starting over, and that was  where I came into the picture. Then we moved to south Texas, and the crash  of    29 cleaned him out again, so he started over. We progressed into  Oklahoma. He did not want to come. He felt there were no-gooders in  Oklahoma. He   d heard all kinds of stories. He didn   t have any money. He  owed so much money that the bank couldn   t drop him. He trailed 350 head of  cows and calves from Canadian, Texas down into just west of Camargo. It  took about two weeks to make the trial drive. I   m very fortunate. I have the  letters of the man who was the trail boss. He was also our hired man at the  ranch at Canadian. I have his letters telling the details of that cattle drive. It  was probably one of the last real cattle drives in the area. There was one other.  How extraordinary.  Yeah, and it was real. They had the chuck wagon and the whole bit.  What year was that?  1932 was when we came to Oklahoma. This is true; it sounds like it   s almost  7  Kite  B. Bockelman  Kite  B. Bockelman  Kite  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  Kite  B. Bockelman  made up, but they came across the Oklahoma line, and they made camp just  over into Oklahoma. They were seated around a campfire and the cattle were  grazing, and two riders came up, and they were looking for two heifers that  they were missing. Granddad rode out into the herd with them, and sure  enough, there were the two heifers, and they had joined the herd. Evidently  they   d been out. He went back and sat down, and he said,    I cannot believe  what   s happened. The minute I crossed the Oklahoma line I became a damned  cow thief and I didn   t even have to try.     laughter   It just came naturally.  He used to laugh about that. We made it finally to two places down there. He  put his head down one night   and I think this depicts some of those  depression times   he put his head down on the supper table, and he started to  cry. When you hear a man cry, that   s one of the most wrenching sounds from  the depths of their body. He said,    I am down so far, that up is all I can see.     And the next few days, he went to Wichita and talked to the bank, and he said,     If you   ll put me on a decent place, I can pay you back.    Well, I was just  reading this the other day in the book. They said that they couldn   t handle the  finances of buying a good place, but they would see what they could do. They  put him in touch with Federal Land Bank, which at that time was helping the  ranchers and the farmers out a great deal, and of course, it   s still in existence,  you know. It   s still helping. He left and he went up in Kansas and looked at a  place that the Federal Land Bank agreed to take over on the deal, and he didn   t  like that place. There was a lot of farmland on it, and he wasn   t a farmer  anymore, but he had been. They told him that they   d heard of a place down  here in Oklahoma, and if he   d go to Woodward, this realtor would bring him  out here. When Granddad came back, he   d found this place. What he was so  amazed about is that the fellow had come from Woodward fifty miles in forty-five  minutes. He just couldn   t get over traveling that fast. That was what he  was telling us about when he got back. Then we made the move up here.  And that   s this ranch?  That   s this ranch, 1936.  That the land bank helped them find and gave the loan.  I have a question for you that   s slightly off topic, but it sort of follows up on  something we heard yesterday. We had someone we interviewed refer to a soil  bank. We weren   t familiar with that term, but we were running out of time.  Do you know anything about that?  Well, Vernor can explain that, I think.  She said she was putting all of her land in the soil bank so she didn   t have to  worry about rain.  Oh, the CRP.  8  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  Kite  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  That CRP, they pay you if you put it in their farmland or sow it to grass. You  do that, you pay for sowing to grass, but then you don   t graze it unless they  tell you that you can graze it, but when you graze it, they take a percent off of  your payment, but they most generally pay you forty dollars an acre a year. If  they did that for ten years, it   d be  400 an acre for land that wouldn   t sell at  that time for  200, which would have been a big price for it.  So that was just something to help the conservation out here.  It   s supposed to help. I don   t know if it helps everything. Land that blew, if  they sowed much grass, it   d last. They plowed up so much land that should  have stayed in the grass it was in when they moved in to this area.  I did research at Beaver at the Herald Democrat offices some years ago, and  those articles said that there were suitcase farmers that came in here in those  early dust bowl days.  What do you mean by suitcase farmers?  Well, it was just that they weren   t real farmers. They came in and plowed the  land. I think there had been some good crops out there that attracted them.  I guess.  In southern Kansas, a lot of them, right?  Uh-huh, and then the drought hit and the land blew.  So they really had no farming experience? They just came in and tried it.  No, they had no ties here.  Some of them did though. You might be going too far by saying they didn   t  have any farming experience. Some of them were farmers where they were at,  but they ran to this new land they had bought to build a location up in the farm  area. They   d drive up there with a suitcase in their hand to stay and do the  farming, and then go back home, and they didn   t live up there; they just  farmed.  Okay, so they weren   t making a real permanent commitment.  Right.  They owned the land after they   d bought it. We had this in one of our son-in-laws.  They had land up there in the western part of Kansas, kind of up at the  top of Kansas, that   s where they   d bought a place. That grandpa was always  buying stuff to make their farm bigger. He also went to Florida and bought  some orange groves. If it was something that would make money, he bought  it. Now our grandson-in-law has sold that place up there.  9  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  Kite  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  Son-in-law.  Son-in-law I mean; he   s married to our daughter. They got good money out of  the land, and they sold those orange things in Florida too, because the people  that had looked after them for years got old like we are, and they weren   t  capable of looking after them. If you go in with a new man that you don   t  know and don   t have much control over; they   re afraid they   ll take advantage  of them I imagine.  One of the things with this CRP land, they allowed some grazing. Right now,  I think grazing was extended to December 30th because of the drought, except  20 percent of that land must be maintained to cover the wildlife on it. That   s  one of the conservation requirements.  We heard some good suitcase farmer stories out around Keyes and Hooker.  This guy came down from Kansas to check on his crop, and he went to the  local authorities complaining that his equipment had been stolen, his tractor  and his implements and things. They said,    No they haven   t.    They didn   t  like these suitcase farmers; they were real resentful toward them. They said,     No they haven   t,    and he said,    Yes they have; I   ll take you to where I left  them    you know, six months ago.  Laughter  The sheriff went out there and  said,    Well, they   re right here; go get a shovel.    The mounds of dirt were  where the tractors were. He took him and said,    There   s your tractor in that  hill over there. Your header   s over there on that hill. Now go dig them out.      Laughter   I went through that area of what you   re talking about, as a 4-H boy. Four  counties went to Goodwell for a contest, and I forgot what I won, but they took  two boys and two girls to Denver to talk on the National Farm and Home Hour  on Saturday. We went through that, and we   d be pulling those two or three  one way with two tractors hooked together. Now they   ve got such big tractors  that they can pull the same thing and do a better job. Even at that time, I  wondered how in the world they were running two tractors when only one man  was doing it. It was blowing so bad   this was in    39   and I thought this was  a rough country when you have to farm and it blows away on you. It did cover  up those tractors and stuff. That story I   m one hundred percent sure is true. It  covered up fences; it covered up everything, even here where we farmed.  So your family came out to this piece of property in 1936, when things were so  bad.  Uh-huh, we came when a lot of people left.  You might have been the only migrants to the area.  It probably is true. That   s the point I   ve tried with selling that book. I started  out by calling that book The Oklahoma Bounder and I ended up changing the  name to A Permanent Home, because when my granddad came to look at this  place, well, when he left that day to go and talk to the bank and see what could  10  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  Kite  B. Bockelman  Kite  B. Bockelman  Kite  be done, he used to tell the story that I put my arms around his leg and said,     Get us a permanent home.    That was my dream, even as a child, because we  had moved so many times and had gone through all of this. He always said  that kind of spurred him on. And it has been about sixty-five years that I   ve  lived here.  Pretty permanent.  Pretty permanent. But this whole community is a permanent community  actually. In our little church up here that we go to, there are second and third  generation families in that church; they   ve been here for many years. I think  it   s a little unusual in today   s world, because people move so fast and they   re  so mobile and move around.  Then this land was a relinquishment? Someone else had been on it and  couldn   t keep it?  Oh yes, it was homesteaded. Part of this land to the east, in those early, early  days a big land company came in here and developed this area, the eastern part  here and on into Harper County, and they were English and Scottish. I guess,  from what I read, they went bankrupt. Just to the east here, along a ridge over  there, is the Tuttle Trail. It was one of the trails out of Texas into Dodge City.  It was a minor trail   you don   t see it listed with some of the more major trails,  but it was. This lady I was telling you about that was the first white girl child  in Beaver County; their homestead was just right down the road here. She told  me I was standing as a child and watching cattle go down that ridge all day  long. They crossed the Kiowa and went up toward Dodge.  So were there any Native Americans in this area?  Evidentially, there have been, because Kiowa Creek on the original map says  Kiowa Encampment. A lot of that history is at Fort Supply and their archives  down there.  But when you were here, you weren   t coming into contact?  No, no.  I   ve heard that Native Americans shunned the Beaver area for a very  particular reason.  What was that?  The sand porthole. Apparently they knew about it and avoided the whole area.  Well why?  There   s supposed to be a spooky place out in the state park that the Native  Americans would avoid, because if you walked into this area, you would not  11  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  Kite  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  Kite  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  come back.  I   ve never heard that story before.  We read about it on the internet before we came out here. We walked around  out in the park quite a bit and talked to one of the assistant rangers, and his  comment was,    Well, we   ve never heard any stories like that from people that  have lived here, but we   ve read about them on the internet.     Laughing   I   ve walked around that park out there quite a bit.  We   re all still here, so I guess that   s it.  That   s right, we were kind of disappointed. We were hoping we were going to  see something fantastic.  You were just going to float away is what you were going to do   Laughter   But there were Native Americans in this?  I think so. I think up toward, is it Forgan where that field is that they found so  many arrowheads? Every time they plowed the field.  They were found around here too.  Yes, they have.  One time, after World War II, I was working here on this ranch, and the guy  that hired the county agents for northwest Oklahoma came here and offered me  a job.  At Boise City.  Boise City, but I hadn   t been through college. I   d been three years, and then I  went into the Army. I had to go to Panhandle to get my degree, of course.  You can   t be a county agent without a degree. I went out there and talked to  that county agent in that county. He was an old man, and he had things all  over that office and his room of what he had found out in that area. I   m sure  there were a lot of Indians that were in that area.  There have been some major archeological finds in this area. Our son-in-law   s  brother owns some of their land and OU has come out and done some digs.  So it   s been Indian remains. I know they found dinosaurs or that kind of thing.  No. As far as I know, I   ve never known.  They found big snakes, the returns of big snakes, not like we see now, but they  were big. They were ten feet long. When they   d dig up to the sand, there   s a  12  Kite  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  guy in Woodward, north and a little bit east of Woodward, he had a sandpit out  there, and he dug sand for you to make cement out of and stuff. You could go  down there and buy it. He had dug up two big old snake hides, or whatever  was left. It   s interesting to me that the stuff gets buried, and it   s down there,  but they don   t see it. That   s why they   re digging all over the world. They   re  trying to find the things in the Bible and stuff in history. It just gets covered  up, like those tractors you were talking about.  That   s right. A few more years, and they would have been gone forever.  Sure, you couldn   t find them   Laughter   Now you said you were born just south of this area; did you live in the same  place until you were married?  I lived in the same area until I got in college. I spent three years at Stillwater.  Whenever I went to college, I was pretty young. I graduated the day I was  sixteen from high school, which was fairly young. The reason I did, I started  to school at five. My mother, being a teacher before she started raising me,  she taught me so much that I was so far ahead of the kids that were in my class  that the teacher immediately wanted to put me in the second grade, so she did.  My mother allowed that. Before Christmas, she said,    I want to put him in the  third grade.    My mother didn   t allow that; she said,    That   s going too far,      laughter  but she might have went too far with the second grade. I   m not sure  about that. It put me through high school pretty early.  During your high school years, even though the economic conditions were  really bad, there was never any question that you were going to have to drop  out of school to help the family?  No. We had trouble getting buses to get to school. The first year, I rode in a  pickup that they built on the wood box on the back, and my dad took me to  Slapout, which was about four or five miles up there. I got on the bus at  Slapout, and then they let me off at Slapout when they came back. He was up  there every night to get me. Then later, I rode the bus, and I was telling you  about how long we rode the bus. When I got out of school, I was in farming at  school in Stillwater   cattle and stuff. I was eighteen when I went into the  Army at the end of my junior year. In fact, I was in the Army before I was  eighteen; I had taken three years of ROTC, so I was prepared to go into the  Army. I went in with seventy boys that were juniors. We have stayed friends,  a lot of those people, down through the years.  Tell them what the name of the group was. The Firehouse Gang.  Firehouse Gang, because we lived in a firehouse down there up on the south  end of the campus. That   s where we lived. Some of them fought fires. I just  went to get smart, so I didn   t fight fires.  They went back several years ago; they have reunions every so often, and they  13  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  all went up in the firehouse where the bunks are and the pole. I think a lot of  them that tried to go down the pole wished they hadn   t.  That   s what I was going to tell you about. That Smith that lives out there  where you can play golf, he was one of them. All of us were poor when we  went in there. Some of them stayed in the Army until they either died or got  older anyway.  Oh, so they made a career out of the Army.  Yeah, some of them did.  A lot of them went into extension.  That Smith, he went into the oil business. He was the vice president of an oil  company. At first, he didn   t have much money, him and his wife, but when  we had the first grouping together   of course I don   t remember what year that  was   but they went and bought new clothes to come.  She said they used their last penny to look like they had something.  Luckily, he married a great woman that we knew in college. She probably  helped him a lot.  Let me back up a little bit to when you were in high school at Laverne. What  kinds of extracurricular activities were there, or were there any?  I tried to play football, but I was so little. When I graduated, I weighted 110.  Well yes, and because you were younger.  Back in those days, you could go to football until football dropped out, and  then you could lay over until the next year. The tackle that played alongside  me, he   d been there about eight years  laughter . The first time I went into a  football game they put me in at guard, and I didn   t know anything about  playing guard. I was kind of an end and a back and I was pretty fast. I said,     What do I do? I don   t know anything about playing guard.    He said,    Don   t  worry about it, I   ll take care of your position and mine too.     Laughter  So  life   s been kind of like that; somebody   s come along and taken care of my  positions.  Well, that   s not such a bad deal. Was participation in extracurricular  activities something that was pretty common?  They did that, but the bus people were like I was; whenever it came time to get  on the bus, you had to get on. Well, the football team stayed there another  hour or two, so we weren   t quite up to par on the knowledge of the game.  Because you had to leave early.  14  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  Kite  Yeah.  Were there other things besides football?  4-H was the main thing that I had. When I went in to be out of college, I went  to basic training, and I had to go before a board to see if I could go to officer  candidate school. I went before this board, and I was scared. An old man  there took my place; like I   m saying, there   s always somebody. He said,     What   d you do in high school?    I said,    Well, I didn   t do very much, but I  was in 4-H.    He said,    What   s 4-H?    and I told him what I   d done. He called  me down there and started asking me questions about the Army, and I got to  go to officer candidate school.  Was his feeling that 4-H had given you enough leadership skills that you  would      Yes, and at that time I was a good talker. Now, I married a good talker.   Laughter  At that time, I could make speeches.  Tell them about your speech about Governor Kerr at a 4-H event.  We were in Oklahoma City at a stock show, and they were having the 4-H and  the FFA boys and girls go up to the center; the governor was on one side, and  the lieutenant governor was on the other side of the loud speaker. Well, I  started to go up there, and the head of 4-H in Oklahoma said,    What are you  going to talk about?    I told him, and he said,    Oh, don   t talk about that; talk  about what good things the governor   s doing for us.    Well I went up there and  I tried.  Talk about extemporaneous   I tried to say something good about the governor, and everybody went to  laughing. I was a comedian.  Well, tell her what you said.  I forgot.  He said,    We want to thank Governor Kerr for what he has done to us,    not     for us      Laughter  They never did quit laughing he said.  So how did the governor react to that?  Oh, he knew me, and the next day he came out to the stock show, and of  course he   d never seen me before, and I was standing there by my calf, and he  said,    That was a good speech you made last night.     Laughter   That   s funny, and what an honor. You got to meet the governor   15  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  Yeah, yeah. That was big time stuff for me.  Well, tell them the reason why you were able to go to college.  Well, when I went to college, my room was six dollars a month and my eating  was twelve dollars a month. I ate two meals a day; I didn   t eat breakfast. We  didn   t have the money; my folks said,    You   ll lay out a year and then go to  college.    Well, the man that became president of the college, Willham     Oliver Willham.  Oliver Willham. He   d been at Panhandle. He had been the head at Panhandle.  He was the judge and eight 4-H   ers and eight FFA boys would get to go to  Stillwater with  125 a piece. Well, that  125 was big stuff. It doesn   t sound  big now, but it was big stuff. So I went to college and enrolled, but I didn   t  enroll. I got there a little bit late, because I had to go to a stock show at  Buffalo. I had barn animals to show for the next year, even though I was  thinking about going to college. The man that later offered me that job that I  told you about out at Boise City, he hauled me to Stillwater. I was a day or  two late, but I   d missed the test, so they enrolled me in classes. And they said  how smart are you in math and how smart are you in English? And I said,     Well, I don   t know how smart I am, but I might be able to make it.    So they  put me into the classes that you could pass, and I had to take the test to see if I  passed, and I did pass. I never showed those animals, but we tried to take  them to Chicago. My dad hauled them over to the northeast part of the state to  go up there on a train, but he got there too late, and he had to haul them back  home then. It rained all the way over there, and we had a little old pickup that  he was hauling two calves in, so somebody else showed them whenever I was  in college. I came home with them that day. He came through Stillwater and  picked me up.  But it was that  125 that made the difference. He got to go.  That was a Sears and Roebuck Scholarship. The guy at the head of the Sears  and Roebuck team in Tulsa was the guy that was over giving it out to us.  Did we ask you how many brothers and sisters you had?  I   ve got one sister.  And was she older or younger?  She   s ten years younger.  Okay, so it wasn   t an issue of your parents having several children and  needing to go to school at the same time.  No, they were just poor. They told me if I wrote a five-dollar check, to write a  letter home and tell them that I   d written a five-dollar check. I could write  16  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  Kite  B. Bockelman  Kite  B. Bockelman  Kite  checks on my own.  So that  125 got you started and then they were able to help you come up with  the rest of the money to keep going so you never had to lay out of school.  I didn   t have any jobs that first year, but the second year I made sure I had a  job. I not only had a job, but I found a place I could stay all night that didn   t  cost six dollars.  You   re a bargain hunter, huh?  A bargain hunter   Laughter  They washed clothes in there. We took baths in  the big thing that they washed the clothes in. I had a good friend; there   s  always friends that come along and want to help you. That fellow, he   s dead  now, but he was a great friend in college. He worked steady, a lot steadier  than I did. I worked a little. We laid our money up on the place where we  studied a little bit, and sometimes, if you had to have money, you just picked  up the money whether it was yours or not. We got to see him. He died here  about     A couple years ago.  Yeah. We went down to buy a cake at that town he lived in, and we found out  where he lived. We went out there and he was in really bad shape, but I   m  awfully glad that I got to see him.  Now we assume they know what cake is.  Right, I think.  The eating cake?  Yeah, the protein supplement that we feed cattle.  Oh no, okay. I was thinking that.  Well, the reason I brought this up, back to the head injury, the young  occupational therapist that worked with him, she asked him,    Now Mr.  Bockelman, what is it that you do at home?    He said,    Well, I do chores.    He  was just kind of floating around. He said,    I do my chores and feed the cattle.     She said,    Well, what do you feed the cattle,    and he said cake. Her eyes got  big, and she looked over at me, and I could see she was thinking,    Oh, this  man   s got a long ways to go.    We started laughing then, or I did. I said,    That  is the protein supplement.    Sometimes it   s soybeans and sometimes it   s made  out of cotton oil. I explained it to her and she said,    I   m learning more from  you folks than you   re learning from me.     So he was right on.  17  B. Bockelman  Kite  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  He was right on   Laughter  That   s been something that   s kind of funny out  of that situation. It   s a very common term in this area. You feed your cattle  cake. Every vocation has its jargon.  Well, I thought you went down there to buy him a cake   Yeah, like a birthday cake.  I looked at you when he said cake. It was like out at Guymon, I used the word  shorts when we fed the pigs. Well, you   re not feeding them shorts; it   s the  byproduct of wheat. It   s a little less nutritious than bran isn   t it? It is  nutritious.  It   s richer than bran. Bran   s the outside layer of the wheat.  Is it richer? I   ve never quite understood.  It   s got a little bit more power in it than the outside edge of the wheat.  Let me just follow up quickly; when you talked about having a job, what kind  of job did you have when you were at OSU? You said you worked a little bit.  Well, I worked for the people that owned this thing.  This laundry?  Laundry, but not very much. I kept track of the hours, and if I   d work, I   d get  paid for it. That was in my second year. The second year, before it was over, I  went to work at a caf  . All I got out of that was my food. At first, I was to  take care of the drinks for the caf  ; then, I got a job waiting on tables. I was  growing up all the time, getting better. Then I began to wash dishes. That was  terrible back in those days. They   d boil that water that they   d wash the dishes  in, and then your hands were always cooked. You   d have those dishes after  you got them cleaned off, and then the boiling water, you   d use little things to  hook on the things to bring them up. After I got pretty good at washing dishes,  he said,    Well, I believe you   ll need to sweep and scrub the floor one night a  week.    Well, I did that for one night a week plus washing the dishes. Then he  said,    I believe you can scrub the floor two days a week.    All the time, I was  looking for a better job. I went to the college and I worked at the sheep barn.  From then on, I was a sheep man.  So did you board in the barn? I know some people did.  Yes, I lived in the barns. I   d walk to a place where a woman had a lot of boys  going to school, Ada. It cost us fifteen dollars a month for three meals.  That was a pretty good deal.  It was. She was a good cook, and she babied us like everything.  18  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  Tell about the peanut butter.  Well, she bought this peanut butter in a big old thing like that. It   s not like it is  now. The oil was in the peanut butter. After we   d eat our dinner, we   d put  peanut butter, and she had jelly and everything you could put in to make a  covering for your bread. Every boy would stir that in the plate after he ate his  dinner, and he would put it on the bread to eat for dessert. I don   t know if she  had dessert. I can   t remember that. She was a whale of a cook and real good  to boys going to college. It was on that street south of where I proposed to  you.  He proposed at Theta Pond.  It was south of Theta Pond.  It seems like it was Knoblock, but I don   t know.  I lived out there. There   s no barn there now, but at that time there was an old  barn that had sheep in it. It was west of where the    well, I don   t know where  the agricultural building for cattle and stuff is now, but it was on that street that  you     Was it on Farm Road?  Probably.  It circles around, I think.  It goes straight down to where they play football.  No, that   s Hall of Fame.  Well, they   ve got a road clear through there now, but I expect it     We always turn at that first stop light west of town and go around that way.  Oh, okay.  We walked about a mile or a mile and a half. When I was looking after those  sheep, I got up at four thirty and worked with those sheep in the morning, and  then did another job in the evening. That   s the way I got through my junior  year, and at that time, the war had broke out and boys were going into the  Army real fast, and they couldn   t get a helper. I had to help her. They all  went into the Army, so they paid me for two jobs. I was still pretty young.  Only the doctors like you all are trying to be and are, he was teaching me how  to feed cattle and the feeds and stuff and the breeds and the genetics of them.  He said,    You   re sharp enough you could go to college and work on a master   s  and then work on a doctorate.    He said,    You won   t be able to get a job out  here at eighteen.    So that was what I had in mind, but I told him I didn   t have  19  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  any money to get through another college. At that time, they didn   t have that  at OSU. He said,    You can go to my college.    I think     Was it Cornell?  Cornell I believe. He was really good to me, and I loved him.  What was his name?  Hilliard.  No, that was the guy I worked for. He had a doctor   s degree already. He ran a  college up in South Dakota, I think from there, but he was my boss at this old  sheep barn. This other guy, I can   t think of his name, but I can tell you how he  died. He was hunting, and he pulled a gun out of a pickup. The thing went off  and hit him right in the eye. But he was a great man. Some people die that  you don   t want to die. Had I gone on to do what you all are doing, that   s how  I would have done it. I don   t know what I   d use for money, but he said I could  get by.  Well, the war interrupted so many people   s plans and changed the courses of  their lives.  I was in the Army four years. I was in the ROTC and they signed us up in the  junior year. Well, the way we went into the Army was they told us we could  graduate from college if we   d sign up. Well, that wasn   t true. We didn   t  graduate, we just signed up at the end of our junior year.  So they signed you up at the end of your junior year?  Yes. That was before I was eighteen, because on May fourteenth, school was  out. We were already moving toward the Army. It was about the time I was  eighteen. Most of the boys in my group were twenty or about that. We went  down to     Fort Sill.  Fort Sill and got our clothes. I came home and the clothes didn   t fit too good,  so my aunt made them fit. She was a seamstress.  So they shipped you off, and you looked real presentable, huh?  Right. We went to California to take basic training, and then we came back to  Stillwater and waited to go to OCS  Officer Candidate School . We waited  around there two or three months, and then went to OCS.  Now where did you go to OCS at?  At Fort Benning in Georgia. That was for the infantry. We went through  20  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  Kite  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  OCS, and they joke about how dumb the lieutenants were.  Ninety-day wonders   We didn   t have much schooling, but we made it anyway. A lot of them got  killed because they made it, but they were good boys.  So where did you go from Fort Benning?  I went to Texas. The reason I went to Texas is my mail came out here to my  folks, but they lived in Oklahoma. If I had had an address from Oklahoma, I  would have gone to     The Forty-Fifth.  The Forty-Fifth, but the reason I went to Texas is because I had that address.  They sent the boys that they thought were going to go over seas pretty quick,  so they sent us to the state we were from. Well, I was from Texas because I  had filed that Texas address.  But he lived in Oklahoma.  Dr. Willham, he was introducing me to the guy from Tulsa that gave us this  scholarship. He said,    This guy   s an oddball. He lived in Beaver County,  Oklahoma, he went to school in Harper County, he played 4-H in both Beaver  and Harper, and his address is Follett, Texas.     Laughter   It probably saved his life, because a lot of those guys that went in the Forty-  Fifth, including this Dennis Smith we   ve talked about, and I don   t know; how  many shrapnel wounds did he have in his abdomen?  Seven.  Seven. He survived, but     From his waist up to his neck. He was in the hospital when I got out of the  Army, but he got over it. He went back to Stillwater and went to college. He  must have gone to Norman for some study of oil field work. As I was telling  you, his wife was great. She probably raised him. Most men have a wife that  has been great. I won   t brag on you, because you won   t drink anything but  water, but I will brag on women  laughter .  You   re getting it.  I know I am. So from Texas, did you go overseas then?  No, I went to Camp Gruber, where the Forty-Fifth had been. They moved my  outfit to Camp Gruber.  21  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  Now where is Camp Gruber located?  It   s east of Tulsa.  Muskogee.  Muskogee. I went there for a while. By that time, I started dating her, and she  was in college.  Now how did the two of you meet?  Well, we   d known each other for a long time, but the first date, I had a date  with a girl in Laverne, but she wanted to go to church that night.  The wrong church. He would have gone to some churches, but not that  church   Laughter   Anyway, she didn   t want to go with me, I guess. So, I was with my cousin     Who is my best friend.     and her boyfriend, so I said,    Well, I guess I just can   t get a girl.    She said,     Let me call Barbara.    She called her, and she said yeah she   d go.  No, she said,    Would you like a date tonight,    and I said,    Yes  With whom?      Laughter   And we went to church up here where we go to church now, at a little church  close to here. When I came in with her, my dad, he was wanting to know who  I was with, so he about fell off his seat.  He scooted clear up to the front of his seat so he could see who he was with   Anyway, they were great people and tried to teach me right. Sometimes I  didn   t always follow it.  We had five dates.  Then you were proposed to?  The fifth date we got married.  Laughter   You move pretty fast, huh?  Well you didn   t have much time in World War II.  Some of those marriages were too fast, but we   ve been married fifty-six years  now, so it   s lasted.  22  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  Most of my friends, in those seventy that I was telling you about, they   ve also  been married a long time.  Yeah, in that group, there have been very few divorces, which is really  amazing in today   s world.  And some of them were married about like we were. The day before  Christmas was our date, and April 20th we got married.  Do you think that going through those hard times that you went through and  learning the things that you learned from that have anything to do with the  longevity of the marriages that you just spoke about? It seems like from your  particular generation that there are lots of people that are married to the same  person until they die. I know there are lots of individual circumstances, but it  seems like there has to be some common factor of why they lasted.  I really don   t know that answer. She probably does, but I felt like a lot of it     of course my folks stayed together until they died, but her folks had been split  up a lot, and she was bound and determined that wasn   t going to happen to us.  That influenced my life. One factor back in the olden days and before that,  marriage was the ultimate goal and the career was not. Many women may  have stayed in an unpleasant situation, because that was the thing to do. I  know my own grandmother said that when she got married she was a product  of the Ozarks in Missouri. She said at eighteen she married because she was in  love with the idea of getting married and not in love with the man she married.  Women were not as educated or able to take care of themselves, the career  woman. I had a great-aunt that was a career woman, and she was an oddity in  Kingman, Kansas. She was a realtor. I think that partly entered into some of  it. Marriage was the thing that a girl did way back when. They didn   t have  any choice. I don   t know whether that would be the answer or not.  I don   t either, but I think those people were very smart. The man and woman  that raised her were so smart. They had lived life roughly, but they were  smart.  Granddad   s education came from a country school that was ungraded. The  boys worked, and then they   d go back to school. It was sort of like this  football player he was talking about. They would go a while until there was  work to do. And sometimes they were older than their teacher. I know  Granddad had such a desire for me to get an education and for his daughter.  She and I did the same thing; we both got married and pulled out of school. I  pulled out of Stillwater; I think I told you about it, but education was at the top  of his list. I think maybe that   s carried on down, because all that crew you saw  in there, all of them have been to college and most of them have graduated. I  counted up yesterday; I think it was seventeen that we   ve had at OSU that have  graduated, most of them.  Right. Well, Steve and I were just talking about that yesterday. In an  23  B. Bockelman  Kite  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  interview we had conducted, there was one person who was in a family of  eight and one in a family of seven. In the one of the family of seven, every  single one of those children had gone to school, and in the other one, none of  them had. It showed how important the parents    attitude toward education is.  For that family, it was worth any sacrifice that was going to have to be made  to get those kids an education, and in the other one, it was just, I had an okay  life without it, so you can too.  In our son   s first marriage   he hasn   t had too good of luck with his  marriages   but his first wife, he hadn   t finished school yet. He had problems  after he had this head injury that he had, problems that could have been  disastrous on him, but things worked out eventually. He always said that if he  had been a ditch digger her family would have liked him better. After his life  straightened out and he had married, he worked as a car salesman for five  years. That really made him see the need of something else  So we financed  his going back and getting his degree. He went to Edmond and got his  business management degree. We went down to his graduation and her family  was there. They had a little supper at their house. I made the comment on  being so glad now that every one of our children had a college degree. Her  mother just drew back and looked at me. I knew right then that there was a  barrier between us. That was not important.  In fact, they made remarks to him. They had that feeling that we thought we  were better than they were. It was true; eventually the marriage did end. We  offered to send her to school. She was plenty smart; she could have handled it.  She was talented, but she had no desire. It wasn   t important to her. We  wanted to send her to Oklahoma City Community College. They just lived in  Moore. She was a very talented artist. She could do about anything she  wanted to, but she didn   t want to. That    want to    wasn   t there in that family.  After the divorce, she went to Oklahoma City Community College and has a  good job now as an occupational therapist at Integris Baptist. I think maybe  she desired a little bit better income than what she found out in the workplace,  so she went ahead and did get some training. She was more motivated. They  had one daughter. She had two daughters she brought into the marriage. I  know he   s working real hard to motivate his daughter, and I think she will go  on. She   s in junior high now. It is a family background. A lot of it in our  family came not only from my granddad, but from his parents and his mother  too. There was no way with his mother. There was no grade below an    A     that was suitable. She didn   t want to talk about that.  That was pretty stern.  It was pretty stern. I didn   t make all    A   s   .  She was a fantastic teacher, and then, like I said, his sister taught for years.  But I am kind of proud. My junior year, I did make all    A   s   . But my  freshman and sophomore years weren   t too good in college.  24  Paustenbaugh  Kite  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  There are a lot more things you   re contending with in college than just the  class work, that   s for sure. Well, I know that during the time that the Dust  Bowl period was going on that you were not real old, but were there things  that you noticed that let you know that you were coming out of the hard period  and that times were going to get better? Is there anything that you can think of  that you noticed?  Something that might have indicated that good times were here.  Well, when I married Barbara.  Cattle prices went up, I think, didn   t they?  Well, they did, but     I   ll tell you what happened   World War II. That   s just the honest truth. It  kept the climax of better times. We were coming up out of it. Of course, the  dirt storms, they got that under control. I   ve heard it said by the older people  that well, World War II came along and prices went up.  Do you think that any of that could have had to do with giving people a  different focus?  It might have. Perhaps it took the focus away from ourselves.  Yeah, like what   s awful about my life, now we   ve got this national effort, and  we all need to contribute.  Uh-huh, sort of like now. I heard someone say the other day that they felt the  surge of patriotism was greater now than it had ever been. Well, I think it was  great after Pearl Harbor. I can remember the excitement in school after Pearl  Harbor.  So you graduated from the high school in 1940, so you were in the middle of  your sophomore year when Pearl Harbor happened. What was the reaction  on the campus after that?  Well, it wasn   t too long until boys began to drop out and get in the Army. A  lot of them dropped out. The guys with a little age on them, they sure dropped  out. That   s all they thought about. I had a roommate that hauled people  around. What do you call those?  A taxi driver?  Yeah, a taxi driver. He just lost interest in school. He knew he was going into  the Army. Then he dropped out of school, but he went into the Army. I don   t  think he ever went back. He   s dead now, but I do know that much about him.  I think he lost interest in college. Of course, I did, because I had an  opportunity to go work on this ranch. Pay wasn   t very good, but it was a  25  Kite  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  location that I always wanted, was a place like this. I didn   t know whether  we   d get anything out of it. Actually, we got the whole thing. We were lucky.  We had a man that had raised her  Barbara ; he loved her, and he was willing  to do anything for us, except we got by without money for quite a while, until  our kids were pretty much grown. Then they all went to college if they wanted  to, and they graduated, like she said. Some of them are pretty smart. This boy  that we had so much trouble with, he   s brilliant.  When you were married, then you came back to live on her ranch?  When I came out of the Army, I came to work here. When I was overseas in  Japan, the man over me, which was a major, I think, the head of four  companies, and I was a company commander. He said,    Why don   t you sign  up for another year and stay over here?    Well, I wrote Barbara. He said I  could bring my wife over there, but our baby was small at that time, our oldest  daughter. I wrote her a letter and asked her if she wanted to come over. I told  her it   d be quite a visit to come over here to Japan; she could learn things she  didn   t know about Japan. She said,    I   m ready for you to come home.     So he came home.  So you thought, I know as much about Japan as I want to know, huh?  Well, Granddad   s health was broken, and he   d had a heart attack.  Sure, that would have been frightening to go that far away.  And you know that Robert Frost poem    The Road Not Taken?     Right.     So it diverged, and I took the one less traveled by.    Well, I guess it made all  the difference in the world. Our lives would have been different certainly. He  probably would have been a career man, I imagine in the military.  My dad wanted to be in that kind of business. He was smart. I don   t know  whether you   ve got to be smart. I think you   ve got to be pretty smart to be a  farmer.  Smart and lucky.  Lucky and smart go together.  And pray a lot, for rain   But anyway, my dad wanted to be it. He   s taken a little business teaching at  St. Louis, in the time before he went back to the farm, and he liked it. My son  came along, and he wasn   t as interested in the ranching as I was. He was  interested in making a living like people that work in jobs. Of course, she told  26  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  you the story of how he worked selling cars and getting an education in book  keeping.  He goes with a girl there in Oklahoma City that we think a lot of, but I   ve  thought a lot of his first two wives too, so I don   t know whether I   m smart or  not, but he won   t marry her because he   s had such bad luck with his first two.  She wants to get married.  She wants to get married. She   s really nice.  The depression era, I see some of those things in the senior citizens. We were  quite active in them at Laverne. Not wanting to throw anything away, reusing  things. If we don   t watch it there, we just have piles of this and that that  nobody uses. Our daughter over here is getting new furniture delivered today.  I know what the hang up   s going to be with her husband, because he is ten  years older than she is and his dad came from the depression era. She wants  them to haul that other furniture off, and I know good and well he   s going to  say,    Well, we can put it somewhere.     That   s right, there   s still use to be had in that.  I hope he   s gone when they deliver the furniture. They told us when they  delivered the table that they would take our old table away and put it by the  dumpster, and it would be gone the next morning, because there are people  who need that, and they watch when there   s furniture out there. Well, that   s  sort of like the depression era. It was sort of frightening. There are still needy  people.  I was going to share something with you if I could, and it   s called    Making  Do.    It tells this whole story. Making do means using things over and over  again and again. Talking about recycling brings a smile when I think of way  back when. A waste was an unacceptable sin right along with stealing and  lying. Waste not want not came before Amen, along with a penny saved and a  penny earned. We didn   t know about the dangers of fat, so we ate lots and lots  of crispy bacon that kept the dripping jar full as it sat near the stove, handy and  ready to use. I don   t know whether anybody mentioned the dripping jar. In  World War II, they recycled that fat. You turned it in, and then I think it went  into ammunitions, I believe.  Yeah, I saw a poster for that at the Oklahoma Department of Library Theatre.  Now mother used   this would have been grandmother   used the bacon  dripping to season green beans, cornbread, rub on baking potatoes, fry fish and  potatoes. There was no reason not to reuse that handy tasty available fat.  From his feed sacks each day, Granddad saved all the twine. It might come in  handy along the way, because scotch tape hadn   t been invented yet. This was  something very common in households. Every piece of string, and everything  like that was saved, and you reused it. Now the chamber pot, carried out  27  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  daylight, was upended on a red ant den. We hoped to poison the stinging  blight, as we recycled even our secretions. Our best recycling make-do feat  came from the old pitcher pump well. First, I had to pump, carry, and repeat  until the tea kettle and the water pail were full. This also included a reservoir  on the end of the wood stove that my grandmother used to cook with in the  wintertime, and you filled it. That thing must have held 150 gallons. It was  my job to fill that thing every evening, but you always had hot water. In a tub-like  tin dish pan, Grandmother poured steaming water.    Come on now Linda,  and let   s get these done up in a hurry.    And then Dad brought in the separator  parts as soon as the dishes were finally done. Washing these was not for faint  hearts. They were slimy, slick, and sticky. If you used real soap, the slime  and the sticky just pulled up like that from those separator parts. They were  disks. There must have been a hundred of those, weren   t there?  I don   t know.  They fit together; they were like little half cones. You had to wash those, and  all that stuff was in there. Proctor and Gamble came out with Dreft Soap; that  was the first detergent, Dreft. Grandmother bought some. She found out she  could wash the separator parts in it, and the water would stay nice and not  slimy, so she wrote Proctor and Gamble her discovery. They wrote her back a  nice little letter and said that they had not put it through their lab test, so they  could not confirm what she had said. She was so disappointed. I guess she  thought she was going to get a case of Dreft, probably. The sudsy water was  put aside, and the rinse water went into play. By now, fingers had crinkle  hide, and the water was nutritious and thick. This all went into the slop pail.  The slop pail   not the kind that sat by the bed, but the slop pail. The sudsy  water came back into the game, for Grandmother was now in full sail as she  scrubbed the floor on her knees. Finished at last, she wrung the dishrag made  from a piece of Granddad   s under shirt. We didn   t throw anything away  because it was worn out and then it went into the rag bag, and then hung it to  dry on a sack twine line.  Now the slop pail was brimming as Granddad carried it to the hog pen, where  he would add shorts and a trimming of fresh milk from the morning   s  separating. Now this milk, we called it Blue John; it almost had a transparent  look. There was no butterfat left in it. The butterfat went into the cream can,  and we sold the cream on Saturday afternoon. The shorts   we talked about  that a while ago. Now Saturday, we all took a turn in the same scalding bath  water. One side would freeze and the other burn, as we quickly scrubbed by  the wood stove. We actually only bathed fully once a week, usually. In  between, you took what we called spit baths, and you splashed water around.  In the summer, my grandmother and I would go out on the porch of the sod  house. We   d built on a wooden porch on the back of it. While she watched up  the road, I would take a spit bath in a pan and splashed water over her. Then,  it was my turn, and I   d watch the road to see if anybody came along. When  we tore the house down, there was a rotten place in the porch where we had  stood taking those spit baths in the summertime.  28  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  Kite  B. Bockelman  Kite  V. Bockelman  Kite  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  Well, I could go on and on with this recycling. I don   t know how we ever  survived those days, but we didn   t even know we weren   t always antiseptic.  We only knew we had to make do to survive. There were children in school  that wore the same clothes all week. I had a clean dress every day; I did have  that.  You were one of the lucky ones.  I was one of the lucky ones. I had a mother who lived far away, and that   s one  thing that she did for my support was send me beautiful clothes.  So she did her hair?  Uh-huh, in return for my clothes. I hated ever one of them, because they  weren   t like the other girls.  Laughter   You wanted the flour sack dresses?  Uh-huh. His cousin that he mentioned that started our first date, she had one  nice dress, just one. That   s the way it went. In that case, my life was a little  bit different. I know Doe  her grandmother  let me buy a sweater one time on  my own. I wore the thing a solid week to school every day in high school.  You came back to the ranch here. You mentioned that you got along, but  didn   t have much money. What were your accommodations like here? Where  did you live on the ranch?  We built part of this house for us, but we lived south of here about a half a  mile on somebody   s land that allowed us to rent an old house. Not rent, we  just lived in it. We didn   t pay any money. I was good at not paying any  money back in those days, and I   m still pretty good at it  laughter , but my  kids try to change me. Anyway, we built a house and lived here. He had thirty  cows. He had about 140 or 150.  He being?  Mr. Sitton. He ran the ranch. Actually, we were trying to pay for the ranch.  When we got it paid for, things got a little bit better. I don   t remember what  we paid for it.  The final papers I have are from about 1952, and he paid about  25,000 for  this ranch,  8 an acre. I have the papers that showed his final payment where  they released it from Federal Land Bank.  But he was a little conservative too. He   d give us money along. Every once in  a while he   d buy us a car or whatever to make it better. When she went to  college, he helped with that too. I don   t remember how. Didn   t they pay some  of your way?  29  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  Kite  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  Kite  Yes, they paid some of my tuition.  Oh, when you went back to Northwestern?  Uh-huh.  They did things like that for us that we didn   t demand, or they didn   t have to.  The cost of living was not as high either. And then this entire area began to  bring in the gas wells. They came in here with seismograph crews in the early  fifties and like that. We all had cracked ceilings. I know we had a crack in our  living room, and there was no way you could repair that. We tried it, until I  guess we redid it when we did this part of it, and it would just shake the earth,  but they were just seeing where the gas formations were. Those first oil and  gas leases didn   t amount to much now, when you look at them. I don   t know.  What were they paying in those days?  A dollar an acre.  Yeah, I thought some went for fifty cents an acre.  I don   t remember that.  Some of the very first ones.  I thought a dollar an acre was about the first.  But people had been without money for so long that it seemed like it was a  bonanza, and it really was at the time. That was an eighth of the production.  The later wells went for far more than that. I   d say that the oil and gas in here  probably helped make a turn around.  So was this house here your grandparents    house?  No, this was a sod house that was here.  It was the one that was torn down.  Yeah, the one that was torn down. The first part was twenty-four by thirty-six.  It was where the kitchen is and the living room. There was a bedroom, and we  left space for a bath. We didn   t have the bath in until the fifties. That house,  the first part was built in forty-six, I guess. It had no electricity and no running  water. It was a house, but we were used to that way of life, carrying water.  Whenever we built onto this part, our son-in-law, Don, out at Balko, wanted a  fireplace. He said he   d bring wood from Southeastern Oklahoma where his  family lived. Vernor said he was not cutting another stick of wood, because he  had cut wood for three stoves, and he was through, and he hasn   t.  That was it.  30  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  Kite  B. Bockelman  Kite  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  Kite  B. Bockelman  Kite  B. Bockelman  But that old sod house wrapped its arms around you. We loved that old house.  Well, when you said that it was stucco on the outside and plaster on the inside;  I guess my vision of a sod house was a lot more primitive than that.  Evidently, the people who built that had money to start out with, because it  was a four-room house and had ample room. Then we built on a bath and the  porch, or the folks did.  Well, there   s even a green architectural movement now, where they   re going  back and looking at those kinds of materials that they used to build houses out  of, and it   s kind of interesting to see history sort of repeat itself.  Those hay bale houses.  Uh-huh, I think I read on some of that too.  I know at the old sod house by Cleo Springs that they used plaster on the  inside, but he used all of his wife   s bluing material to give it a blue color so  that it wouldn   t be the boring old white like everybody else had; they had blue  walls. That was exciting.  When we moved in, it had the stucco on the outside, but it did not have the  plaster on the inside. It had calcimine.  Which is?  I did research on that, and I can   t remember just what it was, but it was some  mixed lime or something like that.  It   s sort of like a whitewash, isn   t it?  Yes it is. Then, someone had tried to paper the walls. I remember the first  year we lived there; you could hear the pieces of the sod that would rattle  down behind the loose wallpaper.  Laughter  We never could keep mice out  of that house, never. And snakes could get in. I know I had my boots under a  little table that I had one day, and I reached down there, and there was a bull  snake just wrapped around my boots. When we tore it down, you could see  those mouse runs and things in it. When we put the fixtures in the bathroom, I  can remember, mice would get in the tub, and you could hear them just  scratch, scratch, scratch, scratch; they couldn   t get out   Laughter   You were really one with nature.  We were  One thing we haven   t touched on is everybody had a cellar at their  home, the fraid hole, or some of them called it the fraidy hole. My  grandmother was deathly afraid of storms. She   d drag me down in that thing.  I just knew there   d be the water puppies, the salamanders, you know, and there  were, or a snake. That   s where the women put their canned goods. In the  31  Kite  B. Bockelman  Kite  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  Kite  B. Bockelman  Kite  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  Kite  Paustenbaugh  material I gave you, I think I gave you the canned porch story of when we  lived down in Ellis County. People were desperate for food. It was in the  early days of the commodities. Of course Granddad, his attitude was that he  would not take anything like that. I remember he went to a little town called  Harmon on the day that just happened to be the day that they were handing out  the commodities. He looked in a box where he was doing business, and there  was ketchup in this box. He came home, and he was so upset. He said,    We  can   t afford ketchup, and there they   re giving ketchup to the people.    He said  they just needed the staples. People were just hard up for that sort of thing.  It sounded like in the commodity distribution that you would just get whatever  happened to be coming along. It might be good things one day     Uh-huh, like the ketchup.     and it might be half a dozen grape fruits the next day.  And when Social Security started, of course, he paid into Social Security for  years. Whenever they let him pay into self-employment, wasn   t that it? So  Vernor suggested that he draw out his Social Security; he had it coming. They  had a row over it; he was not taking that charity.  Huh, even though he had paid into it.  And he had paid it. That   s what Vernor told him; he had paid. He deserved it.  When he started getting it, he was so proud of his check.  Oh really?  Yeah, he really was.  We ran into a lot of people that even considered the WPA work charity. Even  though they would go out and work harder than they ever had in their life to  earn that money, they would consider that charity work, and really, they were  doing work.  They were.  That   s weird that he thought Social Security was charity.  Yeah, I know, but he did. Once he got it, that was pretty good stuff. It was  okay.  We talked about the CCC camp, didn   t we?  I don   t think we have. We heard a little bit about it yesterday.  We   d be interested in hearing more about it.  32  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  Kite  B. Bockelman  Kite  All I know is what I   ve heard from my friends that were in CCC   s. There  were a bunch of them at Woodward, out there where they had that     Boiling Springs.  Boiling Springs, I think. Some of our good friends were in it at that time. The  main thing was they had quite a little bit of fighting, boxing up there at that  old   Fairview?  Slapout.  Slapout. We had a guy that was a rancher for his father-in-law; actually, he  rented the ranch west of Slapout. He was a heck of a good boxer. They also  had boxers at CCC camp. One time, he boxed a pretty big guy down there.  My dad was with them coming back home, and he got to the Beaver County  line before he came to after that guy had worked him over  laughter , but that  guy was a pretty good boxer from the CCC camp. Those fellows can tell you  about a lot of fun. I don   t know that much about it. All I know is what they  told me.  I think I heard you ask someone about entertainment, and I didn   t hear  anybody mentioning the box suppers and the literary meetings that we   d have  once a month at the school.  Did you have those at Laverne too?  No, we had them over here at this little country school. All the country  schools had these. It was the social event of the winter.  Right, we had heard a little bit about that at Gage, that that had been pretty  common. So did everybody prepare something to recite?  Oh yes, it was a big deal. We had plays. That stage seemed so big, and then  years later I wandered into that old building over there to the school. The  stage, it was still up right; you could go in. This little bitty thing you stepped  up on was the stage, and I just could not believe that it could be that way.  There was no electricity, so they had those Coleman lanterns that they hung on  wire hooks in the middle of the ceiling. They hissed, and once in a while they  would go out. It was a social event. You   d take your box, and it would be  decorated, you know, and then they   d sell it.  How would you go about decorating your boxes?  Well, one that I remember the most, I had a Kewpie doll on top of it, but crepe  paper was real popular in those days. It was cheap and colorful, and you  could decorate with it, and do that sort of thing.  What was a good price you would get?  33  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  Kite  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  Kite  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  Oh goodness, I don   t remember. Do you remember?  No.  Twenty-five or thirty-five cents, something like that.  Something like that.  That would be a high bid?  Yeah.  I imagine fifty cents would have been a lot.  Then they   d always have contests: the man with the dirtiest feet or the  stinkiest feet.  Who judged that?   You judged by a penny a vote. Or the prettiest girl. His uncle was a very  fastidious man. You couldn   t have found one better. He got the prize one  time of the dirtiest feet, I think. They said he was so embarrassed  But during  those hard times, people still had good times, and there were a lot of Sunday  dinners, family Sunday dinners. That was one thing we never did do, because  we had no family. I know in his family, he went about every Sunday to  different homes, didn   t you?  Well, I don   t know; we went pretty often.  That was the get together, and it kept the families together and the  neighborhoods.  So it was more than just family, neighbors would get together.  Even in our early married years, we were still doing some of that with friends,  about once a month. Some Sundays, we   d just rotate with our dinners that we  would go and have, and all of us would get together. At one time, we played  dominoes, I think, until our kids got big enough that when they went under the  card table they   d get tall enough.  They   d lift up.  They   d lift up the table. They   d all be playing around. We did do that a  bunch, but people made their own entertainment. I heard them talking about,  was he talking about the parties? I   m getting two things mixed up, because we  went to the deal at Guymon for the retired teachers, and some of this was  talked about there.  I think that   s where they talked about that.  34  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  B. Bockelman  V. Bockelman  B. Bockelman  Yeah, the party games.  Yeah, we talked a little bit about party games last night, but we   ve heard  mention of a couple of games that were popular, like Two Deep.  Yes, I guess it was here, and Skip to My Lou.  I went to Missouri for grade school. I think I was in about the fourth grade.  My grandpa was about to die up there. My great big family of girls and one  boy, and they kind of took turns to take care of him. We went up to take our  turn, so I went to grade school there for about a month or something. Those  Missouri people are rough. When they played those games that you   re talking  about, they didn   t touch you; they pushed you down to the ground.  It was a blood sport, huh?  I know what I was thinking about. We played a game in school called Black  Man, which you could not do now, even label it that.  Right. How did that work?  Well, there were two teams, and you tried to go across, and the other team  tried to catch you, and they hit you in the middle of the back. I don   t know, it  seems like they had to hit you three times. I know it was a pretty rough game.  That   s probably the one I was talking about up there in Missouri. They pushed  me down to the ground   Laughter   I   m just curious; when was the first time that you saw an African American  person? Do you remember? I know there sure weren   t many out here.  Back in those days, in such a little town as Laverne, they were not allowed to  stay past sun down. That was one of the laws at that time. I didn   t think  anything about it. I didn   t think anything about it when we were in Alabama,  and the Jim Crow laws were rampant at that time, and the separate restrooms.  It was just accepted, I guess. There were no African Americans in this area.  When we were riding from here to Alabama, we made two or three trips back,  both of us, and I forgot what state we were coming through, but there was a  black, which she wasn   t real black, but she looked like she was dark colored  all right. Boy, she was about the prettiest girl that you   d ever run into. I don   t  know whether she was all Negro. She might have been all Negro, but she was  sure a good-looking woman. She had class. You could just tell. Some people  show class off, and some people try to avoid class, but she showed that she had  class, to me.  What was different about it, she was riding in the same car we were, and there  didn   t seem to be any differentiation, but ordinarily there was. We were in an  old town called Ozark, Alabama   Fort Rucker   and there was the black side  35  Kite  B. Bockelman  Kite  B. Bockelman  Kite  B. Bockelman  Paustenbaugh  Kite  of town and then the other side. There was a high fence between the two, the  schools, the churches, and everything. They had their own restaurants and  everything. As a young person, I didn   t have sense enough to know anything  different. There really were no minorities in this area. I   d almost say   and  it   s still sort of that way. I mean there   s no problem with it, but we   re pretty  much Protestant here. Now we have the Hispanic influence that has come in,  and these people have no place for their faith, the Catholic faith, unless they  want to travel thirty or forty miles to a church. It seems a sad thing. In  Laverne now, the Methodist Church there just in the last week or two brought  in a young associate pastor who is bilingual. They are having a Spanish  service Sunday evenings for our Hispanic population that has come into  Laverne with the hog farms. I think it   s a step forward. I had a little  discussion with a friend recently about this, and most of them are learning  English, trying to in a foreign environment. It   d be just like if we   d go.  Anyway, he said,    Well I was here first, so they can just learn my language.    I  said,    On that premise, why don   t you speak Indian?     Laughter  I may have  lost a friend, I don   t know.  You made a good point.  I thought it was a good point.  We   re going to have to hit the road. This is pretty abrupt.  Well, I was hoping you   d stay for lunch.  I   ll stay, but she   ll have to come back and pick me up   Laughter   Well I hope we   ve helped you out.  Oh, you have.  In more ways than one.  -------  -------  
