 Paustenbaugh, and it is Friday, November 16th at about 1:15  in the afternoon. I   m at the home of Mary Leidigh here in Stillwater, and we  are meeting today to talk about the dust bowl and depression days in  Oklahoma. The way that we like to get these interviews started is to have you  state your name, and also to spell it out, and then if you could tell me when  you were born and where you were born.  Well, this is Mary Leidigh, L-E-I-D-I-G-H. I was born in Manhattan, Kansas  on June 18, 1912.  Tell me where your family was before they were in Kansas, and then how they  came to be in Oklahoma.  My mother and father both graduated from Kansas State University in  Manhattan, and after they married, they moved to College Station, Texas,  where my father was an assistant in the Texas experiment station. The first 18  years or so of my life were spent, basically, in College Station. I was born in  Manhattan on one of those good old hot days, and moved to College Station.  Then when Texas Tech was established in 1925, my father went as dean of  agriculture at the university.  So you moved out to Lubbock?  So we moved out to Lubbock. I went to school in Lubbock and to Texas Tech  at the university, and then to Austin, Texas. In between there, I had a dietetic  internship in Oklahoma City. That was a year in those days. Then I did my  master   s degree at the University of Texas. Right after that, Ed Morrison, who  was the incoming president at Panhandle State, hired me to be the head of  home economics at PAMC, so that   s how I got to Oklahoma.  Okay, so the name of that school had been Panhandle A M College?  Yes.  Okay, I didn   t realize that. I wanted to back up to about what you said about  both of your parents receiving degrees from Kansas State. Your mother must  have been among the first women to graduate?  5  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  She was with extension but she went to Columbia University.  Yes, in New York.  She did not do her master   s thesis, but this was her post-bachelor   s degree.  Dad was working for the experiment station in Kansas. There are some funny  stories about that, but I won   t go into that. Weekends, they   d get together  somewhere.  Between New York and Kansas?  No, this is in Kansas at that time.  Oh, once she was in Kansas, okay. Well, how many siblings did you have?  I had one brother and one sister.  Did they also attend Texas Tech or another university?  They were at Texas Tech, both of them. My sister was in home economics,  and my brother was in mechanical engineering.  It sounds like education must have been a very strong theme in your home.  Education was a very important part of the whole thing. My sister taught  home economics in Texas. That was vocational home economics. Of course, I  taught at PAMC. It   s really, really, important.  I would guess growing up, that it never occurred to you that you wouldn   t go  to college at one point. It was just an assumption.  No, it didn   t occur to me. In fact, I   m amazed at how we went to school in  those days. It was expensive. It was expensive because there was nothing  provided in the way of scholarships and so forth. Oh, I did receive a  scholarship to the University of Texas, but that was for my master   s degree.  At that time, did they have any kind of a program at Texas Tech where they  gave a fee waver or fee reduction to the children of faculty?  As far as I know, they didn   t.  They didn   t, okay.  The biggest thing that happened was that the banks all accepted their monthly  checks, when there was really, really depression. I   m sure they took off some  there, but they did get paid.  Now what year did you graduate from Texas Tech?  6  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  1934.  So you entered school after the stock market crashed in    29.  1930.  So were you the oldest in your family?  Yeah.  That   s amazing that your parents were able to do that.  Well, Mother and Dad   as I said, I really do not know how they managed to  send us to school. Of course, I did a little part time stenography work. I went  to business school in the summer to learn shorthand so I could do that.  So you were pretty enterprising. You had to be, huh?  You had to be.  I assume you would have lived at home during the dust bowl years.  I lived at home. Both my brother and sister lived at home, and not too far from  the campus in those days.  So that was pretty convenient then.  Well, and then they got me to Oklahoma City by car for the dietetic internship.  I came home the first Christmas by train, from Oklahoma City to Amarillo to  Lubbock, which was a pain in the neck.  I bet it was.  It was cold, and it was a long trip.  So did you do your internship in 1934 and 1935?  Yes.  Is that right after you got out of school?  Right after I got out of school.  Was that in a hospital setting?  Yes.  And what hospital were you at?  7  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  The plain old main University Hospital and we were at the Children   s Hospital  and also St. Anthony   s. We were there at St. Anthony   s for about six weeks to  give a different kind of service that the University didn   t have. And of course,  at that point, I can remember very distinctly that my assignment was wherever  you put out baby bottles and so forth.  Oh, okay, in the nursery.  Sealed up supposedly tight, as far as wind was concerned and dust, but there  was lots of dust at that time, between    34 and    35. You could look out the  window, and you could just barely see across the street.  So you must have been in Oklahoma City in April of 1935, on the day that they  call Black Sunday. Do you remember what that was like?  No, other than the fact that I was doing bottle preparations. We had to be sure  they were clean and sanitary, and then fill them according to orders.  So in 1935, you left Oklahoma City and went to the University of Texas and  got your master   s degree?  Yes, I got that in    37.  Did you have to finish up some of your classes from Goodwell?  No, I was all ready.  Did you go into that master   s program thinking that you probably didn   t want  to be a practicing dietitian and that you would rather teach?  No, this was just one of the things that came along, and it was a good  opportunity. This was a Saturday morning in the first part of September. I had  an interview with Dr. Morrison, and at ten o   clock in the morning, I took a  catalog and some literature that he had, and I went to the beauty shop, which  was what I was supposed to be doing that morning, read the catalog, went  home and talked to my parents, and told him that I would go. We moved me  on that following Sunday by car to Goodwell.  So what was Goodwell like when you arrived there?  Goodwell was out on the plain. I really had very little time to figure out where  Goodwell was. Then, on Monday morning, I was enrolling students that I  didn   t know. Of course, there were new students, and there weren   t all that  many students at that time. Part of the reason was because of the dust bowl.  The parents did not have money. In those days, the NYA helped.  What does that stand for?  National Youth Association. A lot of them couldn   t have gone to school at all  8  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  if they hadn   t had that. But they had that, and also a job on campus.  So the NYA provided scholarship money?  I don   t know whether you   d call it scholarship, but provided money for  students. I had this one gal; I saw her husband yesterday out at Meridian. She  was an incoming senior. It was her final year, and she helped me with  enrollment, because I really had no idea what I was doing. I knew enough  about college enrollment and that sort of thing, but I did not know the students  and what they had had before and so forth, so it was an interesting day. My  mother told me later that she and dad had stayed with the Morrisons Sunday  night after they moved me into one of the dormitories. She said,    You walked  into that room.    I said,    Yes, and I thought I was going right on out.    It was  not as big as even half of this room. It had a bed and a closet and a lavatory in  the corner, so it was adequate. Later, I moved into a different dorm, but it was  good.  Did most of the students that attended school there live in the dormitory?  Most of them. Most of them had to, because Goodwell was not that big a  place.  I just wondered if at any point it had been larger than it is today, because it   s  still not very big.  No, it   s really good now. There were two dormitories and Hugh Strong, which  was an auditorium where the band and music people practiced, and you could  have assemblies. Then there was the office building that also had classrooms  in it. There was a building which had home economics in the ground floor,  and upstairs was a library of sorts, which they could also have dances up there.  I was always afraid that the floor was going to be gone by the next Monday  morning. The campus, one of the things that Ed Morrison did was plant  Chinese Elms, which grow very quickly, and there   s a statue on campus. I  checked on that, and it   s still there, but in a different place, the Sower. I could  look out the window of my room, which was my second room that was bigger,  and if I could see the Sower, it was a pretty good day. If I couldn   t see him, I  knew it was going to be dusty all day. That was a good guide for what was  going on. Everybody wore something over their face on those kinds of days.  I was just going to ask you.  And of course, they covered their head. Even the fellows wore things on their  face. The enrollment was basically agriculture and teaching and home  economics at that point, if I got into the classroom, which was on the ground  floor, there was a droplight over the desk, and that was all of the light that was  in the room. If I could see the students out there just in that room, then that  was a good day. Ed Morrison, as he took over, sealed up all the windows. If  there   d been a fire, we   d just have to knock them out and get out. It helped  tremendously, as far as the dust, but even then, that dust was just everywhere.  9  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  So it could be so bad that in your classroom, between the dust blowing outside  and inside and the light that you couldn   t actually see some of the students in  your class?  In the back row. Of course, the lighting was not good. Those Chinese Elms,  the last summer I was there or so, all the boys had gone to war, and Mrs.  Morrison, the president   s wife, myself, and one or two other wives, because  this was a family out there, we trimmed the Chinese Elms, climbing up in  them, and getting them trimmed down. As a result of that, in the cafeteria,  which was in the basement of the main building, we made sand plum jelly.  Sugar was rationed, but we could get some, and have that for the winter. I   m  sure we made other things, but sand plum jelly I particularly remember.  Before that, by the time that the girls were there and very few fellows, we  constructed some uniforms, which you could buy now, but couldn   t in those  days, for the girls. They went out and rode on the harvesting equipment. That  was home economics where they did that. Also in home economics, this was  interesting for me; they had a living room, which was a part of the set up. The  girls decided they wanted to paper the walls, so we papered the walls, and we  reupholstered a divan, which fortunately, my sister had just got done doing it  with her high school, so I had some knowledge of what I was doing at that  point, otherwise I wouldn   t have known anything about it. We had a real good  time. The faculty was limited. There were a couple people in music, English,  and math, and agriculture of course, but everybody pulled together, whether  you were a housewife or whatever you might happen to be. Oh, I had one  picture that I   ve loaned to somebody, and I can   t find it. I guess it hasn   t come  back. This one     Oh my gosh      well, you can see where the road way was, and this one was even more  graphic than that.  That   s amazing.  We went to Guymon, probably once a week, to a beauty shop in those days  and had evening dinner, which was maybe ten miles away, a real big blow out.  Every once in a while, we   d read in the paper; see we were on the main line of  the Rock Island. The paper came on the train; it was thrown off the train. We  would see that there was going to be something really good as far as plays or  something like that. We   d drive down to Amarillo after school was out on  Friday, spend the night, get up the next morning and shop, and drive home.  All this time, the weather was just fine. Before you could leave Amarillo, they  were beginning to tell you that there was going to be a roller, and sure enough,  we went home in a dust storm. It came up just that much.  What was that like, driving through that?  Well, you just hoped that you knew where that ditch was.  10  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  And that you didn   t wind up in it  laughing    The person on the passenger side would be guiding, and the other one would  be guiding over here, and the poor driver was driving. You didn   t go at any  rate of speed, because you never knew who you might meet or whether you  were really on the road.  So it   s kind of like driving in whiteout conditions, like in a blizzard.  Yes, the same kind of thing.  Was that just a once in a while trip to go to Amarillo?  Yes, once in a while. You couldn   t get gasoline; you had to save up. You  planned ahead and hoped that the weather was going to be good, and it was  that particular time. I remember that one distinctly, because it was so bad.  When we got home, the nurse, we had a university nurse, she went into her  house, and although all the windows had been shut and sealed, she could not  see the pattern on her quilt that was on her bed. It was that bad. Towards the  end, I think about the last time I really saw a roller coming in; it was a  perfectly good day, much brighter than this. You could see this bank of clouds  over here. I took pictures of that, which I didn   t find today, but I have. It  wasn   t as bad as some, because it just went on through. A lot of times, those  storms just lasted and lasted and lasted, which was really bad.  When people would see the rollers coming in, was there any type of  preparations that they could make?  Not a thing, just get out of it I guess. Some of those earlier ones took all the  paint off of any car that you might have out in the territory, but there was  really nothing you could do to stop it. Not a thing, it was just going to be. A  lot of times, even though it came in as a roller, a lot of times it just stayed  about this same deal, but not as bright as this. It was cloudy. It was an  experience.  Oh, one other thing; when we were talking about the Chinese Elms, Ed  Morrison put in an irrigation system on campus, realizing that they had plenty  of water. They would pump and just flood the main campus. Actually, as  people came to the campus, they were amazed at the trees and the grass that  we had, when everything else was like this.  Right, that must have been a pretty amazing sight.  Well, it was encouraging to the people in the community, and to that part of  Oklahoma, because they knew that things could grow then. That is one of the  things that helped people to be encouraged.  Now these are more pictures from out in the panhandle?  11  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Yes. I don   t remember what that one was.  Oh, these are marvelous.  Well, I had a real good experience there, and good students.  Well, how many classes would you teach in a typical semester?  Well, I had about three I guess. They were early in the morning, about 7:30,  8:30, and about 10:30. Now, I did not teach clothing. Well, I did indirectly.  For instance, when we got to the knitting, I asked one of the wives who knits.  Have you talked to Marion Lowery?  No, I haven   t.  Well she was my knitting instructor.  Oh, does she live here in Stillwater?  Yes she does. Mrs. Robert Lowery. He died just about six months, eight, ten  months ago. Have you talked to a Mrs. Chiflet?  Oh, Ina Lassiter, her mother?  Yeah, Ina Lassiter   s mother.  No, I know that she   s out in Hooker.  She only lived in the panhandle; of course, she still lives there, so I shouldn   t  say that.  But she moved back in 1940, right? Yes, I talked to Mrs. Lassiter earlier this  week.  Ina, she   s my beauty operator; she asked me some time ago if you had talked  to me, and I said no you hadn   t.  Yes, and she told me that you had wonderful photographs, and you do. I know  that you said you would go into Guymon sometimes on the weekend to dinner  and to a movie, is that right?  Yeah, we might see a movie. Everybody would get their hair done that had to  have it or do any shopping they had to do.  Were there things to buy at that point?  Oh yes, clothes. Most of the faculty probably came with basic clothes. Ethel  Holter and Helen Muller came from teaching at Fairfax High School. The  fellows that were in band and music, I   m sure had their basic thing, but you  12  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  know, you   d go to Guymon, and you could buy a hairnet or toothpaste, things  like that. There was a grocery store in Goodwell, which we couldn   t have  lived without if we hadn   t had it. There was also a garage where you could put  your cars, so they wouldn   t get the paint taken off of them if you left it there.  Now did you have a car during this time?  I didn   t have a car in the beginning. My folks brought me to Goodwell, and it  was only after I   d been there two or three years. Mother was ill, so I took a  bus and went to Lubbock. On vacation time, I would take the bus. At  Christmas time, I took the train. So this limited what you could do, of course.  For instance, one time, I remember I was home, and I had a dental  appointment. I   m sure there were dentists in Guymon, but I was home with a  dentist I   d had before. I didn   t come home and I didn   t come home, and my  mother began to get worried about what happened to me. I said,    Well, he said  I needed to have this done, and he   d better have done it right then, because  otherwise, I   d be in Goodwell again and he wouldn   t be able to take care of it.     Business was not that rushing anywhere.  What other types of things would you do for fun?  We had a monthly dinner. Faculty came in, and there was a rotation. The men  took care of it one month, and the women took care of it the other month.  And that was the whole thing, setting up for it and making the food?  We ate in the home economics living room. There was bridge and dominoes.  We always had one young man that we told that the meal was at six o   clock so  he   d be sure and be there by 6:30, when it really began. I remember one  turkey dinner we were having, and then men were responsible for it. It was  cooked in home economics, so indirectly; I had to know something about it.  They ordered this turkey from Amarillo, and it was frozen solid, besides  which, it was a New York, which you probably wouldn   t know. That meant  that the gizzard and the liver and everything else was still inside. It had been  separated, but it was left inside. You had to get it thawed to get that stuff out  to make gravy and dressing and everything, which was really a deal, because it  didn   t get there until later Friday evening, and it was going to be on Saturday.  Sometimes, we would hire one or two of the girls to do the main cooking and  preparation and so forth, so that we didn   t do all of it. But we were a family.  Were there any signs to you out there that things were starting to get better,  that the dust bowl period was ending?  Yes, there were fewer rollers that came in. You know, if they don   t get some  rain out there, they   re going to have some more.  Yeah, I was out there last week, and it was really dry.  Uh-huh, very dry. I don   t know, do they still water the campus?  13  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  I don   t know. I was not in Goodwell, but I was out in that direction.  They said this morning that they would possibly have some rain out there. But  I   ve been watching it, and they could be having another dust bowl if they don   t  get some rain.  What happened when you left Goodwell? Was that in 1942 that you left there?  Let   s see,    42, I went back to the University Hospital as assistant dietitian at  that point, and I stayed there for a year or a little more. Dr. Purdie from  OAMC was down on a fieldtrip, and she asked me to come for an interview. I  rode the bus from Oklahoma City up here. It was hotter than Hades. It was  full of young men, ROTC   s. We stopped out at the nine-mile corner down  there. We   d have to wait for the bus. Finally, when it came, there was just  room for everybody to stand up, so I stood up all the way from nine-mile  corner to Stillwater.  Now nine-mile corner, is that the intersection of 33 and 177 are?  Yeah.  So I guess your interview here was successful then.  Yes.  And have you just been in Stillwater ever since then, since 1944?  Basically.  Wow, that   s a long time to live in one place, isn   t it?  Yes, and Stillwater, I wish it   d quit growing. It was a nice little town. I can   t  believe all of this. Have you looked at the campus lately? They   re talking  about tearing down whichever one of them it is of the residence halls.  Oh yes.  It   s amazing.  It is.  Stout Hall is not being used. I don   t know what they   re doing with it, and so is  Murray. I remember distinctly one day when he was here.  Governor Murray?  Yeah. I remember when he was out at Goodwell too.  Was this    Alfalfa Bill?     14  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Yeah. When he was out at Goodwell, we had to be sure and have onion  sandwiches.  Onion sandwiches?  Yeah, he just loved onion sandwiches.  Bread with onions in between them; that   s it?  Yeah, as far as I know.  I can   t imagine such a thing. I don   t think I   d want to be around someone  after they   d had that kind of meal  laughing .  It was quite a deal for him to be there, and the same thing when Dr. Willham  was there. I remember distinctly the day that he was there. I was having the  girls prepare chicken. I can   t believe this, but they had chicken that they  weren   t using for anything; they weren   t even producing eggs with them. One  of the things we had to do was kill the chicken. One of the gals said,    Well,  there   s nothing to that,    and she took a hold of that chicken, and grrrr, like  that.  Wrung its neck?  Wrung its neck. And then, the other ones did not have the strength or  whatever to do that, so they wanted to chop it. Well, that was fine, except the  hatchet they had was not very sharp, so we had chicken flopping around all  over the place. Nothing like learning   well they learned.  I bet that   s the kind of thing that would be hard to forget, even after all these  years, huh?  That chicken.  So when you came to Oklahoma A M, were you hired to teach dietetics within  the Home Ec. Department?  No, not specifically. I taught the freshman foods classes, and that   s what I did  basically, was freshman foods. I did have some diet, but I don   t know what it  was called. It wouldn   t have been diet and health, but something similar to  that, because we had a nurse who was qualified to teach health and take care of  all of the shots and everything else that people had to have. Mine was  basically foods. I had one class that was called housewifery, I guess it was, in  which they learned how to write a check. Now that sounds silly, but there  were a lot of those girls that did not have bank accounts, their parents    hadn   t  had bank accounts where they could put money and draw it out, so they had to  learn how to write a check. That really flabbergasted me, and then I began  thinking about their money being in their dad   s pocket. They had not had it  where they could control it themselves. These were housewives. There were  15  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  women in that class, that summertime, that were older than me. They were  learning how to fix their electric iron and change the washer in the lavatory,  and do things like that.  They had just never learned it.  Yeah, and the husband didn   t know it either, because he was working on farm  equipment. He wasn   t working on things around the house and what to do  when the roller window shade wouldn   t work. It was real interesting. How to  read a meter for the electricity.  It   s sort of like basic survival skills.  Yeah, it   s called housewifery.  Now a days, that would be really politically incorrect, wouldn   t it, to have a  class with that type name?  Yeah, you   d probably have to have a license to do all that, but after all, they  were out there in the boondocks so to speak. If you got somebody to repair,  they   d have to come from Guymon, which is ten miles, or Amarillo, which is  much further. It   s just like the paper. The paper was thrown off of the Rock  Island once a day, and you were lucky if it got there. You could keep up with  radio, of course. I remember very distinctly the day that war was declared  when Pearl Harbor was bombed.  What was the reaction in Goodwell when that happened?  Everybody was for it. Of course, that meant that the young men all went to the  war. Just about everybody was there. The men that were on the campus  faculty or absolutely essential, of course, were granted pardon, or if they had     I forget how many people   to support. We had been over to the cafeteria for  lunch, and came into the dormitory. I turned on the radio, because I was going  to listen to the symphony orchestra from New York, and they interrupted it,  right bang, to say that Pearl Harbor had been bombed.  That must have been a pretty amazing day.  Yes. Well, you   ve got more questions, and I   m just raving on here.  Oh no, you   re sharing lots of really good information with me. I know that the  town of Goodwell itself is still pretty small, and it was smaller at the time you  were out there, and I don   t know how much contact you had with people in the  town, but I know that public assistance programs were pretty wide spread  during those days. What types of public assistance were available out there  for people?  I don   t know. I   m sure that for farmers there was something; there had to be.  Well, I told you there was grocery and a service station with a big garage and a  16  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  post office, and I guess there was a beer joint, probably, which I never got into.  I   m sure there was something for Saturday nights. There were two churches, a  Baptist and a Methodist. I don   t know if there was anything for the Catholics  or not. It was real interesting for students who came from down state, which  could be Clinton. The registrar came from Clinton, I think. I don   t know how  long, 35 anyway, and he would recruit some fellows from his home part of the  state to come out. We also had students who came, as they did here in  Stillwater, from eastern states, New York, Connecticut. Some of them had  quite a bit of trouble adjusting to our family   s style. Where they were like this,  back in the east, you just beat your way around. Well, we didn   t do that out  there. We helped each other if there was something that had to be done and so  forth.  The weather is going to change; I   m telling you right now. We haven   t had  any birds for about three weeks. I have a good place to feed, but we have birds  on the feeder today. That means they   re coming in out of the fields.  Does that mean that it   s going to get cold?  Yeah, that means it   s going to be cold. Thank goodness, I don   t like this  November weather that   s not natural.  I know; it feels like it should be September still. Do you feel that you were  changed in any way by living through the dust bowl era?  Well, I think I was changed in just what I was saying; we all united to help  each other. That housewifery class, I know that changed me, because I had no  concept of people like that. I had lived in a scholarly family, and Mother and  Dad had seen that we had done this, and knew how to do it and to take care of  money and put money in the bank and how to get it out. It was really  interesting.  So it was kind of an introduction to how the other half lived.  Yeah, it really was. One time, when I   d been there several years, we took a  bus trip down state to Oklahoma City, and doing that, we went by Stillwater to  see the home economics here, and for me to encourage some girls to come to  school here, and they did. I also had girls on that trip that had never been on  an elevator. I had to go out and get them off of the hotel elevator, because  they were just punching the buttons and just riding up and down.  It was a novelty, huh?  Yeah, it was different.  Did you stay at OSU until you retired?  Yes.  17  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  Leidigh  Paustenbaugh  And when was that?  I don   t know when I retired, for heavens sakes. I retired at 65. I think I was  65 when I retired. I   m going to be 90 in June, so you can figure that out.  So you   ve been retired for a while.  Yeah, about 75, I think it is. I think it was about 75 when I retired.  So is there anything that I haven   t asked you about that you   d like to tell me  about from that time? Did I pretty much cover all of the bases there?  I think we   ve covered the bases, and probably some that we shouldn   t have  covered.  I don   t know; you   ve had an interesting life.  -------  -------  
