 Paustenbaugh  Eells  Hardison  Today is Thursday November 8, 2001. We   re in Gate, Oklahoma, and we   re in  the home of Mrs. Lillian Eells, and we   re going to be interview Mrs. Eells and  Mrs. Luella Hardison, and I am also here with Steve Kite. Will you give us  some general biographical information about you? For the tape, I would like  you to state your name, and then tell me when you were born and where you  were born.  I was born right here in this country in 1906, September 25.  Wow, okay. And you Mrs. Hardison?  I was born in this country too  laughing , but north of here on my father   s  farm.  Okay, in Oklahoma or Kansas?  In Oklahoma.  When were you born?  On June 10, 1913.  She   s a young chicken.  I was going to say, she   s the whippersnapper here, huh  laughter ? Now  where were your families from, and what brought them to Oklahoma?  My families were from Kansas. My dad was from Turon and my mother was  from McPherson.  What brought them down here to Oklahoma?  Oh, what do you call it? Filing on that home? You know Luella, what I   m  trying to get at.  I think they weren   t old enough to have made the run into Oklahoma during  the Cherokee Strip, but those people that couldn   t clear up their land, wouldn   t  5  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  live on it a year for it, they went back to the state   well, it wasn   t a state then;  it was called Indian Territory.  So then they were able to file a claim on that land.  Uh-huh.  What was your father   s occupation?  Farmer.  My dad?  Farmer?  Farmers, yes.  Did your mothers help on the farm? Is that what their primary occupation  was?  Mother taught school.  Oh, okay, and did she continue to teach school after she was married and had  children?  Yes, but not after she had children.  But up until the time she had children she continued to teach school?  Uh-huh.  Does that school building still exist today?  No, it doesn   t.  So it was like a one-room schoolhouse with children in lots of different grades.  You should have gone to Ditch Valley Club yesterday. We refurbished the old  Star Valley schoolhouse. It   s beautiful.  That sounds like a project that must have taken a long time.  Well, the gal was getting the funds for us when the state had this money or  wherever it came from, and they didn   t know just what to do with it. They   d  call her and she said,    I   ve got a place for it.     Now how far away from here is that?  Well, what is it? About nine miles. The old settlers had their own irrigation  6  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  ditch. There   s a sign up there with the date on it, and I think it said 1849. That  sounds ridiculous, but.  Yeah, that sounds kind of early.  It was early. According to old Sage and Sod, I think it was they called it Post.  The district was Woodward County, and it was Post something. I never could  understand why the Post was there. I believe the address was Yelton,  Oklahoma.  Yelton, huh? That   s not a town that exists today at all, is it? Well, one of the  other questions that we have that   s sort of biographical in nature is the  number of siblings that you have in your family.  Well, there were seven of us.  Wow, and where did you fall into that?  Well, from Rosston out there, it was what, eight miles north. Eight or nine,  I   m not quite sure. My father   s holdings were in two different sections, five  and eight.  Were they contiguous sections?  Well, one was across the road from the other one. What do we live in now?  It   s called Kiowa. My dad lived in Garfield, which was the county just north.  The road separated the two, and the 100th meridian was the boundary line.  Well that   s interesting. Now in your family, were you the oldest?  Yes.  You were the oldest. Were your younger siblings boys, girls? How many were  there of each?  There were four boys and three girls.  How about you? How many children were in your family?  Do you just mean in my mother and father   s family?  Right, how many brothers and sisters did you have?  There were eight.  Eight of you; and were you the oldest?  No, I have a brother that   s two years older than me, and he   s still living. He  had his 97th birthday in October, and I had mine in September. He was 97 and  7  Paustenbaugh  Eels  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Hardison  Eells  I was 95.  Well congratulations.  The two oldest of the eight children are the ones that are still alive today. The  rest of them are gone.  That   s amazing. Why do you think that happened?  Because we had to work and wait on the whole darn bunch  laughter .  That made you a lot tougher, huh?  I think so.  Well, what was typical day like in your household growing up? Did you get up  with the sun and do farm chores?  Oh, my dad was an early riser, and he had to have his hot biscuits every  morning no matter what. He had me up plenty early. It was nothing for him to  get up at four o   clock or so of a morning, but we went to bed with the  chickens, because we never had very good light fixtures back in those days.  You couldn   t see to read. Anyway, we didn   t have much reading to do   There weren   t newspapers and other things like that?  Well, we did without a lot of things back then.  So you would get up and do chores, and then you went to school?  Oh, dad gave an acre of his land, and that was where the schoolhouse was, just  north of us. He donated an acre of land to the district to return back to him  when they didn   t use it anymore, and it was just about a quarter of a mile from  home. We walked to school all through the grades.  Now how many children came to that schoolhouse?  Oh my, that   s kind of hard to tell. At first, the schoolhouse was full, but it just  dwindled down. People began to leave, until there weren   t very many.  Towards the last, there weren   t really enough to have a school. To tell you just  how many, I just don   t have an idea. I know all of the desks were full. We  had quite a little crowd at the beginning. I don   t know how many. I don   t  think I ever thought about how many there were in there. Probably 20, don   t  you imagine Louella?  I expect.  Something like that. I   m not too sure. I don   t know.  8  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  The first year I taught at Prairie Dell, I had 23 kids in all eight grades.  Okay, so the school went from first grade through eighth grade.  Yes, all through the grades, first to the eighth.  What did people do that wanted to go beyond the eighth grade?  Well, there used to be a Lawrence Friends Academy, and it was three miles  from home. When my oldest brother graduated, Dad gave him the car, the  only car we ever owned, and I started in walking. I walked three miles there  and three back. Finally, Dad got me a horse. I rode a horse then  laughter .  So you would ride your horse to school and just tie it up until you were ready  to come home?  Yes, ride it back home. Before he did that, I walked six miles a day.  Oh my gosh, that   s amazing  Well, and on a day like this when it was so cold  and windy.  Oh, yes. I   ve had my collar freeze around my neck from my breath; it   d be so  cold.  I can   t imagine. How about you? Did you go to the same school?  No, but my dad gave a plot of land if they would put that school in the center  of the district. It set on the high hill right in the pasture, a half a mile from us.  Well that was close, compared to three miles away.  But mother taught that school.  Okay, so that was where she taught until she started raising her own family.  Did you also go to the Lawrence Friends Academy?  No, but my mother did. That   s how she had a teaching certificate.  Oh, so when she graduated from there, she was able to get her certificate?  Well, you took an examination, but you   d better have had that training.  Right, in order to pass the examination. Was your family life pretty much the  same? Did your father get up very early in the morning, and you did chores  before you went to school?  Yes. Those children were a milking machine.  Now how many head of cattle did you have?  9  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Well, it varied.  But enough to keep you busy  laughing ?  Well, we all got an education. They all went to college. It was the old cows  that put them there.  So all seven of the children went to college?  Yes.  That   s amazing  Now you told me that you attended Oklahoma A M, right?  Where did the other family members go to college?  Part of them went to Panhandle State, one went to OSU, and one went to  Weatherford to Southwestern.  And in your family, did you all go to college?  That   s what I was talking about where I walked, was high school. This was  grade school that my dad gave the acre of land, was all through the grades.  Right, but did you or any of your brothers and sisters go to college after you  finished high school?  No, they did not. They didn   t have the wherewith to get started  laughing .  Well, that   s an expensive proposition.  Yes, there were none of them that got to go on to college. I would have loved  to, but it was impossible at the time. I had an invalid mother that had this  deformed arthritis. After Dad died, I brought her in my home, and I took care  of her for eight years. She was pretty helpless. She was in a wheelchair.  Well that must have been a very painful disease.  Oh, it was. She suffered terrible. It was awful.  What kinds of things did you do for fun out here?  Well, there wasn   t much time for fun. They played a little baseball.  Just pick-up games of baseball?  Yes, kind of. Sometimes you   d have a school room that was full of children  that were about the same age, well they could have some real good teams, but  then as they graduated and these littler ones came along, they weren   t so great.  They didn   t have the talent, huh  laughing .  10  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Hardison  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Well they weren   t as old.  What kinds of things did you do for fun, or was it the same?  Well, my dad was always pretty active, and he was out a romping and a  playing with us kids from the time until we got up a few years. We   d play  Annie Over the Housetop, and we   d run races. We did all kinds of things  around home for our own amusement. We had to get by with homemade toys  a whole lot.  What kinds of toys?  Well, you take a plastic piece and put a cross on the end of it and take a wheel  and get behind it and make it roll for miles  laughter . Does that sound like  fun? We thought it was  laughter .  It was a toy.  We did a lot of things like that, and played hide and go seek and Annie Over,  throw the ball over the house and line up with different ones on each side. I  don   t know. They were all outdoor games that we did, mostly. My dad was  really active when he was growing up. He was just one of us.  Okay, so he   d get out there and play with you?  Yes, he got out there, and he just was one of the biggest monkeys that ever was  among us kids  laughing . We had a lot of fun growing up. We had to make  our own way and find the best we could to get by. That was our way of life.  There weren   t any of us that got to go on to college. We weren   t that wealthy.  Well, but it seems like you   re a very happy person nonetheless, that you   ve had  a good life without that.  Well, that   s the only way to look at life. You   ve got to be, or else you   ll be  down in the dumps  laughter .  That   s right. Well tell me how old you were when you got married.  I was 22. I should have had more sense  laughter    That   s not an unreasonable age to get married. How did you meet your  husband?  On a blind date  laughter .  Well I want to hear more about that.  Oh, I think it was on a special holiday that he showed up. I knew of him; I had  seen him a few times. He kept coming back, and I kept a turning him down,  11  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  and he   d come back and I   d take him over again  laughter .  What was the difference in your age?  Oh, six months. Yes, he was six months older than me.  So you hadn   t gone to school together, he had come into the community later  on?  No, he lived too far away from me. I suspect he lived eight miles away from  me, and I didn   t get that far away from home  laughter .  And how about you Mrs. Hardison? How old were you when you got married,  and how did you meet your husband?  Well, I was born in    13, and I was married in    37.  Okay, so you were 24.  Almost. I was married in April, before I was 24.  How did you meet your husband?  Oh, he worked for Jacob Wolf that had settled in Ditch Valley, I don   t know  when, but way back there. My brother and Forest Hardison worked together  for Ralph Wolf. Well, he   d come home with my brother, and that   s where I  met him.  And then it just went from there?  Well, I went with him four or five years, but I was going down to Stillwater to  school or over to Alva or somewhere else, and then I came back to Prairie Dell  to teach.  And he was still there?  And he was still around. He had gone to Alva.  To Northwestern?  Uh-huh, and I went to Stillwater to Oklahoma A M.  So did he graduate from Northwestern?  No, he didn   t graduate, but he went several years on and off. He ran track for  Alva, for Northwestern State.  So was a sprinter?  12  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Hardison  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Yes. He ran the half-mile.  Now when you got married, if you were born in 1906 and you were 22, then  you married in 1928, is that right?  1929.  1929, so you got married when times really hadn   t gotten hard yet.  Well, that was just before the dust bowl days, and I tell you, it wasn   t long  until the dust began to blow. I don   t remember. I think it was in the early  thirties when it started, wasn   t it?  Yes, it was. The first year I taught was   I think,    33.  That was the year Ray was born, and he had dust pneumonia, and we almost  lost our oldest son with dust pneumonia. We took him to a doctor down at  Laverne, and he had quite a line he gave me,       if that baby lives    til morning;  he   s got dust pneumonia.    He gave me a prescription to bathe him every few  minutes and get his temperature down and don   t miss a dose of that  medication. My mother came and sat by his bed too. We worked with him all  night. He   d been fussy all week. By morning, he roused up, and his fever left  him, and he was just a different child. There were hours and hours that we  thought we were going to lose him for sure.  Now how old was he when he got dust pneumonia?  He was a little under a year old. Since then, I   ve heard there was a cemetery  that   s just across the line over in Texas that   s full of babies, young kids that  were born in    33. I was told that the other day. I can   t remember the name he  gave me. He does surveying. It   s one of the grandchildren that my son  adopted. He does surveying work, and he said it   s just a little ways over into  Texas from here, where that cemetery is, and it is all little children born in    33.  Oh, that is so sad.  That was dust pneumonia. I can remember it very plain, because I thought for  sure that we were going to lose Ray.  Was he your only child that battled that?  He was the first and only one at that time. I have another son, Roger; he lives  at Yukon.  Now when was he born?  He was born in    41, I believe. He   s a year older than Dick. No, he   s older  than Tom.  13  Hardison  Eells  Hardison  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Eells  Hardison  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Well Tom was born in    42.  Well he was born in 1941. Roger was born in 1941.  Well Tom was born in February of    42.  So I have two sons.  So the one was born well after the times were really terrible.  Yes. We went right into the dust bowl days and the early thirties and they  extended out   oh my. Well, the bad one was in    35.  Tell me what that was like.  Ooohhh weee  I   ve got a whole description of it down there, written on that  paper. It was terrible, wasn   t it Louella?  Yes, it was.  So you were out here in    35 teaching school when that happened?  Yeah.  Yes, it rolled in, and it just looked like a storm cloud. It was so black. We  watched it roll in, did you?  Yes. And birds and jackrabbits and tumbleweeds all went ahead of the storm.  It got totally black. You couldn   t see your hand in front of your face.  The screen door at home had blown back against the cement house. We lived  in a three-room cement house. My dad was out a messing, trying to drive his  chickens in and messing around, and he was trying to get through that wall  where it blew back, and Floyd, my husband, reached out and grabbed him by  the hand and pulled him in the house, because the screen door had blew back  clear against the siding of the wall. It was that dark. It was so dark. They  brought Darrel Maffet   the first time Leona had had him out   to our place to  celebrate that night, and I think he was born in November, but she had never  taken him anywhere. This was the 14th of April in 1935, when that bad, black  dust storm hit there. That was on my sister   s birthday is the reason I  remembered it.  Now that was a Sunday that that happened, right? What did you do when  there were other   I know that was considered the worst one, but for instance,  when you were teaching school and a dust storm rolled in, how would you  handle that with all of those children that you were responsible for?  You just went right on. You didn   t have any covering over the windows.  There were just streaks of dirt from the walls. The old Prairie Dell School had  14  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Eells  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Eells  Hardison  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Eells  Hardison  windows across the east and across the north. But across the west was the  cloakroom, and there was a cloakroom or boys and one for girls, and those  doors just shook.  And the storms would come in from the west?  No, usually they came from the north  North. It was just a terrible black rolling dust.  And you couldn   t see from here to where the car is out there. It would be that  dark. You couldn   t distinguish anything.  How would the children react? Would they just go on doing their lessons or  would they get really disturbed?  No, it was an everyday thing, almost.  Yeah, it was, but yet, it was a little bit worse than an everyday thing. I  remember they took and dampened a sheet and put it over Darrel   s bed, on a  baby bed, and they wet that sheet and spread it over the top of his crib where  he was laying. I   ll tell you, it was just unbelievable. You just couldn   t believe  it. The cars would park and stop along the side of the road. They couldn   t  drive; they couldn   t see to drive. It was quite a disaster. It was just  unimaginable, wasn   t it Louella?  Yes, it was. You   d get down there to school, and you picked up your chair and  poured the sand out of it. I mean you just tipped it and the sand slid off. You  picked up your desk and it did the same.  One time, we had a little sprinkle come down through that dust, and it was  mud balls.  Oh my gosh, instead of hail you had mud balls, huh  laughing ?  Yeah, it was mud balls. It was just a sprinkle, and we hadn   t had any rain all  year, not any rain that year. That was the year of the bad dust storm. We  hadn   t had any rain.  You talked about having to dump the sand out of the chairs and the dust; how  did you go about keeping your homes clean?  You couldn   t.  You didn   t. Everybody was in the same boat, weren   t we?  Right. When you set the table, and it might be twenty minutes before you  were ready to eat, you turned the plates upside down.  15  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  So they   d be clean when you were ready to start eating?  Right, they would have been covered.  It just isn   t real to think about it now. It just isn   t real, but we know it  happened.  When you saw one of these dust storms rolling in, what kinds of things did you  do to prepare for it?  You didn   t do anything, or we didn   t.  Did you have livestock that you had to take care of in anyway?  No, you couldn   t drive them.  So you would just hope for the best when it had rolled on through.  We had a terrible time. Back then, you hung your clothes on the line. You  just couldn   t pick a day that was a fit day to wash, but we did it anyhow.  I know we did.  So what would you do? You would wash the clothes, then you would hang  them out on the line, then they would dry, and you would just beat the dust out  of them after that?  I can remember when they froze to the line, and you pried them loose and  brought them in, and you just draped them over the doors and all over  everything for them to finish drying.  I can remember, you know back then men wore heavy underwear, and we   d  bring them in off the line and stand them down the side of the heating stove   laughter . You stood them around the heating stove until they thawed out.  Well did you have family members that just gave up and left here because it  was so bad?  There weren   t any in my family, because we were all at home.  My family just toughed it out. We just stayed put.  Did you have neighbors that just packed up and left?  There were a lot of them that left, but none of my relatives took off.  There weren   t any of mine that left either.  Well do you have memories of people, I   ve heard stories of just caravans of  16  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Eells  Hardison  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  cars, with everything that the people owned packed up in the car coming  through.  That was the movement of the Okies and the Arkies.  Did you see that yourselves, of people coming through, or not really?  Well, no, because we weren   t; 64 was the only graveled highway in that area.  My dad was a horse and buggy guy. He didn   t ever drive a car to speak of.  He liked horses. Horses and mules were his cup of tea.  My dad worked mules.  It   s just like that song,    This is My Land,    you know how that goes, and we  were just going to stay by it, which we have yet to this day   That is really true. Well, one of the things that we   ve heard about during this  time is that people had encounters with gypsies and hobos. Did you?  Well, there were a few. I didn   t remember too many, but I do remember in  the earlier days that there were a few that we saw once in a while, but not very  many. I   d heard my mother speak of it in her time.  Well I can tell you an incident. I was a freshman at OSU, and they celebrated  Armistice Day, and    Alfalfa    Bill Murray was the governor of the state at that  time. It was a cold drizzly day, and we went out to Lewis Field. They had this  little platform, I don   t know why it was slow getting started, but anyway     Alfalfa Bill    Murray, he was the governor of the state at that time, and he had  on this old black overcoat, and he had his chewing tobacco, and he pulled his  chair out to the edge of the podium that he was going to stand behind, and the  crowd began to leave. They saw old Alfalfa Bill, and he was a hard-looking  fellow. He had a red handkerchief around his neck. People, they began to  leave, and pretty soon Murray stood up, and he said,    You cannot slander the  governor of the state and stay on his payroll,    and they sat down. I was a  freshman, and I was there.  He was quite a character, wasn   t he  laughter ?  He was.  He   s pretty legendary.  Well, he wrote the constitution for the state of Oklahoma.  So was that the only time that you ever saw him speak in person?  I expect it was. I   m not sure. Now when he campaigned for governor, he  walked, hitch-hiked up and down the road.  17  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  So did he come out here to campaign?  I think he   d been in Harper County, all right, because that was part of it. He   d  been all over the state.  Well, in statewide political elections at the time, did you have many political  candidates that would come out here and maybe come to a county fair or  something to campaign or did you not really see very many people?  Well, we didn   t see that many people, because transportation was not that  easy. They might come to Buffalo, but we   re 22 miles from Buffalo.  So that might be as far west as they would ever come.  Buffalo got one of the divisions of the highway, and it was in Buffalo.  We   ve also heard that in this area that there were some people that took  advantage, not in a bad way, but took advantage of government assistance  programs during the dust bowl days. Did you know people that were receiving  government assistance, or did your family ever take any of the assistance that  was offered?  Oh, yes. As I said, my dad had us kids, and we were the milking machine, so  we weren   t on the commodities that were distributed, but I can remember,  even when I was married, that we   d go down here and buy these little old tiny  apples, and they might be wormy. The government was giving great big  delicious apples, but you had to be on the food relief program.  In order to get the good stuff.  Yeah. But if you had your pride, you might have given ten cents for, I don   t  know how many, but several of those little wormy, dried up apples.  Well you talked about the commodity program. What types of things did  people get through that?  Well, they got cornmeal. I knew one fellow that fattened his pig on the  cornmeal that they got.  Oh, that was really supposed to be for them to eat.  For food, yeah. But he didn   t like cornbread.  And he wasn   t going to let it go to waste   No, he fattened the pig on it, and then they ate the pig.  At the time, you said that you had your pride, so you didn   t want to take any of  the relief, but how bad did it have to get for people to say, okay, forget about  18  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Eells  Hardison  Eells  Hardison  Eells  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Hardison  my pride, I want something to eat?  We had work projects.    We Piddle Around,    but they built the Rosston  Schoolhouse  laughing .  Oh, so that was a WPA project?  Yes, WPA   s,    We Piddle Around     laughter .  Did you know many people that were involved with WPA projects? What types  of things did they do out here besides build that schoolhouse?  Well, I guess we built the fairground over at Buffalo.  Well, I think they worked some on the highway.  Yes, I know they did.  I know, I remember Floyd working with his horses out on the highway.  My dad worked on the highway, and so did     Ike?  They had a four-horse team, and this old, they called it a Fresno. It was a big  old shovel of a thing that scooped in all the dirt. You piled it up here in the  middle of the road, and then they shaped it up into a road.  Well it sounds like a lot of those projects involved really hard manual labor.  They were.  So why do you call it the We Piddle Around  laughter ?  Well, I don   t know. They didn   t want to accomplish too much for fear they   d  run out.  Run out, okay. So it was hard work, but they weren   t killing themselves to get  it done, because they needed it to stretch out. What percentage of people,  would you guess, out here were involved in someway working on a WPA  project?  Nearly everyone that   s still out here.  That was how they survived at that time.  Any way to make a dime.  They drove the cattle. The first time I ever saw my dad cry was when they  19  Eells  Hardison  Eells  Hardison  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Hardison  Eells  Paustenbaugh  drove the cattle into the canyon and walked on the bank and shot them.  They did some of my dad   s cattle that way. It was kind of a washout clear  through a canyon like, and they took some of his cattle. But they paid so little;  it didn   t amount to much.  They wouldn   t pay the freight to Kansas City.  No, it didn   t amount to anything. Dad didn   t get anything to speak of.  The old cow wouldn   t bring enough money when she got to Kansas City to  pay for the railroad for bringing him. That   s the reason they drove them in the  canyon and shot them. They killed the pigs.  Well, they didn   t have anything to eat. That was the idea. There were a lot of  little pigs and calves and cows, all kinds, shot, because of lack of anything to  feed them. Some people put up Russian Thistles and got by that way, with  thistles for feed, but it was rough.  So when they shot the cattle, then did people take them and butcher them to  eat, or by that point they were so far gone they weren   t eatable?  Well, you couldn   t eat. You tried to chew that stuff, and it just got bigger and  bigger and bigger. You couldn   t eat it  laughter .  Well we heard that there were rabbit drives out in this area. Did anyone in  your family participate in one of those drives?  Oh, I don   t know. I don   t remember any of our family going on a rabbit drive.  I remember the men driving up to my folks, which was eight miles from here,  and they would shoot the rabbits along their fence lines, and boy, they killed  an awful lot of rabbits, jackrabbits and all, just piled up along the fence line.  Yes, there were lots of rabbits. There were cottontails, but mostly jackrabbits,  big rabbits. I remember dad and the older boy, Ray, shooting rabbits. He had  him to where he could handle a gun too, just like Ray has Rusty. Yes, there  were lots of rabbits back then.  So did you have a lot of rabbit stew and that kind of thing?  Yes, we ate them every way you could think of  laughter .  Bunny burgers  laughter .  Yes, we ate a lot of rabbits.  Well, do you ever eat rabbit anymore, or is that something you never want to  taste again?  20  Hardison  Eells  Hardison  Eells  Hardison  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Eells  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Eells  No.  No, they got to saying that they had rabbit fever, which I don   t know whether  they had it or not, but that cooked us from eating rabbits. I don   t know what  the rabbit fever was, but they did say there was rabbit fever from eating rabbit   laughing , so I don   t know. It   s been a long time since I   ve cooked one.  I cooked one for Harry.  But I can remember us thinking that it was quite a treat when we were kids.  Well, it was, having that meat.  You could just peel them right out, the hide all off of them, soak them over  night in saltwater, and they weren   t too bad, I guess  laughing .  Were you ever involved in skinning? Obviously, if you were married at that  time, you were skinning and cooking these rabbits yourself.  Well sure. I could skin a rabbit.  Well, do you feel like because of what happened during that time that it  affected your political views in anyway?  Well I don   t know whether it did. I   m still a democrat, because I live in the  state of Oklahoma.  Well I wasn   t a politician, so it didn   t effect me anyway  laughing .  My dad came to this country when he was 17.  Where did he come from?  Indiana. Now he had come with his parents from Indiana, and they settled in  Erie, Kansas, but then as dad grew up, he rode the train into Englewood, KS.  Then he came down here. Well did you know anyone that was not a democrat  out here?  Well if you wanted in office, you were a democrat, usually. Murray was one  of them. Politically, no we didn   t hold any offices. My parents always went  and voted.  Did most people in this area that were eligible to vote do that?  Well in our little, old, particular neighborhood, I guess everyone went to vote.  Well, my mother was a democrat, and then my dad, he changed over when he  had a friend that was a republican, and he was a republican, so my dad and my  21  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Hardison  Eells  Hardison  Eells  Hardison  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Eells  Paustenbaugh  mother, she wouldn   t go vote against him, because she   d kill his vote, because  she was a democrat and he was a republican, so she   d stay home, she wouldn   t  vote.  She didn   t want to cancel him out. See, my husband and I go to cancel each  other   s vote out  laughter . I don   t if that makes her a more loyal wife or  what.  My bunch weren   t involved very much in politics of any kind.  Well, dad was friends with old W.A. Davis, who was the first county treasurer  for Harper County, and Billy Little was something. Mort Terry was the  Sheriff.  I remember all of that stuff too, and I remember Uncle Dick Maffet, he was the  one that helped us start Ditch Valley down here. My dad   s father   s brother.  Was that date 1846?  Ooohhh, I don   t know what year that might have been, but I remember that  Uncle Niece Maffet and Uncle Dick Maffet all lived down on the river bottom.  Do you remember the Burns Schoolhouse off there? They called it the Maffet  and the Burns Schoolhouse, because that   s what it was, Maffets and Burns  going down into that school down there, you know where the bridge is that  crosses the Cimarron River there.  Yeah.  Well that schoolhouse stood right back from that for years and years. That   s  where the Maffets and the Burns went to school. Uncle Dick Maffet and  Uncle Niece Maffet were my dad   s brothers, and they lived here at the time,  and all down there on the riverbank, and that   s been a while.  I realized there were a couple of questions that I wanted to ask you specifically  about the dust bowl that I failed to ask you, and one of them was that as the  dust bowl time was moving through, what did people think was causing the  dust storms?  Because the wind blew.  Yes, it was the wind, and with the way they farmed, they stirred up the land,  and a lot of them had one-ways, and they stirred the land, and they didn   t  change it. Man caused it a whole lot, because it was his way of farming, and  he farmed the same way with those old one-ways, and then the dust bowl days  just picked it up and made it worse and worse. I have that all written out in  that deal.  So did you see a lot of change in farming practices because of the dust bowl  period?  22  Eells  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Hardison  Eells  Well, there wasn   t much farming going on. We couldn   t do any farming until  it started raining.  You remember the old farmer built puddlers, that was kind of a disk of a thing  on a chain, and they hooked it on behind the plows, I guess, and they   d make  these little pockets, so if any rain ever fell during that period, it was dry, dry,  but if any of it fell, it didn   t run away. These little puddlers, they called them,  because of these little damns, just all over. They farmed it on the contour of  the land.  Did you ever have nightmares about the dust storms?  No.  Did you know anyone that did, or were there school children that seemed  frightened? You said when the storms came in, they just kept doing their  lessons, but were any of them really troubled by what was going on?  No.  No, it was nearly every day.  It   s just the way things were, so they just kind of got on with it.  Poor farming method, and then doing the same thing over and over and they  stirred up the soil too much. A whole lot of it was done by poor farming and  the same old way of farming all the time, year after year. That really got the  ground all rowed up, and nothing put back. It was ready for something to be  done.  There wasn   t moisture enough to grow good weeds.  To keep anything to start anchoring the soil back down.  Right, you didn   t have anything to mix in with that pile of dust.  Well is there anything that you would like to tell me about the dust bowl time  that I haven   t already asked you about?  Well, you could see the tops of the posts. Some of them were just the tops  sticking out on account of the dust and all.  Piled up around.  Uh-huh, it was piled up among the buildings and everything.  The fences drifted over.  Yes, you could walk right over some of the fences because of the dirt.  23  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Eells  Hardison  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Hardison  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Paustenbaugh  To me, a barbwire fence doesn   t make much of a shelter, but anyway, it  stopped the wind.  I know you talked about dust pneumonia, but did you know of anyone that died  on account of the dust, of being trapped outside?  I don   t.  There was quite a bit of what they called, I told you though, about dust  pneumonia among the younger ones. I don   t know that it took too many of the  older ones, do you?  I don   t think so.  But I remember it took an awful lot of the younger ones, because we almost  lost Ray in that.  Right, well I just wondered if it affected the elderly at all.  Oh, I   m sure it affected everybody to a certain extent. I   m sure it did. It  couldn   t help but affect us in some way or other, I wouldn   t have thought. I  don   t know, do you?  I can remember mama would wet these sheets at night. They put pillows down  along the foot, and then they threw that wet sheet over the head of the bed, and  they went to bed in there.  That   s the way they did for that baby up there, when they brought him out, you  know. Yes, we had an awful lot of it, and it was just quite a problem to get out  washing done in those days. It just was.  Well, it was hard enough work without having to mess with that too.  If we could get them dry, I suppose we shook them off and brought them in  and wore them anyhow  laughing .  That   s right. What choice did you have, right.  It just wasn   t one person. It was all of us. We were all involved.  It helps when everyone is suffering equally, doesn   t it?  Well, you couldn   t complain to him because it blew over at your house,  because it did at his too.  Well one thing we   re really interested in with this project too is finding  photographs or other things like that from the time period showing what the  area looked like. I didn   t know if those were things that you might have that  we might be able to make copies of?  24  Eells  Hardison  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Hardison  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  Eells  Paustenbaugh  I wouldn   t have anything.  I don   t. We were too poor to even have film to take pictures.  We didn   t have Kodaks and things back then.  Well do you know of anybody that kept a journal or a diary during that time?  Yes, old Abbot.  You know, I have a book that I was looking at last night, and it was from  Abbot   s wife, and she taught school in 1883 at Rising Sun, Indiana.  Oh, I know where that is.  In 1883. I have that book yet, and she gave it to Mama, because she knew I  liked poetry. It was of poetry, and I was looking at it last night, it   s practically  all to pieces now, but it was her book when she taught, and she taught five  terms of school at Rising Sun, Indiana, and that was Jim Abbot   s wife. He  advertised for a woman, and she answered the ad, and that   s the reason she  ended up where she died.  Well did you ever hear of any other stories of people advertising for a wife  here?  Well they did back in those days. That   s the way he found Fanny. Her name  was Fanny, Fanny Todd, and she married old Jim Abbot. He lived just west of  the folks there. He had quite a little old dugout. At one time, he had a  beautiful home down in there. It was pretty down in there when he was young,  and he married this Fanny. They had a big lake in back of the house, and it  was fed by a stream under the ground, irrigating, you know. The water came  up, and they had a pump on the porch, and a bucket hanging up there all the  time. It was from that well. It was just natural water that sprung up from that  well. They used that for years, but if finally dried up. Don   t you remember  that, Louella?  I remember it when I was a kid. I went down there, and I saw her mother  many a time. She had her mother there with her in later years. She was in a  wheelchair, and she took care of her own mother there for a long time. Her  name was Todd, but I can   t remember her given name. Mama always made  me go down with fruit and dessert for their Christmas. I always walked and  took them something for their Christmas. Yes, he advertised for a wife, and  she answered the ad  laughing .  Well something you just said made me think of something. During the dust  bowl and depression days, how did you celebrate holidays? I know that things  were probably much more modest, but did people still make an effort to take  something to their neighbors or do anything like that? Was it just too hard?  25  Eells  Hardison  Eells  Paustenbaugh  I don   t remember, only that family was so hard up, I remember mama sending  me many a time with something at Christmas or other times for a little treat for  them at Christmas time. They existed, and they had a beautiful home at one  time, but it went to pieces. He had built a house back in a bank. I also had  pictures of that old house. I have it in there in that old book. It   s pretty  interesting to look at it now, Louella, but that old book   s coming to pieces. I  tied it together last night, and put it in a plastic bag; I wanted to keep it.  Well, I don   t blame you.  That was Jim Abbot   s folly. He called it his folly, you know. He sat on a  stool, up over the bank of this place, and he was watching the stars. He was  interested in astronomy. He was quite intelligent along that line.  We really appreciate the time that you spent talking to u and sharing your  memories with us.  -------  -------  
