 Lemons  J. Kear  Lemons  J. Kear  Lane  Lemons  Lane  Humphrey  Cavis  Kite  Lane  Humphrey  Cavis  Lane  Cavis  You can introduce yourself by telling us your first name, your maiden name,  and your married name and when you were born and where.  Well, my name is Joan Bradshaw Kear. My maiden name was Bradshaw. I  came from a pioneer family that settled here in the early 1900   s. I was born  and raised in Guymon and went all through school here and still live here.  What year were you born?  I was born in 1930.  I   m Margie Lawson Lane. I was born in Cimarron County in the community  of Willowbar.  In what year?  1924.  My name is Alice Lawson Humphrey. I was born in 1923 in the Willowbar  community in Cimarron County.  My name is Lucille Lawson Burdge Cavis, and I was born in the same place  that they were born in, 1925.  Whereabouts in Cimarron County is the Willowbar community?  It   s about ten miles east of Boise City.  Do you know where Keyes is? It   s probably six miles southwest of Keyes.  There was just a store there.  And a post office.  It was an adobe building that used to be a mile from where we were born.  5  Lane  Kite  Lane  Kite  Lane  Lemons  J. Kear  Lemons  J. Kear  Lemons  J. Kear  Lemons  J. Kear  Lemons  J. Kear  Lemons  J. Kear  Lemons  Lane  Lemons  Lane  It was the second Willowbar. There was an original Willowbar that was north  of it.  Is that building still there?  No.  There   s an old adobe building that   s still barely hanging on out in that area.  No, it was finally torn down in    53, I believe.  Well, let   s talk about what life was like when the four of you were growing up.  Do you remember the house where you lived?  Oh yes, it   s still there.  Can you describe it for us?  Yes, it   s a two-story house. Right now it   s green, but it was white when I  lived there. It had belonged to my grandfather, who lived two blocks down the  street south. It had two big dormer windows in the front of it, and it still does.  In fact, it looks pretty much like it did, except they   ve put a different color of  paint on it.  Do you remember how many rooms are inside?  Yes, eight.  Wow   Four upstairs and four down.  And how many people were living there?  Well, my father was gone after 1937, so my sister and I and my mother.  So three people in eight rooms.  Yes, but we didn   t use the upstairs very much. It was kind of like my  playhouse.  Wow, you were doing all right then. Now how did that compare with where  you guys lived?  Different.  Could you describe your house?  Lucille and I were born in a dugout. Alice was born in our grandparents     6  Cavis  Lane  Humphrey  Lane  Humphrey  Kite  Humphrey  Kite  Lane  Kite  Humphrey  Kite  Cavis  Kite  Humphrey  Cavis  Humphrey  Lemons  J. Kear  home. We only lived in the dugout for a year and a half, and we moved to  Boise City. Then we lived in a three-room adobe house. Then we moved back  to the farm.  What year was that that we moved back to the farm?  In    34.  You mean you want me to tell about the little house we lived in? We lived in  two rooms there. Then my father built a big room on to the west of the house  while I was at home. Then, while I was at college, they added three more  rooms. I didn   t live there when it was like that.  The second adobe structure used adobes from the old Willowbar store.  So that brings us back to that Willowbar store there, because we used some of  it.  Recycled.  We hadn   t really heard that word then.  What was it like growing up in an adobe house?  Cool. It was cool and warm when it needed to be. The walls are so thick.  Would you rather live in an adobe house now? Would it be something you  would like to do now?  I wouldn   t mind at all, because the walls were well plastered, and mother  painted every year.  You could paint the inside of the house just like normal?  It   d have normal walls like any house would have inside.  What was the floor made of?  Wood.  Linoleum.  We didn   t have carpet. We didn   t have air conditioning.  Let   s talk about your four playrooms. What were you doing up there?  Oh, I loved dolls, and I had all kinds of toys. There was seven years difference  between my sister and me, so I was the baby. I played house up there a lot  with my friends. I had a friend across the street, and we played a lot together.  7  Lemons  J. Kear  Lemons  J. Kear  Lemons  J. Kear  Lemons  Cavis  Lane  Humphrey  Lemons  Lane  Cavis  Kite  Cavis  Lemons  J. Kear  I also collected movie star pictures.  Who were your favorites?  Gosh, I don   t know. I liked Alan Ladd and Lana Turner, some of those that  the others haven   t heard about. My sister had a large collection too. You   d  send off a postcard, and they   d send you back an autographed picture, a glossy.  We   d put them on the walls, and the walls were just papered with them.  Did you keep them?  They got stolen. I imagine they   d be worth some money now, but no, I don   t  have them now. There was a large stairway going up. It had 13 steps; I  remember that. No, it was 19. My duty every Saturday morning was to clean  them.  That   s how come you know how many there were.  With water and a rag, I   d start at the top and go down every Saturday morning  and clean the stairs. They opened up into the front door, and they were always  dirty because there was always dirt coming in.  What kind of chores did you guys have to do?  Not anything that simple. We milked cows and slopped the pigs and cleaned  the chicken houses and helped in the garden. What else did we do?  We helped in the field.  You drove the tractor some too. You were the only one that got to do that.  Why did you get to drive the tractor?  Probably because I was the biggest one. Lucille had hay fever, so she didn   t  do too much of that.  That didn   t keep me from doing stuff, but that   d probably be one reason that I  didn   t get in the field that much. We used to head maize. Have you ever  heard of anybody heading maize with a knife? That   s probably foreign to you.  I   ve never done it, that   s for sure.  I doubt if anybody does it now.  Do you remember your neighbors when you lived in town?  Oh yes, we had a family next door. They had the grandparents and the  children and the grandchildren; they all lived there. We had a nice lady that  lived a couple of houses down that we were good friends with. She was a  8  Lemons  J. Kear  Lemons  J. Kear  Lemons  J. Kear  Lemons  Lane  Lemons  Cavis  Lane  Cavis  Lemons  Cavis  Lane  J. Kear  Cavis  schoolteacher. She had a daughter about my age. The people across the street,  when I was very small, they babysat me. Two different families took care of  me during the day, because my mother worked.  What did your mom do?  My mom was a secretary. She worked for the Long Agency here for about 35  years. That   s an insurance agency here in town. During the war, she worked  for the ration board. Then she worked for the extension office out of  Stillwater. It   s been here a long time. I went to work as soon as it was legally  possible.  How old were you when you first went to work?  Well, I was in junior high, 14 probably.  What did you do?  I worked at the ten cent store. Then I worked at the bank when I was a little  older. Then I was a legal secretary. Then I went back to school and became a  schoolteacher.  I would guess that your neighbors were probably farmers too.  Right.  Did they have children that ever came over to play?  Well, they were younger than we were.  Not much.  Not much, but we did play together a lot.  What kinds of things were you guys doing?  We were talking about it the other day. They had a building that was covered  up with sand, and we would roll down that hill. We played all kinds of games  there, didn   t we? Their names were Overstreet, and they lived about a quarter  of a mile from us.  I was reading back through my diary in 1935. That particular year, we had ice  cream a lot. Every other day we made ice cream. If we didn   t, our neighbors  did. I don   t know whether we did it to try to keep cool, but we always had ice  cream.  Lots of milk, huh?  And cream, lots of cream.  9  Kite  Lane  J. Kear  Cavis  J. Kear  Cavis  J. Kear  Lane  J. Kear  Humphrey  Cavis  Humphrey  D. Kear  Kite  D. Kear  J. Kear  Lemons  Cavis  And ice would be brought in?  Yeah, we had to bring it from Boise City.  My ice refrigerator, we had a card that you put in the window. It was red,  blue, green and yellow. You put the little thing up for how many pounds you  wanted. Each color was a different pound, and the iceman would come by.  He wore a leather thing on his back, and he carried this chunk of ice. He   d  come in the back door and put it in the refrigerator.  In your icebox or your refrigerator?  In the icebox, and it was my job to empty the water.  Oh, I hated that.  It was a drip pan underneath, where it gradually melted. You   d just take an ice  pick and chip off what you wanted.  Lots of times that ice pan ran over.  I   m sure it did.  Back when we lived at Boise City, we just lived a block and a half from the ice  plant. Sometimes, we needed ice before it was time for the iceman to come  around, so we would take our wagon and go over and get the ice. One of us  would pull the wagon, and the other two would lick on the ice all the way  back.  I didn   t remember that.  Part of the way, we would have to change so that the wagon leader would get  to lick too.  I can remember all of the kids in town following him. He   d take his ice pick  and chip off a little corner and hand it to you.  Okay, now we have to get your name. It   s Mr. Kear, right?  Dean.  He wanted to come so he could talk, because he lived through this too.  Well how would you guys handle every day needs, like cooking, cleaning,  housework? We know you scrubbed the stairs, and they were out in the field.  Well, no, we helped clean house. Everybody envied our mother because there  were three of us and we really got through the house fast.  10  Lane  Lemons  Humphrey  Lane  Cavis  Humphrey  Lane  Cavis  J. Kear  Cavis  Humphrey  Lane  Humphrey  Cavis  Lane  Lemons  J. Kear  Cavis  J. Kear  Cavis  Lemons  We also helped at the neighbor   s house. She was having babies, so we would  help take care of the kids. They were less than a quarter of a mile from us.  Tell us about washday.  Mother was up before dawn, because she wanted to be the first person in the  whole community that had their wash on the line first, and she did.  A lot of the time, if you got it out early, you could get it back in before the dirt  started blowing.  We certainly didn   t have a dryer.  Our washing machine had a gasoline motor, and you had to stomp on it to start  it.  In Boise City, it was electric.  Yeah, in Boise City it was electric, but out there it was gasoline-motored.  Mother washed by hand, she scrubbed on a scrub board.  Well, so did mother.  We did some too.  And boiled the clothes.  Right, you had to heat your water. Even for washing dishes you   d heat your  water.  In a great big boiler, didn   t she? We always heated the water in a great big  boiler set on the stove.  On a kerosene stove.  How about ironing? That looked like quite a job, from the pictures I   ve seen.  Well, I use it for a doorstop now, but it was an iron that the handle came off.  A sad iron? They were called sad irons.  But you could put it on the burner and heat it up, and then you   d iron. Of  course we had an electric iron later, but I can remember using that when it was  just a real small, quick job.  We used it when it was big jobs.  A gasoline iron, that sounds pretty dangerous.  11  Lane  Humphrey  Lane  Humphrey  Cavis  Lemons  Cavis  D. Kear  Cavis  D. Kear  Cavis  D. Kear  Humphrey  Lane  Humphrey  Lemons  Cavis  Lane  D. Kear  Lane  We went from those to a gas iron. We must have used those for two or three  years.  Well, we used the sad iron for two or three years, and then they made the  gasoline kind.  They worked good.  Oh, they sure did.  You need to ask us about lights too.  Well tell us about lights.  Well, what   d we use first? Just plain kerosene lamps? Then we graduated to  gas lanterns.  Carbides.  Was it carbide?  Probably.  Well, they had the little mantles, the little white mantles on them. Is that what  it is Dean?  No, that was a gasoline lamp, I think.  If you touched those little things after they burned, then they would break apart  and you   d have to put a new one of those little bags on it.  That   s how they   d shine up the chimneys, with a kerosene lamp.  You used newspaper because it did it quicker and better.  Do you remember when you first got electricity?  Yes, but we had it earlier than most anybody, because our dad had a wind  charger. We also had a telephone. It was a party line, but our dad helped keep  the lines up.  The thing with the wind charger, you didn   t always have the same level of  light. It depended on the wind and how it was blowing.  The wind charger was a battery system. It charged the batteries. You had a  series of batteries and that was your source of power.  A little tower     12  Kite  Lane  Kite  Lane  D. Kear  J. Kear  D. Kear  Lemons  J. Kear  Lane  Lemons  Lane  Cavis  Lemons  Cavis  J. Kear  Lane  Cavis  Lane  Cavis  Humphrey  What all would the wind charger power? Would it just be lights, or could you  run other things?  A radio.  A radio and lights?  A radio and lights.  It wouldn   t have been enough to run an electric stove or anything. Even an  electric iron would have been tough on it. It had to be small wattage.  I don   t know whether you could have run a toaster on it, do you?  I don   t know about that, but I know everybody had their radios and electric  lights.  Mrs. Kear, do you remember the first time that you got electricity?  Oh, I don   t remember ever not having electricity. I   m a city girl, you know.  We had electricity in Boise City, and we had to get used to not having it when  we moved.  What was that like when you had it and then you didn   t?  It was different.  We had to do our studying early. We went to bed pretty early too.  Where did you go to school?  She went here, you know that.  I went here all my 12 years, here at Guymon.  Let   s see, I went to Boise City through the fifth grade. Then we moved back  to the farm, and then we graduated from Keyes.  Alice, what about you?  Alice was in seventh grade.  She was in seventh grade when we moved to the farm, and I was in fourth.  We moved from Boise City to Keyes, and Boise City had a large school at the  time. We had three sixth grades. We moved to Keyes, and we had two grades  in one room.  13  Lane  Lemons  J. Kear  Cavis  Lane  Cavis  Humphrey  Cavis  J. Kear  Lemons  J. Kear  Lemons  J. Kear  Lemons  Cavis  Humphrey  Lane  Humphrey  Lemons  Cavis  Lane  Lemons  Lane  My fifth grade class at Boise City had 50 students.  Wow, that   s a big class. How many students were in your class in Guymon?  When I graduated, it was 86, and that was a large class.  Oh, ours were smaller. What was yours?  Six.  And yours was?  Seven.  And I had ten.  That was 66 instead of 86.  What was your favorite subject in school?  English.  Why did you like English?  I don   t know. It was easy for me, I guess. If I ever went back and got an  advanced degree, I   d get it in English. I like English. When I taught, I tried to  make it a little more interesting, because it   s sure something that isn   t too fun.  How about you guys. What did you like in school?  I think I liked English.  I like math.  My favorite was history.  I wish she   d talk more, because she knows background on so much.  So what were you guys doing in your preteen to teenage years for fun and  entertainment?  Well, we all three played basketball. I don   t know whether you did or not, but  we all did.  After we were a little bit older, but you said preteen.  Well, like 12 to 16 or 17.  Okay, we were in 4-H by then.  14  Humphrey  Lane  Cavis  J. Kear  Cavis  Lane  Humphrey  Lemons  Lane  Humphrey  Cavis  Humphrey  Cavis  Lane  Humphrey  Lane  Humphrey  J. Kear  And active in our church.  I don   t think we   d started play parties yet.  That   s something we do want to mention. Have you ever been to a play party?  It doesn   t sound familiar. Maybe we didn   t call it that.  Well no, it was just done during the dust bowl years when nobody had any  money and there was really no place to go. They   d have it in different homes  on Saturday nights, is that right? You all need to tell them. You know more  about them. I went to some, but only when I went along with you all, which  you were thrilled to death with.  It was sort of a neat little thing. Somebody would call the players to circle  around.  It   s sort of like square dancing and circle dancing.  Do you remember the names of any of the dances?  Oh golly, we sang to them, didn   t we? Skip to My Lou and that type of thing.  We had many. A different family would host it each Saturday night. It was  well sponsored.  And I don   t know; did we use car lights for lights?  Yes, unless they had yard lights. They finally got to where they had yard  lights, and then we danced to the yard lights.  I think we had the most fun. They were just wonderful.  We also went to the show at Boise City. Shirley Temple films were showing  then.  Well, Clark Gable and Norma Shearer and all of those.  It cost a dime.  We had a movie theatre early, and Margie and my aunt, who is a year older  than we, we would go to the movie. Lucille wasn   t old enough to go yet. We  were probably three, four, and five, and we were going to the movies. It   d  come to a scary part, and I could not stand scary things, so I   d crawl under the  seat and Lena would too, and Margie would tell us that the scary part was  over; we could get up in our seats  laughter .  When we had the show here, I drew for bank night. That was before I was old  enough to go to school.  15  Lemons  J. Kear  Humphrey  J. Kear  Lane  Cavis  Lane  Cavis  Lemons  Kite  Lane  J. Kear  Cavis  Lane  Lemons  What was that?  Well, they won prizes, dishes maybe or whatever one of the merchants in town  wanted to donate or something like that. Everybody that went in, I can   t  remember because I never did it, but I think they probably signed a little sheet  of paper or something, and then I drew it out of a basket. That person got a  prize for being there. Later, I worked at the show for a few years, ushering.  There was the Royal Theater that was right down the street here. After that,  there was the American Theatre. Anyhow, there were two shows at one time,  both owned by the same family.  You talked last night about Annie Over and Kick the Can and things; we did  both of those. My house was built to where the two dormers, we   d throw, and  I think it was a tennis ball that we threw over the roof. Somebody would be on  the other side, and they   d catch it and throw it back.  If they caught it though, they got to go around the house and chase the other  kids.  Well yeah, but how could you believe them  laughter ? We had a large group  of kids in our neighborhood, and a lot at night, especially in the summertime,  we played Kick the Can. There was a church across the street that had a wide  sidewalk, and that   s where we put the can. After dark, you   d get out and hide  in the trees and hide in the bushes and in people   s yards. You wouldn   t do that  anymore now. It was a lot of fun. There were probably 12 to 15 kids playing  there at some time or other.  We used to have a group that would come once a year. Did the Hazel Hurd  performers ever come to Guymon?  They were in the tents, weren   t they?  No, they performed in the theatre. They used the tickets for drawings.  Has anyone ever mentioned that to you before, the Hazel Hurd thing?  No.  Hazel Hurd? And what did they do?  The Hazel Hurd shows, they danced and sang and did different things.  Was it a variety show?  Yeah, variety, that   s it.  The theatre would be packed.  Did they have advertisements that said that they were coming to town?  16  Cavis  Lane  Kite  Humphrey  Cavis  Humphrey  D. Kear  J. Kear  D. Kear  Humphrey  Lemons  Cavis  Lane  J. Kear  D. Kear  Humphrey  D. Kear  Cavis  D. Kear  Humphrey  Oh yes. I   m sure that the tickets weren   t anymore than a dime, if they were  that. Don   t you imagine they were about a dime?  I imagine. That was when we were still living in town.  Did you look forward to the Hazel Hurd shows coming in? Was that  something like the carnival coming to town?  Well, we had a lot of carnivals.  I can remember gypsies being in stores and everybody watching gypsies.  They all had on long dresses. I don   t mean men, just women.  Quite ornate too. The dresses, some of them, were quite ornate. They were  very dark skinned people. Most of them were small, weren   t they? They were  thin people. We were not allowed out of the house while they were there.  The gypsies? I remember that.  They were known to steal children.  They   d take you. They   d steal you.  Since we were blonde, they thought that we would be taken, so we didn   t get  to play outside then.  Do you remember how the men dressed?  I don   t, do you?  I don   t even remember what transportation they had.  I sort of thought they were in old cars, weren   t they?  Big cars.  Big cars, yeah, they were all big cars.  I don   t remember how the men were dressed. I remember the women being in  long dresses.  And a lot of bangles.  They   d tell us not to go down there where the gypsies were because they   d  steal you and take you with them. It   d keep you out of there.  And you know they wouldn   t have. They came through our town quite often  when we lived there.  17  Lemons  Humphrey  D. Kear  Lane  D. Kear  Lemons  J. Kear  Lane  J. Kear  Cavis  J. Kear  Cavis  J. Kear  Lane  J. Kear  Lane  D. Kear  Kite  D. Kear  J. Kear  D. Kear  Would you say two or three times a months?  No, probably two or three times a year I imagine.  I don   t know how they made their living. Did they beg?  They stole.  Stole.  Do you remember them coming into Guymon?  No, I don   t.  Probably smaller towns, I imagine.  There might have been a law about it. I don   t know, because they had laws  about other people.  They had laws about blacks.  Black people couldn   t stay overnight.  Anywhere in the panhandle, I think.  There might have been a law that said they couldn   t come in, I don   t know.  I can   t remember ever seeing more than just a few blacks in my young life, can  you?  That lasted a long time.  We just didn   t have them.  This gypsy deal, all of you know where Oklahoma Park is, right? My  grandparents    house was only about two blocks or so from there, and they  camped out down at Oklahoma Park. The Oklahoma Park then was just a few  small trees and a barbwire fence. I remember seeing them. They   d put tents  up and camp out there.  That   s an odd occurrence.  Yeah, they probably weren   t accepted by the populist at all. They knew that.  It was kind of like our hippies now.  I don   t know about the girls, but the youth here, we made all of our own toys.  We didn   t have any money, and everything we played with, we made. I can  remember stilts, rubber guns, and sidewalk scooters. We made a sidewalk  18  J. Kear  Kite  D. Kear  J. Kear  D. Kear  Kite  D. Kear  J. Kear  Humphrey  J. Kear  Lane  Kite  Humphrey  Cavis  D. Kear  scooter very similar to these new scooters they have today. We took an old  skate that had wheels on the front and back, and cut it in two. We put one end  on one end of the scooter, and the other on the other end of the scooter. We   d  go like a house a fire. You had like a two-by-four for the bottom. You   d  come up with a two-by-four, put a brace on the side, and put the handle on top.  I made several of them. You   d use them just like these kids are using these  new scooters. What do you call those new scooters?  A blade.  Is it a razor scooter?  Razor scooter.  Yeah, there we go.  It   s made very similar, but a lot cruder. It   s the same idea.  What goes around comes around.  You could ride them up and down the sidewalk. And marbles and jacks and  all of that kind of stuff, was very cheap.  Jumping rope.  Rolled tires. Do you remember we rolled tires and got black all over us?  When I was teaching school, I decided that they were going to get  indoctrinated into some of those old things. Of course, they always liked the  jump rope, so that was not a problem, but I had a big can of marbles that Dean  had owned. I brought them to school, and we got out and played marbles.  They had never played marbles before. They   d never played jacks before.  The hula-hoop was kind of a new thing for them too. That was a little later on  though.  We played jacks a lot during recess in Boise City.  Were marbles more of a boy game?  Except for me.  I had marbles too. My mother always made me give them back to the boys; I  could never keep them  laughter .  You   d draw a circle along the ground. You   d take a stick and scratch a circle.  Then everybody would have to put in what you called a    day cup    or  something like that; so many marbles in the center. Then you   d have tops.  We   d spin those tops out into the marbles, and you got all of the marbles that  your top could knock out of the circle.  19  Humphrey  D. Kear  J. Kear  Cavis  Humphrey  Kite  J. Kear  Humphrey  J. Kear  Cavis  Lane  Cavis  Lane  Lemons  Humphrey  J. Kear  Humphrey  J. Kear  Lane  Humphrey  Lemons  I never did get to do that.  It was a big deal. If you could spin your top good, you could get more  marbles.  And there were shooters. They were a little bigger, and you   d put them on the  edge of the circle and shoot it in. Then you kept hitting at it until you knocked  it out, and then you got it.  I don   t know whether kids play marbles anymore or not.  Yeah, they do.  There was a marble game that came out. There was a game that came out that  was just like marbles, but it was played with different things.  Monopoly is an old game that we did a lot. It could last several days. An  original Monopoly set is probably a keeper now. We didn   t think about  keeping things then, when you lost part of it or broke it or something.  It was pretty well worn out by that time.  Yeah, you wore them out.  Yeah, because we used to play a lot of board games during the dust bowl  years. What was the one that was a star and marbles?  Chinese checkers.  Chinese checkers, we used to play a lot of Chinese checkers.  That   s coming back.  What   s Canasta?  Canasta was a thick deck like that.  A double deck, I think. Maybe a triple deck.  It was a very good game.  Yeah, adults and kids played that; everybody played that.  One of my favorite things to play on at school in Boise City was the Giant  Stride. Did you guys do that?  Me too.  What is that?  20  Lane  Cavis  Lemons  Lane  D. Kear  Lane  D. Kear  Lane  Humphrey  J. Kear  Humphrey  J. Kear  Cavis  J. Kear  Lane  J. Kear  Lemons  J. Kear  Lemons  It   s a tall pole.  You hang on two deals here. It hung down, and there were probably eight or  ten on one. You would hang on like this and run, and then everybody would  go around like that. You did it just with your arms; you didn   t sit anywhere.  I think I   ve done that before.  Your arms and your legs. When you got to going fast enough, you would spin  off your feet.  Did they push you, Margie?  No, you were holding one hand here and one here across the bar that was  hanging down. It was long, kind of like a rope or a chain. It was like this     You   d run as hard as you could with everybody else.  People used to get behind them and push them around.  Yeah, they did.  One day, a girl pushed me, and the bell rang, so I knew I couldn   t be late, so I  jumped off and sprained my ankle. The teacher had to take me home I was  hurt so bad.  Crack the Whip.  Oh yeah, that was a good one.  I cracked my head open one time against the school wall.  You didn   t do crack the whip; you cracked your head, right?  I was on the wrong end.  We just played Kick the Can all the time.  Oh yeah, Mother May I, Simon Says.  Well do any of you remember going on your first date and what you did?  I   ve got to tell you about that. My husband and I were in the first grade  together and went clear through school together. I   m sure my first date was  not with him  laughter . No, I   m sure it was, but we used to go to the show  and just meet there. Everybody would just pay their own way and meet at the  show. That was probably my first date. I don   t know, but I   d known him a  long time before I went with him. I had to check him out.  He had to pass the test  laughing .  21  J. Kear  Kite  J. Kear  Lemons  Cavis  Lane  Humphrey  Lane  Cavis  Lane  Humphrey  Kite  Cavis  Lane  Cavis  Lemons  Cavis  Lemons  Cavis  J. Kear  In the first grade, it was just about the time that Snow White and the Seven  Dwarfs had come out. This would be like    36 or    37, and I was Snow White. I  don   t know why, because I was a blonde, but anyway, he was the prince.  After I ate the poisoned apple, he was supposed to carry me off, and he  couldn   t pick me up  laughter , so he went back and got a couple of his friends   laughing . They each took a hold of an arm and a leg and drug me off of the  stage   How romantic.  Oh yes, that   s the reason I had to think about it for a while before I dated him.  What about you guys?  I don   t remember my first one, but Alice probably does.  I   m sure ours was to a play party. We probably went together.  I know I couldn   t date until I was 16.  You couldn   t?  I thought you started at 13, Alice.  I was 12, I think, when I had my first date.  Yeah, but mother allowed you to date a lot younger than I did. I never  understood that.  She was driving a tractor and digging.  See, that was the advantage of driving the tractors, you got to start dating  earlier.  I learned to drive a car by driving to the mailbox.  She used to scare me to death. I went along with her.  In the car?  Uh-huh, and our mailbox was a mile from the house, and when Margie would  say,    Mother, could I go get the mail?    and we did  laughing .  Did you hold on tight?  Yeah, I held on tight.  We didn   t own a car. My mother didn   t own a car until the mid-fifties. We  walked everywhere we went, unless I happened to be with somebody that had  22  Humphrey  Lemons  Cavis  Lane  Cavis  Lane  Cavis  J. Kear  Cavis  Humphrey  Cavis  Lane  Lemons  a car. I didn   t even know how to drive until I was in my twenties. It was a  walking situation.  That   s why everybody was thin, I think.  Well, let   s talk about the dust storms. Do you remember the first time you saw  a dust storm?  Is that one on that Easter Sunday? That was the first really bad one, wasn   t it?  That time we went down to Overstreets?  That was the first really bad one, but the dirt was blowing before we left Boise  City. The scary one was in    34.  Yeah, it was in    34. I would have been nine, I guess. My grandmother was at  our house, and we had an uncle who lived out close to the Willowbar store,  which was a mile from us. She decided she wanted to go down to my uncle   s,  and here was this storm billowing up here. So he took her down there, and our  neighbors came up and got us to come down to their house, which was just a  half mile down there. I can remember that it got so black that we couldn   t see  each other at all. They couldn   t even keep a match lit. It was just so heavy in  there with the dirt. I could remember crying, because I thought my dad had  blown away. I can just remember crying and crying, and that helped the  situation you know  laughter .  Also, there had been a funeral that day, hadn   t there? There were a lot of  people who stopped at that house also, coming home from the funeral. I would  guess that we probably had 25 people in there or more, but in the meantime,  my dad was sitting outside in the car; he had gotten back. He didn   t get in  until all of it kind of eased. That probably lasted about two hours.  It was two hours before he came in, but it blew all night.  Yeah, it blew all night, but it did get to where it wasn   t quite so dark.  I remember that it was usually late afternoon.  It was probably about four or five half the time it happened. Do you remember  that?  I remember the one later more than I remember that one.  But you don   t remember that one? Maybe you were out somewhere.  Another thing we had to do before the dirt storm got there, if you could see it  coming, we had to get the chickens all back in the chicken house, or they  would blow away. That was a job  laughter .  Do you remember any signs from animals, before you would see the dust storm  23  Lane  D. Kear  Cavis  D. Kear  Lane  Cavis  Lane  Cavis  Humphrey  Cavis  D. Kear  Humphrey  J. Kear  Cavis  Lemons  Cavis  Lane  D. Kear  Cavis  D. Kear  coming?  Birds.  A lot of times those dirt storms, the way I remember them, of course I was  pretty small, they just rolled in, and there wasn   t much wind.  And they were beautiful. They were really pretty. They were pink and brown.  There was kind of a calm that settled over you, and then the wind came later.  The wind had pushed all of this for miles and miles.  We were standing out there watching it on a Sunday afternoon. Clear across  here, you could practically see these banks of what we thought were clouds at  first. I don   t know how long it took. Was it an hour?  Oh, I think an hour probably.  And the different colors were caused by the different types of soils.  You see, you   re looking at this over here, but it was prettier than that was. I  don   t know, because it just billowed.  And it was always from the north.  It was always from the north. We never had it from any other direction.  Thousands of birds a lot of times would fly over.  But I don   t remember the little animals, do you?  Well, they were talking about rabbits last night.  We want to talk about rabbits. I don   t know whether anybody   s talked about  rabbits before.  Well, we haven   t heard it from you.  Well, I don   t really remember that much about it. Do you remember ever  going to one of those?  I didn   t go to one.  I remember them.  Did you get to go?  I had to stay in the car, because I was little. They didn   t have guns, mostly just  clubs.  24  Cavis  Cavis  D. Kear  Lemons  Cavis  D. Kear  Cavis  D. Kear  Cavis  Kite  D. Kear  Cavis  D. Kear  Cavis  D. Kear  Cavis  D. Kear  J. Kear  They beat the rabbits to death with the clubs. We had so many. Now we don   t  even see rabbits out here.  We did have them after that time, but we don   t now.  They   d put up fences and drive them into a v-shape. Then they got in there  and just killed them with clubs and baseball bats and things like that.  Then what did they do with them?  Didn   t they sell them?  I   ve seen some piles of them on a truck, but I don   t know.  I think they sold them as some kind of food.  Dog food or some thing like that.  Yeah, I think dog food or something.  You guys never ate any rabbits from those drives?  The rabbits were eating up the crops.  Daddy would shoot them, wouldn   t he? Mother did them just like fried  chicken. Hers was just about as good as fried chicken. When I fixed one one  time, it was like rabbit  laughter .  Those guys that did it probably thought it was just sport, but farmers wanted it  done.  Well, I think the farmers felt like they had to, because they were eating what  little stuff was there, and there wasn   t much stuff anywhere.  Those dirt storms were really pretty depressing for people. My folks always  said, we were right in the middle of the Depression of course, they said that the  Depression wouldn   t have been so bad if hadn   t been for the dirt storms.  Nobody had money.  It was a double whammy.  The dirt was very depressing for people.  I can remember we could see them coming. My mother would get towels and  wet them and put them all around the windows to try to keep the dirt from  coming on in. It   d come right through the windowsills. So that was our job, to  get those towels wet and get them in the windows and around the doors. You  tried to keep it out as much as you could. We had linoleum on our floor, and  you could see your footprints on it just walking through it. It was so fine that  25  Cavis  J. Kear  Cavis  Lane  Cavis  Humphrey  Cavis  J. Kear  Lane  D. Kear  it was like face powder. It kind of stuck together a little bit like face powder.  If it got damp, it was really a mess.  My mother was very strong with keeping ourselves looking good. Every  night, we had to wash our faces and put cream on them. We   d wake up in the  morning, and here would be our eyes. Here was the dust all over us, but here  were our eyes, and that was all you could see.  Dean said he remembered his mother putting a wet sheet over their bed. Not  touching them, but from the headboard down to the end, so to try keep the dust  out of them while they were sleeping. The next morning they   d get up, and  they could write on the sheet. It was just a thin, sticky, wet layer.  I think ours was a little thicker than that, wasn   t it?  We scooped ours out with a shovel.  We really had it because we were on a farm.  It was everywhere.  Yeah, nothing to stop it.  We lived in Goodwell after we were married in the early    50s, and we had  some pretty bad dirt storms then. They said we were getting Colorado sand,  because you could hear it hit the side of the house and stuff like that. It had  been quite a while there. Maybe it went and came back again.  One thing I remember vividly is when the sand banked up around the house.  Then we   d have another dirt storm, and these would all be in a different place.  Well, it half covered our barn. So Daddy finally had to raise the barn above  that so we could bring the cows in to milk.  Let me tell you a little story. My mother, if she was alive, she   d slap me for  this. It was so depressing, and they would sometimes last two days or three  days, and people had to have something to do. You couldn   t go outside, and of  course, if you remember, this was in the prohibition days. My folks did  consume alcohol, very little, but I recall them telling about this more than I  have to remember the experience, but I remember the people. There was  another couple that had two daughters. They were a little older than I was, but  I don   t remember whether they came to the house and played. I don   t  remember that, but my parents and this other couple played cards. They   d  play by the hour. I don   t know what kind of cards they played or whether they  had partners or anything like that, but they had about a half a pint of spirits.  Like I said, this was prohibition days, and as a reward, the winners got a little  sip of the bottle, and the losers just got to smell the cap  laughter . I can  remember my folks telling this thing, and I   m sure it happened. For a half-pint  bottle, you   d have to make that last a long time.  26  J. Kear  D. Kear  Lane  D. Kear  Lane  Cavis  J. Kear  Lemons  Cavis  Lane  D. Kear  Lane  Humphrey  D. Kear  Lemons  Cavis  That   s why they just got to smell, huh?  A lot of stories like that, and a lot of humor stories come out of the dirt storm  era. They called it drink or smell. They said we   d play drink or smell.  I think we did used to on storm days help to string up the rope from the house  to the barn for us to get out there to milk the cows.  They did that in snowstorms too.  I remember one storm we had where we had snow with the dirt storm. There  were dirty snow banks.  They   d just be black, wouldn   t they?  If I was out playing somewhere, and I saw a storm coming, I was always told  to come right home, because if you got caught in it, you couldn   t find your  way home.  Did you know of anyone that was lost in the storms?  I do remember that we used to have to wear dust things over our face when we  went to school. A lot of times we kept them on in the classroom. I don   t know  whether you all ever did or not, did you?  I think it was my eighth grade graduation when the dirt was blowing so badly.  Somebody would be watching over at this side of the car, and somebody over  here and my dad in the middle. We finally got there, didn   t we?  I don   t recall any deaths or anything.  No, now talking about that, I can remember somebody getting lost in the  storm. I think they found their way by following a fence.  I don   t remember that.  My dad got caught in one of them around Tribune, Kansas, which is 70 miles  north of here. It was just black. He said you couldn   t see the radiator on the  old car. You didn   t know where you were, and he finally pulled on the left  side of the road, and there was a little whirl made by the grater. He opened the  door and looked straight at the ground to know that he was even on the road.  He drove that way for several miles, real slow, until he hit the town of Tribune,  and he spent the night there. It   s kind of hard to visualize. We had dirt in the  air the other day, but it wasn   t like these things.  It   s a good thing. I might have turned around and gone home if I   d seen one of  those.  We haven   t had one of those for a long time. Probably in the    50s, was that  27  J. Kear  Cavis  J. Kear  Lane  Humphrey  Lane  D. Kear  Lemons  Cavis  Lemons  Humphrey  J. Kear  Lemons  J. Kear  Cavis  Lane  Cavis  Lane  Humphrey  when that last one was?  I don   t know. Their agriculture procedures became the main focus. They  figured out what was causing it.  They were breaking up too much ground.  And every year too, that was a problem.  We had a bad one in    53. That was after Jody started to school.  We rode the school bus to school. One fellow took the back seat out of his car,  and had little benches built in there, and that was our school bus. Many times,  as we were coming home from school, the vehicle would stall, so he would  have to get out and try and clean that motor that had so much dirt in it that it  wouldn   t run. So we sat there.  Well, it started at least.  The rotor and the distributor caps. You had to pull them out and put them  back on there to keep the ignition on the car going, distributor caps.  Did you know people who left Oklahoma?  Oh, a lot.  Friends or relatives?  No, I don   t think we had any relatives leave, but there were a lot of people that  left from Keyes and Boise City, and I   m sure here to.  My father left. I think he was just so depressed that he had to get out of there.  Where did your dad go?  California, where else  laughter ?  That   s the only place they all went from Oklahoma.  I don   t think there was as much of an exodus from the panhandle as there was  down state.  That   s probably true.  They were the Okies, not us.  I don   t remember any of our friends leaving. I don   t remember anybody from  around us that left.  28  Lemons  Lane  J. Kear  Cavis  Lane  D. Kear  Cavis  Lemons  Cavis  Lane  Cavis  Lane  Cavis  Lemons  Lane  Lemons  Lane  Cavis  Lemons  Lane  Why do you think that is?  I don   t know.  Well, these were family owned farms, and they were going to stick it out.  Down there it was just a little acreage, and maybe it wasn   t that important to  them.  And perhaps not that many owned their land down there, I don   t know.  Everybody out here homesteaded; they were trying to hold on to their land.  Many of the survivors ended up wealthy on land, mineral royalties, and things  like that. Some of the old timers out north of town ended up with more land,  because it was cheap.  But a lot of them lost land during that time too. And what about killing the  cows? What about the cows? Has anybody ever mentioned that?  Go ahead.  I don   t know very much about that.  They government ordered them to be killed.  How much did they pay each individual?  If they hadn   t, they would have died anyway. One year I can remember, the  only cow feed we had, our neighbor and my dad went out and cut thistles and  stacked them.  Do you know what a thistle is?  Yes.  That   s all we had for the cows.  Do you remember anyone in this area thinking that that wasn   t such a good  idea and that even if they knew it had to be done, they didn   t like the idea of  the government killing cows?  Oh, I   m sure.  I don   t think there was any way, because they were so thin that they had to.  The government did it for a good purpose.  What about other government programs? How were they?  Well, some of them we could have done without. I remember they started  29  Cavis  Lane  Humphrey  Lane  Humphrey  J. Kear  Lane  Humphrey  Lane  Humphrey  Lemons  Humphrey  Lane  Cavis  Lemons  J. Kear  Humphrey  Lane  Humphrey  parity payments. I can   t explain it to you, but I remember that we had received  a parity payment of  15. It was close to Easter, so we went to town, and  Mother bought each one of us a pair of shoes, material for new dresses and  overalls for my dad.  For  15?  For  15, and she still had some left. That   s how far money would go then.  Well, Daddy measured land at that time.  Uh-huh, started measuring land, wheat land.  That was one of their jobs.  They put people to work building buildings, government programs, WPA, and  things of that sort so they would have jobs and get a little money.  Our dad helped build the school and brought in canned goods. When we  moved to Keyes, we had a new school building that was built by the WPA.  It   s still there.  Alice was fortunate enough to start school when the school in Boise City was  brand new, and the one at Keyes was brand new.  56:25  Our paper came from Wichita, Kansas. It was always a day or two later.  Wichita Beacon.  Yeah, Wichita Beacon. That was our paper.  We read that. We didn   t read The Daily Oklahoman.  I don   t think we even knew it existed.  Is that still true now?  It is out here. We have a daughter and granddaughter and sister-in-law and  everybody down that way, and when you watch the news and weather, quite  often, the panhandle isn   t even on the map. They chop it off right there.  Not anymore, on Channel Nine, we learn more about Guymon and Kenton  than the other channels.  We don   t get Channel Nine  laughter .  No, but really, Boise City and Kenton are mentioned a lot.  30  Lemons  Cavis  Humphrey  Cavis  Lane  Cavis  Lane  Lemons  J. Kear  Humphrey  Lane  Humphrey  Lane  Humphrey  J. Kear  Humphrey  Lane  Some of the interesting things that people have been talking about are home  remedies and medicine. How would you treat things like a stomach ache or an  ear ache?  How about castor oil. First my mother gave it to us when we felt bad, and then  she gave it to us while we had whatever it was, and then she gave it to us to  cure us.  To clean us out.  We took three doses of castor oil every time we were sick, and I still shiver  just thinking about it.  Her favorite thing was kerosene. She put kerosene on any cut or anything.  It was fabulous. It healed anything.  It wasn   t kerosene; it was coal oil. For a cold, she mixed turpentine, coal oil,  and lard, and rubbed it on our chests and warmed a cloth and wrapped us up.  What   s something you remember?  Probably the main thing I remember, because I don   t remember being sick  very much, but I did have asthma, and I   m sure it was a result of the dust. My  mother had asthma also, but my sister didn   t. At the time, we thought I was  just having a little spell of the flu or something, but I couldn   t breathe. So I   d  sleep in a lawn chair, a folding canvas lawn chair. If I didn   t go to school, I   d  set in that lawn chair by the window. At the time, we thought it was the flu,  because eventually it would make you sick, but I think it was nothing but  asthma and allergies. I don   t remember taking a whole lot of medicine.  We had sassafras tea, always in the fall before the cold weather got there.  Mother liked that. I don   t know why we drank it, but we did.  It was good, too.  Oh yes, very good.  You can still buy it.  Oh yes, because I make myself some every once in a while, but it   s not as  good as it was when I was a kid.  Is sassafras an herb?  Yes.  I got to where I couldn   t take castor oil, and she   d put it in orange juice, and it  31  J. Kear  Lane  Humphrey  Lemons  Humphrey  Lane  Humphrey  Lane  Lemons  J. Kear  Lemons  J. Kear  Humphrey  J. Kear  Lane  Cavis  J. Kear  Cavis  J. Kear  Humphrey  almost turned me against orange juice.  I remember Camphophenique, of course that might have been a little bit later.  I have a little bottle at the house. It must be 50 years old. It was one of the  original. Mother thought that solved a lot of problems.  Yeah, that was being used at that time.  We used a lot of Guaiacamph too. It was a very green, very strong substance.  What did you do with that?  You rubbed it on your chest.  My mother was subject to pneumonia a lot, and they used that on her  So the doctor recommended that, but you could buy it over the counter. You  didn   t have to have a prescription for it.  It   s a green salve. You put it on real thick.  Any type of Horehound Candy that was used as a sort of cough drop type  thing?  Oh yeah. It was used as a cough drop, nasty  I took some of that to school  one time too, because we read a story that mentioned it. So the first time I  found some, I bought it and took it to school. Everybody got a piece, and none  of them finished it.  You liked it.  I don   t like it.  I like it.  It   s awfully strong.  It   s supposed to be good for coughs.  That   d probably be good for you, since you   re having trouble.  Really, my husband was talking about the spirits, but for congestion,  sometimes they would fix a little.  Mother fixed a hot-toddy for us.  It would loosen things up just about as quick as anything.  It really stopped your coughing.  32  Kite  J. Kear  Kite  J. Kear  Humphrey  Cavis  Lane  Cavis  Lemons  Humphrey  Cavis  Lane  Humphrey  Lemons  Humphrey  Lemons  J. Kear  Lane  Cavis  Lemons  What exactly was in a hot toddy?  Do you mean now or then?  Has it changed?  Probably, but there was lemon juice and whiskey and a little honey, and it was  watered down a little bit and heated. My husband kind of likes it when he gets  a cough.  What part of it did you heat? I know it was warm.  I heat the whole thing. I heat it in the microwave.  You didn   t heat it in a microwave then  laughter .  No, we didn   t have one then, but I have since I   ve been married.  What was your favorite food to eat in the thirties?  Fried chicken.  Our mother fried the best fried chicken in the whole entire world, and none of  us can fry it as good.  She raised her own.  And chocolate cake.  With or without icing in the thirties?  Oh, with icing  laughter . And fried doughnuts.  How about you, what were you eating?  It was a treat to have a piece of cube steak, the processed steak. Mother had  them bring chickens in from the country. She had someone that would bring  her a live chicken. They had a place to put it when they brought it to the  house. When she   d come home, she   d take it out. There was a tree stump  about 30-inches high, and she   d driven two nails in it. She   d stretch that  chicken   s neck between those two nails and chop its head off. Then she   d  hang it on the clothesline and let it bleed. Then you   d pick it and scald it; you  know, the things I   m sure that you all did all the time.  My mother would wring their neck.  Margie, you need to tell the story about the worms.  The worms?  33  Cavis  Lane  Cavis  Lane  Humphrey  Lane  Humphrey  Lane  Cavis  J. Kear  Cavis  Lane  Humphrey  Lemons  Humphrey  Cavis  Lane  Humphrey  This is so cute.  Well, during dry years, every once in a while we would have an invasion of  those green armyworms. Our mother was in a home demonstration club, and  she went to Stillwater for annual meetings. I was the only one that had learned  to fix the chicken. My dad did the death part, and I did the rest of it.  Well I picked it. I always got to pick them.  Alice was out in the garden trying to pick the worms off all the garden stuff.  So I went in, and I was ready to cut it up. I started cutting up and down and  across, and here were these worms crawling out  laughter . I couldn   t finish it,  so the neighbor lady came up and finished it. They all but ate the fence posts.  Oh, they really did.  You did save the garden, didn   t you?  Yes we did, but mother was very unhappy. She asked why we didn   t just let it  go. We spent hours out there picking the worms off the broccoli. I remember,  especially off of the broccoli. They loved broccoli.  We always had a garden.  And what we did with our garden, we had a fence around it, and my dad would  put gunnysacks clear around there to stop the wind.  And the rabbits.  Well, rabbits too, but I think it was mostly to cut the wind off so everything  wouldn   t blow to pieces. I can remember those gunnysacks being clear around  it. They had to have something to protect it.  We lived on a kind of a hill, so we always had wind damage. Our neighbors  were down in a little valley. We always had good water.  We had marvelous water. We kept our milk and our cream and our butter cool  by putting them in a tank that had water running all the time.  Did that keep it cold?  Uh-huh, really good, cool.  Well, it wasn   t ice cold, but it was just right. Did we keep the butter out there  too?  Out by the separator.  Uh-huh, in a jar.  34  Lane  Kite  Cavis  Lemons  J. Kear  Lane  J. Kear  Lane  Cavis  Kite  Humphrey  J. Kear  Kite  Humphrey  Lemons  Humphrey  J. Kear  We drank skim milk, but we poured the cream in it  laughter . Well, we sold  cream and eggs; that   s what bought our groceries.  When you separate the cream from the milk, the result is skim milk? Because  all of the fat is out of it, right? So if you sold your cream, then all you drank  on the farm was skim milk.  No,  laughter  we kept the cream. What we used to drink was chocolate milk,  so we   d pour all of this chocolate in it. Mother made us chocolate. We put the  chocolate in there and poured half of it cream. That was so good.  Well, what were Christmases like? Did you decorate for Christmas?  Oh yeah, we always had a tree. We didn   t put lights out everywhere like they  do now, but you always had a tree. I always had a doll. Then I   d go over to  my aunt   s Christmas Day and take my doll. My cousin would have a new doll,  and we would play. I love dolls. Anyway, we had a good Christmas,  considering.  I think all of us played with dolls a lot longer than kids do now, and I think  they   d all be better off if they played with dolls.  Well, the dolls have changed too.  Yes, we didn   t have teenage size dolls. Then mother would make the clothes  for them.  And mother made a lot of our clothes, until they started sewing. I never did,  and then she would just go ahead and make mine. We all three dressed alike;  she dressed us alike, and they used to call us the three cotton tops.  So you   ve really gone a long ways. You really advanced a long way since you  used to dress a like. You   ve really made a lot of changes  laughter    Well, we are dressed alike.  That   s what he   s saying.  You haven   t changed a bit.  My mother was quite a seamstress. She could make all three of us a dress in  one day.  Wow  I think I made a dress once. It took like a year.  And you weren   t happy with it then, were you?  He remembers it.  35  Lemons  Lane  Humphrey  J. Kear  Humphrey  Cavis  Humphrey  Lemons  Humphrey  Cavis  Humphrey  Cavis  J. Kear  Lane  Cavis  J. Kear  So what was Christmas like on the farm?  Oh, we always had a live tree, not an artificial one.  We had lights on it too, because daddy had them. Not many people had lights  on their tree. We always got a lot of clothes. Mother would sew a lot.  Usually it was a new coat and a new hat and new dresses, and usually shoes to  match. My mother was into fashion. She knew the fashion before it ever got  there.  She set the fashion, huh?  A lot of times she did. Mother was a beautiful lady. Christmas was special.  The main thing I can remember is the one Christmas that daddy made the red  toy chest. I don   t know what he made it out of, but it was just so neat. We  kept dolls in there for a long time. I think that ended up down in the cellar,  and I think all of it ruined. I don   t know why we didn   t get it out. We should  have.  We always had good things to eat. We always had our Christmas on Sunday  morning.  Is that just a family tradition?  I meant Christmas morning.  I couldn   t remember that.  Yeah, Christmas morning. A lot of people had it at night.  We never did open anything before hand. We always waited until the  morning. I   d lay there and listen for Santa Clause. I can remember that.  My sister was seven years older than I was, and I was just kind of a pain to her  in every way  laughter .  During all those dust bowl years, we did get rain. Invariably we would get a  big rain around Decoration Day. Mother finally got to where she had to have  somewhere to put those little chickens to keep them alive, so my dad built  some kind of cave. Do you remember that? And kept those little chickens in  there. We got this big rain, and it washed them away. That was kind of sad.  Mother and the neighbor lady always made the flowers for the graves. They   d  start two or three months ahead.  They would be beautiful. What was that kind of soft stuff that they used?  Cr  pe paper probably.  36  Cavis  Humphrey  Cavis  Humphrey  Lane  Humphrey  Lemons  Lane  J. Kear  Kite  J. Kear  Kite  J. Kear  Lemons  Humphrey  Lane  Lemons  Cavis  Lane  No, no, it wasn   t cr  pe paper.  But then this other stuff came out.  It was real soft pliable material.  And they made a lot of violets, I remember.  They put them in boxes with glass over it.  Then they   d bring them home and paint them. If the glass was broken, they   d  replace the glass each year.  Well, do you remember when times started getting better? Is there anything  that stands out in your mind that made you think, oh, things were better?  Just about the time the war came along.  Green Grass. Things were growing a little bit. We had lilac bushes, and I love  lilac bushes. Any my back yard had a lot of trees in it, and they were green. It  just looked better, it made you feel better.  Was there a time when your Lilac bushes wouldn   t bloom?  Oh yeah.  So your flowers coming out was a big deal?  Yeah and we had a white lilac bush too, and purple. We always had flowers,  later.  How about you guys; is there anything that sticks out in your mind that things  were better? She mentioned the war, and she mentioned flowers.  It was right after I started to college when things began to change, wasn   t it? I  started college in    40.  We just began to sort of block out everything in between the depression, the  dirt storms and the war. We had our first and second years of college begun.  How do you think living through the dirty thirties has effected who you are  now? What kinds of things do you think you learned then that you carry with  you today?  I just feel like as a parent and a wife, I could not have gone through those years  like our parents did. Do you wonder sometimes if you could have gone  through and done everything they did?  You did what you had to do.  37  Cavis  J. Kear  Humphrey  Lane  Humphrey  Cavis  Lane  J. Kear  Cavis  Humphrey  Kite  Humphrey  Kite  Cavis  Lane  J. Kear  Lemons  Cavis  Lane  I guess so, but I sure wonder sometimes if I could have gone through and done  the great things that they did to survive that.  In certain areas, I am conservative. I don   t like to make payments on anything.  I don   t like to go in debt for anything.  I think we   re all that way. I still, if I can   t pay for it I don   t get it. I think it  made us stronger people.  I think, in a way, it made us overly conservative.  I think we all have a grocery store in our pantry, don   t we?  Laughter   I do. Alice tried to straighten mine up. She   s been visiting me this week.  She   s tried to find something in there and couldn   t even find it.  I think we handle adversity a little bit easier.  It makes you a little bit closer too. You kind of depend on each other.  I still feel like during those years, that we were probably closer to the Lord at  that time than any time. I know that we   re all strong Christians now, but I  really think that people were closer to the Lord and more people were in  church and helped each other more. Our mother did a lot helping people who  were ill during those years too. I just don   t know how many times she was off  helping somebody and taking care of someone.  She was called out at night a lot of times.  You don   t think having those two million tons of dirt in your face made you  question why he was doing this to you?  I never thought of it that way.  One of you thought you had done something really bad.  No, I didn   t  I think it came on so gradual that we just grew with it.  I was young enough that I didn   t think about it.  So were those the good old days? What was your fondest memory?  Oh, they were wonderful days. We went through a lot, but there were really  wonderful days. We were happy and had a good life.  But I wouldn   t want to go through the dirt storms again.  38  Cavis  Lane  Kite  J. Kear  Kite  J. Kear  Cavis  J. Kear  Kite  J. Kear  Kite  J. Kear  Kite  J. Kear  Kite  J. Kear  Lane  J. Kear  You wouldn   t want to go through it again, but there we so many good things to  remember.  I   m sure we have a little bit of a different slant on it than our parents would,  because they had the responsibility that we didn   t have.  I wanted to talk a little bit about you dad leaving for California.  I really don   t know. At the time he didn   t have a job. I think that he was  probably depressed about the whole no job thing and the dirt and everything.  He had a sister out there, so he went out there and never came back.  You lived in a fairly big house, did he have a good job?  No, he worked for the highway department for awhile. That   s what I mainly  remember him doing. And bookkeeping.  What age were you when he left?  Seven and my sister was 14.  Did he lose his job?  I assume so.  Was there divorce?  Mother was really ashamed having to do it. She didn   t do it for several years,  and then a lawyer told her that she needed to have some legal rights there. As  long as you   re married, you have to share things. My grandfather was very  good to her, because he was ashamed as well. He gave her the house and put it  in her name after she got the divorce so that wouldn   t be any problem.  Did you ever make contact with him?  He came back whenever someone would die. When grandfather and my uncle  died he came back.  How did you feel about him?  Not very good.  Our grandfather homesteaded out here in 1906 and he left after 1910 because  he couldn   t stand it. We did not locate him until the forties. He had  homesteaded this quarter and left my grandmother, two sons and my great-granddad  who homesteaded next to him. The state of Oklahoma would not  grant her the homestead rights to that until 1919.  Dean   s grandparents on the other side were also homesteaders and they lived  39  Cavis  Lane  Cavis  in a dugout. They had to live there so many years in order to claim it. The  father was a shoe cobbler and he had a place in town where he worked. It was  right back here, I think he said, somewhere. He   d walk out 26 miles every  weekend, but the mother and the children stayed out there because somebody  had to live out there.  I have something I wanted to say. We looked forward to Pioneer Day all year  long. We just couldn   t wait for that to come. Well one time, it was blowing,  but daddy let us all go ahead and get ready. It was just blowing so bad that he  got about halfway and we turned around and went back, and we cried all the  way home.  We came one time when the dirt was blowing. Everybody looked just brown  because we were all dirty.  I never will forget how we were all acting. I   m sure my dad was upset with us,  because we all cried all the way home.  -------  -------  
