 Kite  Well, this is just a very informal session. There are no rules or regulations.  We just start out with an introduction of everyone at the table, and then we just  kind of move on from there to wherever it leads us for however long we feel  like we want to stay here. I think we should have another person coming, but  we   re going to get started now, because they   re waiting on a termite  inspection.  It   s May 31, 2001. We   re in the Cimarron Heritage Center in Boise City,  Oklahoma.  We   ll just start with you. State your first name and your maiden name and  married name if you like, where you were born, and when you were born.  We   ll do that around the table, and then we   ll move on from there. So if you   d  like to start, that would be great.  My name is Mary Lee Montgomery.  All right, and where were you born?  I was born in Stratford, Texas.  When?  Six, five, 1926.  June 5, 1926?  Uh-huh.  You   ve got a birthday coming up.  Somebody told me that a while ago, and how they knew, I don   t know    Laughter   All right.  5  Garner  Kite  Garner  Kite  Garner  Kite  Randolph  Kite  Montgomery  Garner  Kite  Garner  Kite  Garner  Kite  Garner  Kite  Montgomery  Kite  Montgomery  Randolph  I   m Lois James Garner.  Lois James Garner. I think I   ve seen your show    The Rockford Files.     Yeah you have, that   s my cousin.  And where were you born?  Stratford, Texas, 4-4-   25. I   ve already had my birthday.  Last but not least.  I   m Joyce Gray Randolph. I was born nine miles east of Keyes, November 8,  1926.  Wow, so you   re almost all the same age, or very close. Huh, okay. Well,  would you say that you all grew up in rural areas, in a farm situation?  I did.  Well, part of that time we were living in Stratford and part of the time out in  the country.  When you lived in Stratford, you lived in town.  Yes.  And then you moved out     Out in the country, and then back in to Stratford.  So you had it both ways.  Yes.  Well, what do you remember about the dirt storms, your most vivid memory?  When you think back to the dust bowl, what stands out in your mind?  Well, what stands out to me is just that you looked at the north, and you   d just  see this huge rolling cloud, thinking maybe it was a rain cloud today, and it  was dirt, just rolling dirt.  What were your thoughts when you saw that?  I don   t think I had sense enough to be scared.  If we were where there was a cellar, we went to the cellar, because people  didn   t know what it was.  6  Kite  Randolph  Kite  Montgomery  Garner  Randolph  Kite  Randolph  Kite  Kite  Williams  Compton  Williams  Kite  Williams  Compton  Kite  Compton  Lemons  Compton  Williams  I know the April 14, 1935 storm, Black Sunday, was what a lot of people call  the worst of the rollers. Was that the first one that you guys remember seeing,  in 1935? You would have been ten and nine years old then  But that   s the first big one. You know that black, black.  And as children, you weren   t afraid, or you weren't that afraid?  I don   t think I was afraid.  No.  We were with our parents in the cellar at friends    house.  Where were you when that storm rolled in? You were visiting?  We   d been hunting arrowheads, and we were at Roton   s house, and we went to  the cellar. There were eight children and four dogs.  All right, hey.   Two new ladies arrive.   Okay, well we started out by just introducing yourself by saying your name  and where you were born and when you were born.  I was Lottie Brandt, born in Pratt, Kansas in 1925.  Used to be Lottie Brandt.  Uh-huh, but I changed it to Williams, and there are so many Williams.  You   d rather just say Brandt.  Everybody here knows me more by Brandt than they do Williams.  Yeah, my daughter   s even a Williams.  All right.  I   m Bernice Compton. I was born at Fletcher, Oklahoma in 1913.  We were just talking about what you remember about the first time you saw  dirt storms.  I went through them all.  I did too.  7  Randolph  Compton  Garner  Compton  Garner  Compton  Montgomery  Williams  Kite  Williams  Compton  Williams  Compton  Kite  Williams  Compton  Williams  Compton  Kite  Did you live here Ms. Compton?  Yeah. I never ever left. I   m the only one in the family that never ever left.  When did you move to Cimarron County?  1917. We came here in covered wagons.  You were a Witten, weren   t you?  Yes.  Were you here when the dirt storms were?  Oh yeah, I grew up in them.  We were just talking about the first time you saw a big storm rolling in. What  went through your mind, or what did you think the first time you saw one?  Oh, I can remember the duster   the bad   one real well. Of course, I was  about ten years old then, but as far as being afraid of them; to me it was just an  every day occurrence. The wind would blow from eight o   clock in the  morning until six in the evening. You just knew it would. There was nothing  different about it.  Once in a while we   d have a nice day, and then we   d wash.  I can remember Mama got the first gasoline washing machine, instead of the  scrub board.  That was quite an improvement though, the scrub board, over what it could  have been.  Do you remember the first time that you received or had a new appliance in  your house, like the first time you got the washing machine, what you thought,  or refrigerator?  A sewing machine. Mama got a new sewing machine about 1930. It was what  they called a national two-spool, and I hate bobbins to this day  laughter ,  because it had a whole spool of thread you put in the thing, and I still have the  sewing machine, and it still sews.  I   ve got my mother   s. It   s like that too.  The national two-spool?  Uh-huh.  That would be the appliance you remember the most?  8  Williams  Kite  Garner  Kite  Garner  Compton  Kite  Randolph  Kite  Garner  Randolph  Compton  Kite  Compton  Garner  Compton  Williams  Compton  Kite  Yeah, because I started sewing when I was about five years old.  Wow  What about the rest of you?  Well, the first new appliance we got out in the country were those Servel  refrigerators, but we got those because we didn   t have electricity out at Caring,  and they were butane.  They ran off of the gas.  Uh-huh, but that was probably in about the forties, maybe late thirties or early  forties, so it wasn   t really during the dust bowl.  I think it was    46 when I got my first one, and it ran off of kerosene.  Refrigerators?  The first one we had, we   d moved from Keyes to Buffalo, and daddy traded an  old truck he had on the farm, after he gave up farming, for a Servel gas  refrigerator.  What was the thing that you remember best about that refrigerator? Could  you have a treat or a delicacy because of it that you couldn   t have had before?  Ice tea.  Well, you could keep your food better.  And ice.  Ice.  Most of you know Mr. Peck, running the salt mine, and he filled every tray, so  I thought we   d have ice the next morning, but we didn   t.  Oh you didn   t?  No, that was too much all at once, and we just put in maybe one or two trays  probably.  Well, the first one I remember is when I was working for Mrs. Hall up here.  They had that refrigerator. We had an icebox, and you always had to make  sure that you got that pan out from under it, or you had to mop.  Well, we didn   t have an icebox, but we had some real up-to-date things in our  house when we had them, at least at that time. We had the windmill just a few  feet from the house, and the pipe came right in barrels inside.  Into the house?  9  Compton  Randolph  Lemons  Compton  Randolph  Williams  Kite  Garner  Compton  Garner  Kite  Garner  Montgomery  Kite  Williams  Yeah, and then the overflow from the barrel went through the cooling tank,  where we kept all the milk and cream and things like that.  Before we left the farm in    35, Mother got a Maytag washing machine. It was  a gasoline motor, I guess. What was it?  Gasoline.  Yeah, that   d be gasoline  .  They set it outside, because we moved it to Buffalo with us.  You   d get that thing started and it   d go put, put, put, put, put. Mom would get  so mad at it when it would die, and she would have to stomp on it again to get  it to go.  They had that pedal that you would step on or something. I   ve never seen one  in action, but it looks like quite the contraption.  Well, we had the scrub board out in the country. Mother had an electric, I  think it was a Meadows washing machine, but they   d rent the house when we  moved to the country and leave the washing machine there. She wanted the  right to go back in and wash, but she   d do that one time, and that was too  much trouble. I just loved to scrub clothes on those old rub boards.  It sure did wear them out though, didn   t it?  And we had an old milk house, and it had an old coal stove out there that  heated the water.  So you didn   t mind laundry day? It wasn   t too bad?  Huh-uh. I thought it was kind of fun. How did you do it Mary Lee?  What I remember is mom took all of the laundry over to Aunt Peach   s, and  they did the laundry there, because she had the, I think it was a Maytag  washer, and then we ate there and came home.  Well, how would you say your lives changed as it went into the thirties, as it  became the dirty thirties? Would you say your lives changed any at all  because of what was happening around you?  Not for me. My mother taught me how to cook and sew and everything, and  there was a big garden. We did lots of canning. We had enough food; we  never were hungry. They sold their chickens in the summertime and had  ducks and geese for Thanksgiving, and turkeys, so we had all that. We  butchered our beef and our hogs, so we were never hungry. We had good  food.  10  Montgomery  Williams  Kite  Williams  Compton  Williams  Montgomery  Randolph  Garner  Williams  Montgomery  Garner  Williams  Compton  Williams  Garner  Lemons  Garner  We had good food. We had cows to milk. We had good food.  Yeah. Daddy, during the five years that we didn   t have any crops, he would  dig the yucca plants and chop them up to feed the cattle. The first time they  had some feed, they wouldn   t eat it, because it wasn   t like the yucca   We had another person telling us about using the roots.  The roots off of the yucca. You dug them up and kind of scorched them first  with a fire and chopped them up and the cattle ate them. And thistles, we even  ate the thistles ourselves. I liked the thistles when they   re real tiny.  They made good greens.  And the lamb   s quarter, I   ve still got some over here in my yard. I picked a  bunch the other day, because I still like them.  Don   t tell Lois, she   ll come and get them   Laughter   She   ll come eat with you.  I love lamb   s quarter.  Oh, I do too. I had one bush out there.  We used to go out in the country and pick lamb   s quarter.  But you can   t anymore, because they spray it.  Well this hasn   t got any spray on it. If you want some, there   s still some under  my tree over there  laughter .  Mine is in full bloom right now, down toward Amarillo. It   s just thick in  bloom.  Another thing I miss is the sand plums we used to have then.  We   d go down toward Amarillo, and that was our summer picnic, was going  down toward Amarillo and picking sand plums. Mother would make jelly and  plum butter, but she also canned those with seed in to later do something. Of  course everybody butchered, but we   d always have beef hanging out, either on  the windmill or in the well house. Mother had a big, old, wooden, chest  icebox, and she   d put hams in that in the fall. There were a bunch of us, so it  took a lot of ham.  How many siblings did you have?  I had nine siblings. There were ten of us. And there were always some other  cousins or hired men.  11  Randolph  Garner  Randolph  Garner  Lemons  Garner  Kite  Williams  Garner  Kite  Williams  Randolph  Kite  Williams  Compton  Now you   re a twin, aren   t you?  Uh-huh.  Was that the only set of twins in your family?  I had an aunt that had five sets.  Five sets of twins?  Mrs. Garner affirms.  Wow  laughter   Are you an  identical twin?  No. I had a brother.  So you would say that there wasn   t really a time when you remember things  getting bad or tight.  We didn   t know any different.  It was tight all the time.  So the twenties, thirties, and forties, it just all blended in together for you all.  Is that right? I   m just making a broad statement.  We just grew up.  You accepted it. Now Daddy, we had the farm, he rented land, and then he  owned 320 acres.    25 was the last crop, and my brother told me that they had  20,000 bushels of wheat, and it was only worth 25 cents, and he wouldn   t sell  it. Well, he had to make payments, so he finally had to sell it, but he got 27  cents a bushel for it. It went on from there, and then in    35, after it got so  dirty, we moved to Buffalo. Julius Cox was the representative here, and he  and Daddy got together, and he   d got him a job with the state Game and Fish  Commission. I think that   s what it was called then. So he had to move to  Buffalo. He had seven or nine counties to oversee as the game ranger, so  that   s when we moved to Buffalo.  Well surely going five years without raising a crop was something different for  you all, for your parents.  Oh yeah, it was very bad. I know my father had money in Germany, and his  brother sent him some money through those years to take care of it, but that  was his inheritance, and we never did get it, because after the war started, the  German government confiscated all of it. My mother said that if you don   t  ever have it, you don   t know what you   re missing, so you aren   t going to miss  it anyhow  laughter .  Can   t miss what you never knew. By the forties though, it was beginning to  get better. My parents moved to California, and I   d even send them five  dollars every now and then. It doesn   t seem like much, but at that time it was  12  Randolph  Garner  Williams  Garner  Williams  Garner  Compton  Garner  Williams  Kite  Montgomery  Kite  Montgomery  Randolph  Williams  Kite  quite a bit.  Well they did odd jobs. Daddy barbered in Keyes. The brother-in-law was a  barber, and they farmed. There were odd jobs to do. I guess that   s what they  did.  I was really thinking that the really hard times didn   t start until the thirties, did  it? The twenties weren   t hard.  In about    31 or    32, I think.  My father died in    35, and in    35, things were looking up a little bit for us. Not  because he died  laughing , but because I know he told Mother he didn   t think  if it had been the year before that he could have left her, but by then, things  were a little bit better.  My father died in 1938.  But we were never very good farmers, so that farming didn   t make that much  difference to us.  Well, you were ranchers.  We were more, yes.  My dad was a well driller, so that was where a good bit of our income came  from. I   m sure as we look at income today it wouldn   t amount to much. There  was one occasion that these people that needed a well had to have a well, and  they traded my dad a player piano for drilling that well. I just thought that it  must have broken their heart to have to part with that. You didn   t have much  else.  What about friends or neighbors? Do you remember them going through  similar things or worse times or packing up and leaving?  We had neighbors, but they were going through the same thing we were.  We   d get together and play Dominoes or Forty-Two, something.  What were some favorite things you would do to pass the time like that,  besides those two things?  I don   t know what I did.  Hunt arrowheads, lots of arrowheads.  I did quilting and embroidery work, and I still do it.  You were a big sewer.  13  Williams  Kite  Williams  Compton  Randolph  Williams  Lemons  Williams  Compton  Williams  Garner  Williams  Compton  Kite  Compton  I always have been.  Big seamstress. You started at five, you said?  Uh-huh, and I have my quilt blocks to show for it  laughter .  I learned to sew at a very early age. My sister and I would find a time where  Mom was gone, and we   d get the sewing machine. I didn   t even know to put  the pressing foot down at first. I wondered, how come my mother could make  that go so straight  laughter . Later on, I discovered you had to put the  presser-foot down to sew.  I don   t remember when Mama got her first sewing machine, but Mama always  sewed, so she had it before my recollection, a treadle.  Well my mother had that machine, and I know I was eleven years old when my  father had passed away, and I was just wishing she would go to town, because  I wanted to cut out my own dress and make it. She   d never let me do the thing  by myself. She helped me do it. Well, she went to town, made the mistake of  going, and by the time she came back, I had that dress made. She was so mad  at me for doing it. She said,    I   ll never make another dress for you,    and she  made one blouse for me in my eighth grade, and that was the last thing she  sewed for me. From then on, I had to make my own clothes.  Did she think you   d done a good job on your first dress?  Oh yeah. I did too good of a job, I think. If I didn   t do a good one, I had to rip  it out.  I think in today   s sewing, it wouldn   t have been very good. It wouldn   t have  been what I first learned to sew on. We made our underwear and everything,  dresses.  Yeah, we made our dresses and suits and everything. For my family, I didn   t  buy clothes for my kids until they were teenagers. I made everything.  I don   t know when I learned to sew. I never did sew real well, but I learned  how to sew, and I helped Mother.  After I got married, I sewed for the public for years, until I got tired of it. Now  I don   t sew very often.  Remember, they had the WPA, where we made some things. I don   t know  what they were for.  You would get paid?  Yeah, a little. Probably ten cents an hour, I don   t know.  14  Garner  Kite  Compton  Williams  Kite  Compton  Garner  Randolph  Garner  Compton  Kite  Randolph  Kite  Compton  Randolph  Montgomery  Compton  Kite  Randolph  Garner  I never heard of that.  And what would you do for the money? What were you sewing?  Well, I don   t even remember what we made, but it was something that  somebody could use. It was a government deal. Oh, Mable Finch, you  probably remember her.  Some of the ladies affirm.  And somebody else.  She was good at crocheting.  Do you remember any other government programs during that time coming in,  the WPA, the CCC, or different things coming through?  Our first fence around our cemetery out there, it   s made out of concrete block I  guess was made by WPA workers.  I had a cousin that was in the CCC.  At Buffalo, there was a big CCC camp. Back in, that would have probably  been forty. It was after we moved over there in thirty-five.  Well, I know that Calvin Elms was in the CCC, and I think he went from that  into the service, didn   t he?  I don   t remember. I went to school with Calvin, but I don   t remember that  part. He was so much younger than me.  Do you remember what the town thought about having the camp there? Did it  have an opinion one way or the other of the programs?  Well they accepted those guys, because there are still people that live there that  married those men that were in the camps. They were just young boys.  They were finding their husbands  laughter .  Well they were glad to get a job, any kind of a job.  You know, I don   t remember what all they did.  I don   t know.  Well I don   t either.  They did all kinds of things. They worked on the state parks and built roads.  I know the WPA built an auditorium.  Schools and post offices around.  15  Randolph  Kite  Compton  Kite  Randolph  Williams  Kite  Williams  Compton  Kite  Compton  Garner  Compton  Garner  Compton  Williams  Oh, and the damn at Fort Supply was a project of the WPA, I think.  Did your dads or brothers work with those programs at all?  I think my brothers did some. Almost everybody, if they didn   t have other  things to do, they   d work on some of the WPA, because that would give a little  bit of income, and there wasn   t much income around.  What about other forms of assistance? Was there a community chest to help  people that were in need? Did you pitch in together to help people out?  They helped one another.  They helped one another, but I know my folks wouldn   t accept anything from  the government, because Dad said that he came over here from Germany to  build his life in this country, and he was not going to accept anything from the  government, which they never did. No relief or nothing.  They just never took anything.  Never took one thing, and to them, it was a disgrace to take it.  Well, at one time we applied for some help from   I guess it was called  welfare. This woman came out to interview me, and I remember to this day  what I wore. I had a white crocheted dress that my cousin had made for me,  and oh that thing was hot  laughter , but it was pretty, and I had a hat that I   d  made, a cloth hat. I had some little cloth shoes that I think cost 98 cents out of  the catalog. And that gal, I guess she thought I looked too prosperous. We  didn   t get any, and I   m glad that we got by without it.  Your plan backfired, kind of. You dressed up for the interview, and you looked  too nice.  Well I didn   t know she was coming. I was just getting ready to go to town,  and I didn   t know she was coming. We didn   t have a telephone, so we didn   t  have any way of communication. She just showed up. Not very many, well  some people had party lines. Now my folks had a party line, but when I  married, we didn   t have a phone. We didn   t even get a phone until 1960 I  believe it was.  But they had them in Cimarron County, didn   t they?  Yeah, they had them some places.  My folks had a phone here in the late part of the teens, but we didn   t in Texas.  My folks did too.  My mother wouldn   t have a phone in her house; even to the day she died she  16  Kite  Williams  Kite  Williams  Garner  Montgomery  Garner  Montgomery  Garner  Montgomery  Garner  Kite  Garner  Williams  Garner  Williams  Garner  Williams  wouldn   t have a telephone. She wouldn   t have a T.V.  She didn   t want a telephone?  She didn   t want a telephone. I tried to get her one so I   d know that she was  okay, and there was no way; she was not going to have a telephone in the  house, and she didn   t have a T.V. in the house.  Why didn   t she want a telephone?  I don   t know, she just didn   t. My brother would have to go by and check on  her, but she would not have a telephone put in.  Mary Lee, did ya   ll have one in Texas?  A phone?  Phone, out in the country?  No.  We didn   t either.  There   s one out there now. I don   t know when it was put in. I don   t  remember.  Probably in the forties, but in Texas, we didn   t have them, and over here in  Oklahoma they had phones. Why?  Well, Oklahoma has always been a few decades ahead of Texas  laughter .  Oh, you think so?  That was just on this topic, so don   t let him kid you. But back in the years  whenever the government came in and told everybody they had to kill their  cattle, my dad refused, and he would not kill his. We had 16 head of milk  cows, and he would not have one of them killed. He said that the government  was not going to make him to kill his cattle.  Well, I think they killed some of ours.  They sure killed a lot of them in the whole community, but not ours.  Of course, I was probably about eight when they did that.  This was in the thirties when I remember that. Then you were supposed to go  on welfare or something like that. You had to get rid of everything, and there  was no way. Of course we had a lot of cheese. It was one of our livelihoods  to have that sixteen head of milk cows.  17  Garner  Compton  Kite  Montgomery  Randolph  Garner  Montgomery  Randolph  Kite  Williams  Kite  Williams  Compton  Williams  Kite  Williams  Kite  Williams  Well, I don   t know how they did that then, because we never did go on welfare  or anything like that. I thought you had to have some of those killed. They  didn   t kill all of the cattle, but I   m almost sure they did kill some of our cattle.  I don   t remember us having them killed.  A lot of times it was done by county. Different counties would do it different  ways?  Why did they kill them?  There wasn   t anything to feed them.  Well, but we always had cattle. I   m almost sure. I should ask Frank.  I don   t remember if we killed ours. I don   t remember.  I know my father was real upset about something about the cattle. I can kind  of remember that.  That seems to be a memory that a lot of people carry with them, the day that  they came to do that.  It was our livelihood, but I don   t remember of them    She could get out there  and work, and a lot of other people never would. They   d be in the house.  I   m guessing your dad didn   t vote for Roosevelt.  He probably didn   t  laughter .  We weren   t much involved in that kind of stuff.  Nope, huh-uh. I wasn   t in it.  As the thirties were coming up, and you were ten and nine, and some of you a  little older, what would a typical day be like for guys? When you would get  up, would you have chores to do?  Oh yeah. I always had things I had to do. To this day, I get up and make my  bed as I crawl out. My mother said,    If you come out of that bed, you have  that bed made.    We had a system with everything. Like I said, if I wasn   t in  school, I went to school all through the years that we had school, otherwise,  we   d just do work at home.  What were some chores you remember either not liking or liking or the ones  that stand out in your mind?  I never had anything. I always knew that you had to do it. That was just  something you did, and you didn   t fuss about it. You just did it whether you  18  Randolph  Williams  Garner  Williams  Garner  Compton  Williams  Compton  Kite  Garner  Williams  Compton  Williams  Kite  liked it or didn   t like it. It never came through my mind not to like it. I made  the best of it.  Well they didn   t give you a choice. I mean there wasn   t a choice.  No, and we didn   t have the idea that,    well I don   t want to.    I can remember  Mama saying,    If you   re going to pout, I   ll give you a licking so you can cry  and then you can get over it.     Laughter  So we didn   t do much pouting.  But, I think probably, in the dirt storms, you   d be surprised that most of the  houses were cleaner than they are today, because every day you swept  everything and dusted.  Kept it for the next day.  When you got through with a meal, you did the dishes. You didn   t have a  dishwasher.  We heated our water on the stove. And something else we did a lot, probably  most of you did, we heated with cow chips. On a Saturday, we   d take a wagon  out, and most of it was over in your area over there on ranch land. We didn   t  live too far apart. You got a wagonload of cow chips, and after they dry,  they   re clean.  We had coal. I can remember going out and having to drag in coal in the coal  bucket.  Yeah, later, we did too.  You had to make sure those cow chips were completely dry. You didn   t want  to get any too fresh.  Any moisture   Laughter   I had a friend that was raised in Boston, Massachusetts. She   d come to Austin,  Texas, and she   d heard about the cow chip business. So, she had about seven  kids at that time, and they decided to go out west of Austin and pick up a load  of cow chips. They had it in the trailer, and she said,    I never will forget. We  were coming down the highway,    and she looked out, and here were all these  cow chips flying out  laughter .  She must have been driving fast.  I don   t know. Anyhow, it wasn   t driving too fast; it probably wasn   t all that  good to drive. Anyhow, she said that she was making it for cow chip tea.  That   s what she was doing for her plants.  Oh you mix water with it and put it on plants.  19  Williams  Compton  Kite  Williams  Kite  Williams  Montgomery  Garner  Kite  Compton  Kite  Williams  Kite  Williams  Kite  Randolph  Compton  Randolph  Williams  Put it in a tub and put water on it, and then you take the water off of it and  water your plants. It makes the plants grow.  It makes a good fertilizer.  I   ve never heard of that.  Uh-huh, and she called it cow chip tea  laughter .  Well, live and learn.  She was from Boston. I didn   t know that.  Have you ever had any cow chip tea  laughter ?  Did you know if you had any?  I   ve had tea that I   ve wondered what was in it maybe  laughter .  Here at Beaver they have a regular celebration with cow chip throwing.  By Stillwater, they have a town that had a cow chip-throwing contest, and one  night, they had all the cow chips lined up for the contest, and it rained that  night  laughter . They switched to cowboy boot. Now it   s a boot-throwing  contest because nobody was going to pick up a soggy old cow chip, because  one night all the chips were soaked. The things you   ll do for fun, I guess.  Well, we kind of got off that topic, but what all would you do, as children  growing up, for entertainment?  Well, like I said, I did a lot of sewing. I   m always interested in crafts and  stuff.  No other games you   d play?  I didn   t care about being outside. I liked to read. If I went to school, I could  figure out more ways to get out of playing outside than anybody else. I just  hated to be outside. I was outside at home, and at school I liked school.  What about the rest of you?  We hunted arrowheads. We had horses. The boys did more riding of horses  than I did.  We rode horses a lot just for entertainment. Rode to get the cows. Rode them  to school.  If a hilltop blew off, my brother said they always went and hunted arrowheads.  Yeah, I   d hunt arrowheads late in the evening if we had a big dust storm,  20  Garner  Williams  Randolph  Compton  Kite  Randolph  Compton  Randolph  Kite  Lemons  Williams  Garner  Williams  Randolph  Williams  Compton  Montgomery  Garner  Montgomery  because it would blow the sand off, and if you   d walk toward the sun you  could see the flint shine, so you didn   t have a hard time finding them.  We liked to play    Hide-n-Go Seek    and    Red Rover, Red Rover, Send  Someone Over.    That would be at recess at school when we   d play games like  that. At home, we always had some horseshoes to pitch.  The only one of the games I remember playing is Blackman over at  Sandyview. We played that, but I   d still try to get out of it  laughter .  The boys had an old bicycle they fixed up. They really liked that, Gene said.  Of course, everybody had an outhouse. That was just part of the building.  You had to have one.  How does that figure into entertainment  laughter ?  It was entertaining to go and read the Sears and Roebuck catalog  laughter .  You sat in there to keep out of work, to keep from doing dishes  laughter .  See, she was pretty smart.  There   s a two-holer out here, out back of the building. The WPA built a two-holer.  We were talking to a lady one time, and she said that they had a, was it  a three-holer?  Cement.  That was a fancy one then.  We had one of those. Did the WPA make those? Someone did and brought  them out.  I think for the cement ones they were, because Mama   s is still here in town.  At her house?  Uh-huh. She made a tool shed out of it  laughter . She threatened all the  Halloween kids,    Don   t you dare turn that thing over      If somebody was in it especially.  Ours wasn   t quite that fancy.  Was it just a piece of wood with holes cut?  A piece of wood, yeah.  21  Kite  Garner  Kite  Williams  Kite  Compton  Williams  Kite  Williams  Montgomery  Kite  Compton  Kite  Lemons  Kite  Randolph  Kite  Garner  Kite  And there   d be two or three people in there going at a time.  Visiting  laughter .  And you   d use the old catalogs, is that right?  Yep, and you   d hope you got one that wasn   t a shiny leaf of paper  laughter .  You   d set there and wrinkle them up to get them soft  laughter .  They said they   d make sure that their brother got all the shiny pages. What  was that? Do you remember that Shelly? They were talking about how they  would horde the regular pages and then give their brother all of the shiny  pages or something.  Well, we had Montgomery Ward and Sears. It was a wonder we didn   t run out  over the period of the year before one of them came.  Well, they never were that wasteful, I guess. They never did want to set there  and wrinkle up all those pages for that long of time.  Now on this one, I hear they have corncobs hanging up  laughter .  They should have an old catalog in there, because that   s what most of us used  was catalogs.  That would be uncomfortable; what did you say? A corncob?  They have old dry corncobs sitting out by this one.  That   s what they used to say that some people used.  I   m thankful I live when I live.  God bless Charmin  laughter .  That   s right, Charmin two-ply.  Oh, and my brother said somebody gave them some old skates that had the  wheels on them, and they made what we call a skateboard. It had to be a real  slick blown-off place, but they were tickled when we moved to Buffalo,  because Buffalo had sidewalks. They made that and rode it lots.  They seem fairly mechanical. They had the bike and the skateboard.  Yeah, they probably were.  Did you ever build other things like that? Do you remember building things  like that on the farm?  22  Williams  Randolph  Montgomery  Randolph  Lemons  Randolph  Williams  Kite  Williams  Kite  Williams  Kite  Williams  Kite  Williams  Compton  Garner  I think in 1942 or something, Mama bought a bicycle, because we didn   t have  a car. We lived here in the south part of town. We had a paper route, so  whoever had the longest route got to ride the bicycle for that time. She rode  that bicycle for years herself going to work. She said she learned when she  was a kid in Germany, and you never forget it, you know. Of course, we never  did have a car for years.  Where we lived, for entertainment, we did lots of arrowhead hunting.  We did too.  We met with the Roton   s, and they had four children the same age as we all  were, and we   d meet. That was entertainment.  What would you do with the arrowheads after you found them?  Oh, we have lots of arrowheads.  Well, I   ll tell you where mine all went to, down to Oklahoma State University.  They talked us all into giving ours back to the school so they could take them  down there, so all the ones I found are down there.  At OSU or OU?  At Oklahoma State, or whichever one it is that collected them up in the thirties.  That might be OU. They   ve got a big collection down there.  And the kids out here at Sandyview and everybody gave them all of theirs. I  don   t think I have one or two left out of all of the ones I found. I thought  about how dumb we were.  I don   t know. You can think about how many millions of people have seen  your arrowheads.  The same way with the buttons my mother had are all in this thing over here. I  was so mad at her when she gave them all away, because she could have given  some of each one away, not the whole smear. She said,    Well I didn   t have  any use for them.     That   s a lot of buttons.  She brought some from Germany that are nice buttons, and they   re all here in  the museum. Not that I care that they   re in the museum, but I   d like to have  had a couple of them.  Buttons are expensive now.  One other thing we did with Sears Roebuck and Montgomery Ward catalog, I  23  Compton  Kite  Garner  Compton  Williams  Compton  Montgomery  Kite  Compton  Lemons  Kite  Randolph  Montgomery  Randolph  Montgomery  Williams  had a sister, and for our paper dolls, we   d pick out a lady or a man whichever  one, that was pretty well straight, and then we   d go through when you got the  catalog and put our name on each one of those, and you   d make little tabs up at  the top and change their dresses. Those were our paper dolls. We really liked  to play with paper dolls.  My sister would want to play paper dolls and I didn   t want to, so she   d say,     I   m going to tear yours up,    and she did too  laughter . I   d just go cut out  another bunch.  That would cut into your toilet paper supply, the more paper dolls you had.  Dad would go out there and get all mad.  Well, we adjusted for that some way.  Well, we had two, and they were big thick ones too, at that time. We   d get it  twice a year, in the spring and the winter.  Gradually, Spiegel came out with some. That was really a fancy catalog that  you could set out there and look at  laughter .  I have a bedroom set that I bought from Spiegel in the early forties, I believe.  I remember how much we gave for that. There was the bed, and the dresser, a  three-drawer dresser, which was a big long dresser with a mirror, and then  chest-of-drawers. We gave 82 dollars for the whole thing.  Eighty-two dollars  laughing ?  That probably included shipping.  You couldn   t even buy anything now for that.  You   d have to buy sheets for a bed for that.  Well what about on holidays? Were those special times for you all or what?  We got together. We celebrated every holiday. We had lots of relatives that  lived north of Keyes and in Keyes and around. We always got together.  Memorial Day.  We did.  The whole family came. Everybody would bring food.  My mother had dances there for years, out on the farm on Saturday night. The  neighbor Williams    boys would play for the dances.  I went to my class reunion here in    79, and some lady said she remembered  coming out to the dances that my mother had.  24  Kite  Williams  Randolph  Williams  Randolph  Compton  Williams  Kite  Compton  Williams  Randolph  Williams  Compton  Williams  Garner  Montgomery  Kite  Montgomery  Pretty big get-togethers?  Well, she built a porch onto our house. We had a three-room house, and she  built a porch on it. Oh, I   m going to say it was about 12 feet wide and maybe  24 feet long.  Would there be ten people there?  Oh, we had quite a few there.  It was more than that?  It used to be so crowded you could hardly dance.  I was just a little old kid.  Do you remember going out to her mom   s dances?  Not to her place, but we had one close to us where we went every Saturday  night, went to the dances there. Most all of us went to country school; I think  all of us did.  I was just about seven. That was before my father passed away, so that was  like in    33 and    34.  What did your father pass away from?  He had to have an operation, and gangrene set in. That was before they had  penicillin.  In the country schools, the big deal was we had a Christmas program, and then  at the end of school you had a picnic.  Uh-huh, and the Christmas programs out here at Sandyview were really  interesting, because there was Dolly Meiser, and her friend Mrs. Mckinney.  They would dress up, and I mean they put on a show. It was just something  that everybody remembered.  Mary Lee, tell them about your teacher.  Mr. Arthur? Well, I went to a country school too, and sometimes he   d come  home with us and spend the night, because he liked Mom   s cooking  laughter .  He went to bed that night, and some time in the night the ceiling fell in on him  because it was so heavy with dirt. That was one of our experiences    Laughter   So much dirt had collected in the top of it.  It just fell in.  25  Kite  Montgomery  Randolph  Montgomery  Kite  Montgomery  Kite  Garner  Williams  Kite  Williams  Compton  Williams  Randolph  Williams  Randolph  Williams  Randolph  On the teacher.  Uh-huh, on my teacher. He still laughed about it.  But he would come spend the night with you.  Yes.  To get some good cooking.  He liked mom   s cooking. He   d bring my brother and me home and stay.  What would they think today if a teacher followed students home to eat their  parents cooking?   They did that a lot though.  Out here in the community, I guess, everybody took turns for the teacher to  stay, because I remember Minnie Mance that taught out there at that first little  school that I went to at Liberty, or Victory I think it was, and she stayed with  Mama and them for a long time, because her son stayed there too. We still  keep in touch with each other. They boarded them. They boarded the teacher  that was in that community.  I want to get back to the Christmas programs with the two people you said  everybody remembered. What did they do that was so memorable?  Oh, they dressed up as black mammies, and they really had a program going.  And then of course, they had a big Christmas tree there, and everybody got a  sack of candy. You had your orange and your apple and a couple of nuts and  stuff like that, but they always had a good program going.  And then we drew names. Everybody was really hoping that the teacher  would get their name, because they got a little bit better gift than some of us.  And back through the years, Roy Nall and Mrs. Nall were teachers out there at  Sandyview. Every year a couple of them would change.  Did Horace and Vera McBride teach out there?  Yeah, Vera did. One of them was a young lady named Pierson, I believe. She  was a teacher at the time Mrs. McBride was.  Vera was my cousin.  They lived out there in Sandyview, in the school building.  Where was Cowboy College?  26  Williams  Garner  Kite  Randolph  Garner  Compton  Williams  Randolph  Kite  Williams  Kite  Compton  Montgomery  Compton  Garner  Montgomery  Kite  Montgomery  Williams  Montgomery  You know, I don   t know.  It   s out across the river past Brookhart   s.  What   s Cowboy College?  It was a school. That   s what it was called.  At the time of statehood in 1907, we had 57 school districts in Cimarron  County, with 54 or 55 holding school. Some of those were a room in a ranch  house. I think until about 1920, we averaged 45 schools in the county, so there  were more people at the time of statehood than there has ever been in this  county.  And of course, you may have talked about it before I came in; everybody had  their Saturday night bath in the washtub.  I remember that   That was entertainment.  Oh it was, taking a bath.  You had to haul water. You didn   t waste water, I   ll tell you. We didn   t have  any problem with the water part, because we didn   t waste it.  Would you take a bath once a week whether you needed it or not?  Yes. Everybody was in the same boat, so nobody complained.  This says,    what is your fondest memory of these times?    I guess that bath tub  would be my fondest  laughter .  Did you get to go first?  There were just two kids.  Oh, I hated that  laughter . I did.  Why did you hate taking a bath?  Well I wanted to take a bath, but I hated that dog-gone tub.  It was a round tub like this. If you got real ritzy, you had the oblong one.  I remember I was in the kitchen taking my bath, and Mom and Dad had  company in the living room. Well, if they had opened the door, there I was  sitting in that dumb, old tub  laughter .  27  Garner  Kite  Williams  Compton  Montgomery  Williams  Compton  Williams  Kite  Williams  Kite  Montgomery  Kite  Williams  Montgomery  Williams  Garner  They would have been so proud that you were getting clean.  That   s right. When you took a bath, would you refill the tub each time?  Oh heck no  The cleanest one went in first  laughter .  Sometimes they divided it, and men would take a bath in one tub of water and  then empty it and then the women would take a bath.  That was terrible.  Well, if you had to haul water, you wouldn   t be carrying very much water,  because you   d think about it before you threw it out. We always watered the  plants with bathtub water. You didn   t want to throw it away after you had to  go haul it.  Yeah, we had an upstairs. We had to carry our water upstairs. We heated it  down on the stove downstairs and carry it up to the tub.  And when we went to school, you   d come home and change clothes. You  didn   t wear your school clothes out after you came home. You   d wear them a  whole week before you had to wash them, and you   d better be clean enough  that you kept them clean, or we   d get a spanking.  Does it seem weird to you today that you   d take just one bath a week and not  change clothes? I   m just assuming that you do things differently now  all  affirm .  You don   t have to carry water.  Yeah, that   s right.  How old are you?  35 years old.  He   s younger than my kids. I   ve got grandkids his age   It   s a good thing you   re 35. You would have hated all of this.  Well, he might have learned something.  Well, everybody just took it for granted. I think one thing good about it was  that we didn   t have any money, and we didn   t spend anything. My father died  in    35, and my mother had federal land bank notes to pay off, so boy, she  saved everything, because she didn   t want to not be able to make those  payments. It taught us not to buy anything until we could afford it, that we  didn   t need it unless we could afford it.  28  Williams  Garner  Compton  Garner  Williams  Randolph  Williams  Garner  Williams  Garner  Randolph  Williams  Compton  Williams  Kite  Garner  I still don   t buy anything unless I have cash to pay for it. I don   t have a credit  card, and I don   t want one.  The only time we ever bought a car on time was when Carl was selling Buicks,  and he got some kind of premium if he sold so many that had to be through the  credit union or whatever, and he had sold enough except for one, so we bought  one and had to make those payments on that car  laughing .  I use one credit card, but I pay it off every month.  Oh well, yeah, we use a credit card. We paid that off. What I mean is I think  that generation of people did learn to do without it, unless it was for business.  I   m sure people should buy tractors on time  laughing .  Ms. Garner   s husband  was a John Deere tractor dealer for 43 years   Yeah, now a days, at the price of them.  So you could have sold more.  That   s just like the tractor dealer that was here in Keyes, Oklahoma in the  early thirties. I went to Europe in 1985, and I came back through Dallas,  where you had to get off the plane, and this guy was interviewing me from  where I was at and where I lived and where I was born and raised. I said,    I  was raised in the panhandle of Oklahoma. You probably don   t know about it.     He said,    Oh yes I do. I was raised in Keyes, Oklahoma.    His dad was the  tractor dealer.  What was his name?  I think it was Tuttle. He had one more year before he could retire in 1986.  Her husband sold tractors.  We had the little car, kind of like a diary, that has a Tuttle, a Tuttle Implement.  Uh-huh, and he said he was raised at Keyes, and I said,    Well here you can go  anywhere over the United States and meet up with people.     Where did he live at that time?  Dallas.  I had a student one time that was going to bet me money I wouldn   t know  where he grew up, and it was in Oklahoma, and I   m pretty good with  Oklahoma, and I bet him, and it was Felt. I said,    I was just through there  two days ago.    I had come back from New Mexico through Felt. He couldn   t  believe I knew where Felt was.  Do you know what his name was?  29  Kite  Garner  Williams  Kite  Williams  Garner  Williams  Kite  Williams  Kite  Williams  Kite  Randolph  Kite  Compton  Kite  Williams  No, I have no idea, but surely you   d know it.  She grew up close to there.  I went to school at Felt, too.  It   s weird how those things work out like that.  Another thing, when we lived in Florida, it took two days to come up to  Austin, Texas and a third day to come here. It was back in about 1955. We  came after my mother. When we were coming back, we had to stop in a motel  in north Florida, because we drove 750 miles that day. I heard this lady  talking, and I told my husband,    She and my mother came from the same  town,    because they had the same broken language. He said,    No, there   s no  way.    Well, we came and picked her up and took her back. Sure enough, they  went to the same school. They were born in the same town, except this lady  was six years younger than my mother.  You mean in Germany?  No, here in Florida. We met in Florida. She had left Germany when she was  young and settled in Wisconsin, and Mother left Germany and came to Pratt,  Kansas.  But they had both come from the same town in Germany.  Same town and went to the same school and had the same broken language.  There are certain languages in Germany at different parts of it, and I  recognized the sound of her broken language. Anyhow, she went back to  Germany in 1968, and my mother ended up going back in 1968  laughter .  Well, did you all stay in touch with people that left from here?  Oh yeah.  And ended up in different places?  Oh sure.  Did you maintain your relationship with people?  Many of them came back too, after it got better.  Did you have friends or family that took off?  Well, I didn   t have any. We were the only ones here from Europe. My father  and mother came directly from Europe, so all my relatives live in Europe,  South Africa and places like that, my real relatives.  30  Kite  Randolph  Kite  Williams  Kite  Williams  Garner  Kite  Williams  Garner  Randolph  Kite  Williams  Kite  Williams  Kite  What about friends that might have abandoned their farms and took off?  Well, after we moved to Buffalo, we came back for holidays and things, but oh  gosh, we were tickled to get back, because we had our relatives and friends  that we liked to see.  Some of the things we talk about when we talk about people leaving or kind of  leaving their houses is tramps and hobos making their way through the  countryside and your reactions to them and your parents    reactions to them.  Oh, my mother fed everybody that came to the door. I know even in Boise  City, back years ago, we had a caf   that she worked in, and this lady told her  not to serve the black man that was in there, and my mother said,    Do you  want this job, because you can have it right now. I serve everybody that  comes in the door.     Good for her.  So she did.  At Stratford where we lived, we were about two blocks from the railroads, and  there were lots of hobos that came through, and I think mother always gave  them a sandwich or something. They didn   t usually get as far as our house,  though. The lady across the street, she was afraid of them, and she would put  out a feast almost for them. That was Mrs. Hunter.  She   d just put out food to keep them away?  They probably had her place marked as a good place to eat   Laughter   I guess if she wasn   t home, they   d come on over across the street, and Mother  always had some cold biscuits or something to give them.   Mrs. Compton leaves for an appointment   See, we moved away. We left in    35, and then after I married, Joe worked for  the Santa Fe, and we moved back out here. We   ve lived here ever since 1951.  There is something attractive, I guess, about it.  See, I left in 1944, and then I came back in    95.  Now why did you leave?  I married a guy from down in Texas, and we just lived different places. He  had hay fever so bad here all of the time that he never did like this part of the  country. I   ve never had any allergies. Nothing bothered me.  And you left because of the railroad job that your husband had, is that right?  31  Randolph  Kite  Randolph  Kite  Montgomery  Williams  Montgomery  Randolph  Montgomery  Kite  Montgomery  Williams  Montgomery  Lemons  Montgomery  Williams  Randolph  Montgomery  No, we came back.  Oh and why did you take off?  Well when we left, Daddy was the game ranger, and his base was going to be  in Harper County, so we left in    35 and we moved to Buffalo. That was going  to be the central part of his area.  Have you ever gone away and come back at all?  Well let   s see, how do I start this tale of mine  laughter ?  Well you grew up not too far from here, didn   t you?  I grew up in Stratford, and I had a cousin that had a flower shop here. He  wanted me to stay up here. He had sold it to some people that wanted me to  stay up here and help them and show them how to fix flowers and corsages  and things. That   s when I met my husband. He was in the bank here, and the  girl that worked at public service and another girl and I would go have coffee  every morning, but she had to go to the bank. I was in the flower shop, and I  got this phone call, and this guy said he would like to order a corsage, and I  told him what we had and what he wanted. He wanted an orchid corsage. I  said,    Well, we don   t have any orchids, but we   ve got some real pretty roses,  and he said that that would be fine. I asked how he wanted it delivered, if he  wanted to pick it up, and he said he wanted it delivered to Mary Lee  Montgomery, which was me.  Did he know it was you talking?  Yeah  laughter .  He was just being smart.  And we met.  I went to school with him.  Then I moved. Then I went on to Amarillo and worked down there for a  while, and he   d come down there, and we finally got married.  When did you get married?     55. And we had three children.  I went to school with him for four years in high school here.  And you moved back up here. When you married you moved back up here?  Uh-huh.  32  Kite  Williams  Kite  Williams  Randolph  Williams  Randolph  Montgomery  Kite  Williams  Montgomery  Randolph  Montgomery  Williams  Kite  Williams  Kite  Williams  And you went to school with her husband?  Yeah, all my high school days.  He seems like a pretty smooth operator, with that flower trick.  He was a pretty nice guy.  Yep, Dale was pretty nice.  Yeah, he was a real friendly person. His sister was nice, Helen.  When did Dale pass away?  In 1960, in Houston.  Well, kind of as a wrap up question, we usually talk about things that you   ve  carried with you from those times, from the thirties, having lived through the  drought and depression and dust bowl and things. How has it changed you as  a person, do you think, or what lessons do you carry with you?  I think it made us better citizens. We could solve our problems better. We  didn   t just throw up our hands just because things got tough. It was just  something you just dealt with.  I think we look back on those things, and it makes us a stronger person, don   t  you?  It makes you appreciate things.  Appreciate what we have now.  My husband grew up as an only, spoiled child, I   ll put it that way, very  spoiled, and he always had the old saying    things didn   t fit his hands    when he  didn   t want to do anything, so that threw me into doing lots of things that I  wouldn   t have ordinarily done, but I was determined not to get a divorce or  anything like that. That was a problem I dealt with. He would say it didn   t fit  his hands, and to me, I always said,    My mother said whether it fit your hands  or not if it   s got to be done, it   s got to be done.    You don   t worry about  whether it fits your hand or not; you do it.  Do you think going through that experience was a good thing for the country?  Yeah. I think a lot of us need to go through it again.  Oh yeah.  A lot of the younger generation needs to go through it. They throw their hands  up too easy. My son is already on his third marriage. It   s just one of those  33  Montgomery  Williams  Randolph  Williams  Kite  Williams  Kite  Williams  Randolph  Kite  Randolph  Williams  Kite  Williams  Kite  Montgomery  Kite  things. They get married, and they throw their hands up and get a divorce and  create more problems.  I just think about some of these 16 year old kids that have nice cars now.  What would they think if they   d lived back then?  Oh teachers were the only ones that had cars back in our day and time.  They walked to school.  Dale walked to school. I walked to school. Nobody had cars. Dale was from  a family that had more money than the rest of us did, and he didn   t have a car.  We all walked to school. You done good if you had a car to go out. When I  went to work, I worked seven days a week. If I wasn   t working that seventh  day, there was somebody there waiting for my job, so I didn   t have a day off.  Where did you work?  I worked in the restaurants here in town, Crystal Coffee Shop, every shop in  town practically. Then I still had perfect school attendance when I was in high  school.  What were your first paid jobs? Do you remember working, getting paid for  the first time?  I know mine. I was the dish washer at Crystal Coffee Shop. I made  6 a  week, and I thought I was really making money.  We were living in Buffalo, and I worked in a drug store.  As a clerk?  A soda jerk.  Well that was my public paying job. I took care of an older couple here when  I first came to town by the name of Cook. When I was taking care of an older  lady here a couple years ago, she said,    That was my parents.    I   d gone on to  the next generation   I thought for sure you would have been rich with all of your sewing projects.  You don   t make money sewing, just like beauty operator work; you don   t  make money doing that.  Mrs. Montgomery, what was your first paid job?  I worked in a drug store for a little while.  Soda jerk?  34  Montgomery  Kite  Randolph  Montgomery  Williams  Kite  Randolph  Williams  Randolph  Montgomery  Williams  Lemons  Williams  Randolph  Williams  Randolph  Montgomery  Williams  No. I was just selling stuff in there.  Was it hard being a soda jerk?  No, it was fun. We worked the whole drug store. There was a pharmacist in  there. He gave the prescriptions, and it was busy.  Yeah it was, all the time.  And then the war came out, and I went as a fry cook. I made more money then  than I   d ever made for a long time when I was a waitress for years. It was just  another step up the ladder, and it was interesting. I   m retired, supposed to be,  and I   d just as soon be working. I don   t like retirement.  Well, I think that about wraps it up for me.  We all quilt, even Lois. I don   t know about Mrs. Compton.  Yeah, Lois does beautiful quilting. I was going to tell you, I took care of her  brother Andy here last month, and I didn   t know the family. I knew her for the  quilting thing. So one day, I met her in the nursing home, and she told me,     Oh, I   ve been in to see Andy,    and then I put the two together that she had to  be his sister, so I went in and said,    Oh Andy, your sister came over here to see  you, your sister Lois,    and he said,    I don   t call her Lois. I call her Baby Lois.  She was our baby, with all the rest of us boys.    They evidently had a sister.  Everybody calls her Baby Lois.  Everyone down at home calls her Baby Lois.  He said,    Don   t tell her I said so, but that   s what I call her.     Do you guys have nicknames, or did you have nicknames?  Mine was Lottie. My nickname was Lottie. It still is.  Well what   s your name?  Charlotte.  I thought her name was Lottie.  I did too.  That   s what I say. Nobody knows me by Charlotte. I went and signed all my  stuff in school, it   s on the picture in the school, Charlotte, but nobody knows  me as that. Even my brother didn   t know what my name was when he had to  go sign my papers up at the hospital a couple years ago when I had to have my  arm fixed. They asked him how to spell Charlotte, and he said,    I don   t know,  35  Randolph  Montgomery  Lemons  Randolph  Kite  all I   ve ever known her by was Lottie.  Did you have a nickname Mary Lee?  Huh-uh.  What about you?  No.  I don   t have one either. It seems like a lot of people out here have nicknames  like that.  -------  -------  
