 Kite  It is January 10, 2001. We   re in Cimarron Heritage Center at Boise City, and  we have Opal Blancett, Lucile Hart, Pearl Morrison, Betty Kirtley, and  Mildred Stringfellow here. This is not a strict formal interview, we   re just  talking as a group about the time period and what your memories are and  some details about the thirties and the period leading up to that and just after  that. Each of you will get a typed transcript, a typed copy of the tape as well.  That   s good. I think that   s nice.  If we could just go around the group here and state your name, when you were  born, and where you were born.  Betty Kirtley, 1921 in Wichita, Kansas.  Opal Blancett, Guymon, Oklahoma, September 19, 1917.  We have the same birthday.  September 19th? Well Heaven sakes, I   ve never run onto anybody.  Mine was Lucile Paterson Hart. I was born on July 14, 1921, and we were  about 17 miles south of here.  Pearl Morrison, August 18, 1923. My sister said 17 miles and I had it as 16, so  that   s close enough, just straight south of Boise City.  So you two are sisters, Lucile Hart and Pearl Morrison?  Okay, Mrs. Stringfellow.  Well I   m the first one of all  laughter . I   m Mildred Stringfellow. I was born  January 25, 1911 in southeast Kansas, Neosho County, close to the town of  Erie, Kansas.  What brought you to this area? When did you come?  6  Stringfellow  Kite  Stringfellow  Kite  Stringfellow  Kite  Kirtley  Kite  Blancett  Kite  Blancett  Kite  Hart  Kite  Blancett  Morrison  Blancett  Kite  Kirtley  Blancett  My parents came to this part of the country in 1914. I   ve lived down here ever  since, in this county.  You were three years old. Why did they come here?  To farm.  Farm. Were they not having luck in Kansas?  Oh, everybody was coming west, and going to get rich, I think, and they  thought they would too  laughter .  Who else came from far away? How did you get to this area?  My folks were flooded out in Kansas. We came out here just before the dust  storms started. We went from one extreme to the other.  From too wet to too dry. And the rest of you were, well you were a little ways  away.  My dad was a rancher on the Cimarron River just north of here, and they went  over there to give birth to me because my grandparents lived there. I was there  a couple weeks or so.  And then back.  Then back to the ranch.  You were born right here.  Yes, in this county.  And made it all the way here. Did all of you grow up in a rural environment,  like a farm or ranch setting?  I did.  No, Betty didn   t.  No, I didn   t. My folks, when we came here in 1929, they had a little five and  dime store, just a small one. We lived in one room in the back of the building,  and then they just progressed a little bit to a larger building and so forth.  Is that building still standing today?  No, it isn   t.  I remember we really enjoyed going to Palmer   s.  7  Kirtley  Blancett  Morrison  Blancett  Kirtley  Blancett  Kirtley  Stringfellow  Blancett  Kirtley  Kite  Blancett  Kirtley  Blancett  Morrison  Blancett  Kirtley  Blancett  Kirtley  Blancett  Kirtley  Kite  Blancett  Kite  I think everybody remembers that.  Everybody would come to town to go to Palmer   s.  They were in the building where Pam   s is now, the last one.  But the first one was in the corner, southwest corner.  Yeah.  There   s no building there now.  No, they tore that building down. They tore down the second building where  the gazebo is now. They were next door.  Yes, they were in that building there where the little park is right there.  The caboose?  No, the gazebo across the street.  What was so good about Palmer   s?  Well, they just had all kinds of goodies that you could get for ten cents and a  quarter and so forth.  It was a very popular store at the time.  We   d come to town and get our goodies in there.  They had about everything.  They had candy too, I think, candy bars.  They had lots of candy. They had a candy case.  They no longer have those nice five and tens, do they?  No they don   t. Do they even have Woolworth   s?  They have Ben Franklin   s in the north.  They had a Ben Franklin   s store then, for many years.  Your parents did?  After the dust storms.  Let   s talk a little bit about the day to day activities of your lives once you were  8  Kirtley  Kite  Kirtley  Blancett  Kirtley  Kite  Lemons  Kirtley  Kite  Kirtley  Kite  Kirtley  Kite  living here. If you could, describe a little bit about what you would do on  normal non-dust storm day, if there was a normal day here  laughing .  Waking up, what would you do? I know your daily activities probably differed  a little bit from the other people.  Well, they did.  Let   s start with you. What was a normal day like for you, living in the back of  the store?  We only lived there about a year, and then we moved out. They moved from  Kansas from an eight-room, nice, two-story home into this one room. It was  quite a change. I remember two things. When we had the store over on the  corner there across from the caboose, every Saturday night people would come  to town and line the street. The store was open from eight to ten on Saturday.  People all over town, they would come from the country, and sit. That was our  recreation.  Saturday nights? Now it   s Friday nights that people come to town, but it used  to be Saturday nights.  Saturday nights.  I guess we were talking more about everyday activity for you. What would a  normal day be like?  Like what would be your daily chores or the things you had to do everyday?  I can   t really remember very much. I remember helping my younger sister  with working the store. She wasn   t very big, she   d have to stand on a box to  wait on people. I would cook the meals at home. I wasn   t very old. During  the dust bowl days, the folks bought an Electrolux sweeper, and we had to run  it every day. We had wet sheets at the windows at night, so that you could  sleep at night.  Do you think being the daughter of the five and ten cent store owner made you  a little more popular  laughter ?  Oh, I don   t know about that  laughing . My mother played piano, and of  course, we did everything to make a living through the Depression, and she  had 40 pupils at one time.  So she gave lessons. Did you take lessons?  Well, I did, but not from my mother  laughter . From other people I did. Then  I went to Amarillo in    35,    36, and    37 to boarding school for music.  To concentrate on your music? Did you carry that further?  9  Kirtley  Kite  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Morrison  Blancett  Kite  Morrison  Blancett  Morrison  Blancett  Morrison  Hart  No, that was it.  Well what about the farm girls? What was a typical like for you?  I   d get up about seven or eight o   clock and follow my dad out to the corral.  When I was about six years old, I learned to milk. I thought that was really  something. My brother wouldn   t get up and go. He was eleven months  younger. I   d go out and milk with my dad. Then I   d go to the feed yards or  drive the team to the feed yards, and mostly follow him around and ride horses  and work with the cattle. After the dust storms started, my mother would hand  me the broom. She didn   t teach me to cook, but    you take the broom, you  clean the house.    That was my chore. Sometimes in the mornings, you could  see the imprint of your head on the pillow. It would have been that dusty,  coming through the windows. Isn   t that right?  We were living out in the country. There wasn   t any protection out in the  country. Here in town they had buildings that would protect them a little bit,  but out in the country the dirt came right on through.  It wasn   t that dirty. The soil didn   t blow that bad out on the Cimarron because  there was the Vega and all of the grass and everything, but it came from  somewhere else and rolled in.  That   s right. The dust bowl was always going somewhere else.  I remember that April 14, 1935.  I thought it was the 15th, maybe it is the 14th.  The 14th or 15th in    35, I think. Horrible, black, coal black. You   ve seen those  pictures.  Yeah, oh yeah.  To me, when it started rolling over, we were at home, Lucile and I, with our  grandmother.  My mother and I were in a house.  I wanted to stay outside. It fascinated me, but I didn   t have sense enough to be  scared of it. Anyway, it did; it just rolled over the house, and the wind was not  strong at all.  No, there was hardly any wind. It just rolled in.  Then later, the hard wind blew.  Yeah, a little later, oh I don   t know, I didn   t have sense enough to get in I  guess.  10  Blancett  Hart  Blancett  Stringfellow  Kite  Blancett  Kirtley  Morrison  Blancett  Morrison  Hart  Morrison  Blancett  Hart  Kirtley  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Morrison  Blancett  Wasn   t it scary? It was coal black. It was about four o   clock in the afternoon,  and it totally shut the light out.  Yes it did.  Totally, coal black.  If you lit a kerosene lamp, it looked like a match.  Was it different from others because there wasn   t the wind with it?  It was one of the worst, heaviest.  It was the worst, wasn   t it?  The number one.  I think it was. The Black One, we called it.  The ones that came later, the winds were stronger.  Oh yeah.  That one just rolled over us.  We never did have another that was that totally black, did we?  I don   t think so.  I can   t remember how long it stayed black.  My mother started praying. She thought it was the end of the world. My  father and my brother had gone down about a couple of miles to pick up some  horse feed with the wagon. They had to walk ahead of the horses and lead  them home.  How did they see to get home even?  There were ruts.  Oh yes, big ruts.  We didn   t have pavements, we just had the ruts.  Where the wagons went.  They just walked these ruts and held on to the horses, brought them in. It  wasn   t nice. It wasn   t a good time.  11  Kite  Morrison  Hart  Blancett  Kite  Morrison  Blancett  Stringfellow  Morrison  Blancett  Morrison  Blancett  Kite  Morrison  Blancett  Kirtley  Kite  Stringfellow  Kite  Stringfellow  Hart  Blancett  Kite  Do you think you weren   t scared of that one because you had seen other ones,  smaller ones coming in?  No, that was the very first.  That was the first one.  That was the worst. Everyone was frightened a little.  That was the first one that you remember was the April 14, 1935?  That was the first one really.  The mean one, the worst. We   d seen a lot of dirt and dust and things blowing  everyday, but not anything like that.  There was dust everyday.  It wasn   t what we called that.  Not that black one, no.  There was a little wind.  There are some of those pictures aren   t there, with that totally black one.  There are some pictures in here.  After that, it was every day.  We had wind and dirt every day, but not one like that baby.  We stayed out until just before it hit. We didn   t even make it in the front door.  There you go.  There it is.  Hey, I think I see you there.  No you don   t, because I was inside  laughter .  Right after the wind finally got up, I went out to the southeast corner of the  house. There was an old hen coming around there  laughing , and she was just  a flopping.  Poor chicken.  Here it is, taken out of western Kansas, the same thing.  12  Stringfellow  Blancett  Kite  Morrison  Stringfellow  Kite  Blancett  Kite  Morrison  Blancett  Kirtley  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Stringfellow  Kite  That   s the way it looked.  That   s it. That   s just like it, brown and black.  How long did it stay pitch black? How long did it stay so dark?  Well, all night, most of the night.  We didn   t even go home, we were with my husband   s parents, and we stayed  there all night.  It came in in the afternoon, right?  About four o   clock it hit the river.  Then just through the night?  We didn   t see any light until the next day. It was totally dark.  That was in April, and I remember another really bad one. We had gone out to  the Dunley Ranch, my cousin and I, from our ranch visiting them, and a bad  one hit. We couldn   t drive. So we stopped at the Stacey   s place and Ms.  Castanada was there. She couldn   t get home either, so we stayed there until  the wind kind of went down. Then we drove on home about ten o   clock or so.  You couldn   t drive it was so bad. Alice Hood was telling me the other day  about one they were in.  Who?  Alice Pitzer Hood. They were going to Dalhart. They lived down here on the  flats. They got stalled, they couldn   t go any farther, and they found a dugout.  They crawled down in that dugout and stayed all night. It was just kind of a  vacated place. I was a teenager and didn   t take it that seriously, but it   s a  wonder it didn   t worry your parents to death it was so bad.  Well it did when you couldn   t get no crops raised.  Yeah, no grass.  No grass for the cattle and stock. You couldn   t hardly raise a garden for the  wind would beat it up.  Oh, not possible, not possible.  It was terrible.  Did you know anyone that had gotten lost out somewhere, disoriented in the  storm?  13  Kirtley  Stringfellow  Kite  Blancett  Morrison  Kite  Blancett  Hart  Blancett  Stringfellow  Hart  Blancett  Stringfellow  Kite  Kirtley  Stringfellow  Kirtley  Stringfellow  Blancett  Stringfellow  I remember the blizzard one time. Let   s see, when that school bus got stalled.  When was that? It was snowing dirt.  That was a snowy night.  Was that the  snuster ? I saw something over there about the snow storm/dirt  storm that came in. They called it the    snuster   .  Oh, I didn   t know about that.  I didn   t know about it either, I   ve never heard about it.  It   s over there. I   ve never heard of it either.  No, it   s new to me. We had some bad blizzards; I remember that. We had a  terrible one in    57.  Yes, yes.  March.  None of you, I don   t guess, remember the one in    18?  That was a little before my time.  I don   t remember that one, but I   ve heard folks talking about it.  Well I do.  Well let   s hear about the 1918 one.  Was it dirt and snow?  No, it was just a snowstorm, a blizzard snowstorm. My father was in Texas. I  think he   d went the day before with two wagons and four head of horses.  That   s the only we had of traveling and to haul the grain off. He   d go down  there and load it up with coal and staple groceries. The next morning when he  got up this blizzard was on. We lived about 45 miles from the Texas line. He  tied the reins to the wagon and walked the biggest part of that 45 miles to keep  from freezing to death.  When was that?  1918.  Is that the year the flu was so bad?  Yes.  14  Blancett  Stringfellow  Kirtley  Stringfellow  Blancett  Kirtley  Morrison  Stringfellow  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Stringfellow  Kite  Stringfellow  Kite  Stringfellow  Kite  I heard about. It killed people.  Oh yes, lots of people died of the flu that year. He had to get home, because  we were without coal.  How long did it take him?  All day. He was gone all day. He left early and got in about dusk that  evening. We had a shed barn that the cattle could get in. When that was all  over with, that was all closed in and the cattle were all in that shed barn, that  snow was plum over the edge down to the dirt. One cow was standing close  enough to that snow that her breathing melted a little bit, and he cut a little  door there for him to get out the next day.  That   s terrible.  Well, in this    57 one there was a drift between our house and Bob Johnston   s  here in town,    til you could walk on their roof from this drift.  You could walk all over town.  Well it practically covered up my house in    57 too. If I   d have thought you  were going to do that, I   d have brought some pictures of it.  It wasn   t cold. It was so wet. The snow was so wet it drowned cattle, you  know breathing that.  Yes, they   d breathe that snow and it drowned them.  Yeah, it drowned quite a few cattle.  They   d freeze in snow.  Wow. How do you think that once the dust storms rolled in, and those times  began, I guess that was an official beginning for that time, how did it change  your lives? Surely it had to have had drastic changes in the way you lived or  how you thought about living.  In my family you learned to live without, because we didn   t have it.  Do you remember anything specifically doing without?  We always managed to have food. It wasn   t as plentiful, maybe, as we   d like  to have had it, but we had something. We didn   t have money to buy anything  with.  Do you remember a change in your diet? Do you remember not getting to  have so much of things?  15  Stringfellow  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Kite  Morrison  Stringfellow  Morrison  Stringfellow  Morrison  Stringfellow  Morrison  Blancett  Morrison  Stringfellow  Kirtley  Stringfellow  Kirtley  No. Well, we probably did have not as much of anything, yes. I do remember  that in the thirties, my mother-in-law, I don   t know how she managed, but she  had a bunch of little chickens. When we were married, she gave us a dozen  pullets out of them chickens. Them pullets, I would use all the eggs I wanted  for home use and bring twelve dozen to the store. I got ten cents a dozen for  them to buy groceries with.  Ten cents a dozen, for Heaven   s sakes.  Down at Jack Booth   s.  I remember Jack Booth   s.  What else do you remember about the time period and how it changed how you  were living?  We just continually fought the dirt, and as far as food, we didn   t have a great  abundance. Like most everybody else that lived out here, we ate a lot of  potatoes and beans and gravy and things like that. I don   t ever remember  feeling deprived. Nobody had anything.  Well didn   t your family have their own meat?  Yes.  They   d butcher hogs and things like that. You   d have that to do.  But no refrigeration.  No, no, you couldn   t keep anything.  If they butchered, it was usually divided, and they   d hang a quarter of beef up  on the windmill tower when it was cold enough to freeze.  That was good eating too   Then take it down, cut off whatever we needed then, and then put it back up,  wrapped in a sheet.  To keep the dust and stuff off of it.  Mildred, what did you bring Mama? Was it cream?  Eggs I think. I   ve handled eggs for a long time here in town, but that was  more after the dust storms.  She gave the piano lessons in exchange for eggs and cream and milk, different  things.  16  Stringfellow  Blancett  Kite  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Kite  Stringfellow  Blancett  Kite  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Hart  Blancett  Kite  Morrison  Hart  Blancett  Kite  If the Raleigh-man happened to come around, you gave him a couple of old fat  hens  laughter .  I remember the Raleigh-man, Watkins and Raleigh both came around.  Who   s the Raleigh-man?  He sold all kinds, he sold vanilla. My mother always got their pure vanilla and  their seasonings. Mostly, I just remember seasonings and spices.  They had medicine.  Yeah, some medicine.  They had some medicines and things that you could get and things like that.  I   ve still got some sitting out.  Oh you have? Good, great.  And you would trade chickens or hens, and that   d be acceptable to him?  Oh yeah, they   d take them to market and get what they could get out of them.  It was their money. It was that or nothing for them.  What about the way it changed your lives when that came in and started?  We still had plenty of food. We never did get on welfare, because we always  had food.  We did too. Could you get welfare then?  I don   t know if you could or not, but I bet you could. They called it something  else on the county.  They called it WPA, didn   t they?  They called it on the county, remember.  WPA was a program to give you work. You had to work for it.  You had to work for it.  My dad never did get on it.  Well my dad didn   t either. He might have had to borrow a little money from  the bank, but he didn   t get any welfare.  Do you remember any WPA programs coming in?  17  Kirtley  Hart  Kirtley  Morrison  Kirtley  Kite  Kirtley  Blancett  Kirtley  Blancett  Kite  Blancett  Morrison  Blancett  Morrison  Blancett  Hart  Morrison  Stringfellow  Hart  I do. I can   t remember. They built county roads. What did they do?  They built our schoolhouse, that one.  Did they build the schoolhouse?  After they tore the old rock one down, the WPA built the school, the grade  school. Well, it was high school too.  Oh, while I think about it, at one time we had 62 schools in this county. I  think one on every section.  Yeah, I remember seeing some of the little rural schools. I remember seeing  that on a map over there, all the different ones. Now how many?  There   s Plainview and Delta, Boise City Keyes; about five, maybe.  We went from second grade to eighth grade in a little one-room schoolhouse  on the river.  In the Burnett School.  Yes. And the teacher stayed at our house. We had many of them. Some  couldn   t take it, so they   d quit, and then we   d get another one.  What were you doing to them?  Well, we were just rotten kids I guess  laughter . I remember one time we said  a word she didn   t like. She scrubbed our mouths with soap and salt, and it  made our lips swell. It made my dad so mad. We didn   t like her too well, so  she quit and we had to get another teacher.  Do you know in Norma Jean Young   s books that came out, and they were  listing all the schools? They didn   t have the Prairie View School in there  anywhere.  Plainview?  Prairie View.  Oh, I don   t know where that is.  That   s where I started.  I started over at Sunny Slope.  Was that East of over where you lived then?  No, it was north and west.  18  Stringfellow  Morrison  Kirtley  Morrison  Stringfellow  Morrison  Hart  Kirtley  Stringfellow  Kite  Stringfellow  Kite  Stringfellow  Kirtley  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Stringfellow  Hart  Blancett  Morrison  North of it.  When I said something about well there wasn   t any, and I said well I know  there is, because I have a certificate from there.  Prairie View, I remember that.  Roy Nall and his wife Todd, and Blanch Miles, Irma Eifer.  Did May Hall teach there too?  No, no.  Yes she did. I think so.  Everybody bartered. One person would have something. Like old times, my  mother would trade music lessons for eggs. Did your girls take music from  her?  No, they never did take music.  Have you heard a story about a couple trading two cows in for a car?  Well, I wouldn   t have been a bit surprised.  The garage took the cows just like it was normal. Chickens to the Raleigh  man.  A car back in them days didn   t cost you but about  300 or  400.  That   s right.  Right.  Absolutely.  I remember a little car my dad bought us. What was it? This was in 1940  though. It was about  700 or  800, a little brand new coup, Plymouth.  Back in the dirty days, my husband planted some wheat one time, and it came  up and it wasn   t worth anything. There was no moisture. It didn   t make very  much. But what we did cut we sold for 25 cents a bushel.  I think 26  cents  was what dad got.  A whole bushel.  That   s a shame.  19  Hart  Stringfellow  Hart  Kite  Stringfellow  Blancett  Morrison  Blancett  Morrison  Kirtley  Blancett  Kite  Stringfellow  Kite  Stringfellow  Blancett  Stringfellow  Kite  Well, dad had a big crop of wheat that he leased from Darshes, the Latham  land. He had a good crop. He was going over to Mr. Alan Regan   s, and he  was going to have us a real nice home built. Just before he left to go over  there, he got the market on the radio. That stopped that.  Everything went down.  26 cents a bushel was what he got for his wheat.  So you had a lot of food, but it sounds like you didn   t have a lot else.  There was no money to buy it with.  You didn   t get a new Easter outfit every year, did we?  We didn   t feel deprived.  No, we didn   t think we did. It was just nobody.  Well, maybe one or two families.  We made dresses out of flower sacks.  We didn   t feel deprived.  Well, if you   re wealthy you can   t feel extra poor.  I know many a night, the dirt would blow all day and fill the windows. As  quick as the wind went down we got the broom and the buckets and brushes,  and went to cleaning up. Maybe it would stay that way until eight or ten  o   clock the next morning when the dirt would hit again. It was all to do over  every day.  Did that become your primary chore, cleaning the house?  Just about.  Well, you   d have to look after the animals and that sort of thing. I remember  my dad watching the sky all the time, looking for clouds, hoping for room. If  he saw a hopeful looking cloud, he   d be so happy. Then it   d go this way or  that way or something.  On wash day, we didn   t have all this automatic stuff then, I washed on a board  with a boiler that I   d heat the water on the oil stove, and then tubs and  washboard. I   d wash my clothes, maybe I   d get them hung out and look out,  and here would come the dirt. I   d have to go grab them and get them in the  house before they   d even get dry.  How was doing laundry? This is something I   ve just started asking the last  20  Stringfellow  Blancett  Kite  Stringfellow  Kite  Kirtley  Hart  Blancett  Kirtley  Morrison  Hart  Blancett  Kirtley  Kite  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Kite  Blancett  group of ladies. To me, it seems like an incredible task, keeping things clean  in all of that.  You couldn   t.  It was terrible.  So how would you? You boiled your water on a stove, pour it in something,  and then scrub on the board?  And put the clothes in there and boil them to try to get them bleached out and  white and nice looking. Many a time I   ve hung them just on the line and  looked in southwest, and here would come the dirt, and we   d have to take them  down, bring them inside, and cover them up.  Does that sound familiar to all of you? How was a laundry day done at your  house?  You know, I can   t remember. She must have washed on the board though.  When did mom finally get a Maytag washer?  Yeah, we got a Maytag. I was trying to think, a gasoline-powered. But when?  I don   t know when it was.  I can   t remember if we had a washing machine. We did have one later on, but  not in the early thirties.  We got one before we moved to town.  The later twenties, I think.  I think we had one during the dirt storms, a Maytag.  In one room, you wouldn   t have had room.  No, not for that noisy thing.  We did the wash water on the stove kind of like that, Maytag.  I didn   t have a stove quite like that. I had an oil stove, a three or four-burner  oil stove.  Yeah, we had one of those two, Perfection brand.  When do you all remember getting your motorized washer?  We   re trying to think.  21  Morrison  Blancett  Hart  Stringfellow  Morrison  Blancett  Hart  Stringfellow  Blancett  Morrison  Hart  Blancett  Kite  Stringfellow  Blancett  Morrison  Kite  Morrison  Hart  Stringfellow  Kite  Hart  I don   t remember. It was a Maytag.  It was a gasoline-powered, ours was, and you stepped on something and  started it.  Ours was too.  It had a pedal on it, and you   d push down on that pedal to start it.  You had to have a door open so you could put an exhaust pipe outside or it  would stay in there  laughter .  I don   t know when it was.  I think it was about    29, something like that.  I didn   t get one that soon.  I think it must have been in the thirties before we got ours.  I think it was.  It could have been. I   ve slept since then  laughter .  It   s been more than two hours ago.  I just can   t imagine having to do your wash with the washboard and the  boiling and all that, and then having all that dirt to contend with.  It wasn   t any fun, I   ll tell you that for sure.  It was pretty bad on the mamas, I know that.  But you had to have fuel. She had kerosene, but we had a coal and a wood  stove. That was one of our chores after school. We went out into the pastures  and picked up cow chips to burn.  Yeah, I   ve heard of cow chip burning.  Yeah.  And corncobs, dad would try corncobs.  Yeah, the corncobs.  In the thirties you were out picking up cow chips to burn?  Yeah, sure were.  22  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Morrison  Blancett  Stringfellow  Morrison  Stringfellow  Morrison  Kite  Stringfellow  Hart  Stringfellow  Kite  Kirtley  Kite  Stringfellow  Kirtley  Stringfellow  Kite  Stringfellow  I   ve heard of them doing that, but we had plenty of wood on the river. We  didn   t have to burn cow chips.  Well you were up there where they had more wood. We didn   t have any  wood.  There was a lot of driftwood. We used driftwood and coal.  We usually took a tub between us. We   d take a wash tub and go out in this  pasture and pick up the cow chips. That was one of our chores.  Pick the dry ones up.  And they took that wash tub just didn   t warm up the house, did it?  Yeah, because they burn just really really fast.  Just in a flash.  Yeah, they were gone, but they were a source of heat.  Corncobs too?  Yes, if you had corn and hogs, they   d eat the corn off of the cobs, and then you  could gather them up and burn them.  When they shelled corn, that   s when we had the most.  Yes.  What about living in town? What would you use for fuel?  I can hardly remember.  Do you remember picking things up?  I expect you had some gas by that time.  Oh, I do think we had a natural gas stove. I can   t remember when it came to  Boise City. Maybe about 1927 or    28. We did have natural gas. When we  first came, Mama had a kerosene cook stove, but she didn   t like that very well.  They were dangerous.  Did you have a great big old heating stove?  To heat the house or heat your room with?  We did, of course we had coal.  23  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Kirtley  Kite  Kirtley  Stringfellow  Hart  Blancett  Kite  Blancett  Hart  Blancett  Kirtley  Hart  Stringfellow  Hart  Stringfellow  Blancett  Hart  Blancett  Kirtley  Shaped like this.  Yes.  We had those in the bedrooms, I remember.  I can   t. My mind   s blank.  How were other chores affected by the dust, like cooking or kitchen work? It  seems like that would be tough to do as well.  You had to clean before you could cook, I know that.  I heard one lady say that when her mother set the table she turned the plates  upside down until they got the meal ready, and then they would turn the plates  back up. You could see the ring where the plates had been.  That   s right.  Isn   t that a shame? Isn   t that awful?  Baking bread, it seems like it   d be hard to get it grit free.  I imagine we ate some dirt, don   t you?  Laughter   I expect we did.  Quite a bit, maybe.  You know, we walked to school though. I guess maybe, the folks would take  us some, but we walked most of the time and walked home in the evenings.  I remember our grandmother had dust pneumonia.  Yeah, a lot of people had that.  She lived with us, and she had dust pneumonia. I believe the doctor   s name  was Dr. Wilson.  Well there was a Wilson here in town at one time.  We had a Dr. Wilson here.  She lived through it. I think he was the one they got to come out there.  Handy   s wife, she committed suicide.  When did you move to town?  24  Hart  Kite  Hart  Blancett  Stringfellow  Morrison  Hart  Morrison  Kite  Blancett  Kirtley  Morrison  Stringfellow  Kite  Blancett  Stringfellow  Morrison  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Kite     35.  Do you remember other people having health problems because of the dust?  So many of them left.  They went to California.  We stayed through all of it, and I guess all of you did.  I was trying to think how many left. The Hallans, the Womacks and the  Campbells     And the Turners.  The Turners, all in our vicinity all left.  A lot of friends and family and neighbors were leaving.  When was it really over? What year? Does anybody remember when we had  rain and the dust stopped?  1940 was when we had rain, wasn   t it?  1940 and 1941 I think.  One house I lived in was so open that of a night we had to put sheets over the  tops of our beds just to go to sleep. I had one little girl, she was about two to  three years old, and I had to put that over her bed so she could sleep.  If you didn   t, you would wake up covered in dust?  So much dust. The homes were not insulated. The windows were not fit well  like they do now.  They didn   t fit good anyway.  There were a bunch of cracks.  They weren   t cropped right and everything.  You could get tape and try to seal them shut, but it seemed to come right on  through anyway.  Yeah, it knew its way.  What kept all of you from moving away, if so many of your friends and  neighbors left?  25  Stringfellow  Kite  Stringfellow  Blancett  Hart  Kite  Hart  Blancett  Hart  Blancett  Morrison  Kite  Blancett  Stringfellow  Kite  Stringfellow  Kite  Hart  Blancett  Kirtley  Blancett  We didn   t have the money to do it.  They had money to move, so they did.  I guess they had some, I don   t know. We didn   t have any.  Maybe it was over about that time.  Our dad sold horses and gave the money to one of our neighbors so they could  leave.  He gave the money away.  Yeah, he did. The mother, Mrs. Campbell, was sick.  Maybe about the time that people were ready to give up, it rained.  I don   t think Dad ever would have given up.  My dad wouldn   t either.  You asked why we stayed. He had 800 acres of his own land and then, like I  said, he leased. They stayed to hold on to that land.  It just seems like so many people left. They had land and hopes and dreams,  but they took off. There had to have been some difference.  Neighbors probably buy it for nothing, maybe.  The place I   m living on right now, we bought it in    40 or    41. I think we gave  about  10 an acre for it, and it   s a 160  acres .  Do you want to sell it any time soon?  Laughter   No, I   m still living there, mister   So you think that one, you didn   t have money to leave, and two you just  weren   t going to leave.  Too much pride.  They just waited for it to be over. They knew it would end some time. They  were natives and they stayed.  They didn   t have the dust out around Kenton like we had here in town,  because it was all grassland. It wasn   t nearly as bad out there.  How far east did it extend? Do you know?  26  Kirtley  Blancett  Stringfellow  Kite  Blancett  Kite  Stringfellow  Kite  Morrison  Kite  Kirtley  Kite  Kirtley  Kite  Kirtley  Kite  Kirtley  Blancett  Kirtley  Blancett  Way over in central Kansas.  Yeah, but I mean East to West. Did it go clear nearly to Tulsa?  John Barns always said that some of his folks down around Oklahoma City  said the dust would come in down there.  We   ve heard dust stories come from Stillwater, Oklahoma City, and all the  way through here, and it seems like about Woodward they stop being dust  storms. It just starts being kind of dusty     I think so.     which is what everybody had. From Woodward, west, we   ve found a big  change in stories and recollections.  The dust would just kind of settle in and they were thinking the world was  going to end, and they weren   t out here where the dirt was blowing.  They weren   t living through what you saw   You have to be kind of tough to stick it out.  Well, a lot of people that moved on, picked up and left, came through, and  we   ve heard a lot of stories about tramps and hobos.  Oh, we had that.  I   d like to hear about that from you, living in town. Everybody else we   ve  talked to is out.  My mother always had something for them to eat. She never turned anyone  away.  That seems like it   d be hard when you were kind of scraping by yourself, just  barely feeding the family, and then somebody comes knocking on the door.  They   d always set on the back step or somewhere.  What would she round up for them, do you remember?  I can   t remember.  Make them a sandwich or something. We had gypsies that came to the ranch.  We had gypsies here too.  They came clear down to the ranch. Mother was baking bread. She was just  getting it out of the oven, and there came a whole bunch of them, women with  27  Kite  Lemons  Blancett  Kite  Kirtley  Stringfellow  Kite  Kirtley  Blancett  Kite  Kirtley  Stringfellow  Blancett  Stringfellow  Kite  Hart  big skirts and all. Our school was just a quarter of a mile up the road. They  knocked on the door, and they wanted food and they wanted money.  Who doesn   t, actually?  Doesn   t everybody.  She grabbed the bread that she had taken out, maybe three big loafs, gave them  that, and gave them a little something else, and told them to go on up the road.  They left, and they didn   t do any harm, but they got that far. It was nine miles  to the highway, and they got that far off. It nearly scared her to death.  What about gypsies in town?  They would camp up to where Frank Walton   s Insurance is and across the  street Mr. McGowen had a filling station. They would camp kind of behind.  There were no buildings back there. I can remember those gypsies real well.  They sure liked our store too  laughter .  I   ll bet they did.  Would you try and lock the door when you saw them coming?  No, I can   t remember that we did. We weren   t afraid of the gypsies.  She was because she was by herself. They would steal too. They   d take  things and put them in these big old dresses and cover them up.  Would they steal from the store? Do you remember them taking things or your  parents talking about it?  I think they did.  I expect they took plenty out of you. I had one man say he was standing  watching a fellow one day and he stole a whole lot. He was standing there  watching him, and he didn   t see him steal this, but he did. They   re just so  slick.  They   re so good at it. There are still groups of gypsies.  Well I don   t want them coming out my way.  You didn   t see any gypsies? What about you guys?  There was one bunch that came to a place over west of us when we went to  school at Sunny Slope. I don   t know if it   s right, but they said they threw  some stuff in a little girl   s eyes. Why, I don   t know. That was Lowens or  Pinners or something.  28  Morrison  Stringfellow  Morrison  Kite  Stringfellow  Kite  Hart  Kirtley  Blancett  Kirtley  Kite  Blancett  Kite  Morrison  Blancett  Morrison  Kirtley  Kite  Blancett  I can   t remember that. There were tramps that came by when we lived in the  country. Mama always had something for them. When we moved to town, we  lived north of the railroad tracks. There were forever hobos stopping there.  They always told us that if they ever found a place where they could eat they  marked it somehow. I don   t know how they did it, but we had a lot of people  stop.  I always heard that.  I don   t know what she fed them, but she never turned anybody down.  It must have been something good   I heard one man say that his wife always kept cornbread on hand, and gave  them some cornbread and maybe milk or something like that.  Would you ask them to do work or anything around the yard or something like  that?  No.  No, I wouldn   t.  You wanted to get rid of them as fast as possible  laughter .  Yeah, get rid of them.  Where do you think these gypsies came from?  Europe.  Shelly and I remember the first time we heard gypsy stories we had never  heard anything like that before.  I don   t know where they came from.  Remember that movie long years ago, the gypsy, that story of the gypsies? It  was called The Golden Ring, or something like that. It depicted their life in  Europe.  I don   t remember that.  They may have come from Bulgaria and Europe.  So they were heavily European. You could tell they weren   t from here. And  they were just wondering around the panhandle of Oklahoma stealing  chickens   Yeah, they   d steal chickens.  29  Morrison  Stringfellow  Hart  Blancett  Kite  Morrison  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Kirtley  Blancett  Kite  Blancett  Kirtley  Kite  Blancett  Kirtley  Blancett  They   d steal anything they could get their hands on.  I bet they did too. I don   t remember ever having any come to my folks' place,  or to me even.  Were they the same as Bedouins?  No, the Bedouins are more or less Arabs that live in the desert and have their  camel groups.  Gypsy stories certainly are interesting. With the tramps and the hobos, you  would just kind of feed them and get them out.  Usually, they were never let into the house, if I remember right. You gave  them something outside. You never let them in, but they would just go on up  the road or on into town.  We might have had a hobo or two that far out, but I don   t think we had any  problems.  You were too far out of existence down there.  Yeah, way out there.  Off of the main roads and everything like that. They tried to stay more on the  main roads.  But the gypsies just made one trip.  They traveled in covered wagons, didn   t they?  These were in a car, a vehicle.  I   ve heard tales of both.  I   m sure they traveled earlier in wagons.  The ones I remember, they   d park their wagons there behind the McGowen  filling station.  How did the coming of the dust bowl and the drought hurt the downtown? It  seems like businesses would go out. Do you remember a big change in the  way the town looked at all? Did it turn into a ghost town at all?  I guess we went to high school here. I graduated.  In that old board building? I was gone my sophomore and junior year.  I went all four years here.  30  Hart  Blancett  Kirtley  Kite  Kirtley  Morrison  Kite  Kirtley  Stringfellow  Kite  Stringfellow  Kite  Kirtley  Blancett  Kirtley  Blancett  Kirtley  Morrison  Blancett  I did too.  It wasn   t so terribly bad, was it?  Well, we walked to school, so it must have been not too bad early in the  morning. Unless it was real cold, then we didn   t walk, or real dusty. Lots of  times, they just turned out school.  Yeah, they would close it.  I remember that red brick building, that grade school. They didn   t have the  fire laws then, but they would chain those back doors so that we only had one  door we could get out in case of fire. I always worried about that. Do you  remember that? They would chain those back doors.  No.  Why would they do that?  The wind, and then kids would run out that way.  And leave the doors open.  So they just fixed it by locking it.  When I started school it was    27, and I graduated in    31. The dirt storm was  just starting by the time I graduated.  So you don   t remember any big changes in the town itself, the size of the town?  We had quite a few little businesses in town. I remember we had two or three  drug stores and we had two or three grocery stores. We had one or two  clothing stores. We had filling stations, one, two, three, five or six filling  stations in town.  I think we had more businesses than we do now, really.  Oh yeah, we did.  It was all up and down Main Street and around the square. All those were  occupied.  And the motel out west. We did have more businesses.  And two banks at one time.  We just recently got two banks here, the Keyes Bank. Then we had the  Citizens; what was it called?  31  Stringfellow  Blancett  Kirtley  Blancett  Kite  Morrison  Blancett  Kirtley  Hart  Kirtley  Blancett  Kirtley  Blancett  Morrison  Blancett  Hart  Blancett  Hart  Blancett  Kirtley  Blancett  Kite  Kirtley  Blancett  The Citizens was over where the Caboose is now.  The First State   s been where it is now forever, hasn   t it?  And we had the Ford garage and a Chevrolet garage.  Thriving, they did well.  Did a lot of those go out when the dust storms hit?  No, they stayed.  Yes, they stayed right on through.  They stayed right through.  Wasn   t your dad involved in the Plymouth garage?  We had two or three lumberyards.  I think he might have run across some money to start with.  We had a bunch of goods here in town, and they just gradually closed up.  I stopped and looked in that old place not long ago just to see if I could see my  old Packard in there  laughter . It wasn   t there.  How many doctors did we have? And we had a dentist.  About four doctors. We had a dentist, and we don   t have a dentist now.  Or an optometrist.  No we don   t.  We used to.  It was thriving more than it is now, really, business wise.  You didn   t have to have a lot of business to make a living, really.  No, it didn   t cost much to live.  How did these businesses survive if none of you had any money?  Well, they   d come in our store and have fifteen cents, and get a sack full of  something.  I don   t know. I   ve wondered how they did. There   s a Snap   s Chevrolet  32  Kirtley  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blnacett  Kite  Morrison  Kite  Morrison  Kite  Stringfellow  Kirtley  Hart  Morrison  Blancett  Kite  Hart  Kite  Blancett  Morrison  Stringfellow  garage. They seem to always do well. The Ford garage did great.  The Showalter Garage had Willies.  Showalter had the Packards and the Ambassadors. What were those others?  Willies.  Plymouth, yeah they had the Plymouth.  Somebody was giving them money.  The people that had land were able to borrow money to keep going.  A lot of it was coming through mortgages and things like that.  That   s where a lot of it came from.  Do you remember your parents getting in debt more during that period?  We were too young at that age.  We didn   t worry about it.  I don   t think dad did though, because there was a lean on some of them.  Well yeah.  They were good managers. I know my dad was a lot better manager than my  ex-husband was  laughter .  Do you remember having any particular views toward the new president, like  Roosevelt, coming in?  Oh yeah, I remember that.  Like how your parents felt about the    New Deal    and the big government and  the government coming in. I know some people were really thinking it was a  good thing and other people thought it was the worst thing.  My dad thought it was great. He was a democrat no matter what  laughter .  Whatever they did was wonderful.  You talk about the government coming in, this is going back a little, but it got  so bad that there was no feed or anything for the cattle, and the government  bought the cattle for just a few dollars a head and killed them.  We lost about all of our cattle that way. They just paid us so much, and then  shot the cattle and hauled them off some place.  33  Morrison  Kirtley  Kite  Morrison  Blancett  Kite  Blancett  Kite  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Morrison  Kirtley  Blancett  Kirtley  Blancett  Kite  Because of their hide. I don   t know whether they took their hide or not.  I can remember my husband, they had a big ranch. They had a lot of cattle.  They raised the feed. They raised the feed through the thirties because they  were kind of protected. FDR had so many of the cattle shot. I don   t know  why.  Do you feel like at least somebody was buying the cattle from you? You got  some money for them.  Got a little for them.  There wasn   t feed for them, so they reduced that. Then he established the  CCC   s, remember that? That gave a lot of people work.  It sounds like the general consensus was positive towards that, the    New  Deal,    towards his plans.  I think so.  Well, having lived through that period of time, and obviously surviving, do you  think that it had any lasting impressions on you? Do you look at the weather  now with more fear? Are there traits or things that you brought out of that  period of time that you can identify in yourself today?  I think it probably taught us economics, and not to be wasteful. And to think  maybe that could happen again. You   d better put a couple of dollars back  somewhere.  I   ve been thinking of that all morning long. That   s exactly what I thought. It  taught us that when you had a little that you   d better save some of it, because  something might come up any time that you would need that money.  I remember my mother telling my one time to always be frugal and save. She  said,    I don   t think I   ve ever wasted a tablespoon of flour.    That   s just what  she said.  I think those times gave us a strong work ethic. You learned to work hard and  take care of things.  I don   t remember your mother.  She had brown eyes and dark red hair. You remember Pop though.  Yeah.  Yeah, he came to town a lot, and she stayed home.  Yeah, and not be afraid of hard work.  34  Morrison  Kite  Morrison  Hart  Blancett  Morrison  Blancett  Morrison  Blancett  Kite  Morrison  Blancett  Morrison  Stringfellow  Blancett  Kite  Blancett  Kirtley  Blancett  Kirtley  Blancett  Hard work. I really think it did.  Do you think that carries through with you right now to this day?  Oh yes. It makes us very grateful for what we have now.  It seems like people now, if they want to go to work they do, and if they don   t  they don   t.  No, they just do what they want. Somebody feeds them. I see that everyday.  Back then you didn   t get very much money to work, and I can remember our  dad always said,    Give an honest day   s work for an honest dollar.    That   s  about all you got back then.  I remember when I went to Oklahoma City in    40. I was a secretary to Julius  Cox at this building. He took me down as his secretary. He says,    It   s going  to pay  150 a month.    I got there, and it was  180. I was thrilled to death.  Yeah, did fine, had a lot of money.  The first job I ever had was out at the high school working for Dr. Harry Hall.  I worked 54 hours a week for  5.  For Heaven   s sakes. Five dollars a month   54 hours a week.  Six days.  No, I never did have one of those.  Well, she  her sister, Mrs. Hart  worked there before I did.  In    28 or    29, I helped a neighbor lady during wheat harvest. They had a little  wheat, and I helped her for one solid week for fifty cents a day.  For Heaven   s sakes.  I bet you didn   t get paid very much to work in that store  laughter .  You got your clothing and your food, didn   t you?  Right, and we were thankful for that.  And a dime to go to the show. We had a theatre then.  Oh yeah, we did.  We had a skating rink part of the time.  35  Kirtley  Blancett  Kite  Blancett  Stringfellow  Morrison  Stringfellow  Blancett  Morrison  Blancett  Kirtley  Blancett  Kite  Blancett  Kirtley  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Kite  A bowling alley.  A bowling alley, a nice bowling alley.  When money was scarce and you were young, what would you do for fun?  What was entertainment to you all?  We didn   t require much, did we?  I don   t remember anything that we actually did during the thirties, because it  was so bad you just didn   t. You didn   t have the gas to drive anywhere, even if  you did, unless it was an emergency.  When we still lived in the country, every so often we   d have an ice cream  social or something. The neighbors would all gang up at one place. Most of  the time you had milk for that.  We went to the theatre every Saturday afternoon for a nickel.  It was a nickel huh? Is that what it was? I was thinking it was a dime.  Well later it was, I think, that you could get in for a dime.  That is really a beautiful theatre. It   s a big shame. You should see the inside  of this theatre. Isn   t it? It   s a beautiful thing.  I   ve never been in it.  Not since Freddie fixed it? Oh, it   s fantastic. It   s probably the nicest theatre  I   ve ever been in.  Where is it?  Down here on Main Street.  North Main Street.  North Main. Brown front, on your left as you go to town. It   s almost to the  square, look on your left, a brown front. It   s beautiful.  Does nobody run it anymore?  Well, they leased it and these people have closed it down. I saw a truck there  the other day. I hope they   re not hauling away some of the beautiful things  that were in there. There was a coat of arms. There   s everything beautiful in  there.  So movies were an option to you during the thirties, during the Depression.  36  Kirtley  Stringfellow  Kirtley  Blancett  Kite  Kirtley  Blancett  Kite  Kirtley  Blancett  Stringfellow  Kirtley  Blancett  Kite  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Kite  Blancett  Kirtley  I know so many people were caught in there the day of the black, April the  14th. They had an awful time getting home.  Was that when the theatre was West of the drug store there?  Yeah. Mr. Oliver had it. That   s where it was.  Oh yeah, Oliver, Addie Oliver. I remember them. The first movie I ever saw  was at that, The Covered Wagon.  What else would you do to entertain yourselves?  We   d have neighbors, and we   d all play ball until time to get supper. Then  we   d cook and run the sweepers so we could go to bed.  Run around with your buddies.  Ice cream socials, you mentioned that.  Another thing, we had the maypole in the school. I don   t think they have that  anymore.  No.  That was so playful, that pole.  Yeah, the maypole.  Yeah, that was nice. Down on the ranch we made our own fun. When it  snowed we took a sled. We had a homemade sled and a box sled. We   d run  up on the hill, slide down the hill, and we   d ride and skate in the old bedrooms.  What now?  Skate, roller skate. We learned to roller skate. We didn   t have sidewalks out  there, so we skated around the beds in the bedroom  laughter .  They must have been bigger rooms than I   ve got then, if you could skate  around the bed.  Yeah, we had two pretty good-sized old bedrooms, and we   d skate around  those beds. We pulled the headboard out and pulled it out front. That   s how  we learned that my brother was an excellent skater. I wasn   t that good.  You leaned to turn circles real good I bet.  Yeah   The church had activities once in a while, didn   t they?  37  Blancett  Kirtley  Kite  Blancett  Kite  Kirtley  Hart  Kirtley  Lemons  Hart  Lemons  Kite  Hart  Blancett  Kirtley  Blancett  Hart  Blancett  Hart  Morrison  Kirtley  Morrison  Sure, all the churches were here then, weren   t they?  Oh yeah.  What was the predominant religion at the time, then or now?  Baptist and Methodist. My mother   s Christian Silas; they didn   t have her  church here.  You two were saying you made your own fun as well out there. What would  you do? What do you recall doing?  Swimming.  Walking on stilts and tin cans. We   d make what we   d call Tommy Walkers.  We did that too.  My mom made those for me when I was little   Did she?  Yeah, yeah.  That   s what I was thinking.  We had croquet and marbles.  I never did do that. How   d they make those walkers?  You probably played in the horse tank, didn   t you? Swam?  With cans?  Yeah, we took cans, and the higher the can the better.  We never did do that. We did stilts though; dad made us stilts.  Oh yeah, we had stilts.  Another thing, the boys had them more than anything. They would carve guns  out of wood. Then, you had inner tubes for your tires then, and you   d get what  was left, cut a circle. You   d put a clothespin on the end of that wooden gun  and stretch out those inner tubes. If you got them long enough and strong  enough, they could really hurt you. You   d turn lose of that clothespin.  I think kids had more fun then than they do now.  We did.  38  Kite  Kirtley  Blancett  Hart  Kirtley  Kite  Blancett  Morrison  Blancett  Morrison  Blancett  Kite  Blancett  Hart  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Kite  Blancett  Kite  Hart  Why do you think it was more fun then?  We were just making our own fun.  We had more initiative. You developed that, and you didn   t have every toy  that you cried about wanting.  Now kids always say,    Well I   m so bored.     They practiced ball and they had ball games that night.  Let me see; it was dirty, you had no money, you were walking to school,  skating in the bedroom, I don   t know.  We had a good time.  We rode the school bus.  My brother and I, if we weren   t fighting, we were playing or going out  watching the bulls fight  laughter . We had bulls that hated each other. We   d  get them together and get them to fight, until our dad caught on to what we  were doing  laughter .  It used to make dad so mad if we rode the milk pin calves.  Oh yeah, no he didn   t let us do that.  One thing that I wanted to hit on that we   ve been talking about sometimes is  how before big storms the animals would act differently.  The horses particularly.  They ran.  They ran and jumped up and down and acted kind of crazy. They did.  And all the cows would gather all up together.  The horses particularly, and the cattle would gather up in a corner along the  fence. The horses would almost tell you if something was coming. It  happened about everyday anyway though.  It became normal.  It became normal.  Do you guys have any recollection of that going on?  Yeah, we saw about the same thing they did.  39  Stringfellow  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Kite  Blancett  Kite  Blancett  Kirtley  Blancett  Kirtley  Kite  Kirtley  Blancett  Kirtley  Blancett  Kirtley  She   s out on a farm, and they had all them animals. She did and she did. We  had some, but we didn   t have that many. I was married in 1931, and that   s  just about the time the dust bowl started. My husband and I had a few cattle  and some hogs and stuff like that. We didn   t have bigger stuff like they did.  What was your husband   s first name?  John.  John. I started school with Charlie Stringfellow.  That was his brother.  What was his brother?  Charlie. We always called him Snoops  laughing .  I started school with him.  Do you remember Christmas time during this period? When there was so little  to go around, what did you all do for Christmas?  We got one present.  What Santa Claus brought?  You   d get a pair of skates.  A doll.  I didn   t like dollies, so I didn   t get them. I got some new clothes, something I  needed.  My folks would always load up the car and go to Wichita for Christmas.  They   d drive all night long and come home the day after Christmas.  Was there family there?  Yeah, all the family was there.  My parents said that for Christmas, they both came from large families, they   d  get some fruit, maybe. It was rare to get an orange they said.  Mama said they would get one orange.  Get some fruit, yes.  Well they would get an orange for Christmas, when she was young.  40  Morrison  Blancett  Morrison  Kite  Blancett  Kite  Blancett  Morrison  Kite  Morrison  Blancett  Kite  Morrison  Hart  Morrison  Blancett  Hart  Blancett  Hart  Morrison  Usually for Christmas too, we got a doll. I don   t know what the boys got. The  country schools would usually have a Christmas program.  We did.  They   d get a tree, and then there was usually a sack of candy or something. I  don   t know how they did it for kids, but there was usually something.  So the schools kind of took over a little bit at Christmas.  They would come and get together. We would get together, sometimes, with  the Hurley School that was on the flats, the first school on the flats, and have a  program. I remember we   d practice and we   d sing. We   d have a heck of a  good time.  We had a couple of things come up that were interesting about the rabbit  drives that were held.  Oh, I   d forgotten that. That was awful.  There were also an awful lot of rats at that time. Do you remember they   d try  to pour water down through the holes to drown them out? There were an  awful lot of rats at that time too.  Just in your house?  Well, everywhere. They were around the barn, all over.  We didn   t have rats.  How would you get rid of the rats?  You didn   t very well. They tried to drown them out a time or two.  And they trapped them. I remember one of our neighbor boys got bit through  the back of the neck.  I   d forgotten that.  By a rat?  By a rat, at night.  What was it? Pack rats, what were they?  Just big old rats.  Just rats, I don   t know.  41  Kite  Morrison  Blancett  Hart  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Kite  Stringfellow  Kite  Blancett  Kirtley  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Kite  Blancett  Kirtley  He was just sleeping?  Yeah, it was a neighbor boy.  Oh my.  In the house.  I remember those rabbit drives. People, they   d use a club. They   d get those  rabbits in a corner. They were eating what there was to eat, eating the cattle   s  grass and food, what little bit there was. So they killed them that way, with  clubs. Jackrabbits.  I was looking through some pictures last night. Out there where I lived, I  don   t remember when it was, but I think there was a little snow on the ground.  I took a picture of them, and there were 50 rabbits in one little strip there in  that picture that I took.  For Heaven   s sakes.  That was just a touch of them. When the school bus would come by, it was  worse than a herd of cattle coming out of the wheat fields and things them  rabbits would be so big  laughter .  They were jackrabbits weren   t they?  Did you participate in any of the rabbit drives?  No.  Did anybody?  I think my dad and my brother did, but we didn   t.  No, my dad didn   t.  They probably took guns too. Did they?  I think they did.  Or did they take clubs?  Clubs were cheaper probably  laughter .  That might be. Some used bats.  Back in the thirties, every Sunday afternoon, my dad played clarinet. Roy  Butterball and Norma Genestead played clarinet. My mother played the piano.  Then we had two or three people, one from Keyes and one from Texhoma.  42  Kite  Kirtley  Kite  Kirtley  Kite  Stringfellow  Kirtley  Morrison  Kirtley  Morrison  Kirtley  Stringfellow  Morrison  Kite  Kirtley  Kite  Kirtley  Morrison  Kirtley  We had about five or six in the band. They would come to our house and  practice all afternoon. Mrs. Butterball would sit and listen and enjoy it. They  did that every Sunday afternoon.  Did they play dances and things as well?  No.  Just for the fun of it.  Just for their own enjoyment.  There seem to be a lot of musicians in this town. I don   t know if that   s normal,  but everybody had musicians in their family one way or the other.  I remember Bob White telling me about your mother and her brother. One of  them was playing the piano and the other was on the organ one afternoon, and  he told me how much he enjoyed listening to her mother.  Yeah.  Your mother played for the church for a long time didn   t she?  Yeah.  And weddings and funerals.  She played for the Methodist church for about 45 years.  Something like that.  Whatever came along.  A couple times, we   ve had good stories dealing with bed bugs  laughter . That  was something we hadn   t thought about running into, but boy have we had  some stories.  Well I could tell you one.  Well let   s hear it.  My folks had that nice eight-room home. It was made out of walnut from their  farm. They moved out here into a shack until they got their new building  done, and we got bed bugs. It was just awful.  It   s awful.  Well, so she set kerosene at the bed legs in cans with kerosene oil in them. We  got rid of them, but we   d get bed bug bites. It was awful, for two or three  43  Morrison  Kite  Kirtley  Stringfellow  Kirtley  Kite  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Kirtley  Stringfellow  Blancett  Kirtley  Blancett  months.  If you ever got them it was a constant fight.  So you solved it by putting the bed legs     The bed legs in tin cans with kerosene.  Kerosene oil.  Kerosene oil.  And that kept them from getting up there?  That   s the way they got there, huh? My mother was always looking for them,  but I don   t know if she ever found any  laughter . The hired man stayed out  above the garage in a room, and I remember she   d go out there every so often  and turn that mattress every way but loose, and take kerosene on a rag and rub  along the seams. Always looking for bed bugs. She   s a lot tidier than I am.  When we first came to this company we lived in a dugout. I lived in a dugout  for several years. Then my dad went over on the state line and got a two-story  house and brought it up there. The two rooms down below were finished, but  the upstairs wasn   t quite finished. He goes to get some lumber, and seals that  upstairs in it. When he got that lumber he had bed bugs in it. And do you  think my mother didn   t have a time then.  In the lumber.  They were in that lumber.  I never did see one that I know of.  I bet if you ever saw one you   d know the next one  laughter .  Something I was wondering not long ago that we used to see, lightening bugs.  Have you all ever seen a lightning bug in a hundred years?  I   ve never seen one out here.  Not out here. I saw some out east.  A little bit on the river, but the Canadian River was full of lightning bugs.  They   re wonderful. They   re pretty little things.  I saw them about two years in Gettysburg.  Oh you did? Lightning bugs.  44  Morrison  Blancett  Morrison  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Kite  Blancett  Lemons  Morrison  Kite  Blancett  Lemons  Kite  Stringfellow  Morrison  Blancett  Stringfellow  Kite  Blancett  Stringfellow  Kite  My daughter-in-law went back to Iowa to insurance school. She finally asked  because she didn   t know what they were. She saw a lot back there.  Is that something fluorescent on their back or what is that?  I don   t know.  It   s not fire.  I saw some in southeast Kansas. They   d go back there to visit and they   d see  some lightning bugs.  I just don   t know if they have them any more. Do they?  They   re all over Stillwater.  They are?  Yeah, and Missouri.  Someone was saying, I can   t remember who said, they saw some here not too  long ago.  You can set on your porch and see hundreds in the summer time.  I   ve been to Montana 25 years. I guess it   s too cold up there. I didn   t see any  lightning bugs up there.  I wanted to ask them about the black bead medicine.  Oh yeah, asafetida.  Oh my lands.  I don   t think we ever had any of that.  I   ve seen it. They tied it around their neck, just wore it off the bugs. Is it  made out of onions?  I don   t know what it   s made out of.  Is it flat or is it a ball?  I just remember seeing it on a cousin in a little bag. They put it in a little bag.  I don   t remember. I had to wear some of it one time when the flu was bad.  My dad made me wear some of that.  It   s in a bag?  45  Stringfellow  Kirtley  Morrison  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Kirtley  Kite  Blancett  Lemons  Kite  Blancett  Stringfellow  Morrison  Blancett  Kite  Hart  Morrison  Hart  Kite  Hart  Stringfellow  Morrison  Blancett  They put it in little bags and tie the strings.  Mama talked about having to wear asafetida.  I heard about it, but I never saw it.  I don   t know what it is.  It was just a little piece of something square, something like that. I think it  was black. It had a terrible odor to it.  I don   t know what it was made of. It was nasty.  What was it for?  It   s supposed to keep you healthy.  Yeah, ward off the evil.  It doesn   t kill you evidently  laughter .  It sounds like it   d ward off friends and families.  I remember it smelled terrible. I don   t know what it was.  That was back when the flu was real bad one time.  They used to use mustard plasters too, didn   t they? It was for your chest when  you had a cold.  Yes, put it on the chest.  How did you all deal with your bed bug problem?  The same way.  Just took the kerosene.  Yeah, and put it all around the mattresses.  Do they just bite you? You   d lay there at night and feel them going at it?  Yeah, they   d bite.  They   d come out and crawl all over you.  It   d start itching if they bit you.  I guess they bite. Do they bite? We didn   t have any, but she was looking for  46  Stringfellow  Blancett  Stringfellow  Kite  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Morrison  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Morrison  them.  We papered the house in them days. We had wallpaper. When my mother  would go to paper the house, her and daddy would put carbonic acid in the  paste. That helped.  I bet that would. That would fix them.  They   d tear off all the old paper they could and put new paper up and put  carbonic acid in it. That   d help get rid of them.  As a closing question, we ask what to you is typical of that time period. What  memory or recollection do you have in your mind that is the most vivid  memory of that period? When you think back to the thirties and the dust bowl  and all that, do you have a scene in your head or an event or something that  happened that makes you think oh yeah, that was the thirties?  Family, more family. Everybody coming out of town on Sunday to eat dinner   laughter . Used to, all of the relatives would come out to the ranch on  Sunday. Mama would make cherry pie and fried chicken. They liked it. Her  health got kind of bad, so I stopped her  laughter . But anyway, family, I  think, more family.  Oh, I don   t know. The main thing that I always thought of was that it taught  me to try to be saving. I had to do without so much in those days that I tried to  save some so if I never needed it I would have it to fall back on.  And people helped each other.  Yes.  All the ranchers helped each other brand and round up. They   d all just gather  in and help everybody.  It was the same way with the crops.  They   re a lot more helpful than people are now.  People don   t visit you now like they used to.  No they don   t. In a way it was the good old days. In a way it was.  With all the trouble we had.  Yes, I think so.  I think my most vivid memory is just of the afternoon that that storm came  over. I was just fascinated with it. That sticks out. I have a lot of memories,  but that just sticks out.  47  Kite  Kirtley  Morrison  Kirtley  Stringfellow  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Morrison  Blancett  Hart  Blancett  Hart  Stringfellow  Blancett  Kirtley  Morrison  Kite  Blancett  Hart  What about you? Anything in particular?  I can   t remember anything particular, but I know my folks, they didn   t want  for anything particular. I do know that we wore dresses made out of flour  sacks.  And feed sacks.  And feed sacks, yes.  When I had all those little chickens I   d buy the feed in the printed sacks, wash  them, and my girls wore feed sack skirts. We   d buy material to make a blouse  or buy a blouse to kind of match some of the color in the skirts. They went to  school a lot of the time that way.  Those printed sacks, did they have printing on them?  No, not the later ones.  No designs or anything.  Oh they had designs, yes.  How would you get rid of the printing?  They didn   t have it on there.  Not at all?  No.  It was on a card.  My mother didn   t sew, so I didn   t have any of those.  Well, mama didn   t sew either, but she had two or three different ladies in town  that would sew for her.  Usually when you went to buy feed or something, they would try to get  enough sacks just exactly alike so they could make the dress or something.  They picked their feed by the pattern on the bag.  That   d be a good idea.  Well, I think the thing that I   ve thought about so many times is Dad would go  to town and he would bring back dried apricots and apples, big boxes of them.  We had fruit all the time there. A lot of people didn   t, but we did.  48  Blancett  Kite  Hart  Blancett  Kirtley  Blancett  Morrison  Blancett  Kirtley  Morrison  Stringfellow  Kirtley  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  Stringfellow  Blancett  We had a lot of dried fruit.  It was always dried?  Yeah.  Then we   d have fresh apples a lot. Something else they used to do, there  would be salesman, maybe based out of Fort Worth, that would come around  through the ranches, and probably the farms too, early in the fall. We   d buy all  kinds of goodies through the winter. Staples. I remember one thing that Dad  would buy, maple butter. Did you ever hear of it? The best stuff you ever ate.  I have.  That came from Vermont or somewhere, from the maple trees. We   d get all  kinds of staples. That would come in, you   d order it and pay for it, then the  order would come in, and we   d go to town and pick it up. That   s all kinds of  goodies through the winter.  In the fall too, different people brought around loads of apples and peaches and  things to buy. Mom canned a lot and made jelly.  We had some apple trees, but the alkali in the water, goes to the river, killed  the trees.  Do you remember Monaco used to bring a wagon load of corn and all that  stuff?  Oh yes.  Corn.  All summer long.  And then you could go up the river and get wild plums from old Mr. Dan  Island. Mama would make a lot of jellies.  Was that the sand hill plums?  Sand hill plums. Good too.  Weren   t they though.  Make preserves and jelly and all that good stuff.  They made good cobblers if you didn   t mind spitting the seed out  laughter .  Yeah, she did that once in a while.  49  Morrison  Blancett  Kirtley  Hart  Stringfellow  Morrison  Blancett  Kite  Stringfellow  Kite  Blancett  Kite  Stringfellow  Blancett  Lemons  Kirtley  Morrison  Kite  Was it corn that Monaco called maize? Maize he called corn. He had a  wagon, and he   d bring his produce to town. He lived in the country and  whatever produce he had he   d bring it in and run around and sell it.  Everybody liked Monaco, didn   t they?  You know how he grew stuff in that dust storm? He always had some every  summer.  I don   t either, but he usually always had something.  He was a Mexican. He lived up north and west of town here.  There were very few. He was about the only one, maybe one or two other  Mexican families. He was a nice old man.  Yes he was, everybody liked him.  Always had good food.  Well, that corn was good. Do you like to eat corn off the cob?  Oh yeah   I do too, I love it.  Good corn, sometimes it is good not cooked, just good sweet corn. Well, I  think that about wraps up what I have to say, or what I had to ask you.  Well, I want to tell you, she was talking about the dried fruit, my father went  and made a little screen thing. This was before the thirties. He made this little  screen thing and put screen wire on it and stand and put little trays in there.  Mother would peel apples and put them in there and dry her own apples for the  winter. That   s the way we had dried apples.  And apricots too. I like dried fruit.  Something else I wanted to ask you guys, I   ve heard my mom talk about it and  I   ve heard some people in this project talk about canning meat. I don   t have  any idea about how you can meat. Do you have to boil it or something first?  Pressure cooker.  You cook it for a long time, or you could do it with a water bath. You just put  it in the fruit jars or whatever, and then you had to cook it for a long, long  time.  So would it be cooked when you put it in there?  50  Morrison  Kite  Hart  Morrison  Kirtley  Stringfellow  Blancett  Stringfellow  Kirtley  Kite  Stringfellow  Blancett  Stringfellow  Kirtley  Blancett  Morrison  Kite  No.  It would be raw and you would put it in the jars, seal it down, and cook it  away.  Yes. Four hours, wasn   t it what they cooked it?  Well we the pressure cooker, but     We used to have canned meat all summer and all winter. They would kill two  or three calves at a time and can it off.  My mother, when we butchered the hogs, she   d take the bacon, I know she did  the sausage anyway, and take the coffee cans that we had, fill those coffee cans  full of sausage, and put it in the oven and bake it for so long. When she took it  out, she put the lid on the can and turned it upside down so that the lard would  seal it.  That   s a good idea.  She did that.  They did that at the ranch too.  And that would seal it?  Yes, and then you could use it anytime you want.  That would seal it completely.  I don   t remember how she used to put bacon in these stone jars, someway or  another. I think she had to cook it a little bit, and then put it in the stone jars  and pour lard over that to seal it.  The food used to be so much better than anymore.  Yes it did. My dad made sausage that was so good.  The hams used to didn   t have all the water in them that they do now.  Well thank you all for coming. We   ll send you transcripts of this tape typed  up. You   ll be able to look it over and see if there   s anything you   d like to  change. We   ll change it and send a final copy to you to keep. Then we   ll keep  one copy in Stillwater and one copy here at the museum. We   re keeping the  recorded copies there.  -------  -------  
