 Kite  So, we have Lonetta McQuigg, is that right?  Yes, yes sir   I started to say yes ma   am  (All laugh)  And Esther Livengood.  Yes.  And Eloise Prewett.  Yes.  And it   s January 25, 2001 at the Shattuck Senior Center. Well, first of all, I   m  curious to know what kind of name McQuigg is. Is that Scottish?  That   s what they claim it is.  And Livengood is   ?  Dutch.  Dutch. And Prewett? Is that English or   ?  Oh, Prewett is probably German, I imagine. My maiden name is Taylor, which  is English.  I never thought about the origin of Prewett. Well, this is just a real simple  informal talk and the whole purpose is just to get your memories and stories  and accounts of living during the twenties and thirties and so on, just to get it  on tape so that we have a record of it. You have a record of it and we do and it  doesn   t get lost. And we   ve just been going around the state talking to people  who grew up or experienced life in this area in the twenties, thirties, forties,  and fifties, and taping them and having a good time swapping stories and tall  tales.  5  Livengood  Kite  Livengood  Prewett  Livengood  Kite  Livengood  Kite  Livengood  Kite  Livengood  Kite  McQuigg  Kite  Well I   ll start with mine.  All right.  When that cloud started in we were over at Doctor Stella   she was a doctor  here, she and her husband, he was a doctor, and she was Dr. Stella Davis and  her husband Dr. John. And my sister and I we had gone over there; my cousin  worked for them, and they entertained quite a bit, and she had a big dinner and  we always went over and helped my cousin do up the dishes and get things  straightened up. Wasn   t long Mrs. Davis rushed in and she said,    Oh, there   s a  big storm coming     She said,    Let   s get in the car. We   ll go to the hospital  basement.    So we all got in her car and she took us up there, and it wasn   t long  then that hit. She had stayed upstairs to watch it and she came down and she  said    Oh man, it   s blowing black dirt.    She said,    You can   t hardly see  anything.    So we all went up to see and it looked ferocious. You couldn   t see.  Then, we just lived a block from the hospital. So my sister and I, we walked  home, and we had to bend over the wind was so strong and that dirt was hitting  us in the face. And anyway, we got home and it was kind of late afternoon     wasn   t that kind of in the afternoon, or after lunch when that   ?  Mid afternoon I think, uh-huh.  Mid afternoon, anyway, I know we were at the hospital quite a long time and  we walked home and we had told the folks where we were going. She wanted  to know where we were so we told her, and anyway, that was the start of it and  I   ll tell you, that blew in like crazy. In our home, we had a place   we just  lived in a three roomed house with a lean to kitchen and a pantry. Anyway, we  had to get tape to paste around the windows so the dust, we tried to keep the  dust out because it just covered everything. Our beds were just dusty, and we  endured it like that, and I don   t know how my mother kept everything clean  and cooked. I can   t even remember how we did the laundry, but we had a time  I am sure.  Where were you living when that came in?  Just right up here, just west of the hospital, a block north.  So in town.  Here in town.  What year were you born?  I was born in    18.  Mrs. McQuigg, you said    10.  1910, October 13th.  Mrs. Prewett, time to fess up.  6  Prewett  Kite  Smith  Kite  McQuigg  Prewett  Smith  McQuigg  Livengood  Kite  Livengood  Kite  McQuigg  Kite  McQuigg  Kite  McQuigg     22.  You want to go ahead?  That   s my mother.  Oh, all right.  Baby is that you? Good lands, honey.  Audrey Lee, I wouldn   t have known you.  Go ahead, I don   t want to interrupt, go ahead.  Oh goodness sakes honey, I never.  And then after I graduated from high school I started working at the telephone  office. That was in    38. And all during that time, you know, we   d have these  dust storms, and they just filtered in. Anyway, I started working at the  telephone office. I guess back then they didn   t build the buildings real dirt  proof you know, but that would sift in. I worked nights from   well, when I  first started I had to work a 12 hour night, 12 hours, anyway it was up to me to  keep the switch board dusted and the desk and I tried to clean, and the heating  was these tanks or something, I don   t know what they call those?  Radiators.  Radiators, yeah, and the dust would just I guess kind of cling to that heat or  something and anyway, I had to keep that all clean and have it ready for the  next shift that came on. I   d go home and I   d try to sleep and the dust was   you  know, you couldn   t hardly breathe sometimes it was so bad and I had trouble  sleeping.  What do you others remember about the Black Sunday, April 14th, 1935? Do  you remember when that rolled into town?  Yes I do, I can see it just like it was yesterday.  Where were you living at that time?  I was living in the country.  Just outside of town here?  Oh no, 20 miles south, and we had company. Audrey Lee, my little daughter,  and her little cousin were outside and they came running in and they told us  about the storm coming. So we went out and I   ll tell you, that cloud was  coming in, just rolling like a big black roll of smoke, coming from the north, I  think.  7  Kite  McQuigg  Kite  McQuigg  Kite  McQuigg  Kite  Smith  McQuigg  Smith  Kite  McQuigg  Kite  Smith  McQuigg  Smith  Do you remember any colors in it? What color was it?  No I really don   t, I don   t remember any colors, but I remember what we  noticed so much, the cattle. The horses were running and just acting, just  jumping around and the cattle were doing the same thing, just acting like they  were scared, and the chickens started going to roost. Started going to the  chicken house   it got that dark and I remember seeing the last old hen go in  the chicken house. (Laughs) And so we all got talking, we said well I think we  better go to the cellar we don   t know what   s behind that. So Ernie said,    I   ll go  get the lantern.    So he went and got the coal oil lantern and I went in and got  some wet towels, and several wet things you know to take down to the cellar,  and some cookies and some water to take down for the kids. We went on down  to the cellar and we stayed down there a long time. Of course I don   t know  what happened while we were down in there, but when we came out it had all  gone over. Ernie said,    Now we don   t want to go out before it   s over,    because  we didn   t know what was behind it, see? So we kept the cellar door down and  then the inside door, we had it shut too. But anyway we got through it alright  and when we came out it seemed like all was calm. I don   t remember any wind  blowing, I guess it had all gone over, but it just seemed calm to me and we  went on in the house then.  You would have been 25 at the time, is that right?  Well, I hadn   t stopped to think about it.  You were born in 1910, so in    35 you were 25. You were married at the time?  Yes, I was married and had   this is my little daughter.  So you were there, too?  Oh yes, I was about five years old.  She was born in    32.  Four, I was born in    32.  So you would have been three or four.  You   d have been three.  Do you remember the big dust storm?  No, I do not.  No, she said she didn   t remember.  I do not remember it at all, no.  8  Kite  Prewett  Kite  Prewett  Kite  Prewett  Kite  Livengood  Kite  McQuigg  Livengood  McQuigg  Livengood  Prewett  I don   t think I   d remember it either, I wouldn   t want to. Mrs. Prewett where  were you when this big thing came through town?  Well our family lived south of town, about 20 miles southwest of town. But  our family had gone to Higgins for the day, it was Sunday and that   s when we  went to visit relatives. Such a beautiful day, calm, beautiful, sunny, warm day  and we girls   four of us I believe   had gone for a walk and we were just  walking, that was what we did. Go for a walk, and had a little cousin who was  about two years old with us. We were just walking along giggling and talking  and pretty soon my brother came around the corner on   we said two wheels     and said     Get in the car, there   s a storm coming.    We got in, he went back  down to where our relatives lived and we got out and went across the street to  a storm cellar, but when we all just fell out of the car all four doors just opened  and we just all go out; I turned and looked back and here was this two year old  still in the car (laughs) so everybody else was gone, I went back and got him.  So I was the last one in and when I got to the cellar door it was black. And that  all happened within a matter of ten minutes at the most, that it went from a  beautiful sunny day to just black.  Do you remember any stories or signs of animals doing weird things before  the storm, like Mrs. McQuigg was saying the horses and cows went running  around and the chickens went to roost?  Well I don   t remember because we were not at home, we were in the country.  Sometimes people remember birds, birds coming before the      I have seen birds out ahead of storms but not that one.  Yeah, well do you think that was the beginning, would you say, of the dirty  thirties, or the dust?  Oh yes.  Things had come before then or they didn   t?  I don   t think we had dust before then did we?  I don   t know, it seemed to me like we had some little dust, not bad but dust in  the air. I never.  See this was so black; it was picked up in Kansas and Colorado, or maybe out  in the Oklahoma and Texas Panhandle too.  Oh this was the worst one, but I don   t know whether it was the first one.  What I remember the next morning as we were coming in to Arnett for some  kind of a contest   school contest or some kind   and as we came past the  fields, how desolate they were. We had not seen that kind of damage in the  fields before. I know that because the fields were so blown and the  9  Livengood  Kite  Livengood  Kite  McQuigg  Kite  McQuigg  Kite  McQuigg  Kite  Prewett  tumbleweeds were piled up against the fences and I know that that   s the first  time I can recall. Of course I wasn   t very old but     Well we   d have periodic dust storms and they really blew for I don   t know a  good many years there for awhile when that started.  How do you think the drought and the dust storms changed your life? You  would have been 25 and you were 13 and you would have 17. Do you  remember it causing any change in the way you lived your life at all? Was  your life different from the twenties than when the dust came in?  Well, I   m sure we were real concerned about getting sick or breathing too  much dust. But we were in school at the time and I know we   they had a little  school that was right over here, we were in the northeast corner with full  windows on two sides. Oh my, oh man, how the dust would blow in there and  the desks were all covered up and oh my, it was almost beyond     Do you remember any changes, or how your life was affected by that period of  time?  Who you talking?  I   m talking to you. Yes, the drought and the lack of the rain and the dust and  the depression, if it made any difference in your lives? Do you remember any  changes you had to make during that time?  Oh yes, we had to make changes, but there wasn   t any change in the way I felt  about Oklahoma, I tell you, because I knew that before long the rains would  start coming and everything would be pretty again. Of course the main worry  for me was about my little daughter. The dust, I was worried about it you  know affecting her lungs, but the house we lived in was built pretty well. We  lived in a kind of a ravine. There weren   t any plowed fields where we lived. It  was all grass and trees around the house and grass on each side of this little  ravine, so we were down a ways, we were protected from the wind, and also  there wasn   t that fresh dust blowing off of a field. Too along with the other  that had blown in from somewhere else, we taped around the windows. Of  course there was that light dust; it would sift in anyway, but not bad. It wasn   t  so terribly bad but still I had a little worry about her lungs, but I tried to protect  her all I could.  How would you do that?  Well with the damp clothes you see. But I don   t believe that, in    32 there  wasn   t much was there, I don   t remember about how it was in    32.  Mrs. Prewitt do you remember?  I don   t remember just exactly when the drought started but I think we had dry  years through the thirties most of the way.  10  McQuigg  Prewett  McQuigg  Smith  Prewett  Kite  McQuigg  Smith  Kite  Smith  Kite  Smith  McQuigg  Prewett  McQuigg  Prewett  Kite  That   s the way with me but I know, yes, yeah.  I   m Eloise Taylor.  To Audrey Smith   Yes, oh honey I forgot to tell her, I just took for granted.  Oh my, she was my fourth grade teacher.  Would have been fifth if I taught you.  Are you just visiting in town or   ?  They just came from Las Vegas.  We just came from Las Vegas.  Well we just started at about five to; it usually takes about an hour to an hour  and a half.  That   s no problem, we   re at the motel, we   re gonna be here for a week or ten  days or whatever. Oh, we saw so much snow  on the way to Oklahoma , and  within a hundred miles from Albuquerque over to Tucumcari I bet we saw 25  wrecks. There isn   t much telling how many people were killed. There were  cars smashed, cars, trucks, it was unbelievable. They closed the highway,  when we got into Tucumcari on the other side a little bit we stopped for  gasoline and there was some cars in there said they had tried to go and they  had closed the highway.  So you just barely made it?  Terrible, absolutely terrible, so excuse us. We went to California, and Mom,  you   ll have to tell him.  When she was a baby in    32 I didn   t have to worry about the milk, see I nursed  her. But I don   t remember the dust storms then. I don   t believe any dust honey.  No, I think our first big   1935 I think was our first real dirt storm.  But after that we had quite a few.  What I recall, in 1935 our family went to Colorado to visit right after school  was out, which would have been soon after this first dirt storm and I know how  grateful we felt when we drove through southwest Kansas and southeast  Colorado and saw how terribly blown that country was, we realized we didn   t  have it bad at all. As far as the moving of the soil and all.  Right. Do you consider the impact of the Depression to have been big on your  lives, I mean do you remember having to go without certain things or having  to change the way you ate or dressed because of the Depression?  11  Livengood  McQuigg  Prewett  Kite  Prewett  Kite  McQuigg  Kite  McQuigg  Livengood  McQuigg  Prewett  Kite  I made my own clothes back then, (laughs) I bought my material. I worked     my superintendent he excused me the last hour, if I kept my grades up, so I  could work down at Bridey store and we sold material for 10 cents a yard.  Well I had taken a little bit of home ec. So I would see a pattern and I   d just  cut my dress out and I   d make it and I had different dresses to wear. But 10  cents a yard for 30 cents, I   d trim    em up.  I don   t remember hard times at all really. We had all we wanted to eat all the  time, and all that I needed to wear, probably not all that I could have worn, but  I had all that I needed. But we had the food because we lived in the country.  My dad butchered beef and a hog, and we had our chickens and our eggs and  our milk and our cream and our butter, and there wasn   t very much we needed  to buy. But you see the coffee and flour and salt and stuff like that.  I can   t recall it being a hardship. I think if it did anything, it bonded the  neighbors and if anyone needed something there was someone there to help  out. And if someone butchered a hog, the neighbors came and helped and we  shared the meat. Then vice versa, same way with beef, someone probably told  about the government program of a killing the cattle during the Depression     have they told you that?  Yeah, we   ve heard about that.  You   ve heard about that, yeah, and they would pay the farmers for the cattle  that were slaughtered, but then in turn the farmer   as I remember it, I was just  a girl   the farmers then could claim the meat from the cattle, and that was  when we did so much canning of meat and beef.  Do you remember that Mrs. McQuigg?  Yes, my mother canned a lot of meat and vegetables and fruits. We always had  ample.  How would they can the meat? I   ve heard different ways of doing it.  Well you have to use a pressure cooker really, for canned meat, for it to really  last and keep.  And my mother cooked in grease and fried it and browned it you know.  Yeah, you can fry it down too. You can slice the ham and the tenderloin and  stuff and fry it down and cover it, pour lots of lard over the top of it. Of course  it was home rendered lard, you see, from the pig, from the hogs you see, you  rendered the fat.  It was all precooked before it was pressure cooked.  Right, I   ve heard of canning in the pressure cooker or boiling it   that   s how  my mom would can. But I   ve never heard of the frying it down and pouring the  grease down on top of it, that   s something that   s new to me.  12  McQuigg  Livengood  Kite  McQuigg  Livengood  Smith  Kite  Smith  Kite  Prewett  Livengood  Prewett  McQuigg  Prewett  McQuigg  Livengood  Prewett  Livengood  McQuigg  Livengood  McQuigg  And that kept good too.  Yes.  How long would that keep?  Well I don   t know because we ate lots of meat. (Laughs) But it would keep  pretty well during the winter seemed to me like.  Well my mother would fry it and put it in little 3 or 4 gallon jars too with the  grease over the top it preserved it in some way. I don   t know but.  I do that right now with sausage.  Pour the grease over the top?  Sure, make my own sausage put it down in the jar put the grease on there,  yeah.  Do you keep it in the fridge that way?  You can freeze it or can it in the jars.  We made great big jars of sauerkraut; she   d can that so we always had  sauerkraut.  We always had food in the cellar.  Yes, I want to   go ahead Eloise.  Our grape juice from the wild grapes and apples from the   we were fortunate  in the community where Lonetta and I lived that we had apple orchards near  by and grapes.  Oh yes, wild grapes, wild plums.  We used to drive down there and pick apples down through.  Eggleston   s.  Eggleston   s yeah. And McConnell.  And McConnell   s had an orchard.  We   d got out to Boxty ranch and pick the wild plums; my mothered can    em.  My mother always raised a wonderful garden. The creek ran through our place  and my dad went down by the creek and found a place that would be sub-irrigated  and he plowed this up and Mama then early in the spring, the 17th of  13  Prewett  McQuigg  Prewett  Kite  Livengood  McQuigg  Livengood  Kite  Livengood  Prewett  Livengood  Kite  McQuigg  March is when we planted our potatoes. Also at that time she set out some  green onions and planted some lettuce and some English peas, at that time.  Then later on we had, well we had everything there was you know. We had  cucumbers, we had tomatoes, green peppers. Well about everything. And it  grew real well even if it didn   t rain because this was sub-irrigated, you see. It  was down protected from the wind because there were trees around and I don   t  think she ever failed to raise a garden and then she would can; we   d have all  we wanted during the summer, and then she   d can tomatoes and pickles.  Our first hot lunch programs were self-done, I mean we did it ourselves. I was  a student, did they have hot lunches when you were in school Audrey Lee?  The mothers would meet together and have what they   d call canings and  they   d all bring vegetables and tomatoes from their gardens and they   d can at  one place   at one of the homes   and they   d can half gallon jars of mixed  vegetables or tomatoes. And then they   d meet some place else and can another  day. Those things were at school, they took the food to school and about 30  minutes before noon. Some of the high school girls would go and fix lunch, fix  soup. We knew   each of us took a tin cup in our lunch.  That   s where some of the meat went to it was pressure, it was cooked and they  had it for the lunches, for the soup.  And we had cocoa or tomato soup or vegetable soup with our lunch that we  carried and that was our first hot lunches.  Do you remember any programs besides the cow killing that the town or  government brought in to help out during that period?  Well we had what, the WPA.  The WPA and CCC.  I think eventually my dad had to work on that.  What was the attitude of your fathers or husbands towards those programs?  Towards Roosevelt and the government programs?  Well I think my dad on WPA it was a job and money that we could buy things  with and it helped out because at the time I don   t know what, or I can   t  remember what his jobs were. Well he worked on the railroad for a good many  years and during that time I don   t know whether they laid them off or what but  anyway he got on, worked at on the WPA. Worked, what was that?  WPA.  Yeah, the public works. I don   t know.  Yeah, Works Progress Administration.  Yeah, you could work with horses or work. Well my dad went, he thought it  14  Smith  McQuigg  Kite  Prewett  Kite  Livengood  Kite  Prewett  McQuigg  Prewett  McQuigg  Kite  Prewett  Kite  McQuigg  was for everybody so he went with his horses and worked three days and some  of them said   see we had borrowed money and we had several head of cattle,  and we had milk cows, we milked quite a few cows and sold the cream and  then Mama had the eggs. After he   d worked a while, well some of them said  that they thought that it wasn   t for anybody that could, made a living. Of  course we had a living because Mama raised a garden and we did have our  milk cows, but everybody else did, but anyway Papa said    Well I don   t want to  work if someone else needs it worse.    So he just said I won   t go back to work  so he didn   t. We got by without it. But I know my folks thought it was a good  idea, for what Roosevelt had done.  But Daddy never did work on that.  No, no he never did.  Do you remember any other attempts to help, do you remember trying, helping  people out around town with? Did you have clothing drives or for families that  didn   t have things in town?  We had moved into Higgins after 1935; we moved into Higgins for four years.  And there was a sewing room there and this was similar to the public roads  work, except the women made clothing to be given away; they sewed  undergarments, dresses, shirts, trousers, various garments.  Do you remember anything in the Shattuck area, Mrs. Livengood, that was  anything like that?  Can   t remember.  Any church programs or distribution of things to needy families? Or maybe  nobody knew they were needy at the time.  This is it   I think everybody was like everybody else.  That   s right.  We didn   t go through the Depression at all compared to the cities, the boys  who came from the cities had had it so rough. Eating out of garbage cans and  all the things that we   d heard. And we didn   t, we weren   t deprived of anything.  Oh, no.  So when he heard stories of city life, during the Depression     My brother felt very fortunate.  That he lived in this area, wow. Well do you remember people from the cities,  any of them coming out looking for food or work, kind of tramping through?  Well I   ll tell you a long time ago they had to come in a wagon. It took quite a  15  Kite  McQuigg  Kite  McQuigg  Prewett  McQuigg  Prewett  Smith  McQuigg  Prewett  McQuigg  while so.  You remember people coming, like kinda hobos or tramps coming through  town looking for work?  Well I remember a real old professional hobo one time.  Professional hobo?  He was a professional   Ernie said he was because he had a big pack on his  back and he had long whiskers and an old slouchy hat and we were over  milking, and at that time we had a barn, but it wasn   t big enough to have  Stanchions to put the cow in to milk. We just milked, just went out and set out  the cow, took our stool and sat down and milked her out in the coral and then  hung the milk up in the barn until we got enough to take over to the house and  separate. And while we were milking one evening, the sun hadn   t gone down  yet and we were busy and didn   t know anyone was anywhere around and  pretty soon we heard somebody said,     How about a bucket of milk,    and  Ernie looked around, we looked around right quick and there was that old bum  standing right there. He was outside the fence of the corral but he was standing  and Ernie said,    Well, we   ve got a couple more cows to milk whenever we get  this done, then we   ll go over to the house and then we   ll give you a bucket of  milk.    So he waited there and pretty soon he says,    Whew, that was a  treacherous old river.    He had come across the Canadian river, I imagine the  day before, probably it didn   t have too much water in it, but there was some,  and the quicksand was terrible in that river. But you know horses could pick  that out and when we went across in a wagon Ernie didn   t have to guide them  because he didn   t know where the quicksand was, but a horse could tell. These  horses could anyway and we never did get in any quicksand and I guess that  old bum must have known how to pick it out; you know, how to get across it.  So he got across then after we finished.  We had Mack Myer. You don   t remember Mack Myer?  No honey, I don   t. (Laughs)  Well Mack just kinda lived among the community. If anyone was gonna be  gone for a few days he   d go there and just live in the house (laughter), and  milk the cows and gather the eggs and feed the chickens and the pigs and do  the work that was to be done. Do you remember?  I don   t remember that one. I remember that old bum that came by.  She remembers the bum.  Oh, you remember the bum.  She was old enough to remember that bum. Well anyway when we got  through, Ernie got two big buckets full of milk and I got two big buckets full  of milk and Ernie started on to the house and told him to come on, and he  16  Smith  McQuigg  Kite  Livengood  Kite  Prewett  Livengood  Kite  followed Ernie over there and then I came behind him and then Audrey Lee  was by me and after we got over to the house Ernie opened the door and told  old bum to go on in. He went on in and Ernie told him to sit down, he sat down  in the chair in the corner of the kitchen and our separator was out on a little  porch so Ernie poured the milk in the separator and then after I got in the  house there I thought, well he   s probably hungry, he probably needs something  besides that milk. So I said,    This is Easter Sunday.    He said    Oh it is Easter  Sunday.    I said yes and I said    I   ve got a lot of food left over, if you   re  hungry, if you   d like something to eat,    he says    Oh I would.    So I set a bunch  of food out on the table for him and he got up out of the chair and threw his  old hat off and threw it over in the corner and then started scratching his head  and then went over and sat down, and ate everything I had on there. I was glad  that I asked him because I could see that he really was hungry. So then when  Ernie got the separating done, why he gave him a bucket of milk. He had this  bucket in that big old satchel, he got it out and it had a lid on it and had a bail  on it.  It was one of these buckets that had a syrup. I remember the bucket, it was a  syrup bucket. Yes and daddy filled that up with milk.  And then Ernie said well he   ll probably   it wasn   t sundown yet but the sun  wasn   t far up. And Ernie walked out and said    Well I want to see if he   s going  to go on up the hill or if he   s gonna go over and sleep in the barn. But he went  on, and we found out then that he went up to as far as the creek and he fixed  him a place, he slept on this side of the creek instead of crossing the creek,  then he crossed the creek the next morning.  Mrs. Livengood, do you remember any experiences with tramps coming  through your property?  No. Other than pasting those windows shut, that was a chore for us girls.  Yeah.  I don   t remember any tramps. I do remember that being on the farm we would  share our farm products with relatives. We had relatives in Woodward,  Shattuck and Higgins and any time we   d go to visit, which was every few  weeks, we   d take butter and eggs and fresh milk to the families in town. And  we   d take, well whatever we had, a fresh chicken or food. There was a need  and we always had a big garden and dry beans, things like that that we   d thresh  out ourselves and we   d share them with our neighbors and with our relatives.  Well we had a cow too; Daddy boarded it down at Mr. Sweeny   s place down  on Rock Creek, just west of town. And we had pigs   we raised pigs   we  always had chickens and baby chickens and mother always had fresh chickens;  we had eggs, we more or less had most of our food except we didn   t raise any  gardens or anything like that, but we had it.  It   s odd how different the experiences were between city people and people  that lived in the country. Now the people in the country it seems didn   t really  notice that much of a change. Maybe make it stretch a little further or  17  McQuigg  Kite  McQuigg  Livengood  Prewett  McQuigg  Kite  Prewett  Kite  Prewett  Smith  Kite  Smith  Kite  McQuigg  something or didn   t have as much gas, but always had good food. Well visiting  seems to have been really important to everybody here, everybody   s mentioned  visiting or driving to see relatives. What would you do for fun when you would  get together with people, for entertainment?  The kids.  The kids or the adults?  Well the adults played pitch or 42.  Back at the hospital and the school houses there, and what was left there was  just a cement slab and it was lowered about that much, and a bunch of us kids,  we   d always get together there and we   d each make our little home. We had  crates and broken dishes and we just used our imagination. We each had our  little home in each corner of that big slab. It was a school house at one time     that was before we moved to the house that we lived there.  I can remember playing Shinny with Lowell Satterwhite and Helen Jo, and  games like that, and all it took was a stick and a tin can.  Oh yeah, tatter base and steel sticks; oh there was all kinds of games to play,  Farmer in the Dell.  Shinny?  Shinny.  That   s a new one on me, I don   t know what that is.  Well I can   t remember exactly how you did it but it was a little like hockey.  The tin can was the puck.  You had sticks that you would fix that had a little hook on it and you would  have you some kind of a tin can   not the big tin cans but the regular smaller  tin cans and that was what you would play with.  You played this game?  Oh yes.  I know why it   s called Shinny now. Wham   I   ll tell you what my brothers like to play when we didn   t have a bunch of  other kids around was stick horse. They had some stick horses and they had  them fixed so that they had rains; they had their little something so they could  hold on to that, and they just imagined they were really riding a horse. They   d  just gallop and they would run, and they   d say whoa and they would play for  hours just with those stick horses and they just had the best time that ever was.  18  Smith  Kite  McQuigg  Smith  McQuigg  Prewett  McQuigg  Smith  McQuigg  Smith  Livengood  Smith  Livengood  Kite  Livengood  Kite  Livengood  Prewett  We played Mumbly Peg and     Yeah.  Hopscotch.  We   d play lots of hopscotch, and of course we were fortunate, mom, dad, and I  and there was an old bachelor that lived across Commission Creek named Bill  Snowden and he would come over almost every evening about the time we  were finishing milking. We would eat and we would either play Pitch or 42, so  at a very young age I learned to play cards.  Oh this is after you got a bigger     That   s why you wound up in Las Vegas.  Before the dust.  Yeah, oh yeah  (Laughs)  We always had a big crowd on Sunday.  We played lots of games, lots of games, and Dad and I played too lots, just  Rummy or something. But Dad and I always played partners from Mother and  whoever and Dad was a big joker, I mean he was a big joker.  Our card game was Rook.  Yes, played Rook and Canasta.  There was four of us and my older sister and my older brother, they could  argue, oh they could argue. (Laughs) They thought each was cheating here you  know.  What other games did you play Mrs. Livengood, other games or things that  you   d do for fun?  Well my girlfriend and I, they just lived a block west of here and they had a  dug out under the house. In the summer time I   d gather up pieces of print and  I   d go down to her house and we   d make doll clothes for our little Kewpie  dolls.  (Laughs) Just out of materials?  Uh-huh, yeah, we had our scissors and thread and material, and we had our  little   they were celluloid I think   Kewpie dolls. They were just little dolls  about like that and we   d make little dresses and oh, we   d have a lot of fun.  My sister always had the dolls. I didn   t care about dolls but I   d take cheese  boxes   cheese came in real good little wooden boxes and I took those cheese  boxes and make furniture for Doris   s dolls.  19  Kite  Prewett  Kite  Prewett  Kite  Prewett  McQuigg  Kite  McQuigg  Kite  McQuigg  Kite  McQuigg  So she played dolls and you were a carpenter?  Yeah, I was always outside riding a horse or playing with the dog and things  like that. Loved to be outdoors and we   d play mud pies, and besides mud pies  we   d have salad made out of leaves and we   d have fried chicken made from  the hind parts of grasshoppers. (Laughing)  Oh boy.  You   d just make up your own games; children do that.  Do you remember friends or neighbors moving away because of the dust and  the drought and the Depression, losing friends or neighbors or relatives?  Some of our relatives. We had relatives in Woodward and in Shattuck who  moved to California in 1935 because of the Depression.  Well my Dad, after it got so bad that they had, you know the drought so bad,  he couldn   t raise feed and the water was getting low for the cattle you see, he  decided that he would just have a sale and we would go to California. We   d  heard they had all kinds of jobs out there, so he had a sale and sold and well  anyway that cleared his bill up so that he wasn   t in debt when we went to  California, and of course the men all got jobs in steel mills and we women, of  course she was just little, but they would let you bring your children with you  at this place where we worked. It was an apricot   you had to get the apricots  ready to dry. And they   d bring you a box and you were paid by the box that  you did see, that you emptied. Therefore we could watch the children, but oh I  tell you, they were really against the Okies.  And that   s what you were?  That   s what we were. And they   d heap our boxes, oh they   d heap them up, and  the other   s they wouldn   t be nearly as much see and they could get three times  as many boxes as we could. But anyway that was alright if that   s the way they  wanted to do. We didn   t work very long, we worked a while, but anyway we  did not like California, we only stayed one year and we came back to  Oklahoma.  How did you get back, did you have land to buy when you came back here?  Well we came back, Ernie went to the bank and borrowed money and we  bought 360 acres. My brother George was teaching in Kentucky, and he went  with my Dad to the bank and signed for him and he got money so he bought I  don   t know how much, 300 or 280 or maybe it was 300, and then also some  cattle, a few head of cattle and we got by on it.  What year did you go to California?  Well I think it was in    36, I think we went in    36 and came back in    37.  20  Kite  Smith  McQuigg  Smith  Prewett  McQuigg  Kite  Livengood  Kite  Prewett  Kite  Prewett  Kite  Prewett  McQuigg  Kite  McQuigg  Kite  Do you remember that trip?  Yes. A blue pickup. A blue    36 pickup. Daddy had bought it new, it was bright  blue.  Honey, I don   t know.  Yes, it was, I remember that very clearly. Little old blue pickup bought it in     36 new, and I don   t remember how much he paid but it was probably around   500, I don   t remember for sure but it wasn   t too much but it.  Our first car was a Model T.  Well mine and Ernie   s first car was a Model A,    29 Model A.  Mrs. Livengood, do you remember friends or relatives that moved away?  No, I don   t.  You mentioned some, Mrs. Prewett, and you did move away. Did you all stay  in touch with people that left? Did you make any contact?  Oh yes. And I still call and talk, to Fresno, California, to a cousin who moved  out there at that time.  How many years ago was that?  That would be 65 years wouldn   t it?  Yes, it would. (Laughs) Sometimes family or friends would move out there lose  contact, or they   d try to stay together, they wouldn   t do it but.  Oh yes, we kept close contact.  Every one has passed away that I knew, I think I   ve only got one friend that I  know of now that is left in Oregon.  That moved out there from here?  No, that I lived with in Oregon when I was a kid up until then.  Well some areas that bring up good memories or bad memories but good  stories are tales, like medicine stories of trying preventatives or cures  sometimes. Or trying to ward off colds or keep bugs away. (Someone chuckles)  And this was something that we didn   t expect to find when we started  interviewing women or talking to them, but out came stories of bed bugs and  skunk oil and asphidity and things like that. And I was just curious if you had  any good   ?  21  Livengood  Prewett  Livengood  McQuigg  Prewett  Kite  Prewett  Livengood  McQuigg  Smith  McQuigg  Kite  McQuigg  Smith  Smith  Prewett  McQuigg  Kite  McQuigg  Smith  McQuigg  Oh yes, Camphor and lard? If we had a chest cold?  Turpentine and lard.  Yeah, something, I don   t know, it stunk.  And coal oil.  And you know coal oil is Kerosene.  Mix that with lard and smear it on, is that right? How did that work, how  would you mix it up?  Mixed it together.  Yeah, just mixed it up.  Now, I never did fix any of that, but Momma used to all the time, but after I  was married they had a medication called Camphophenic    no not  Camphophenic, it was that green, Gycocamph, I   ll tell you, that was what I put  on the kids.  But Campho and the other medicine was Adlorica, and Castor oil.  Well that Adlorica is what Papa took honey I don   t think you ever took any of  that.  What   s Adlorica?  Adlorida, that   s a laxative.  Oh that stuff stunk.  Castor oil.  Epson salts and castor oil.  Oh yes, epson salts and castor oil.  What was the traditional medicine you would get if you were getting a cold or  if you were trying to keep people from getting a cold? Was it the coal oil and  lard?  Well for your chest some camphor or turpentine, only there was everything  mixed with it. Mama put everything in it.  Oh we rubbed it on there and put a hot cloth on you, on your chest.  Well I don   t know honey, about that hot cloth now with when there was  camphor, but when I put Gycocamph on, I   d put on a hot cloth but I don   t  think when I had this other    I think it would blister you terribly.  22  Smith  Kite  McQuigg  Smith  McQuigg  Smith  McQuigg  Kite  McQuigg  Kite  Smith  McQuigg  Kite  McQuigg  Livengood  Kite  Well I know you put that on me sometime though.  What about did any of you have any problems with bed bugs or things like  that?  Oh I   m ashamed to tell you about this.  I can tell you too, I remember, we went to that auction, remember, and we  bought that bed.  Well honey listen, baby, baby be still honey, that   s not it what I   m going to tell  you sweetheart.  Okay, first okay.  This is when Ernie and I were first married and we   he was working on a  ranch for a dollar a day, but had a house furnished, a cow furnished and  chickens and a pig, but he worked for a dollar a day, so he bought some second  hand furniture. It was all second hand, and I   ll tell you that mattress was just  loaded with bed bugs. We found that out, and oh it was terrible, and I told  Mama, I said,    We just can   t sleep; the bed bugs are just terrible.    So she said,     I   ll get rid of them for you.    So she came over the next day and she took the  mattress and the beds. Maybe you haven   t got time to hear all this?  I got a lot of time.  Anyway she took everything outside and seemed to me like she put coal oil,  seemed like she poured coal oil all over it, not on the mattress, but I don   t  know how she, what she, that   s terrible I shouldn   t have even started telling  that, but I don   t know how she got rid of the bed bugs on the mattress. She put  something on it but she poured coal oil all over those slats, and all over in  where the slats, you know in where the     Yeah.  Springs?  You fasten them on, but I don   t know how she got rid of the bed bugs, but she  certainly got rid of them.  You could sleep again.  Now we could sleep real well.  Well, talking about wages, I trained in at the telephone office for 10 cents an  hour.  (Laughs) Do you have any good bed bug stories?  23  Livengood  Kite  Livengood  Prewett  Livengood  Kite  Prewett  Kite  Livengood  Prewett  McQuigg  Prewett  McQuigg  Kite  McQuigg  Kite  McQuigg  When I tell the young kids that they just look at me and think I   m crazy, I say  that   s absolutely right. I sat there a whole hour, for 10 cents. And then when  you were ready to take up the switchboard why they raised it up maybe to 15  cents you know but you had to work so many months.  Yeah, money went a little further back then.  Well I remember when eggs were 6 cents a dozen.  And the cream was separated and the eggs we sold bought the groceries.  Yeah.  Do you remember any bed bug stories Mrs. Prewett?  My mother bought a house in Higgins   mother was a widow, and she bought  a house in Higgins and we rented it to some people while we were still living  out in the country. Yes, there were bed bugs when we came back and before  we moved in we checked   we were suspicious, we checked   and underneath  the paper, all the walls were papered and where there was a little loose place  on the paper there would be bed bugs back in there, and we got them cleaned  up before we moved back in.  Seems to be a common theme to a lot of the high plains lives with the bed bugs  coming in. One thing I forgot to ask earlier was, a lot of people moved away,  and you Mrs. McQuigg moved away to California, but why did you guys stay,  Mrs. Livengood and Mrs. Prewett? What made you stay but others moved  away?  Well I don   t think we had the means to travel. So we just stayed put.  Well I don   t think there was   being out in the country we had our own food  and were self-sufficient.  But it got so dry my dad couldn   t raise hay for the cattle and I don   t know     This is true; we had to drive our cattle down to the river in the summertime.  And he didn   t have a job   he would not work. We never got anything off of  the county or anywhere, we never got any support, so he thought if we got up  there and got a job, why, we would be alright.  Why wouldn   t he work for the county?  He tried the WPA.  Oh that   s right, they sent him home.  Yeah, and so that   s the reason and we didn   t have to get any groceries or  anything because we raised it all. We had fried chicken at Christmas time;  24  Prewett  McQuigg  Kite  Livengood  Prewett  Kite  Prewett  McQuigg  Kite  Prewett  McQuigg  Livengood  McQuigg  Kite  McQuigg  Livengood  McQuigg  Kite  Livengood  Mama, she raised chickens year round.  Fried Guinea.  Huh.  What would you have at Christmas, would you have a special dinner for  Christmas, or a special meal that you wouldn   t have any other time of the  year?  We usually had duck or goose, and Mother raised her own ducks and geese  weren   t as easy to raise as ducks.  And turkeys, we had turkeys.  Turkey was a special Christmas dinner?  It was a special deal, yes.  Oh we had lots, yeah turkey and lots of pies and cakes extra, that we didn   t  have all the time.  If you think back to those times which people now consider hard times, you  know the drought and Depression, what are some things that you went through  then that you think affects you to this day?  It   s difficult to throw things away if you can wear them another week, or it   s  difficult to throw food out. It   s difficult to be wasteful.  We never wasted anything and we wore everything until we wore them out.  When we would come home from school we had to get into our everyday  clothes. We couldn   t wear our school clothes.  Oh yes, we changed as soon as we got in.  You think you behave today differently because of that?  Sure. Happy that was the happiest time of our life.  I think we had happier. We visited; today TV   s the ruination of family life.  Yes, they are really.  What about radio?  Well radio was pretty good. We always on Saturday evening it was special  because we listened to the hit parade and some of the nice orchestras and the  baseball games.  25  Prewett  Kite  Livengood  Kite  McQuigg  Kite  McQuigg  Kite  McQuigg  Kite  McQuigg  Livengood  McQuigg  Prewett  Kite  Livengood  Amos and Andy and The Lone Ranger.  Everybody liked the radio, do you remember? What about when you first had  electricity?  Oh our first was a wire hanging down from the middle of the room with a bulb  in it. That was our first electric light.  Mrs. McQuigg, do you remember your first electricity?  My first electricity was in    49, I remember.  Why do you remember it so clearly?  Because, let   s see, my son, my little son was born in    50, and I was pregnant  with him and I   ll never forget we got electricity the year before he was born.  What was the first thing you plugged in?  Well     I   ll ask you all this question.  Well the most wonderful thing was my electric stove, oh I loved that. And of  course the lights, goodness sakes the lights were the first most wonderful thing  were the lights, we had lights.  When mother had her washing machine fixed with a motor so she could run it  with electricity instead of having to do something like that.  Oh yes, the washing machine, everything.  We had a gas motor on our Maytag washing machine and when Daddy bought  it, of course everything came around, salesmen came around and sold them.  When Daddy bought mother a washing machine, she cried, and we just  thought that was the strangest thing we   d ever heard of it.  My brother came home from college and wired the house, and he put one drop  cord in the center of every room, and that was it, that was all, and you had your  little plug ins, screw top plug ins and with your irons you got underneath the  drop cord and did your ironing, and at first that   s all we had was lights and I  remember, I don   t know why I remember the electric bill was a dollar, one  dollar was minimum for 10 kilowatt hours and mother watched the meter, and  we never paid more that a dollar for our electricity, because she   d manage her  ironing and her other things so we didn   t ever have to pay over a dollar.  Mrs. Livengood, what do you remember plugging in, what do you remember  turning on?  Oh, just that washing machine, that was the important thing. When my mother  26  McQuigg  Livengood  McQuigg  Livengood  Kite  McQuigg  Kite  McQuigg  Kite  Livengood  McQuigg  Livengood  Kite  Prewett  Kite  Prewett  in laundry during those rough years, to compensate for extra. She took in  laundry from some of the more affluent people in town.  Well I remember we had our house wired for electricity and I remember we  had the different plug ins for the, we got a deep freeze and we had to have  different plug ins also for the dryer.  It was a long time before we had a refrigerator, we just had the icebox and had  to empty the pan every so often and the man in the wagon would come and  deliver the ice and we bought ice off of it, everyday I think.  Yeah, where you lived in town you could buy the ice, but we had to do without  in the country until     If he had an extra chunk or something loose, oh we   d get it. (Laughs) That was  a treat   When you think back to those times, do you have one certain image that comes  to your mind that you know if you say, like when I say, 1930   s, do you have a  certain image or a thought or a picture that comes to mind as the first thing  that comes to your mind?  Well that   s when I met my cowboy husband. I used to say when I was in  Oregon that I was gonna come down to Oklahoma and marry a cowboy and I  sure did. And then my little daughter, she came along, and then my little son.  So the first thing that comes to your mind when I say 1930   s is cowboy  husband.  That   s right.  Mrs. Livengood, your turn.  That dust storm.  I don   t think of the dust storms, I forgot all about the dust storms.  And I knew that big old black cloud or bank that came in from the northwest.  Mrs. Prewett, what do you think of, what do you think first of all, what comes  to your mind as?  Of the thities or 1930?  The 30   s yeah that era, it could be late 20   s or early 40   s   that era?  Well I can   t think that it   s a whole lot different than anyone else   s childhood,  because I was a child at that time. And I can   t think it was a whole lot different  than anyone else   s, even now, because we had necessities for a good life.  27  McQuigg  Prewett  McQuigg  Prewett  McQuigg  Prewett  McQuigg  Prewett  McQuigg  Livengood  Kite  Livengood  McQuigg  Livengood  McQuigg  Livengood  Kite  Prewett  McQuigg  Prewett  McQuigg  Livengood  That   s right, and we were so happy  We were happy, we had community programs, we made our own  entertainment.  And a dance every Saturday night in somebody   s house.  Yeah.  That   s where I met Ernie was at the dance.  Summertime we   d have parties at the neighbors and we   d play what we called  party games, Skip to My Lou, and what we now know as square dances.  Uh-huh.  And rather than having somebody play instruments, usually they sang the  songs and we played the games.  Play a Victrola.  My folks would go to the dances on Saturday night and they   d put us all in the  car and we met other kids out there and ran around and had fun while they  were dancing.  Where were the dances in town here?  The one we went to was out, it was in Harris I think, it was southwest of town.  The one   s I went to were in the country, somebody would each   well we   d  take turns each Saturday night, moving out all the furniture out of one room,  and everybody would take turns.  Mine, this one as I remember was a big     Having a dance and then the older people would play cards.  And they had lanterns hanging in each corner.  Would you have a live band?  The live band came from Lonetta   s family.  Oh   Lonetta   s family made music wherever they went.  Well.  The Harris   s always played fiddles and guitars and they were the makers of the  music at the dances. I don   t know if they charge, I don   t remember that  28  McQuigg  Prewett  Kite  McQuigg  Kite  McQuigg  Smith  McQuigg  Smith  McQuigg  Prewett  Smith  Prewett  McQuigg  Prewett  McQuigg  Prewett  Kite  Livengood  whether they charge so much a couple or   I don   t remember.  I just don   t remember I don   t believe they did. I know they didn   t at the, in the  country homes, there was no charge. Just everybody had a wonderful time.  No.  So you would rotate houses; a different house would host the dance every  Saturday night?  Yes, uh-huh.  And in one of those houses you met your cowboy husband?  That   s where I met my cowboy husband. It was the Jim Fox   s when they had it  up there.  Up where?  You knew Jim Fox?  Oh yeah.  You knew them Eloise?  Yes.  Well tell about two moons and Eloise they had the old time shivarees you see  someone would get married, it wasn   t a big elaborate deal they   d have the  shivarees, those were fun times too.  That was an occasion for a party rather than to have a formal party of some  kind a shivaree was a time when the young people or younger couples would  get together and soon after this couple was married a few days, they   d surprise  them, come in with a shivaree, with all kinds of noise and refreshments.  And you had to give them candy and cigars.  What?  You had to give them candy and cigars.  Oh yeah, you had to be prepared, that   s right, you had to be prepared with  refreshments. And you knew they were coming.  The shivarees were something you all would, do you remember, Mrs.  Livengood, do you remember that at all, the shivarees?  Oh yes, my Aunt and Uncle they lived southwest of town on land; there was a  whole string of cars driving in that yard and we were with them and we just, I  29  Smith  Prewett  Smith  McQuigg  Smith  McQuigg  Smith  McQuigg  Smith  McQuigg  Smith  McQuigg  Smith  Prewett  know we made em, he had to push her in a wheel barrel over the yard (laughs)  I don   t know, it was quite an occasion.  Oh and the kids would sneak in cause they had those little cigars that were  fingers, small little one   s. And the kids were all there, do you remember that  mother? That   s why I don   t smoke today and never smoked because I was  about 10 years old and there were a whole bunch of us kids and someone  sneaked in, got one, it may have been Lowell.  Probably.  Probably so, but anyway, my cousin, so we all had them we were all smoking  out there do you remember that?  Well I don   t remember that.  Mother, do you remember Daddy made me ride on the fender of the blue  pickup going home because I was sick and he thought it was so funny and you  got mad at me. Dad thought it was funny, but you know I never smoke; I never  did.  I can not remember that.  Oh lord, I remember, I think it was at Ted and Vivian   s maybe is where we  were.  Well I don   t remember you see, I never thought about you kids even thinking  about cigars or anything.  Oh yes, we all sneaked off.  I had all of that out of my mind; I never thought about it.  Those were fun times.  I wish you hadn   t have told me.  Oh, well.  Well we were married here in Shattuck, but moved to Kansas where we were  both teaching, going to teach, he already was and I was going to teach there.  So naturally all the school kids, the high school kids were gonna shivaree us.  On Saturday night, we drove in from   we   d gone to another town and we  came back to this little town where we lived and all the cars and pickups were  turned around backwards headed out instead of headed toward the curb. The  bumper was to the curb, and Ivan said    Uh-oh, we   re in trouble now.    So we  went through this little main street kinda like Shattuck but not quite that big,  we went through Main Street all these cars headed right out behind us, they  were gonna chase us and follow us. And we drove out, we were in a pickup,  we had borrowed his Dad   s pickup to do some moving and we came to a big  30  Kite  Prewett  Kite  McQuigg  Kite  old tree row, and he made it, he turned like we went down the tree row on the  other side, and turned his lights out and turned and went the other way. And  then we sat back up on the hill and watched them all go back west while we  were over east. (All laugh) But when we got home, we finally went back  home, everything out of the refrigerator had been put in our bed. But they had  left gifts, they were high school kids and they had left gifts for us. So then the  next Sunday night, after church, the kids came and serenaded us, and then they  came in and we had refreshments.  What year was that?  That would have been 1948.  Well I guess it   s about time we close it up here. I want to thank you all so  much for helping us out with the project, I think it   s an important thing to do,  to capture these memories and stories that so often people forget to write them  down or forget to tell them to somebody else and they get lost. What we   re  doing with this is we   re going to take these tapes, type up transcripts from the  tapes, and send them to you and you   ll have a chance to look over the  transcripts, to read it and see if we got it all right or if there   s things that you  want to change or correct the spelling, and then we   ll type up a corrected  version and keep a copy of that transcript and the tape at OSU in the archives  and send you the completed transcript.  Oh that   s nice.  It   s something that people can come back to twenty, thirty, forty years from  now, and learn about life in the great plains. I appreciate it so much.  -------  -------  
