 Lemons  Craighead  Today is November 14th, it   s one o   clock in the afternoon, and we are at the  home of Mr. and Mrs. Max and Donna Craighead at 1119 West Eskridge  Place in Stillwater. Mrs. Craighead is going to be talking with us today about  her experiences in the dust bowl. If you can state your full name.  Okay, I   m Donna Maree Ring Craighead.  And when were you born?  May 22, 1932.  Where?  Buffalo, Harper County, Oklahoma.  Did you live most of your life there?  A good portion.  Where were your mother and father from?  My father was from Harper County also, a farm close to Selman, Oklahoma.  My mother was born near Dobie Springs, which is another little community  adjacent to Buffalo.  I guess they lived their whole lives there. Were their parents from Oklahoma  also, or did they come in?  My father   s parents were from Russia. Immigrated via Kansas and they did  not make the run, but homesteaded in Oklahoma. My mother   s people, they  were basically Oklahomans. They came from southwestern Kansas to  Oklahoma. Mostly they came for free land and the grandparents escaped the  Russian army.  That   s a really interesting story in itself.  They were German, from Germany and went to Russia to help Catherine the  Great train her farmers. They spoke German, and so basically they were for  most of their life from Russia, but ended up in Oklahoma.  5  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  So were they farmers then, when they came to Oklahoma?  Yes.  And your parents, they were farmers also?  No, my family were not real farmers. My daddy worked in a bank until the  depression came, and then he had to take day work. That   s basically about the  time I was born, 1932. Then he worked for the Oklahoma State highway  department. He was a large equipment operator. Consequently, we moved a  lot, in through western Oklahoma mostly. Some of the towns I lived in were  Waynoka, Helena, Cleo Springs, Alva, Boise City, and Buffalo was basically  the home. That   s where we had a house eventually. Although, in these other  cities I lived in a lot of rent houses. In Boise City I lived in a sod house.  Really, what was that like? What do you remember about that?  Well, that sod house I remember well because even though my daddy went  from community to community as the highway progressed, Highway 64, he  would always find a place for the family to rent. I remember that sod house  really well because it was so much fun, so very unique. It had really wide  window wells, or windowsills. You could sit in the window, and most of the  other homes you couldn   t. It was there in Boise City that I experienced the  most of the dust storms.  About how old were you when you were living in Boise City?  I wasn   t in school yet, so since I was born in    32, so probably five.  Four or five, okay. And you remember the sod house.  I remember the sod house. My mother had to be courageous to live the life  that we lived, but she wasn   t necessarily brave. She was frightened easily by  the storms, so the dust storms are very vivid in my memory.  What would your mom do when she saw a storm coming?  She would gather us close up, there were three children. I have a younger  sister and a younger brother. My sister is three years younger and my brother  is five years younger, so I   m the oldest. But she would gather us close, and we  would have to come inside. Now, that didn   t set too well with children, having  to be inside.  I guess you resisted, huh?  But it was important because the winds were very strong, and you couldn   t see  a long ways. The first sign would be a yellow sky. When the dust would get  in the air between you and the sunshine it would just be yellow like before a  big storm, and she would know it was coming. There were several things that  we would do. We   d always bring in the clothes if there were clothes on the  6  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  line, and sometimes the rush would be so great that we wouldn   t have time to  bring everything in which meant once the storm hit there was a lot of noise.  For instance, the tubs would blow off the outside of the house because that   s  where they would be hanging. After the storm you   d have to find them, and if  you had anything out that children play with, like spoons or any little  equipment, you couldn   t find it because of the dust. I remember so vividly  wondering where all my stuff was because it would be covered up, and  eventually it might surface once again, but you couldn   t count on that.  But sometimes you were able to find your toys and things outside.  Sometimes, yes. The neighbors had chickens, of course that was before things  were zoned very well, so real communities had cattle and chickens, but I can  remember the chickens once the sun would start to be cloudy or obscure the  chickens would go to roost like it was dark. They thought it was evening, and  it would be broad day light. There were several  things  that I remember. I  can remember the dust being so fine there was no possible way my mother  could keep it out of the house. I remember she would take a table knife, and  stuff or poke rags in between the window and the windowsill to try and fill up  everything. I guess that was before caulking, of course it was so dry in those  days caulking would have just fallen out anyway. But, she would poke every  little hole, and make us get into bed.  Why did she make you go to bed?  Well because the floor was dusty. I can still remember walking on the  linoleum floor with dust on it, and that is not a good feeling. Besides that it  was too hard to keep things clean, so she wouldn   t want us to get real dirty.  We would go to bed, and she would usually read to us through those times, to  keep us calm, and probably to keep herself calm too.  Do you remember if it was storybooks, or what was she reading to you?  I   m sure that it was Mother Goose type things. She had been a schoolteacher  before she married, so we did have the readers in the house that she would  have for us. She read to us a lot, and I can remember, three children in the bed  with the mother reading, and sometimes we would eventually drift of to sleep.  That was exactly her plan of course. While the storm raged outside, you felt  very secure in the bed with your mother. Ordinarily you didn   t get to  sleep  with your mother . I was too old to sleep with a mother. Ordinarily I wouldn   t  have been in the bed with mother. Anyway, she would read to us, and  eventually we would go to sleep.  Usually, I can remember very distinctly, waking up, I don   t know how long it  would have been, maybe an hour or two, and you could not see the pattern on  the quilt. Regardless, it  the dust  had sifted in. It makes everything gritty,  everything that you touch. If there was a wash on the line it had to come in  immediately because it would have to be done over. For the most part we did  not own very much equipment. No washing machine, no dryer, clothesline,  and she would usually wash it by hand in a wash tub on the back porch.  7  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Conservation of water was important. None of the houses, of the places that  I   ve lived, none of them were modern. They all had an outhouse, but they all  had a faucet in the yard. To the best of my remembrance, I don   t remember  that we had any well water anywhere. My grandparents did, but we didn   t, we  always had some kind of a faucet. If it was a clear day, and a lot of days in  western Oklahoma it   s clear and sunny, mother would put water in a tub and  let the sun warm it. Then, she and I would carry it in as best we could. I was  the oldest, remember. Then in turn you took a bath, everybody in the same  water, and then she would mop the floor  laughter . It sounds awful today, but  that   s the way it was, and we thought nothing of it. You could go to the  hydrant outside and wash your face and hands, but that wasn   t the same as  your feet in the same water.  Especially after a dust storm had filled your house with dirt.  Mother would work so hard, and I can still remember smelling the Old Cedar  furniture polish that she would use because oil was just about the only thing  that would take that fine dust up. You would not want to put water on it  because then you would just have mud. It would just be cloudy.  We didn   t have but one pair of shoes, so you took care of them. We weren   t  exactly poor; we never did receive assistance. We never did go through the  WPA or New Deal because we didn   t have farmland. Daddy was a wage  earner. I expect we would be considered poor, but we didn   t know it. We  were clean. There were two things. One would be not enough money, but the  worst thing would be to be dirty. It was always a struggle for these women. I  think the hair business was really hard. My mother had long hair, and at this  point in time I don   t know how she kept the dust out of it. She must have just  gone outside to the faucet or the hydrant after the storm was over and rinse it  off. It was a good time.  Most of the places did not have electricity. I remember when an electric line  was put in at Buffalo, where our house was. It sounds like a great big house,  and it wasn   t. It was two rooms, two rooms for five people. My grandmother  lived across the other side of the block, and usually somebody would always  have to stay over there to sleep with her. My family had a couch that we made  out when my daddy was home. My brother or sister would sleep on the couch,  and I   d go sleep with grandma. That   s where I learned to play Chinese  Checkers and Pick-Up Sticks, I don   t know what they call those now, the game  where you put all the sticks in your hand. She also taught me to knit and play  dominoes.  And this is all from your grandmother?  My grandmother, yes. My mother didn   t have time to play games, in that  respect. She would read to us, but she wouldn   t play games. Usually our play  area would be outside, and you could well imagine with two rooms there  would be no way that three small children could play. We   d play house, and  we   d play outside the house. I can remember around when you would open  the back door after a dust storm there would be the finest, finest silt in through  8  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  the screen and filling up the door. It was so soft, but my mother would not let  us play in that.  But you wanted to.  Yes. It felt better to your feet than the grit on the linoleum, that was for sure.  We did not have a garden; we usually did not live any place that provided  garden space.  You were moving around a lot. Would you say those houses are in more of an  urban setting or more of a rural setting?  In a town, a little town.  So, no room for garden space.  Well, there was no time because mother would not have the equipment to put  in a garden. In those days, surprisingly enough, people shared a lot. I guess  they thought Mrs. Ring and those three little kids were poor  laughs . We  would have nice things brought to us, and then my mother in turn would bake  and return some of the stuff that came to us, some of the favors.  We walked everywhere; we didn   t have a car. That was one reason why daddy  would not have rented a farm. Well, two reasons. He would not be there to  take care of it because he would go every day to work, and then we wouldn   t  have the equipment, and then that would be too far for all of us to walk. When  we lived in Buffalo then we thought nothing of it, and we walked a long way  to school. It was through town, and clear on the other side. And church, too.  When the babies were little, of course we didn   t have pampers then, there were  lots of diapers to string on the line, and you look for a sunny day  laughter .  Well, you being the oldest, what kind of chores did you have to do around the  house? What kinds of things were your jobs in the house?  My job basically was to take care of my younger brother and sister. Then  because I was the oldest, my mother very early would write a grocery list, give  me money, and let me walk to town by myself and buy the groceries. I was so  small that I could not just hand the clerk my grocery list; I had to reach way up  high. In those days the meat was not in the same grocery store like it is now.  There was a meat market. There was the place where you bought milk and  butter, and then there were groceries like cereal and bread and caned goods.  So you   d have to know where everything was. I can remember being so tired  of carrying things   Mother had sent me to town after eggs, and I can remember   this is a lesson  that you never forget   there was a retaining wall along the way. I sat down  there and sat those eggs right down beside me and broke nearly every one of  them. My mother was just furious when I finally got home. I was very sorry, I  just didn   t realize. Plus it could have been that would have been all her  9  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  grocery money that daddy had left her for a week. She was trying to make do  feeding three little children. Anyway, those were good lessons that you never  forget.  I can remember walking. We   d all go to town on Saturday. This was in  Buffalo, and she would set in somebody   s car and visit with people. We had  lots of relatives in that town. She would give me a dime, and I went to what  we called    the show    or the movie.  Then we would go to the grocery store and she would buy  things , and I  would be expected to help. I   d carry things home. I can remember my arms  being so tired. I thought I would invent something that went around my neck  and went around my hips, a ring, and in the middle was net. We could just put  the groceries in there, and my arms would not be so tired  laughter . I would  still be strong, and I would still carry my load. A bag of potatoes are really  hard for a little tike to carry.  How old were you when you had this great idea for the invention?  Well, I don   t know. I wasn   t in school yet, so I must have been five probably,  four and a half or five. My mother didn   t work away from home. She   d been  a schoolteacher, but in those days you wouldn   t have considered keeping on.  You wouldn   t be allowed to have taught after you got married and had a  family. My daddy was a good worker. He had a good job, and jobs were very  hard to come by. My daddy   s people were German, and when they would  butcher out on the farm, they came to town every Saturday, I remember I did  not ever have a conversation with my grandparents, but we communicated.  There   s a difference. On Saturday they would come, and we would have gone  to town, me to the show, mother to visit, anything to get out of the two-room  house with three children, my grandparents would have been there with a  dishpan with a tea towel over it. There was no refrigeration of course. There  would be products from their butchering. There would be what was  considered side meat, which would be the bacon, but it wasn   t cured yet, it was  just fresh. Well, I imagine that would have sat out there on the porch all  afternoon, and probably wasn   t too hot. Of course, they wouldn   t butcher until  it was cool. But we never did get sick.  Probably tougher then?  Well, I don   t know. Or else there weren   t so many bugs around. The one  thing that I thought was so wonderful that we had there in the little town of  Buffalo was an ice plant, which is where they made ice with a big generator.  They   d get electrical power and then they   d use that. But we didn   t have a  refrigerator of course, nobody did. We didn   t even have electricity for a long  time. So I would pull a little red wagon with a gunny sack over to the ice  plant, get a chunk of ice, and pull the wagon home, and that would be for our  ice box. I don   t know they may have delivered, but I don   t think that we could  have afforded a delivery charge, or not on a regular basis. So anytime we were  going to make homemade ice cream we   d get to get some ice. I thought that  felt so cool  laughter . Of course there wasn   t much cool in my life. I   m not  10  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  even sure at that point in time that we even had a fan, but we didn   t have  electricity, so what use was a fan. On very special occasions my mother loved  to make homemade ice cream, and it was considered a very rare delicacy.  So what would be something that would call for ice cream, what kind of  occasions?  A birthday, anybody   s birthday, or somebody special coming, a relative  coming from afar. I had an uncle that lived in Fort Worth, an uncle that lived  in California, and a great-aunt that lived in California, and anytime they would  be coming, well then however many of the family were around, we   d always  get together to eat and make something really special. If there wasn   t room     there certainly wasn   t room for company in our house   we   d usually entertain  and take the table out in the yard. I thought that was great fun. I could  remember, it   s not fun to put all that stuff back  laughter .  It still isn   t.  We would have fun that way, and play house. Our toys consisted of   very  early I learned to walk stilts, wooden stilts. If in the neighborhood, wherever  there was, we could round up a barrel we thought that was great fun to learn to  walk the barrel. There were lots of advantages to that. We didn   t think about  TV of course, and I can remember when radio came in and TV both, but we  didn   t have any of those for a long long time.  What else do you remember playing with neighborhood kids?  Oh, we would play    Red Rover, Red Rover, Send Somebody Over.    We   d  play crack the whip, which is really dangerous.  I don   t know what that is.  Okay, everybody takes a hold of their hands, and then you start running and  turn. The one that   s on the end last, my goodness, they would be lifted off of  their feet, and sometimes just crash  laughter . It   s outlawed in school; you  don   t do that anymore. Anyway, we   d play Blind Man   s Bluff, and mostly  May I. Do you know May I? It   s where all the children get in a line, however  many there are, there   ll be one person that   s the leader. They say    Shelly you  may take six baby steps,    but if you forgot to say    May I?    you had to go  back. So it was a manners type thing. We played that a lot. Whoever got to  the leader first got to be the next leader. See, it was a little bit slanted because  you could always pick out who you wanted to be the next leader. You   d give  them twenty giant steps. But if they forgot to say    May I    they had to go back.  That was always a big kid game. I   m talking about early grade school type.  What would you say would be your fondest memory of this dust bowl time?  You were relatively young. At that time what would be your fondest memory  from that?  My fondest.  11  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Something that you think back and you think even though this was a  depression time it really made you happy. As a five-year old, I can imagine  it   s going to be a little different than someone we talked to who   s older.  That   s true. It always made me happy that we were a family together. That  was always good because lots of times my daddy was gone. My mother was  not nearly as happy raising three children when daddy wasn   t home. Now,  he   s a German daddy, so that meant that he was really very, very strict. He  was tolerant of going to church. He was raised Lutheran and my mother was  Baptist, so there was not any conflict there because he was rarely home on  Sunday. He did not object to us going to Sunday school, and in later years he  did convert. He was baptized a Baptist, and remained a Baptist the rest of his  life. That was always good, to have a family home. Going to Sunday school  was fun too because you got away. One of the things I can remember the most  is how much the diseases were dreaded. Whooping cough was just about a  death knell, for a young baby. If they got that, of course there was no shot yet.  You always dreaded that.  One of the things I do remember fondly, my mother belonged to a young  group of matrons. It was called the Bee Square Club. They would take the  children; they wouldn   t leave anybody home. That   s where you usually got  chicken pox, and measles, and then somebody had the mumps. They would  not bring the sick child, but they would bring somebody that wasn   t real sick  and was coming down with them, they would say. I can remember getting  diseases that way.  It was not a bad time. Like I said, we were probably very, very poor and I just  didn   t even realize it. We always had gifts for birthdays and Christmas.  That   s not to say that they were fancy gifts. I realize that there were others  that had a lot more than me, but my mother always thought we had as close to  what everybody else had. We always had dolls. We always had a little play  kitchen to play with. She was good to make little cakes and things like that.  We made lots if mud pies too, lots of them  laughter . Of course I was the  oldest, so I was always the boss  laughter , which is not real good, and if you   d  ask my siblings they would probably say    Donna always thought she was the  boss.     Well we can kind of get through what happened with your life after the dust  bowl, so we have a good context of who you are. What did you do? Where did  you go to high school?  When the war came in 1941, my daddy quit at the highway department in  Oklahoma so we wouldn   t have to move. We moved to a small bedroom town  close to Wichita, and he went to work in the airplane factory. He was right in  the middle. He was too old to be drafted and too young to volunteer. He  worked at Beech and Boeing, so he was deferred. I remember being very, very  frightened, but we would always go back to Buffalo for holidays because my  grandmother and aunts and uncles lived there. We moved to Kansas when I  was ten, fourth grade. We bettered ourselves, as far as that goes because there  was much money to be made in the airplane factory business. I was so  12  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  homesick for Buffalo. I really did like it down there.  What did you miss about it?  Well, I missed the kids, and Kansas did not have girls    basketball, which was  really a low blow.  So you were a basketball player?  Well I wanted to be, and my major in college was physical education. But I  did the next best thing; I married a man from Buffalo  laughter .  So how did the two of you meet?  I   ve always known him, always. We were small children in the same church  even though he was three years older. Then as a senior in high school I went  back to visit grandma, and dated then. Then I went off to college and he went  to the air force. It was a long courtship by telephone and letters and whatnot.  The advantage was I roomed with his sister. I got to know the family real  well, but I already knew them anyway, and they already knew me, so we  weren   t total strangers.  Where   d you go to college?  Oklahoma Baptist University, Shawnee. Max had been there two years before  I got there, and like I said, I went to college and he went to the air force. It  was some time later then that we married.  So when did you get married?  1954. I was out of college and he was almost out of the air force. We married  in June, and he got out in September. Then it was his turn, and he chose to  come to Oklahoma State University.  Is that how you guys got to Stillwater?  Well, yes. I had taught in Ponca City. We lived there and he commuted to  Stillwater for three years, and then he was asked to become Extension  Forester. He did, right out of college. They don   t do that anymore. Then we  moved to Stillwater. We   ve been here ever since.  What year was it when you moved to Stillwater?  1958.  Some of the dust bowl questions I kind of want to go back and talk about. You  talked about the wash tubs on your back porch blowing away; well, how did  you find them again?  You just went down the street until you found them. Everybody would be out  13  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  looking after the storm. One thing I really remember in this sod house in  Boise City we lived next to a filling station. That was a big advantage. It  sounds awful, but one of the best places there was to play was in the restroom   laughter . It was cool. It had tile, green tile. We would play over there. That  was a good memory. During one of these storms the gasoline wagon, which is  a wagon that had a big gas tank on it, got away, and went rumbling out from  the filling station   service station they would say now   and went rumbling  down the street. My mother was so frightened. It wasn   t until a long time  later I realized that if that gasoline had hit a house it would have just exploded.  She was very, very frightened, and I just thought it made a lot of noise. I  thought she was frightened of the noise. She was frightened of the potential,  I   m pretty sure.  Probably the noise too. I   m guessing that was probably pretty loud.  Pretty loud because it wasn   t on the rubber tires.  We were talking about the tubs blowing away. Were any of your tubs ever  buried? I   ve seen pictures of cars being buried in dust.  Not that I remember, because we would get out very soon. Now cars, if I have  it analyzed correctly, I think it was probably deserted cars that were left  through several storms, so the dust would pile up. This is true, the dust would  pile up around the fence posts, and if you didn   t go out and knock it down, of  course I guess, eventually the cows could just walk over the fence. Now I   ve  seen the displays in the Smithsonian in Washington D.C., and most of that I  can remember, but not anything specific because we didn   t live on a farm. It  would just get stifling hot in the house if it was a summer storm. The only air  conditioning we would have would be the window, and of course dust would  be coming in so badly. Mother would take a wet bath towel, and just tack it up  over the windows and catch it down here with either knives or something, so  that the wind would come through the wet and the moist towel would catch the  dust.  So trying to keep the window open to keep the house cool at the same time.  Trying to have some circulation, but then of course, that towel would just be  encrusted. I remember that. It didn   t faze me. Now it repulses me to think  about it, breathing all that, but we didn   t know any different. I   m sure a lot of  people did have dust pneumonia and a lot of things. The worst thing that we  had go through our family was whooping cough. That was very, very  frightening.  Do you remember there being a big difference between a dust storm in the  winter and a dust storm in the summer? Besides the heat, was there any other  difference that you remember?  I don   t remember that, but I would think that most dust storms would be in the  spring and summer.  14  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  One of the women that we talked to talked about teaching school, it was in the  winter during a dust storm. She said there was the dust blowing in and the  wind was cold, and it seemed much worse to her.  I don   t remember that. We were always glad for the snow though because it  was clean and we could play with it. Not being in school, not being allowed  out that much in the world at four or five, I don   t remember that much.  Do you recall any time when a family of a playmate left as one of the people  that migrated to California or wherever, and left?  Well I don   t remember any friends, except I had family. I had a grandmother,  some of her siblings, which would be the great uncles and aunts, left to go to  California, and they became sharecroppers, fruit pickers really. My  grandmother and two uncles went out, but we never did go. There were just  too many of us to go. Mother never did get to go. My immediate family did  not stay. They just stayed a while. I had one uncle that was in the CCC camp,  and then eventually he ended up in the naval yards in Napa, California. I  didn   t know him very well.  The others, they came back to Buffalo?  Yes they did. Basically they had their own professions. My grandmother was  a mid-wife. She would nurse people in their home, and then she would cook  in the hotel dining room. She was a widow, and had been widowed when my  mother was eleven, and she raised five children alone.  She was a very strong woman.  Yes she was. I stayed with her when I was older, so it was oldest child, oldest  grandchild, so I got to know my grandmother very well. Some of the other  cousins think that they know her better, but they don   t  laughter , because I  would sleep with her every night, or just about.  How do you think she has influenced who you are? You spent a lot of time  with her. You said that she taught you games and things like that.  She taught me games, and she made me feel very special. My household,  remember, was crowded, and my brother and sister were younger. If I would  get anything that I especially liked she had a drawer in her dresser that I could  have, just my things, my keepsake things. Children like to save, I think girls  more than boys probably. Toys that I would play with when I was at her  house. It was kind of like our special secret. Although the other children  would have the same things, they would just go by the wayside because they  were younger and they would just tear them up. She made me feel special that  way. She also instilled in me responsibility. She made me feel like I was  responsible for my brother and sister. I was responsible to my mother. In this  situation grandmother   grandma we called her   carried just as much weight  when it came to discipline as everybody else. You minded her just the same.  She had a piano in her house, and I would practice. She would let me go in by  15  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  myself. That was one thing, she trusted me. Even though she would be at  work, she would let me go into her house and practice, and then I took my  piano lessons over there. It was just across the block, so it wasn   t all that big  of a deal.  Yeah, but pretty significant.  Yeah, it really was for her to let me do that. I still don   t know where my  mother found the 50 cents for lessons, I just don   t. There was a high school  boy that would walk from the high school and stop in certain days, and meet  me there. In this day and age you would not do that either, but we thought  nothing of it. His name was Knight Braley, and he turned out to be a medical  doctor and practiced at Woodward.  And he was your piano teacher. How long did you take piano lessons?  Several years. I not only took them in Buffalo, but I also took piano when we  moved to Kansas. Mother found us a teacher. My sister turned out to be a  much better piano player than I was. My mind was always outdoors playing   Well that leads me to the next question I wanted to ask you. How do you think  you growing up at a time when there   s a depression going on, a time of these  dust storms, the way the environment was, how do you think that that has  effected your view towards nature and the environment?  Well I think it makes you a little bit more aware that, in my case anyway, there  does have to be some intervention when things are just going wild. People  have to be taught how to care for the environment. Our son was a wildlife  major, and he has a very high regard for the outdoors, of course. My husband  is a forester. It just seems natural. We do save, recycle. I think living through  the depression makes you a saver. Now, not just money, but it makes you save  string, tin cans, and aluminum foil. My mother recycled orange juice cans,  Crisco cans, and TV dinner containers. It makes you aware that there   s always  going to be some use put to everything. I think it gives us sensitivity. Plus the  fact, my generation is not, and I repeat not, a throwaway society. Your  generation, that   s all you know, and I have two children the same way, but you  fixed it and made do. I think that   s what the depression does for people. You  can nearly always spot them when they want to do things the most economical  way, and not be extravagant or foolhardy about things. Besides that, because  the banks closed it also makes you remember what a big thing that was in the  lives of your parents. It makes you a little more wary of organized  government. I   m thankful for FDIC in the banks, so you know you can save  and not worry about it. Many in my family lost money when the banks closed.  They always thought they were going to get it back, but they never did.  Do you remember your parents talking about politics any way? How did they  feel about FDR and the New Deal?  I do not. I don   t know.  16  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Some people   s parents were so adamant about it even if you   re five you still  remember.  That   s true, if there had been big arguments or whatnot, but I don   t remember  that kind of thing ever coming up. We didn   t have a radio, and we didn   t take  a newspaper. My daddy was gone a great deal. I   m sure they had their  opinions, and I   m sure they voted, but I   m not positive about that either.  Your mother probably had more interest in her home and what she had to do  everyday.  Just trying to make ends meet, and keep things clean and the children fed.  They learned how to stretch a dollar, and I think they passed that on to us, that  you don   t have to have the very, very best; some things you can have are just  as good. Now our own daughter, maybe you did this too, do you remember  Hang Ten stuff? This shows my mindset more than hers, but she wanted  anything   socks, everything Hang Ten. Well, I went down when we had  Bonnie   s, a fine ladies ready to wear downtown, so I bought Melanie a skirt at  the Dollar General store, we had one even way back then. It had a little bit of  a flaw on it, but anyway, I took all the tags off it, folded it, put it in a Bonnie   s  sack, and put it on her bed. She came home, and she thought it was just so  wonderful. I said now Melanie that skirt has a little bit of a flaw, but I think I  can fix it. She said mother it   s fine, it   s perfectly all right, just leave it. So she  tried it on, and it was so wonderful. I said,    Well how do you feel?    and she  said,    I feel so great.    I said,    Well do you feel like you   re just as good as  anybody else?    and she said,    Oh yes I feel right up there,    and she named  people that she was always wanting to live up to in her class. Eventually I did  tell her it came from the Dollar General store. I said,    But how do you feel  now?    She said just fine. I said,    What   s your attitude to that skirt? Will you  ever wear it? Are you the same person on the inside?    She said yes. To this  day you cannot get her in brand name anyway  laughter . About the best she  will do would be Oshkosh for her little girl from the Good Will.  How many children do you guys have?  We have two. Melanie is married, and has one little girl. Todd is six years  younger, and he   s 31. Melanie is 37, 38 coming up. Remarkably enough, they  both went through college, and they   re both doing exactly what they studied to  do. It   s really an interesting thing. Todd works for the Oklahoma Department  of Wildlife Conservation in Oklahoma City. You can view him on Outdoor  Oklahoma TV.  I   ve seen him on that.  His voice report. He will do that more often than in person, and he writes for  Outdoor Oklahoma. He   s not married at this point in time, but I think he   ll be  married soon. Melanie   s older, and she studied piano at OBU, and voice. She  taught school at Lake Highlands in Richardson, Texas. They had Zoe after 13  years of marriage, and she stays home and teaches piano and voice at home.  Her husband is working on his doctorate. He has two jobs, one at a church and  17  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  one at a university. They are very busy people.  Well, I   ve covered all the questions that we need to, except for maybe just a  general statement. How do you feel about the dust bowl era?  I hope that it never returns. I think that we   re smarter now. I don   t think that  the present generation would manage like we did. They would demand more  intervention sooner. I   m not sorry I lived through it, I don   t have any bad  feelings about it. In fact, I   m proud that my people survived it. I   m glad that I  probably will never have to face that same type of thing in my own lifetime  with my own children. Well, I haven   t anyway. Maybe we would have the  same approach as a nuclear war or something. That would be equivalent in  this mindset to what it was then. You just did what you had to do, and I think  that still applies in this day and age. Just do what you have to do. I probably  didn   t say enough about Max.  Yeah, what do you want to tell us about Max?  Luckily he was from Buffalo, and so we basically had the same value system.  He was a Baptist already, so we had that in common. We knew from the very  start, we would probably not have a real elaborate lifestyle because that   s not  our way.  It   s not you.  No, but we like nice things, and mostly we like our children. We did put both  children through college, so that when they walked across the stage they did  not have any debts. We thought that was important. I used my education, I  substitute taught 19 years in Stillwater public schools to help them get through  college. My mother was in college at the same time I was, and then she taught  school and helped put me through, and my brother and sister. We all  graduated from OBU. She helped me, I helped my children. I think in turn,  they can help theirs.  Do you happen to know Enid Pritchard?  Sure.  Yeah, we interviewed her. She was our very first participant in the Oral  History project.  She   s a sweet lady.  Yeah, she   s really nice. When you said you worked in Stillwater     She taught school.  She told us that too.  She would have a little bit different perspective.  18  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Lemons  Craighead  Yeah, she   s a little older.  But she   s a nice lady.  She was very nice, and very kind to talk with us.  Well, did we cover everything that you wanted to cover?  We covered everything we needed to. Is there anything else you want to add?  No, but I do feel privileged that you would call and ask.  Well thanks for participating.  Now I need to know what this is going to be used for.  We're doing this project is for the Women   s Archives in special collections, so  that we will have this ongoing collection of reminiscences from women from  Oklahoma. We wanted to focus our original project goal on the dust bowl.  What will happen next is we will take this tape, and it will be typed up into a  transcript which will be sent to you. You will get to proof it and make sure  everything in there is right and then if it is it can go into our collection with  your permission. You will get a copy of it for yourself to keep too, a final draft  copy.  We just heard Carney   s report on women in entertaining just the other night at  the Emeriti. That was fun.  I didn   t get to hear it.  Oh, you   re in for a treat. You won   t remember nearly as much as we did   laughter . A lot of them I didn   t remember, but a lot of the singers I did.  -------  -------  
