 Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University  Library. Today is Monday, October 22, 2007 and I am in Tulsa,  Oklahoma interviewing Maxine Horner. This interview is being  conducted as part of the Inductees of the Oklahoma Women   s Hall of  Fame project. Mrs. Horner was inducted into the Oklahoma Women   s  Hall of Fame in 2007. She is the first African American and first woman  to serve as chairperson of the Oklahoma State Democratic Caucus.  Along with Vicki Miles-Lagrange, Horner shared the distinction as  being the first African American state senator. She was elected in 1996  and served through 2004. In addition, Mrs. Horner is a founder of the  Oklahoma Jazz Hall of Fame and has been a strong advocate of the arts  and preservation of Tulsa   s historic Greenwood District. Thank you for  joining us today.  It is my pleasure to be here.  Let   s begin by learning a little more about you. Could you start and tell  us where you grew up, a little bit of background on your early life.  Okay, I am a native Tulsan. I graduated from Booker T. Washington  High School. In fact, we were the first class to graduate from the new  building. We were the Class of 1951. I received a scholarship from  Wiley College in Marshall, Texas. I attended Wiley for two years. I  received my associate   s degree and because of finances I had to put my  educational goals on hold. I returned home to begin working so that my  siblings could have some opportunities as well.  I never did forget that one day I would return to college and obtain my  degree, which I did much later. In fact, I was in my fifties when I  returned and I graduated from Langston University with a degree in  personnel management. I chose that field because I was very interested  in human resources.  5  Nykolaiszyn  Horner  Nykolaiszyn  Horner  Nykolaiszyn  I worked with Congressman James Jones in his district office in Tulsa   Oklahoma  and I also was the director of a program called Minority  Women Employment Program, which recruited minority women in the  area of professional positions in the corporate world. This was a national  program that operated in approximately ten cities throughout the country  and Tulsa was chosen because of its low unemployment rate. And  normally offices were placed close to the universities and at that time  there were no state universities in Tulsa. We would recruit on campuses  at OU, OSU, and Central State University, as it was called at that time.  And so that   s part of my work history before I entered into the world of  politics. I have two children, a son and a daughter and, of course, the  loves of my life are my grandchildren and I have five. My oldest will  graduate from law school from OU and I have a senior graduating this  year and the other three are still coming along.  Now when you were younger, what were some of your favorite subjects  in school?  I loved the arts. And so I participated in all of the drama and music, and  usually had a leading role in those areas. Coming from a family of music  lovers, my mother was classically trained and my dad of course loved  the blues and gospel and jazz. I would say probably more blues and  more jazz than gospel. I took piano lessons. Actually, I thought one day  I would be in New York City probably playing in a club. That   s where I  wanted to be. That didn   t happen but that was one of my dreams.  Because I was surrounded by musicians, many of the musicians would  come to Tulsa to perform would usually stay in homes with friends. I  can remember my dad talking about Cab Callaway. Count Basie and  many of them were playing on a smaller scale when they came to Tulsa.  So I was always involved in music and my dad would allow me every  summer because I was taking piano lessons   he would allow me to go  with him to one big jazz band that would come to Tulsa. And I can  remember one of my favorites at that time was Lionel Hampton. I was  just excited to be there because I had an opportunity to visit and spend  some time with the musicians when they hung out at our place.  So music has always been very important in your life?  Very important, very important. I love music. And I love all of it.  Having a mom and a dad who exposed me to music provided me a great  appreciation.  Prior to the high school, which you mentioned earlier, what were some  of the other schools you attended in Tulsa growing up? Elementary  6  Horner  Nykolaiszyn  Horner  Nykolaiszyn  Horner  Nykolaiszyn  school?  I attended Dunbar Elementary School. There were two elementary  schools. It was Booker T. Washington located on Eastern Street. It was  combined with the high school, the old building. There was one junior  high school which was Carver Junior High School. So you either came  from Dunbar Elementary or Booker T. Washington Elementary School.  And this was great because you met all the kids from Booker T.  Elementary School and also students who came from Dunbar  Elementary School.  We graduated from Carver and attended Booker T. Washington High  School. We only had the one high school that we could attend. However,  being involved in music, Carrie B. Neely, who was our Choral Director  at Booker T. Washington High School, would put on these fabulous  productions and we had an opportunity to perform in the other schools  even though we were segregated.  Nice. Now when you were younger, did you think you would have that  career in music or did you have other aspirations?  Actually, I aspired to be a musician. When I went to Wiley College and  was visiting with one of the counselors and she asked what was my  major in I said,    I really want to be in entertainment.    So she began to  counsel me regarding my career goals and advised me to consider a  business major. She said one thing about it that I will never forget,    If in  fact, you can take short-hand, you will always be able to find a job.    She  said,    If in fact, you go into the entertainment, and while some of those  things might not come around as soon as you like, you would probably  be able to get a job in an office with those skills.    And that was a good  thing. That was a good thing to have a basic foundation to pull from,  which did lead me into other jobs. I did not get to the music thing, but  my business skills kept me employed.  Outside of music, when you were younger, what did you like to do for  fun?  I loved reading and I loved going to our library. We had a library very  near my home. And the librarian would allow me to spend some time  putting books on the shelves or working with the books being returned. I  loved reading and loved movies. I still love movies. I   m a real movie  buff. I did a little bit of the sports. I did run track, did enjoy track. And at  that time for us, it was softball. So those were some of the activities I  did. Of course, I loved dancing. I do still love to dance.  You mentioned your family briefly. How important was the role that  7  Horner  Nykolaiszyn  Horner  your family played in your early life?  Absolutely the most important. In fact I would say that the strength from  my family was very important to me. And taking their training for me in  a positive way. Because coming up in a segregated community, my  mother and my father constantly told me,    You know, we are not going  to allow this to be a crutch for you.    And I can remember when I took  my first train ride to Wiley College out of the train station here in Tulsa.  I remember her telling me,    I do not care how thirsty you become. I do  not want you to stand at the fountain that says    For Colored Only   .    We  were protected in that sense and I say protected because she did not want  me to go through the rejection and humiliation.  My mom and dad said,    Work hard. Get a good education. Education is  something no one can ever take from you. And you will always have  that. Don   t rely on the negatives, focus on the positives. And we just  demand that at some point, you treat people well regardless.    Those  were things that really were helpful because you do see things that are  unfair. And being involved with the Civil Rights Movement, which I  was, I felt strongly about the injustices to us.  In our community we had our movie theater. We had our variety stores.  We had our grocery stores. We had our restaurants. We had a hotel in  our community. When urban renewal came along, things changed as far  as businesses were concerned, particularly in the Greenwood District  area.  Could you touch upon your involvement in the Civil Rights Movement?  Yes, in fact, I remember very vividly    I was married with my two  children   and I remember marching downtown. There was a rally held  at the old Post Office building which is the Corps of Engineers, I think  that   s what it is now. I remember seeing the hatred from people on the  sidelines that were angry because we were marching.  At that time, we were involved in marching for restaurants that would  not serve African Americans. I remember when it was Borden   s  Cafeteria and I remember when the doors were opened at Borden   s and  this was in that time when there was Northland Shopping Center. When  I took my son, daughter and husband to eat my son was so disappointed.  He loved mashed potatoes and when he tasted the mashed potatoes he  turned to me and he was real upset, he said,    Is this what we were  marching for? These potatoes are horrible.    So those were fond  memories. It was civil but you did experience the hatred coming from  people.  8  Nykolaiszyn  Horner  Nykolaiszyn  Horner  We were told and trained not to look left or right. Just keep focused  because they didn   t want you to break rank and get into any kind of  battle. The whole point was to march for justice needed in our  community and that we should have the right to attend all of the things  that are available in Tulsa, the schools as well. And of course, many of  our students would go out of state because they could not attend our  public nor private universities. Some progress has been made.  And so many of our young people who did not go to Langston  University went out of state. And I can remember when my husband  came out of the service. He had developed a skill in the accounting when  he was in the service so he wanted to go into that field. We had to leave  Tulsa because at that time there was not a school available to him and  Langston did not offer a degree in accounting. So we went to the  University of Denver to get an accounting degree. One of our professors  at Booker T. Washington High School had recommended to my husband  saying that this is a fine school to attend. If this was the area, he could  have gotten a business administration degree but he wanted an  accounting degree. But we went to Denver and then did return back to  Tulsa and he did stay in his field of accounting in Tulsa.  Did you feel that your sense of family extended into the African  American community?  Oh yes, oh yes. Absolutely. And of course, there were strong leaders in  our community. I can remember when many of the men of the  community had said that we should have an Urban League in Tulsa.  They went to work to put it together to make sure that there was a  chapter established here in Tulsa. I can remember the YMCA and  YWCA were in separate facilities and men and women came together  and said,    We want to have a larger facility.    And a capital drive built  the Hutchison Branch YMCA and YWCA, located at 1120 E. Pine  Street.  Now tell me about college in Texas. How was that for you? First off,  what was your major? What were you studying?  My degree was going to be business administration had I stayed there  for four years. I ended up with an associate degree in that area. That was  a real experience as well because I   d never been away from Oklahoma.  We had traveled but always by car and it was always to relatives and  family events. But coming to Texas was a big change for me, meeting  people from all over the country and the state of Texas.  Having a love of music, I did participate in the choir. Also I represented  my class as the attendant for the Senior Homecoming Queen. That was  9  Nykolaiszyn  Horner  Nykolaiszyn  Horner  exciting. I was also involved in events on campus with various clubs and  organizations and worked in the community and tutored children. From  a college level, we could go and mentor and tutor children in Marshall,  Texas.  Now later in life, as you mentioned earlier, you went to Langston and  earned your degree in 1985, just a few years prior to entering the  Senate. What was that like for you returning to college at such a later  time?  A funny experience happened when I had made the decision to return to  school. On my first day at class I thought,    I will try to blend in with  these students,    look as casual as I could with slacks and a shirt and so  when I was entering the classroom, one young man said,    Get out of the  way. Get out of the way and let the teacher in.    They thought I was the  teacher. I laughed and I said,    No, I am one of you guys. I am a student.     I was well-received after that point. We all had a big laugh.  But that was an experience because at that time there were not that many  people coming back and entering into the classroom. But I adjusted very  well and Dr. Holloway was very, very kind to find an opportunity for me  to work on campus. I was able to get a job in the African American  Resource Library, which I worked there for a time in addition to my  classes. And then I would come home on the weekend and put on the  wife-hat and do the wife things and leave on Sunday afternoons coming  back to Langston. It was not about returning to school to be more  employable. It was absolutely a commitment I made to myself when I  left Wiley. So that was my goal I put on hold. I knew one day I would  return to school. That was a major achievement for me, to obtain my  degree. I walked across the stage and my family was there cheering for  me because they knew how important that was to me.  So how did running for Senate come about?  Actually, I was working for Congressman Jones in the District Office. I  worked in campaigns in our area. I spoke about the many things I  enjoyed doing in his office. Actually working for the congressman was a  great experience.  I was just amazed by what he demanded of his staff for his constituents.  So when the senate seat became open, one of my friends said,    You  ought to run for the seat.    I said,    I am not interested in doing that kind  of thing. I like working behind the scenes. I enjoy what I am doing in his  office. I never envisioned myself running for an office at all.    And so it  was actually my daughter who said,    Well, why not do it in your name?  You   re bragging about the things that you are doing for the  10  Nykolaiszyn  Horner  congressman, why don   t you transfer some of those things that you are  doing in his office and do it in your own name?     When I got into the race people told me,    This is not a role for a  woman.       You shouldn   t be there and that   s not a place for you to be.  It   s the good ole    boys    club.    The more that was said to me, the more  determined I was to try to win the seat. Of course I had to work very  hard because I was up against individuals who had name recognition and  while I had been involved in the community, it was always a behind-the-scenes.  So the more someone would tell me,    You cannot win.    The  more I would say,    Yes I can.    And so I was able to make that run and  win. I think there were about ten or so in the race. I ended up in a run-off  with a real important name, Homer Johnson. Everyone knew Homer, a  leading advocate in the community. I did win the run-off and the  general, becoming the first African American female from Tulsa to serve  in the state senate.  While you were there, what were some of the issues that were very  important to you?  Education was a very key thing for me. And of course, the arts. The  most important legislation for me is the OHLAP  Oklahoma Higher  Learning Access Program . And of course, that took a lot of twisting and  turning at the very beginning to even get the bill passed.  I was watching 60 Minutes and a gentleman from Louisiana talked about  every child should have an education in the state of Louisiana. And I  thought,    That is so true.    He was going to visit his legislature and see  what could be done to get this in motion in Louisiana. I thought,    I am  going to try that myself as well.    And so when I went back to Oklahoma  City and session began that was my goal. One of the things was very key  to me was to reach out to families who might say,    Well, I am doing  good to get this kid out of high school.    So I wanted to make sure that  people could have an opportunity to think beyond high school. I wanted  students to maintain a grade point average at 2.5.    The reason being,  sometimes there are extenuating circumstances. Young people may be  working   it is not that they can   t perform, and I am happy to say that  when tracking the bill once it was passed, the majority of the young  people who took advantage, their grade point average far exceeded the  2.5. And it makes me feel really good when someone comes up and  says,    I am an OHLAP graduate and if it hadn   t been for the OHLAP, I  would not have been able to go to school.    So that was a real challenge.  I think the legislature now even has it a part of the budget that will be  on-going and I think this is tremendous because the more we can keep  our kids in school and reaching for higher heights, I think the better  11  Nykolaiszyn  Horner  Nykolaiszyn  Horner  citizens we will have existing in our communities. The other thing that  was important was everyone is not college-bound. So in the legislation,  one could also take advantage of technical training.  Of course, the Oklahoma Jazz Hall of Fame became a realization. Dr.  Savage, a professor at OU, came to Tulsa and did a book review for one  of the arts programs sponsored by the North Tulsa Heritage Foundation  and our community. He came and he spoke about Oklahoma jazz artists.  Well I knew several of those that he mentioned but I had no idea that  Chet Baker, Barney Kessel, and the list goes on and on and on, came  from Oklahoma. And so I thought this is the best kept secret. This is  something that should be shared in our state.  We have a national treasure of artists throughout the world that should  be recognized. When I spoke with him after the book review I said,    As  I listened to you, we ought to be able to establish something to honor  these people.    And he said it probably would never happen,    I do not see  the legislature getting in behind something like this.    I said,    If they did,  would you work with me in a consulting way to get this off the ground?     He said,    Of course I would.    But he said,    I do not have to worry about  that because it will never happen.    But it did.  One of the things that is very surreal for me, I took my first train ride to  Marshall, Texas out of that train station where I couldn   t drink out of the  fountain. It is now the home of the Oklahoma Jazz Hall of Fame. I  never would have dreamed I would have been involved with, having a  performing arts program in the building as well as being the founder of  the Oklahoma Jazz Hall of Fame and we have some wonderful programs  there.  It is amazing how it all comes back around.  Yes, it really is.  We learn bits and pieces throughout our life. Describe some of the most  important places where you learned the background you needed for your  career in politics.  When I entered the legislature and particularly for the senate, there were  orientation sessions. Before session you know what you want to do  while campaigning and the things you want to accomplish. One of the  things that I think is most helpful is the opportunity to go to various  workshops. Particularly in the area of healthcare, education or mental  health. By attending workshops you get ideas, some of them will work,  some of them will not work. Some policy issues may work in Maryland  but may not work in Oklahoma. But you do have an opportunity to  12  Nykolaiszyn  Horner  participate in all areas of interest to you.  Also, there is staff. You have people who have the expertise who are  very helpful in terms of keeping you on track and writing legislation. So  you really have all of the components there to work with you. For  example, regarding the OHLAP bill, a staff person met with me to make  sure the proposed legislation could be lawfully implemented and funded.  Then there are lobbyists who may get a bad name, and special interest  groups, but there are some that are absolutely great because they bring  their expertise and their knowledge regarding a need for the legislation.  There are lobbyists who are well-trained. I know there were a couple  who served as staff aides in the senate and became lobbyists. You begin  to know those who are really professional. Also, there are advocates who  are not paid who bring their wealth of knowledge before you.  More importantly, stay close to your constituents. Stay connected with  your community to make sure you are representing their needs while you  are serving the state.  Now going back, including your time working in politics and prior to,  tell me about any stumbling blocks or adversity that you faced along the  way.  Well, I can remember, going back using my business skills, my mother  was working in the home of an executive who was staffed, at Sunray DX  Oil Company, at Ninth and Detroit. And he was visiting with my mother  while she was working and said to her,    Our company must hire  minorities.    He asked my mother to recommend someone for an  interview. They were going to be looking at various areas. Of course,  my mother said,    I can recommend my daughter.    She went on to brag  about my associate degree from Wiley College at Marshall, Texas. I was  working at the North Tulsa YWCA, at that time, as a secretary to Mrs.  Thelma Whitlow. So my mother called and said Mr. Hutchison would  interview me for a personnel position with the company. Well to make a  long story short, I did pass the interview, the test, and did get the job. I  was the first female African American to be hired in personnel with the  company.  Later I accepted a bid to work in the lease records department. That was  a whole different ball of wax because there were men and women in  there. Of course, you   re dealing with all the leases and royalties and  those kinds of things. It was very challenging but I was very interested  in learning and working in that area. I usually took my lunch with me all  the time and sat at my desk and so one of the young ladies said,    You  should come down and have lunch with us.    So I said,    Well I will. One  13  Nykolaiszyn  Horner  day I   ll do that.    I decided on this one day to do that. And so there was  one lady in the group. I guess not realizing that I   d been invited to join  the club, to have lunch in the cafeteria with them, once I got my lunch  and came to the table, she got up and said,    I refuse to sit at a table  with   ,    and she used the n-word. Of course, everyone was embarrassed  by it. They said,    We apologize. We did not invite you for this to  happen.     I went back to my desk and I was trying desperately on how I should  handle this. I felt like my dad was giving me his fighting words which I  cannot repeat. Then the angelic voice of my mother who was a very  quiet-spoken person, saying,    It is something you must handle.    So I did  address the issue with her.  I said to her,    You know, I am going to be here. And so, you don   t have  to worry about me being at lunch with you anymore but what I will  demand from you always is respect. In that we will not get into name  calling, because I could call a few, but let   s just respect one another  because I am going to be here and if you are uncomfortable with that  then you leave. But I am going to be here.    I think she was shocked that  I would come to her in this manner.  I said,    Because I am very proud of the fact of who I am and the color of  my skin. I am here just like you are. I have the right to be here. I do not  have to eat lunch with you, that is a choice. I make the choice not to ever  be in your company again. But you will respect me in our work  environment. I will respect you as well.    That was probably the worst  public encounter for me. The executives called and the word went  through the building and when they called I said,    It is handled. I do not  need you to talk to her, I did. I am fine with it. We   ll just move on.    So  that never happened again in the company.  But this was the kind of strengths that my mother and dad provided me,  to be very proud of who you are and don   t ever let the skin color get in  the way of doing and knowing who you are and what you want to  achieve.  Can you go into detail about a key moment in your career that you  consider one of your biggest highlights?  As I think about it, I think I would probably have to say with Minority  Women Employment Program because this was an opportunity to, not  only to be able to meet people but it was so exciting to be able to go to  the various campuses and recruit graduates into these positions. And the  beautiful thing about this program was we would go into the companies  first and find out what their needs were   what were they looking for?  14  Nykolaiszyn  Horner  Nykolaiszyn  Horner  What kinds of skills must the graduate have? When we would send them  to the companies, we conducted mock interviews and we would give  them a profile of the companies so they knew the history of the  company. If it did not fit we would not send them. And so we were able  to open doors at Xerox, IBM and many corporate offices. Also we were  trained to work in all offices of the Minority Women Program. The  national office was in Atlanta  Georgia  and we would go there for on-going  training. To be able to reach out and place young, professional  people in employment was one of the highlights for me.  When you were notified that you were going to be inducted into the  Oklahoma Women   s Hall of Fame, what was going through your mind  at that time?  First of all, I was just so surprised. Dr. Emily Harris came to the house.  She had been trying to contact me. She said she needed to get my  resume. I said,    Well I   ll get it to you.    She said    No, I   m going to wait  because I need to have it right away.    When I received the call, I  thought,    This is truly an honor and truly exciting.    And certainly  learning about all the other women before me and of course, the class  that I was going to join, was truly an honor. When you   re doing things,  you are not doing them because you think,    One day I   ll get a plaque or  I will get a certificate or something.    I just thought,    I   m so excited to be  recognized with this great group of women.    What a privilege to be  recognized with these outstanding women.  I do not know that you ever see yourself that this is something you are  doing that is so outstanding because you are doing it for that passion and  love you have for the things you are working toward ,to get  accomplished. So it was just truly, truly an honor and I just kept saying  over and over and over,    Wow.    Because this is big, this is huge, this is  a state thing. This is not like something out of your little club or a local  thing here. I thought,    This is truly, truly, truly an honor.    And it was  something I wanted to make sure my family was present, particularly  having two granddaughters. I thought,    Hopefully some of these things  they see or read about me will also serve as an encouragement for them  to reach for the highest goal they can achieve.     Do you remember who presented you?  Yes, I do. I will never forget that moment because I told my grandson I  always knew he loved me. In fact, I wished I had a recording of the  things that he said. My knees felt like they were going to fall out from  under me and I thought,    Oh, please just let me be able to stand here.  And for gosh sakes, please don   t let me cry.    (Laughs) I was truly  pleased he was my presenter. More importantly for me, he spoke from  15  Nykolaiszyn  Horner  Nykolaiszyn  Horner  his heart and not from any notes which spoke volumes of his love for his  grandmother.  Well I heard it was well-received. I was not there. But I heard that it was  quite impressive.  Yes, he was absolutely eloquent and I do not say this because he   s my  grandson. But his words to me were very, very special. I have often said,  I wish I had a recording of it because he spoke from his heart and he  didn   t have a piece of paper before him.  How do you feel that now people look at you as a role model?  Well, I tell you an interesting thing happened to me. We had a ceremony  at the Oklahoma Jazz Hall of Fame on Thursday and you never know  who observes you in the things that you do. A gentleman by the name of  Joe Kinney called me over a year ago and said that he would like to  donate something to the Oklahoma Jazz Hall of Fame and he wanted to  do a bust of me. I thought,    Wow, a bust? I mean, what do you mean?     He said,    I have followed your career and I would love to be able to do  that.    Well, it was unveiled on Thursday evening at the Oklahoma Jazz  Hall of Fame with the Leona Mitchell concert, which will be in the Hall  of Fame.  I thought and I have continued to think about this gentleman just out of  the blue. You never know how people see you and perceive you. He  said,    I have just followed your career and I wanted to do this and I  wanted to capture your strength and I wanted to capture what I thought I  was reading about you.    So when I gave him photographs   he asked for  different photographs of different places and different settings   and I  provided them. He said,    Well you know, if you want I can do a younger  you       And I said,    No, I want to do me as I am now. I have earned  every wrinkle I have.    He came to my home with the mold and as he  talked and engaged in conversation, he said he was trying to capture my  strength that he felt from me. He said,    Certainly when I first met you, it  was the way you shook my hand and looked at me dead in my eye with  such strength.    I mention that because that   s really special for me. You  just would not think of an artist coming out of nowhere almost and do  this. It will be in the Hall  of Fame  and so   even after I   m no longer on  this earth, I will still be there in some way in the Oklahoma Jazz Hall of  Fame.  I think with younger people and some of those that I am involved with,  just to continue to share things that I have experienced in growing up  and I have served as a mentor in the public schools because I love going  into our public schools and participating with our little mentees and  16  Nykolaiszyn  Horner  exposing them to different events that they may not normally attend, like  the arts and those kinds of things. So hopefully, I feel that with some  young people that I am in contact with, I do have a little bit of impact on  them. Saying to them, always,    You can do anything that you want to  do.    I look at Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama. We have come a long  way in terms of changing attitudes and minds about things and the fact  that we do have a female in the running. And we do have an African  American who is there along with other minorities participating. It   s  great to be able to see that.  But I have to say, it is really great to see Hillary Clinton be there and be  able to hold her own. That is what I kind of say to young people. She  can hold herself and hold her head above the fray. It doesn   t necessarily  mean that I would be endorsing that particular candidate, but I point  out   I always try to point out the strengths that I see in individuals to  say,    This is an example of what you can become.    It sends volumes to  young people of what you can achieve if you set your mind to it and stay  focused on your goals.  What would be your advice to women who plan to follow in your  footsteps?  I would say, first of all, have complete passion for your agenda,  particularly if you are coming into the legislature and never giving up.  Because it is your passion doesn   t mean that you are going to be able to  convince a full body of legislators whether it   s the House of  Representatives or the Senate. Because you have to learn how to engage  people to become involved with the things that you are wanting to get  done. I guess my primary advice would be   is, never give up. I say this  because I could have just said,    Okay, I am not going to be able to get  the OHLAP bill passed. It is going down hill. They are just tearing it up  and cutting it apart. They want to add new language or remove  language.    And so, I would say concentrate and stick to your guns on  something that is very, very important to you.  When you come to the legislature   you are going to encounter  opposition on various kinds of issues. The other thing that I would say is  remember you were elected by your constituents and never forget that is  who you   re representing. You have to remove your personal self out of  the politics and remember that you are serving a body of people that  voted for you and you should never forget that. Remember it is not  about you. It is about serving the people that you represent and on a  wider scale, the people of the state of Oklahoma. Another thing is try to  remove some of the partisan politics. We would be a much better state in  terms of getting things done. We need to learn to work together for the  good of the state of Oklahoma.  17  Nykolaiszyn  Horner  Nykolaiszyn  Horner  Nykolaiszyn  Horner  What does Oklahoma mean to you?  Oklahoma is a great state, a great place to be. Oklahoma is a great place  to raise a family. We travel miles away when we have tourist attractions  here in the state of Oklahoma. I think it provides a great venue for  cultural activities. We have excellent schools and our universities.  People who visit Oklahoma are always impressed with our warm  hospitality, cleanliness and beauty.  Oklahoma is a great place to be, a great place to live, a great place to  have a family, a great place to educate our young people and hopefully  we can get our young people to come back and stay in our great state.  And have the kind of activities and jobs that would keep them here.  Would you like to mention or talk about the people who have helped play  an important role in your life?  Yes, because first I would have to say most definitely my parents. My  mother and dad served as the anchor for me. There were teachers who  played a significant part in my life. On a professional career, I would  have to say Thelma Whitlow. Professionally, she had a great impact  regarding my training. Not having an opportunity to work in the private  sector because of segregation, my professional ethics I received from her  prepared me for the world of work.  In my legislative career, it was Rodger Randle, who was very helpful to  me and allowed me to serve in my first year as vice chair of the Human  Resources Committee, which was not usually the norm, being a  freshman. Also, Senator Bob Cullison. One of my favorites on the other  side of the aisle was Senator Howard Hendrick. Then of course, my  colleague from Tulsa, Representative Don Ross, who I worked closely  with on several issues. We were able to create the Greenwood Cultural  Center and the Oklahoma Jazz Hall of Fame in Tulsa. Working with him  on the 1921 Race Riot legislation which brought attention to a horrific  period in our history was an important period of my legislative career.  And thanks to him for making this a part of our history in Oklahoma. I  was the senate author but he was the driving force on this issue and as a  result there will be a museum named after Dr. John Hope Franklin.  What   s next on the agenda for you?  I am involved with the Oklahoma Jazz Hall of Fame and we   re going to  be in a capital drive and so we are going to be working diligently to get  funding for some of the things that we would like to see happen. We  have had generous donors who have come forth and made a lot of things  happen. We have a long ways to go, I am sure. Then in my play time, I  18  Nykolaiszyn  Horner  Nykolaiszyn  Horner  Nykolaiszyn  Horner  Nykolaiszyn  am going to continue to do traveling and I guess most importantly is  being able to spend time with my grandchildren and I do adore them. A  little bit on the charitable side, I am quite involved with the Ronald  McDonald program and I do enjoy working with this charitable  organization. It is a great program serving a great need to this  community. So combined, the Hall of Fame and traveling and the  reading and the movies   those are some of the things that I enjoy at my  leisure.  When history is written about you, what would you like for it to say?  I would hope that history would record that I am a very loyal person  committed and determined to achieve whatever goal I set forth. Those  are some of my attributes along with my compassion and love for my  family and dearest friends.  Is there anything else you would like to add that we have not spoken  about today?  I would like to end by saying to someone who wants to serve in the  legislature there is no greater honor than to be able to serve a  constituency and have voters who believe in you. That is one of the  highest honors one can receive. Be relentless in fighting for your policy  issues. I will always remember Freddye Williams who served in the  House of Representatives. She was a strong advocate for breast cancer.  She had difficulty getting support but she never gave up. I believe that is  an important factor while serving in the legislature,    never give up and  fight for your legislative issues.     Well we do appreciate you taking time out of your busy schedule to meet  with us.  It was my pleasure to sit down and have this conversation with you.  Well thank you very much.  -------  -------  
