Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  My name is Juliana Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University  Library. Today is Tuesday, November 29, 2011 and I   m in Tulsa,  Oklahoma interviewing Kathryn Taylor. This interview is being  conducted as part of the inductees to the Oklahoma Women   s Hall of  Fame Oral History Project. Kathryn Taylor was inducted into the  Oklahoma Women   s Hall of Fame in 2011. Thank you for joining us  today.  Absolutely.  Let   s begin by learning a little bit more about you. Could you tell us a  little bit about where you grew up and give us a little background on  your early life?  I grew up in Oklahoma City. Attended the Oklahoma City Public School  System and was the third of four children. My father was born in  Cheyenne, Oklahoma, and was on the first mounted Boy Scout troop.  My mother was from Ohio and moved to California. They met in  California as he was being deployed in the Navy. They moved back to  Oklahoma to make their family after they had their first child. I was born  in Capitol Hill Hospital in Oklahoma City.  Tell me about growing up in Oklahoma City. What was it like?  It was a great Midwestern town. We lived in a small house in a  neighborhood in the middle of Oklahoma City called The Village. There  were a lot of small political subdivisions and this was one. I lived at  2206 Dublin Road. I went to Ridgeview Grade School. Two older  sisters, twelve and fifteen years older. So my oldest sister went off to  college as I was very young and then my younger brother, who is three  years younger, was at home with me. We kind of did what siblings do,  tormented each other a bit, played outside. We did a lot of plays in the  backyard. Sometimes he had to be characters that he didn   t choose to be,  5  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  but I was the older sister, so that   s how it worked.  Our parents really raised us being very involved in political campaigns.  They were always very involved, it was dinner table discussion for us. I  then went to junior high in the middle of desegregation in the Oklahoma  City Public School System. That, to me, seemed like a very adult  problem. I was just trying to get on the bus and get to class on time so I  could get my work done. A woman stood in front of the bus and  wouldn   t allow us to move to the next class at the school where we took  our math classes. We had to watch her be taken away by the police  before we could move onto school. It was a very curious thing to me  because in our family we never discussed people by race or religion. We  had a small home, but it was a very welcoming home. My mom and dad  ran a small business. Employees of all kinds were at our house on a  regular basis. So that was the time that I grew up in.  Your parents ran a small business. Would you get involved in those  activities? Would they put you to work?  Absolutely. As you know, if your parents own a small business, it   s a  family affair. So we owned a moving and storage company for a while  and my first job, which was fifty dollars a month, which was a lot, every  Sunday I had to go through all the classified ads and do an index card of  everyone who was selling their home because that was a potential person  that we could move their goods. Those would be categorized and given  to the sales people, probably salesmen at that time, actually, and they  would make the calls to them. Then we owned an insurance agency and  a dry cleaners. So I learned to make coffee, I learned to count the cash  drawer, I learned to check in clothes. So we always kind of lived, really,  at our business. I think I first played hide and seek in a moving and  storage company warehouse.  Interesting way to grow up.  Yes.  But also interesting that you were exposed to business so young, too.  Right. At that time, certainly most of the people involved in business  were men. My mother and father were partners. They were both equal  contributors to the business, so I think that helped me grow up and not  really understand or have a concern about gender roles.  Where did you go to high school?  I went to John Marshall High School in Oklahoma City. I went to public  6  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  school all my life. I was a John Marshall Bear, was editor of the school  newspaper, I was on the high school debate team. Still have people that  remember me, haven   t seen me since the high school debate team, and  unfortunately still remember me just from that experience. My debate  coach was very influential, H. Oliver Roberts, amazing man. I still keep  in touch with my high school journalism teacher, Larin Ward, thanks to  Facebook, today. So that, the writing and speaking, whether I excelled in  those because I had teachers that had confidence in me or they had  confidence because I excelled, I don   t know, but those were certainly my  favorite classes and actually, I think what was the basis of everything I  did after high school, as well.  Outside of newspaper, were you involved in any other extra-curricular  activities?  I was involved in a few things. I was always involved in political  campaigns, a little bit in student council. I am a Democrat now, but in  the presidential year that Richard Nixon ran for election, I represented  the views of Richard Nixon and actually a law partner of mine today  represented the views of the other presidential candidate. Jay Shanker  represented George McGovern. So obviously things changed for me, but  I was always involved in political campaigns, speaking and writing and  government. However that related, that   s really where my interests were.  So as you were growing up, any ideas of what you wanted to be when  you got older?  Well, I think I always thought I wanted to be a journalist. I loved  writing. I got an A+++ on a paper on the Land Run in seventh grade, so I  felt like that was my destiny. I then learned that journalists need to move  a lot and work odd hours. In fact, in college, I worked at The Oklahoman  and I worked the midnight to six a.m. shift. I wasn   t really sure that was  a lifestyle that I wanted. That was what my vision was, it didn   t turn out  that way.  Were your parents very encouraging when it came to education?  Absolutely they were. It was interesting, though. In high school, my  oldest sister attended college, my mother attended college. My oldest  sister received her degree. Neither of my parents had their degree, but  they were very supportive. My high school counselor, who was  supportive at the time, because I thought I wanted to be a journalist, I   d  researched and I wanted to go to the University of Missouri at Columbia  or Northwestern. Her response to me was,    That   s really not necessary.  That would be very expensive. Why would you want to invest that kind  of money in your education? You should go to a state school.    I   m glad I  7  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  went to a state school. It was a fabulous education. I   m not sure that was  the right analysis at that time, but that was the attitude.  That   s why you decided to go to OU?  University of Oklahoma, I did. I   m thankful that I did. My freshman  year in college, my father died. Eleven months later, my mother died.  Had I been certainly at a more expensive school, but also a school  further away from my support network, I might not have finished  college. As it was, a family from Sapulpa stepped in that I just met  through their daughter in my sorority. They put me through college, they  let me live at their house in the summers because obviously I didn   t have  a home. My uncle, who was an editor at The Oklahoman, got me this  midnight to six a.m. shift. A job which I was, by the way, incredibly  thankful for.  What a tough kind of personal turning point for a young kid.  Yes, it was, but here is how I coped with it. I was always a very  responsible child, but I became    If you look at my calendars for those  four years, there   s not a minute open. I was involved in everything in  college. I was in student government, I was in the governing council of  the sorority I was in, which by the way was never something anyone  would have chosen for me. I didn   t seem like the typical type to be in the  sorority. But again, thankfully, because that really became my home.  There was a housemother, I got a great breakfast every morning, I could  store my stuff there in the summer and that group of friends really, and  still are, my closest kind of family in a way. So it was a difficult turning  point, but I always think that obstacles can become positive. They really  shape you for the future and that really shaped me for the future. I  learned how to negotiate for my own car. I had this really nice car and  then I had to sell it. So I bought something that was going to be very  economical. It was a Datsun B210. I bought it in the most undesirable  color because that was the cheapest, dark brown.  I thought that I negotiated a very good deal in the trade-in and that night,  my oldest sister and her husband took me out to dinner to celebrate this  major milestone in my life, in a nice restaurant, and my car salesman  was at the same restaurant taking two women out to celebrate the same  evening. I have no idea if he was using my money or another sale he had  made that day. Anyway, there were lots of great learning experiences  along the way and I really saw the giving nature of people. If you think  of this family that just knew my circumstances, but didn   t really have a  long background with me, they came forward and made sure I got my  education. That probably was a pivotal moment for me to say when I  have that opportunity, I will make sure that happens for others. That   s  8  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  how it works.  You were at OU. Any classes, any professors that really made an impact  at that time?  Well, certainly, I think my journalism professors made an impact. That  was my passion and kind of where I could lose myself. I had some great  philosophy classes. I had a great professor that got me through botany,  which I was thankful for. My brother-in-law who tutored me in business  math that I was thankful for. I think at that time, because I really moved  my life to the campus, that was my home. It wasn   t just the professors, it  was the entire atmosphere of the community at that time. That was a  very memorable place for me.  So as you approach graduation, are you thinking, I   m going to leave  here? I   m going to write for some outlet?  Well, I really wanted to travel, but I didn   t really have any money to  travel. So I applied to be a traveling graduate counselor for the sorority I  was in. I traveled all over North America visiting college campuses.  Came back to OU to work at a program called Women Returning to  College. At the time, there was a big push at the University to encourage  older women, who had completed raising their families, to return to  college and get their degrees, increase college degrees in the state and  help the income level of these women. So I worked in that program and  then decided that if I was going to pay off my gargantuan student loans,  which I had at that point, and use my writing and speaking skills, the  right place for me would be law school. So while I was working, I  applied to law school and interestingly enough, was not initially  accepted. I was placed on the waiting list and then was accepted. I  graduated number three in my law school class. So I don   t know what  that tells you about the admission process.  But I was in the first class that had a significant number of women. Our  class was one third women. Of the top ten ranked, seven were women,  which put the law firms who really hadn   t been hiring women in an  interesting situation because they prided themselves on hiring the top of  the class, but were they to do that, they really were going to hire all  women. So that was actually in a weird way, a fun experience because  we were   a good friend of mine, who was also in the same sorority, also  blonde, a few inches taller than me   we were interviewing back to back  all over the country because we were from an oil and gas law school,  and we were women, and top of our class. Whatever, so we had some  interesting experiences. One where I walked into a partner   s office at a  law firm in Dallas and he said to me,    Didn   t I interview you  yesterday?    I said,    No, that was the other blonde.    One interviewer,  9  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  before Hillary Clinton made the line famous, said to me,    What does  your husband think about you practicing law?    I said,    I didn   t put  myself this far in debt to stay home and make bread.    They did not offer  me a job.  Then the most, I guess, amazing experience to me, because I   d just never  experienced this kind of gender treatment difference, in an interview I  went on, also in Dallas, we went through the buffet line at this fancy  business club. I was at the front of the line because I was the guest. I  went to sit down and one of the wait staff came and tugged on my  jacket. He said,    You need to go to the lady   s room.    I am never known  for being very neat. I do drop stuff on myself, so I assumed that either I  didn   t have the shirt buttoned or I dropped a pickle on my dress or  something, but in fact, I was headed into the men   s only dining room to  sit down. I didn   t have any idea that it was a segregated   that at a firm  that was recruiting me to work for them would take me to a segregated  dining facility, but in fact, they did. That was a new experience for me  pretty late in life to realize that even in this profession, there is very  much a separation of gender. That goes a little further.  Before you tell me where you ended up, in law school, where would you  sit in the classroom?  Oh, always in the front. Always in the front. Me and this friend of mine  that was in school with me, she also was right at the top of the class, we  had decided we were going to be there, we were going to make a  difference, we were going to sit in front of the class, so we did. And we  got called on a lot.  Well, that   s a good thing.  Yes, it is a good thing in law school.  Alright, you   re interviewing all over the country, you   re having all these  experiences, where do you end up?  Oklahoma City. Oklahoma City and not Tulsa. Very specifically, not  Tulsa. Oklahoma City, although I love Tulsa now, and I was the mayor,  so it   s a great city, but at the time it lagged behind in terms of I think  opportunities for women. At least that was my perception. Not that I  didn   t get job offers here, great job offers, I did. But two reasons I  landed up in Oklahoma City: one, I determined I was going to stay in  Oklahoma. I worked in New York City, I worked in Dallas. In New  York City, there was a different bigotry. That was a southern bigotry. I  have an accent. I don   t think it   s dramatic, but in New York, it was.  People assumed things about me, about my intelligence, about my  10  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  ability to accept a multi-cultural environment and I chose not to fight  that fight at that time.  I think because of my family situation, staying in Oklahoma ultimately  became important to me. I had a lot of debt and the firm that I went to  work for in Oklahoma City offered me the highest salary and a five  thousand dollar (this was in 1981) clothing allowance, which was key.  Because I did not really have any clothing appropriate to wear to  practice law in. And when I worked in Tulsa in the summer, the business  clubs that I had lunch in with the firms were still segregated. In fact, the  lunch, the private dining room that one firm would have their weekly  lunches in, was the men   s-only floor. If you had to go to the bathroom, if  you didn   t plan ahead, you had to find a waiter or waitress, someone, to  escort you to the elevator to go to the women   s floor to use the restroom.  It was just not a comfortable feeling for me, welcoming feeling. Didn   t  feel like I could make the best impact. So I went to work at a small firm  that was very entrepreneurial. As long as you were smart and you  worked hard, it really didn   t make a difference. I was an oil and gas  securities lawyer in 1981. It was the heyday of oil and gas securities law.  Unfortunately, July 5, 1982 came and I became a bankruptcy lawyer, but  flexibility is good.  Always good to adapt.  Yes, absolutely.  So how long did you stay with that particular firm?  I stayed at that firm until 1988, I was a partner. My husband at the time,  was from Tulsa and really wanted to move to Tulsa, was not employed.  We had a three year old daughter, who is now twenty-nine, and he  wanted to move to Tulsa where his family lived. So I looked for a job  and became Vice President and General Counsel of Thrifty Car Rental in  January of 1989.  So that   s kind of changing industries. You went from oil and gas to  bankruptcy     To franchise law. Thrifty was a franchise company that was publicly  traded, so my skill set fit perfectly. A friend of mine, Cliff Hudson, who  practiced law with me in Oklahoma City and then became general  counsel for Sonic Industries, called me and said,    Hey, I know you   re  looking for a job in Tulsa. They just lost their general counsel, they just  went public, you   re perfect. You should apply.    Interesting the way life  works, I now sit on the publicly traded board of Sonic Industries and  Cliff is the CEO.  11  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  It   s funny how it all comes back around.  It does.  So you   re just guns blazing, working in law     Yes.  You   re doing your thing. I   m guessing you   re working long hours?  Twenty-four hours a day. Right. Traveling all over the world. New  Zealand, Australia, China, Great Britain, France, you name it. Many  times, dragging my child to Thailand. My only child, many times  dragging her with me on these trips. When you have one child, you can  pretty much pack them up and go anywhere.  So the challenge of raising the family, not too much?  I got divorced when she was five and so while her dad was in town, he  also had a demanding job, I discovered the TU women   s golf team, who  kind of became my team of babysitters for my daughter. They were great  role models and available. Then, as I said, I packed her up. I joke that  she learned what a leveraged buyout was by the time she was nine years  old.  That   s pretty good.  Yes.  At what point do you make the transition from the legal sector into other  avenues?  Public sector?  Yes.  Well, what happened is as I left, Thrifty was sold to Chrysler  Corporation. I loved being at Thrifty. Again, it was a very  entrepreneurial company. We bought Dollar Car Rental, Stampy Car  Rental, General    We bought companies all over the world and I got to  lead that. I got to lead the legal part of it. Great team of people I worked  with. When you become a subsidiary of a major corporation in a non-core  industry, life changes. When you become the subsidiary in the  automotive industry, which was at the time, and certainly still is, but  certainly at the time, incredibly male-dominated. Again, it   s a very  12  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  different position. I actually went to a board meeting in Detroit for our  company. I was the only woman at the board meeting, the CFO was  male. I excused myself to go to the restroom and came back and there  was laughing in the room that stopped as I walked in.  I was curious. The CFO and I were contemporaries and later I said,    Tell  me what happened. What was that about?    There was a joke being told  that they did not feel like it was appropriate they could tell when I was in  the room. I just thought, this has been a great run, but I   m done now. I  went back to private law practice and began to get more involved in  community activities. The state treasurer at the time became a friend of  mine and he pointed me to a small little authority called the Grand River  Dam Authority. Then I had the opportunity to invest in my daughter   s  college savings, but I figured with that golf team experience, maybe she  could get a scholarship if it didn   t work out.  In National Car Rental, along with three other people, one of whom is  now my husband, we bought National Car Rental from General Motors.  Their alternatives were to find a buyer or liquidate the company because  it   d lost almost a billion dollars under their ownership. So I became an  entrepreneur again and it worked out well when we sold the company. I  said,    Now is the time that I   m going to pay my debt back.    However  I   d do that. We started a charitable foundation and I kind of put the word  out that I was interested in being involved in government. A new guy  whose campaign I wasn   t involved in had just gotten elected governor,  Brad Henry. Ultimately, I became his Secretary of Commerce, Tourism  and Workforce Development and a small business advocate.  Now, those three organizations aren   t traditionally tied together in one  position.  They are not. That was the first time they   d ever been tied together. As  the governor and I talked about how you impact economic  development   you bring people to your state so they will ultimately  come there and locate a business or work, and you develop a great work  force to make sure you support your businesses. So we had a strategy to  leverage that workforce, those departments together, those  organizations.  Was that challenging?  It was very challenging because there were three cultures. One, work  forces are federally funded, all federally funded, so that   s one culture.  Tourism was state funded and very state legislature driven because that   s  what drives rural Oklahoma is tourism. The Commerce Department  was   I always called them    the chosen ones.    It was a totally at-will  13  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  department. They made more than anyone else, they went on fancy trips  around the world and they got the big headlines when they brought jobs  to town. So there was never a natural affection. We did a daylong  facilitation of the management teams of those three groups. The most  exhausting day I think I have ever spent, but at the end of the day, we  definitely found common ground and people understood why the saying,     A rising tide lifts all boats,    worked in this situation. We were able to  make, not all the connections we would have liked to, but we were able  to make a number of connections that helped. It was pivotal in recruiting  Dell to Oklahoma City. Had we not had those connections with those  departments, we would not have been able to convince Dell to do their  largest site outside of their corporate headquarters   largest site in the   United States    in Oklahoma City.  It seems like you   re working with business and those legal aspects, it  was one type of political climate, and now you   re working for the state  government and that   s a whole other ballgame. How did people take  these changes? How did employees take these changes?  That   s a great question. In the state legislature, right after I was  appointed, we got a 30 percent budget cut and I did what I knew to do  based upon my business experience. I gathered my management team,  we put everything we did up on the wall and we figured out what other  people were already doing, where we could eliminate tasks without  eliminating services, and implemented our plan. I got a call from the  chair of my budget committee and he said,    Please come over and see  me. I   d like to see you. I   d like to hear about your vision for commerce.     I was excited. I got my PowerPoint, got my management team and went  over to the state legislature, we   re going to tell them about our vision.  What could be better?  I walked into a room of men, arms folded, angry. Very angry. Because  some of the positions I   d eliminated really were political positions that  were in rural   they were in areas, quadrants of the state and they really  supported helping people get re-elected. That   s the only way I can say it  because that   s the way it was. I knew that those people weren   t pivotal  to our mission, so they were terminated in the budget cut. I didn   t have  the money, couldn   t pay them. So one of the legislators, at the time, he  just had surgery. He was walking on a cane. He picked his cane up and  he actually shook it in my face and he said   it referred to a person that  they had just kind of run off from state government. He said,    If you  don   t do what   s right, that can happen to you as well.    I said,    I believe  I   ve done what   s right, but I   ll make you a deal. Give me a year and if I  am not providing your constituents the services that you need, then you  and I will walk to the governor   s office and we   ll jointly hand him my  letter of resignation. That   s the deal.    So, fine.  14  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  He   s now, really one of my very closest friends and we recount that  story and laugh. At the time, I did not think it was very funny. So the  legislature did not support it well, the employees were worried because  it was a new administration and they were worried for their jobs. Did the  change mean that they would be less impactful, less respected or have  less job stability? But ultimately, I think, through communication with  them on a regular basis, on a very open basis, we had suggestion boxes  that people could anonymously ask questions and we would post  responses to. We had weekly employee meetings with all the groups, all  three management teams together on a regular basis to dispel rumors.  Ultimately, we were able to convince most of the people to get on the  train with us. We also saw a number of people voluntarily leave because  they didn   t like the direction we were headed.  I think when you can take your experience and turn it into kind of a fresh  approach, it really helps open eyes and increase productivity in certain  areas.  Well, it   s not the way things are usually done. A lot of times, they   re  done more in back rooms and quietly and without offending. It   s never  been my style to do that. I don   t, as a lot of managers, believe in the  mushroom theory. You just keep people under a mushroom, feed them  what mushrooms get fed and they don   t see much of the light of day. I  don   t believe in that. I think you give everybody all the information they  can digest, they use what they need and they   re going to be the most  effective team.  You mentioned while you were Secretary of Commerce, Tourism and  Workforce Development, bringing Dell to Oklahoma City. You also led  EDGE  Economic Development Generating Excellence . Tell me about  EDGE.  That was a great opportunity. Really, I have to credit Chancellor  Paul   Risser for a lot of that idea and process. The governor wanted a big idea  for how we transform Oklahoma. So we put together about a hundred  and fifty people, very careful about making sure that we included  diverse voices, and that is diversity in all senses of the word. Location,  background, gender, ethnicity and political views. We had ardent  opponents of the governor on that task force, as well as supporters, and  we tasked them in various areas to come up with the best ideas to  transform Oklahoma. Of course, there were many great ideas that were  implemented that are probably not well known today. I think moving  commercialization processes in higher ed got a lot of push and some  new legislation based upon EDGE, but the endowment, the billion dollar  endowment for research in Oklahoma was the big idea. The idea that we  15  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  fought very strongly to get funded, and it did receive significant funding.  I saw that they just released another five awards this last month to  support research that will ultimately lead to jobs and new industry in  Oklahoma.  Were you happy in that position?  I was. I loved working with Chancellor Risser. Loved working with  higher education. Not that higher ed is not pragmatic always, but I could  be the very pragmatic side and he could be the academic, process driven  side. We gathered wonderful data to show that what we were doing was  making, would make an impact. We were able to get the support of a  wide variety of people with various opinions. That is I think what makes  a state very strong. I used to say that in speeches when I was Secretary  of Commerce and Tourism,    Oklahoma has a population about equal to  that of metropolitan Houston. If we do not figure out how to get behind  some ideas all as one state, we will never compete in a global economy.     EDGE really got buy-in from especially the research endowment from  across the state.  Other highlights during your term as secretary?  I led, with Chancellor Risser, a trip to Asia, China and Japan, signed a  number of two plus two agreements with Asian universities and  universities here, Oklahoma State, University of Oklahoma, University  of Tulsa. That was a wonderful experience. Not just to be able to  experience the culture, but here and talking with the students and the  parents who were sending their kids very far away to have the  opportunity at an education. I think that ultimately that experience is  what led me to understand that there is a lot of important work you can  do in the world, but the fact is if you don   t have a base of education, a  lot of it you   ll be doing over and over again. You   ll pave the streets and  you   ll hire police officers and you   ll bring in some jobs, but if you  cannot have a well-rounded, educated citizenry (that goes true in  Oklahoma and across the world) then you don   t have a solid foundation.  I think that was the lesson I learned, certainly, from that experience. One  of the lessons.  Well you decided to make a run for Mayor of Tulsa. Did you just wake  up one day and say,    You know, I think I   m going to  run for  mayor of  Tulsa   ?  Well, I was encouraged to run and I   m a student by nature, so I attended  my summer camp in 2005, was the Yale Campaign School for Women.  It   s a non-partisan campaign school to encourage women to run for  office. The theory that you may have heard, I think it   s true, is that it  16  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  takes seven or eight people asking a woman to run before she   ll finally  say,    I   ll run.    Men, apparently, wake up and look in the mirror and say,     I would make a really good governor.    So I went to the Yale Campaign  School and I came back and said,    I don   t want any part of that. I   m not  running for office. I   m going to stay with the governor, finish his term, I  love it.     Tulsa was having some problems with its largest employer. We worked  with the city to put together a plan to maintain those jobs, 5,000 jobs,  jobs that could never be replaced. Although, today is an interesting day  to talk about that, American Airlines. But the city simply didn   t execute  on their part. So I was part of the delegation that went to see the  President of American with President Boren, who was on their board,  Governor Henry, the mayor and the congressmen. I was the staff person  that went. The state was prepared to execute. We had the pro tempore  and the speaker and the lieutenant governor, the governor, all signed on,  but we didn   t have the city. I left that meeting and called my husband  and I said,    I need a check for fifty dollars. I   m going to file for mayor.     That   s not the way I   d suggest you do it, by the way. It   s good to have a  plan.  So I did and I had a brutal, beyond brutal, about 110 day campaign. My  democrat opponent called me and told me that it wasn   t my time, hadn   t  served my    He   d been in the legislature. I could run later, but not now.  That was not a good thing to say to me. He then accused me of a couple  of felonies and I won by 64 percent against my democrat opponent. He  spent a million-five on that primary and I spent about a million dollars.  Outrageous. I had to run against the incumbent Republican in a  Republican town, whose uncle was the favorite mayor at the time. I was  about nine points up. I   m a polling addict, I   ll admit that. So at nine  points up, four days going into the election, and a robo-call was made  against me. A soft money robo-call, saying that I was for gun control,  for gay marriage, and for abortion. Those were issues I had never taken a  stand on. Of course, local government has no impact on those issues. But  I won by three-quarters of a percentage point in the very late hours of  the night.  What was your campaign strategy?  Make life better.  Did you do much door knocking?  I did. I did everything. First of all, I got a corporate branding firm to  help me figure out (because I didn   t know about political consultants or  didn   t know any) what my slogan should be. My slogan was    Make life  17  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  better.    I explained my background, which was middle class, lower  middle class, just wanted to make a difference. I knocked doors, I talked  to anybody who would talk with me, I met with every group who would  meet with me. Politicians go to a lot of church services and for me, that  was a very    It   s not uncomfortable going to church, but it was very  uncomfortable running into a church and then leaving. So I didn   t do  that. If I went to a church service, I stayed. I was raised in the  Episcopalian church and we   re a fifty-nine minute Sunday service. So  the first time I went to another church, a minister called and said,     Would you come to my church?    I said,    Yes, what time does it start?     He goes,    Well, this is the time to come, come at this time.    I said,    No,  I come for the whole service.    He goes,    Well pack a lunch because our  services are three hours.     I met some of my best friends at those experiences. I did everything. But  I did a lot of TV commercials, I did a lot of direct mail. I spent a lot of  money. I did a lot of fundraising. I had a wonderful campaign finance  team that volunteered to help me raise money all across the state. I had  people have fundraisers for me in Oklahoma City. I did every strategy  there was and I did a lot of polling. I did everything but one thing. When  I ultimately hired a campaign consultant, I said,    I have to live in this  town and I have to live with myself, so I will not do personal attack ads.  I will focus on issues, I will focus on ineffective decision making, but I  will not focus on people   s families. That   s something I choose not to  do.    He said,    There   s a good chance you   ll lose this election.    I said,    I  understand that, but that   s a decision I get to live with.    I almost did lose  the election, by the way.  It   s hard going up against the incumbent.  It is. People still come up to me and ask me about the accusations that  were made against me in the democratic primary, believing them to be  true, because if they   re said, people believe them to be true. That I voted  twice, that I didn   t pay my taxes, all kinds of really amazing, amazing  things. Tactics, political tactics that were used that I was completely  unaware of. I didn   t know that you did opposition research on yourself  to find out what people might be able to string together to accuse you of.  I just never considered that. I really was a little bit na  ve, even though  I   d been to campaign school, to think that it was about my ability to do  the job. We have a strong mayor form of government, I had a CEO  background, and that   s really how I ran, is I   m going to be the CEO of  the city.  Tough skin.  Yes, you have to learn to have tough skin or a room to be in by yourself  18  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  for a while or with some very close friends. I had a great family. My  daughter left Congressman Boren   s office and came back to run my  campaign and my husband was out on the road for work one day and  called and said,    How   s the campaign going?    She said,    I   ve got some  good news and some bad news. The bad news is that you are a bobble-head  behind bars in a political commercial. The good news is that you  have on some really cool sunglasses.     There   s always that plus. (Laughter) What was the hardest part about  that campaign?  Two things. One is that I didn   t ever realize that I hadn   t really spoken a  lot about my parents    death, even though it had been in 1973, 1974, so  this is 2006. So I had to speak about that to crowds of five hundred and a  thousand people. Now I can speak in front of anyone, but it was very  hard to learn to speak about that. So that was a good cathartic experience  for me. George Nigh told me,    When this campaign is over, you   ll be  surprised about who your friends are and who your enemies are.    I think  that was the hardest thing because there were people that I very much  believed were my supporters and my backers and people that I never  thought would be a two in the morning phone call for me, and I found  out who those people were. I think that   s an important lesson in life.  Well, in 2006, you   re mayor of Tulsa, trying to get things going     Get the ship right.  What were some of your biggest challenges going into office?  Well, I was elected on April 4 and took office the twentieth. Had to  assemble a staff and get a budget by May 1. It   s a strong mayor form of  government, so I really believed I needed to do the budget. I did do the  budget. The staff didn   t quite get that at first. They were like,    Why does  she want these numbers? She   s the mayor.    So that was the first  challenge. We were in a very difficult economic time. Polling showed  that nobody was going to do anything, citizens would not vote for  anything else until we fixed the streets. So I submitted the budget, I  assembled a staff as best as you can in two weeks and then got the news  that the convention center, BOK Center, that had been started under the  previous mayor, the bids we opened were about 65 million dollars over  budget. So we had a strategy. We ultimately did some value engineering,  decreased it, got a little bit more money from the county, finished it. It   s  been a great success.  Then in 2007, we had the worst ice storm our city has ever had. Seventy-five  percent of the people were without power on December 7 and as I  19  gathered in this antiquated war room that had no technology in the  basement of Old City Hall to try to map out a strategy for what we did, I  learned from our engineers that the city and PSO  Public Service  Company of Oklahoma  could do only so much, but under our  Corporation Commission rules, the citizens are responsible for what is  called a weather head, which is where the wires come into your house to  make sure you have power. Even if PSO restored power, everyone had  to have their weather heads fixed because the ice had pulled most of  them off the wall, off the sides of the house. The engineers said,    Oh,  everyone will understand that.    I said,    Well, let me just tell you that  this mayor doesn   t understand it and so we   re going to educate.     So we did flyers at QuikTrips and everywhere we could and we had  firefighters literally walk the streets because we had people without  power who had limbs who couldn   t leave the house. We had people on  emergency oxygen who we couldn   t identify where they were. It was the  one time when I was mayor that I said,    If I don   t do this right, people  will die.    That   s always the standard. Do you really lose sleep over  whether that constituent letter had a typo in it? No, but this was a matter  of life and death. Then we began seeing, as you always do in weather  crisis situations like in New Orleans, price gougers. People that were  going to take advantage of the people that could least afford it.  Then there was FEMA who was not exactly quick on the draw with  decision making, which also would hamstring our local state agencies.  So I talked to the governor, gave him a heads up about what my kind of  crazy plan was. He obviously couldn   t give me a formal okay, but I felt  strong enough about my relationship that we literally opened up an  electrical shop at the convention center. We sent faxes out to every  electrician in the region, every electrical store. We gathered all weather  heads and everything else they would need there. We sold them to them.  We booked the jobs. We had citizens calling to us, we booked the jobs,  we paid the electricians by the job so they couldn   t gouge and then we  ultimately got reimbursed by FEMA. I had the occasion to go to  Washington, DC and meet with the head of FEMA and actually go over  the plan that we put together and implemented.  In less than twenty days, we had power restored to almost every single  person in the community. The goal was by Christmas Eve and we met  that. I   ll tell you, the team at the city worked their tails off during a time  when they would have liked to have been shopping for their families.  They wore Hawaiian shirts and people brought us in food and we did the  best to make it fun, but we were in a cold fairgrounds making sure that  people got their power on and it worked. That was the biggest challenge,  and the thing that brought our team together most aggressively as a  team, our city team, ended up with the head of Public Works in the  20  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  hospital with MRSA. Almost died. It was a really difficult situation. I  have no idea what anyone got for Christmas that year in my family, but  my husband took care of it, thankfully.  I think it   s different when you   re dealing with life and death and you feel  responsible for these people.  Right. Well, I   ve only started sleeping again through the night, because I  was on call. If I was in the city, I was on call, and if there was a murder,  I asked the police to call me and they did. I did feel responsible. I needed  to know what was happening in the city. So one night, it was during the  ice storm, I got a phone call from the fire chief and he said,    I think  there   s something I need to let you know.    A friend of mine and her  husband had just been killed in a fire. Their law partner was a good  friend of mine. I said,    I   d like you to hold that information for fifteen  minutes because I   d like to be able to go over and tell him face to face  that he   s lost his law partners.     So that was a very difficult experience, but when you say you feel  responsible, I felt, not that I caused it, but I was responsible for the  aftermath of those things. When someone was murdered, how was the  investigation handled? When there were three young men, seventeen  years old, killed about my second month in office and I went to meet  with their families and said,    Please help us with this investigation.    The  mother said to me,    Do you want to get the rest of my babies killed?     Meaning, if she snitched, then her family was at risk. From that, we  started a confidential, reliable citizen program where we could  absolutely ensure confidentiality to people who would give us tips for  solving violent crime. I didn   t ever feel like I caused it, but I did feel like  I was responsible for at least doing what I could to make it not happen  again.  I wonder how many mayors instruct the people in their community to  call them, to inform them, of these events. I   m guessing not many.  Yeah, I don   t know. I will tell you that as I was in a leadership team with  the US Conference of Mayors. Being mayors, we all agreed, was a  different job. I have friends that were mayors and are now US Senators  and Congressmen and Governors. Being mayor, you have a very defined  responsibility for a group of citizens. Other than school board, and  you   re not in charge of police, fire, water and all that, you   re really  responsible for people   s lives. I think mayors, actually, as a group, take  that very seriously. I got to be good friends with Mayor  Thomas   Menino of Boston and Mayor  Michael  Bloomberg in New York and  Mayor  Greg  Nickels in Seattle and Mayor  Richard  Daley in Chicago.  I   ll tell you, if I had an issue, I would often call on them for advice  21  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  because no one else really understood. It   s a diverse business being  mayor. There   s no company that   s as diverse as a city. You do plays and  you do police. They would answer my call. If a mayor calls a mayor,  you get a return phone call within three hours. Staff knows that we have  crises that needs responded to immediately, and we really shared. So I  don   t know, but I think all mayors that I know felt that sense of true  responsibility for the citizens. It   s a different job than any other, I think,  elected official, especially in a strong mayor form of government.  Did you have a learning curve? Was there something you had to really  educate yourself about?  Police. First of all, it   s a paramilitary organization. They communicate  differently. They   re very black and white. I   m not, I joke a lot. That did  not translate well to them. So I had to really learn to communicate with  them. I had to learn where I could get my information, the chain of  command. I couldn   t just call a captain because he would be  uncomfortable with having to respond to the mayor without going to the  chief. My police chief was on suspension when I took office, so I didn   t  have a police chief, actually. That was the biggest learning curve for me.  I hadn   t really been involved in murder investigations before.  So you dealt with the ice storm     Got the streets done.  Got the streets done, BOK Center completed. What are some other  things?  Moved into a new City Hall. We had a vacant building, we had lost a  company    I happened to know the guy that used to be the CEO,  happened to have another couple of good visionary friends who realized  the city was taking up way too much space downtown in a lot of  different buildings that were dilapidated, needed a lot of repair. No one  was going to move into the WilTel building. We could finance it at tax  exempt bond rates, and they felt guilty enough about taking the jobs they  gave us a really good price on the building. So, we consolidated five city  facilities into City Hall, moved into an open office environment. Talk  about an employee culture change. That was a very difficult culture  change, but we managed it. We shared the building with other tenants.  That was something new for city employees. But it was great, and then  we built a new ball park.  So what they say when you become mayor is, they say,    You want to get  re-elected, don   t pass any taxes.    We passed the streets package. Largest  investment in the streets in the city   s history.    Don   t build a new  22  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  municipal facility. Don   t build a new performance center or ball park.     We did all those things and I simply chose to not run for re-election. I  felt like I had given back. I had really given up my life. My family was  very patient. They said I had dinners with other people much more often  than I ever saw them and I thought it was a good time to turn the keys  over to a successor. I also believed that I could complete my term  making some hard decisions if I didn   t have to worry about whether  those impacted my re-election. So that   s what I did.  You had a great approval rating.  I did.  Was it a tough decision?  It was a tough decision because I loved the job. I really did love the job,  but I do think you have to know when to step down when it   s right for  you. I had made a lot of decisions, which means I   d made a fair number  of people unhappy. I had stood up to forces in the community that hadn   t  had anyone talk straight to them in the past. That was my style and we  made a difference. We trained a thousand employees in lean processes  through our partnership with CareerTech. Saved, probably twelve  million dollars in annual city funding that we didn   t ever really talk  about. I gave it everything that I had and I thought, it   s time. I   ve  accomplished what I can. A second term would be more about me than  about the job, and I didn   t have any long term aspirations to do anything  else. I like running things and I loved running the city. Once I came to  the decision, I was very much at peace with it.  And you didn   t take a salary as mayor?  I didn   t take a salary. The city was in difficult financial time. I have been  fortunate enough to have made a great investment that gives me  everything that I need and I feel like it was better for that money to be  used    In retrospect, it may have been the wrong decision. Certainly, the  current mayor and I have similar financial situations and he does take a  salary. I don   t know whether some people validate your work by the  salary. I didn   t. I worked as hard as I would have if I   d been getting a  salary. The salary was not the relevant thing for me. I don   t know  whether that was a mistake for me, but I didn   t. Just didn   t feel like it  was the right thing to do. So then I left, finished my term as mayor in  December and happened to have had a Thanksgiving meal with the  governor that year and he said,    I think you should come help me in my  final year. Do what you   ve decided you   re really passionate about and  that   s education.    So I went to lead his team on education and the Race  to the Top applications, but also the new legislation on teacher and  23  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  leader effectiveness in our public school system in Oklahoma.  Well, we   re moving into after your time as mayor. You   re back working  for Governor Henry.  Yes.  Tell me about Race to the Top.  So, Race to the Top was Secretary of Education  Arne  Duncan and  President Obama   s vision for how we would implement best practices  across the nation to close the achievement gap, not only within our  country, but in our country   s education system with other countries.  America has been falling behind in math and science skills and we  needed to do something to change that. Our public education system, as  Colin Powell   s group, America   s Promise, said, was failing too many  children. We are having significant dropout rates in the high school level  and in today   s economy. If you don   t have a high school degree, you   re  basically almost sentenced to prison, I think Maryanne Wright Edelman  in her work and the Cradle to Prison Pipeline would say, particularly if  you   re a minority.  So their idea was how do we encourage the best ideas to come forward?  So that, Oklahoma determined they would compete in the Race to the  Top application. It was me and my former chief of staff in the mayor   s  office who is now the chief of staff for Tulsa Public Schools. We were  the two people writing the grant application. We, by the way, had never  written a grant application before. We did have a lot of great data from  the Department of Education and ultimately had some good consultants  that private industry helped fund for us. And then we did a listening tour  around the state. Talked to parents and teachers and principals. Looked  at data and determined how we could best revamp our education system.  The conclusion that we came to is that we were still living, as many  states were, in a very different time. Oklahoma imprisons more women  per capita than any state in the nation. Forty-eight percent of the babies  born in Oklahoma, as well as in most states, last year were born to single  mothers. We had 83 percent of the kids in Tulsa Public and Oklahoma  City Public Schools live at or below the poverty level. That is not the  way it was when I was a child. Whether the school system appreciated  that or not, those are the students they were going to have to teach. We  needed a different way of training teachers, a different way of  supporting teachers and a different way of making sure the right teachers  were in the right place because otherwise, the achievement gap,  particularly among minorities and non-minorities, was going to continue  to increase.  24  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  So we drafted a Race to the Top application that was not successful. We  simultaneously drafted bipartisan, union supported legislation for  teacher leader effectiveness. That was some of the most aggressive in  the nation. That was passed. We drafted a second Race to the Top  application that was only two slots below being completely funded and  yesterday, I got to see the implementation of our legislative work at  Tulsa Public Schools and talk to teachers who are so excited that they   re  able to identify which teaching practices are helping and which are not.  Based upon not achievement, but on growth of the students controlled  for the environment in which they come to you. So it   s very exciting  work and I think very exciting work for teachers to be able to do the  very best job, which is, by the way, why we know they   re in that  profession.  What is it about education that you feel is so important? You   ve had a  very interesting career, here. What really draws you to education?  If I hadn   t had the opportunity to get my education, I   d be in a very  different place. My husband feels the same about his life. I think that it   s  the base. If you want to have a safe city, educate your citizens. If you  want to have a healthy city, make sure you have an educated citizenry. If  you want to have a population that has a good per capita income and that  contributes to your tax base, you don   t have potholes in your streets,  then have an educated citizenry. Everything goes back to that  foundation. If you fail there, you   re going to be playing catch-up  forever. As the world becomes smaller and smaller, the ability for  students to have a post-high school education is vital. If we don   t get  them out of high school where they can read, compose a letter and have  basic math skills, they won   t have an opportunity for any post-high  school education.  In Tulsa, I certainly credit President Tom McKeon with this, but we did  first discuss the idea on the eleventh world City Hall    We had the  opportunity for every child in Tulsa County to get a two year associates  degree at Tulsa Community College at no cost to them. There   s even a  trust fund to buy their books if they can   t afford it, but we had to get  them out of high school first. So going into these schools all across the  city when I was mayor, realizing the importance of education and  realizing the lack of support that teachers had and information they had  on how to do their job the best and challenging circumstances where  kids were coming to school hungry. Kids were coming to school having  slept in a meth house or a violent situation. Things have to change for  our city, our state, and our country to remain strong and to provide a  future for our kids and grandkids. Education is the base. We mess that  up, everything else is much harder or impossible.  25  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  How do you think the state of Oklahoma is doing?  I think we   re doing better. I worry about budget cuts on education. I do  think that it matters and I know that higher education and public  education encourage that get a significant amount of our budget. I think  that is appropriate. There is work being done to gather data that can truly  show the significance of education and the gaps and where it isn   t  working. Where it isn   t working, we can redirect funds to areas where it  is. I think we   re doing well. I think we   ve got to continue with the  promise of the Oklahoma Higher Learning Access Plan. We   ve  promised these kids OHLAP, we   ve got to do that. That   s important. If  we   re involved in education, we have to continue to make it more  effective, but a well-rounded student is a well-rounded citizen. So we  certainly want to train people and educate them so that they can make an  impact and have a job in the world, but they also need to be educated so  they can have a broad worldview. I think we have to balance those when  we look at funding.  I know this is a little bit close to your heart. Talk to me about the  importance of mentoring.  Well, I think it   s invaluable. We started a program, again, because we  saw how many kids were in poverty, how many kids didn   t have any  exposure to opportunities, so we were losing them in eighth grade.  That   s where the big dropout rate is. So we started a program called  Mayor   s Mentoring to the Max. Got a little funding from a couple of  companies. We trained five hundred mentors to go into high poverty  schools and then we would interview them, do statistics later about the  impact that made, but we would also get anecdotal evidence. The  mentors said it worked for them. The kids had lower absenteeism rates.  The teachers said it made a huge difference in their ability to teach. So  it   s helpful in K-12, but it   s also helpful    And I think it   s an obligation,  certainly an obligation I feel now. I have people call me, send me  Facebook messages every week asking me to meet with them for coffee  to advise them on various issues. These are men and women all at  various stages of life. I take that seriously. I think it   s very important. If  Robert Butkin had not mentored me as to how to be in public service, I  wouldn   t have been on Governor Henry   s staff or ultimately been mayor  of Tulsa. So I think it   s an obligation we all have in a community to  support each other with our life experiences. Anyone can fit the word,  the term mentor, based on how they share their life experiences with  others who ask.  It seems that throughout your career, you   ve always made time,  probably more so now that you have a little extra time, to be very  26  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  involved in the community. You kind of touched upon it as we were  talking and why is it now today such a big part of your life?  I feel very blessed to be where I am. I think it   s important to share your  time, your talent and your treasure with causes that you believe in. I used  to joke that someday our house would be declared a public free speech  space because we had so many events in our home to support causes that  we believed in. That   s how my parents raised me. It   s certainly how I  raised my daughter, who now is the executive director of our family  foundation. I hope it   s for generations to come. It does take a village to  have a healthy prosperous community. I think it   s unsustainable to think  that government can do it all or business can do it all. It takes a wide  variety of people to make a difference and we all have different talents  and different passions and that   s what we need to follow.  We learned the background for our careers in many different places.  Where are some of the places you   ve learned the background for some  of the various things you   ve done?  Certainly being on the debate team caused me to have no fear of public  speaking. My background in writing and journalism    I can sit down at  midnight and write a speech I   m going to give the next morning. I  learned to manage multiple constituencies for the first time when I was  president of the Pi Beta Phi house. It might seem unlikely, but I had  alums and I had students and I had the university. As I became a lawyer,  managing partners, managing clients, expectations    Then as a  corporate executive. So every step of my career has been a building  block to the next. I wish I could say that I planned it that way, that I had  this grand plan that this is where it would lead to, but I didn   t. I have  seized upon opportunities, I will give myself that credit, and followed  paths where I thought I could make a difference. But every experience  has been a building block for me to the next.  Any major stumbling blocks or adversity that you faced along the way?  I think that adversity is what you make of it, so I always looked at it as a  learning experience. I am sorry, for example, not to have my parents  around, but as I look at people my age who are dealing with a lot of  issues with their parents, that   s a burden that I don   t currently have. I  certainly faced the challenge of raising a child, finding babysitters and  schools and all of that. It made me learn how to balance and it now  makes me very appreciative to have a little more time today to  experience my new grandson. Every life has its challenges and there was  a very wise couple who had a daughter who I recruited to work with me  at a law firm. She was amazing. She was from a small town, Walters,  Oklahoma. Went to Cornell, was a Rotary fellow, I think in Ireland. I  27  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  said to them,    Tell me, how did you raise her to be such an amazing  person?    They said,    We did not pave the road for our daughter. We  paved our daughter for the road.    I think adversity paves you for the  road.  All right. Key highlights.  Key highlights. Well, being elected mayor. That   s a moment that I   ll  never forget. Walking through meeting offices, meeting city employees.  Being able now   A lot of days I   ll just drive around downtown by  myself with a big smile on my face and be able to look at the impact that  our team made. Learning the value of education. Learning about how the  education system can make an impact in someone   s life or not, I think is  an important part. Now, learning that I can actually have balance in my  life. Cook dinner occasionally, go to a basketball game and still make a  difference is a good highlight. So every part of my life has provided a  highlight and a lesson for me to learn.  Balance, now?  Balance. Oh, much more so than I   ve ever had. Much more so. (Laughs)  How many hours do you sleep now?  I   ve never required a lot of sleep, so probably six hours max. I just don   t.  It   s how I work. I don   t require a lot of sleep, so it   s kind of nice. It   s  helpful.  I bet it is. You can get a lot done.  Exactly, exactly.  Moving into the Oklahoma Women   s Hall of Fame, what was going  through your mind when you got the call?  Well, I was very excited. I was excited that my daughter had nominated  me. That probably means more to me than anything. But also, I have  admired so many women who are in the Hall of Fame, but I think as an  institution, it   s very important because it does highlight the impact that  women have made from very different paths and in many very different  ways. I think that   s important, not just as role models for women, but  role models for citizens across our community. We are at a time when it  still is very important that we highlight the contributions that women  have made to the state of Oklahoma.  Do you remember who introduced you at the ceremony?  28  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  My daughter.  And what was going through your mind when you heard her speak such  nice things about you?  Well it   s the second time she   s introduced me. The first time, I was a  Tulsa Press Headliner with David Boren. Neither of those times, by the  way, has she allowed me to read her speech in advance. So my first  thought was that I had to kind of move myself out of the moment so I  didn   t start crying while she was introducing me. I wouldn   t want to be  up there and be inappropriate. But she knows me better, really, than  anyone. She knows my faults and she knows my passion. To have the  respect and love and support of your family    My family was all there.  Have your daughter say wonderful things, but also to look at her and see  the amazing young woman that she   s become and the impact that she is  already making in the world I think is the best reflection.  It was moving, I was in the audience and she did a really great job.  She   s a really good speaker. I really hesitate    In fact, David Boren said  after he spoke after her at the Tulsa Press Headliners, he goes,    There  aren   t many people that I don   t like to speak after, but I think Elizabeth  might be one of them.     She mentioned in her speech that John Steinbeck got it wrong, and how  so? I guess you like to say that a lot?  I do, so people think that the story of The Grapes of Wrath is about a  poor state that was uneducated and shouldn   t be admired. But in fact,  when John Steinbeck really wrote about these characters, the Joads, he  said that if America had a national character    In fact, he thought these  people that were beginning to be called Okies would represent that  character because they could face all adversity and conquer it. They had  a spirit, a sense of community to support each other against all odds. So,  to me, you can read The Grapes of Wrath with that common analysis  that it   s about a poor state, people that wanted to find a better life, but I  choose to read it the way that I believe his notes say that he wrote it,  which is really about an amazing spirit of people and a spirit that I  believe still exists in the state of Oklahoma. Whether it was the Dust  Bowl or the oil crisis or the Oklahoma City bombing or tornadoes or ice  storms, we rise as a community to the occasion and we don   t whine. We  get the job done. We do it, I think, with grace and humility. I   m very  proud to say I   m from Oklahoma. I never miss an opportunity to tell  people this is the state that I call home, that I have lived in most of my  life and the state that I choose for the rest of my life to stay in and make  29  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  an impact.  You joined a very diverse group of women in the Oklahoma Women   s  Hall of Fame. Women from all walks of life, all professions. What does  this type of honor mean to you?  It   s very humbling to be on a stage with the women that are in the Hall  of Fame. To be in that group and to think that forever in history as  women who are thinking about what to do with their lives will be able to  see the impact that we as a group have made on this state. So it   s  humbling to think that you are a part of history that hopefully will have  an impact on other people   s lives in Oklahoma, long term. Especially  with the group that has been inducted into the women   s Hall of Fame.  You   re very involved, you   ve worked hard, you mentor lots of people.  How do you feel that people now look at you as that role model?  I think it   s interesting. I   m amazed at how much I   m recognized, usually  by my voice now, because I   ve kind of changed my look a little bit. Of  course, with Facebook, people can reach out to you. Much to my  family   s chagrin, I do have a Facebook page. So I   m gratified that  people look at me as a role model. I hope that I can impart some help to  them, both from the mistakes that I made as well as the successes that I  had. Because I certainly made my share of mistakes and I think that   s  the most important thing a mentor or a role model can do is to say,    It  wasn   t a perfect road and I was not perfect in the role, but I did what I  could in the best way that I could, but I certainly made mistakes. Expect  to make them and accept them. Don   t dwell on them, learn from them  and move on.    So if people see me as a role model and seek my advice,  that   s what I really hope. That   s the role model I hope to serve for them.  Advice for Oklahomans. What would you tell your fellow Oklahomans?  Be proud of this great state that you   re from. More ecosystems than any  state other than California and Alaska. Great heritage and the energy  industry, wonderful dedication to education and we should be very  proud of the state that we live in and take every opportunity to tell others  about this great state.  Advice for people who aspire to run a city or become a lawyer?  Study hard, work hard. You always have to work hard, but remember  your values and your compass. Know that those people you debated in  junior high will still be people you work with and know when you   re in  your fifties. Play hard, but be nice.  30  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  We touched a little bit on your family throughout the interview. Could  you talk a little bit about the role of your family in your life, now?  Sure. Well, certainly my husband and my daughter and my step-daughter  and my grandkids, who range in age from five months to  seventeen, are great supporters. The ones that were old enough to walk  when I campaigned all knocked doors for me and my husband did my  laundry, made sure I had food to eat and they served as my sounding  board. Certainly my oldest sister who is in Dallas, and my other sister  and brother in Oklahoma City, share very different political views. I   m  the only Democrat in my family, they   re all Republicans. They always  support me and are very proud of me and my brother still, even though  he still torments me as he did when I was a child, we have great political  arguments, if anyone criticizes me, he is the first to defend me.  My family has played a very important part and I don   t know how you  could ever take on the kinds of roles that I have been blessed to take on  without incredible support and encouragement from your family. And  tolerance because there was a time when I simply didn   t have much  energy left for them and they stuck with me as about a handful of friends  did, as well. Encouraged me and propped me up when I thought that I  couldn   t go any longer. That kind of a network, whether they are blood  relatives or they are friends that are your family, I think are vital.  Especially when you   re in a position that is very public, a lot of media  coverage, internet coverage. I frighteningly went to YouTube the other  day and looked at YouTube videos of myself and it   s frightening to see  how many there are of me. There were days where I had to see myself  on TV so much that it was great to be able to come home to my family  and my dogs who cared about me regardless of what I said, did or  looked like.  Is there anybody you would like to make mention of that have really  helped play an important role in your life?  Well, certainly my husband Bill Lobeck, my daughter Elizabeth Ellison,  step-daughter Millie Peligrini. Barbara Barry and the late Guy Barry, are  the family that put me through college from Sapulpa. I can   t imagine  how I    Well, I wouldn   t be where I was today without their support  and my sisters and brother. I have a handful of friends that came from  Oklahoma City that had never been involved in a campaign before that  campaigned in some areas that they didn   t know in Tulsa and knocked  on doors that they didn   t know what was going to be on the other side,  and they saw a lot of interesting things. So there is a whole village of  people that allowed me to be the public person and make the public  contributions that I made.  31  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  Nykolaiszyn  Taylor  What does Oklahoma mean to you?  It is really my family. It   s my base, my foundation, it is   as I said, I   ve  lived in New York, Dallas, Minnesota, Florida, Washington, DC, but  Oklahoma is home. It is where my values come from, it is the place that  I most want to see continue on a positive force and course.  Up next on the agenda?  Well, I   m playing with this grandbaby and I   m traveling a lot. My  husband has a couple of trips, places he   d like to see and I   m trying to  learn Spanish. I   ve taken a lot of it, but it   s rusty, so I   m trying to learn a  language. I don   t really know. In my life, opportunities, doors have  opened and you always have the choice whether to walk through them or  not, and I   ve chosen to walk through some great doors that have been  wonderful experiences and I   m confident there will be another one that  will happen in the future. But I have no idea what it will be.  It   s not going to be retirement?  No, I   m not ready to retire. I have decided that. I enjoy being active. I  am very much    My energy is by interacting with other people, so I  have to be at a high energy, high people touch environment. We   ll see.  When we look back, when history is written about you, what would you  like for it to say?  I hope that it says that she was generous with her time and talent and her  treasure, and she did things that she had a real passion about, and made  an impact with a team on people   s lives.  I know we just kind of skimmed the surface on so many different things,  but is there anything else you   d like to add that we haven   t spoken about  today?  No, I think we have done a great job. Thank you very much. I think  we   ve been through a lot of great memories and a lot of my fifty-six  years of life, so I enjoyed it, thank you.  Well, thank you so much for adding your voice to our project.  Absolutely. Thank you  -------  -------  
