 Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University  Library. Today is Friday, July 20th, 2007 and I   m in Oklahoma City,  Oklahoma, interviewing Dr. Joe Anna Hibler. This interview is being  conducted as part of Inductees of the Oklahoma Women   s Hall of Fame  Oral History Project. Dr. Hibler was inducted into the Oklahoma  Women   s Hall of Fame in 2007. She served as the first appointed woman  president of Southwestern Oklahoma State University from 1990 to  2001, and became only the second woman in state history to lead an  institution of higher education. Thank you for joining us today, Dr.  Hibler.  My pleasure.  Let   s begin by learning a little more about you. Could you start with  where you grew up and give a little background on your early life?  I was born in Shattuck, Oklahoma which is in Ellis County. My dad was  teaching in the Arnett public schools. I was born in May but in August,  my parents moved to Leedey, Oklahoma which is in western Oklahoma.  And that   s basically where I grew up. However, when I was four years  old my dad was not eligible to enter the service during the war and they  hired him to be superintendent at Forgan, Oklahoma, which is in the  Panhandle. And that   s where I actually started to school   in first and  second grade.  Both my parents were public school teachers and they decided that they  didn   t want to teach. My Dad had always worked for the Coca-Cola  company in the summer at Perryton, Texas where my mom grew up.  And so, for one year we lived in Perryton. I went to the third grade and  in the spring I can remember my dad coming in and saying,    Leedey  schools have called us again, what do you think?    And mother said,     Let   s go.    So we moved back to Leedey, and I was in the fourth grade.  5  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  That   s where I actually grew up and graduated from high school.  Okay. While you were going to school what were some of your favorite  subjects?  I just liked school. I liked English because of Miss Andrews. She would  read us wonderful stories when we were doing the literature part. I liked  math. I liked the business courses   got typing and shorthand and book  keeping.  Is that where you started to develop your love for business?  Yes, with Mrs. Quattlebaum as my teacher.  Now outside of school what did you like to do for fun?  Oh, I was a tomboy. I loved to play basketball and softball and you  know, growing up in a small town   you played all kinds of outdoor  games with all the kids in town. I loved to read. I was perfectly happy to  sit on the front porch with a book.  Now, did your parents ever teach at some of the schools you attended?  They taught at all of the schools that I attended. (Laughs) I went to  school with my parents every day.  Did that pose any problems for you?  Well, I thought it did once in a while because my dad was always kind  of the school disciplinarian and of course my mom expected me to  behave like I was supposed to. At the time, I may have thought it  cramped me a little bit but, as I look back on it, it was really a good  experience.  Now, at that time growing up, you   re sitting on the porch reading, out  playing, in school studying hard   what did you want to be when you  grew up?  I had no idea. The only thing I knew I did not want to do was be a  teacher, because both of my parents were teachers. Is that not usually the  case? So I really didn   t know. And in our house, there was no question  that I was going to go to college. It was just a matter of where I was  going to go.  When I graduated from high school I was madly in love. So I thought  I   ll go to Southwestern. I had a scholarship offer, and take what was  6  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  called the short course. It was a forty hour business-secretarial course,  and I thought that   s what I   d do, and then I   d probably get married and  live happily ever after. Well, I got to college and found so many  wonderful things I had to explore. I did do the short course, but decided  that I wanted to stay in school because I was involved in student senate.  I was involved in a lot of things. And at that time, there were really kind  of two things that women did   you were either a teacher or a nurse, and  I certainly could not have been a nurse. So I decided I could go through  the business education program and was not going to teach but I would  have dual use of my degree. I could go into business in some capacity  and if I ever thought I wanted to teach, I could.  How many men were in those business classes, business education  classes?  Very few, very few at that time.  When you were growing up, who were some of your role models that you  looked up to?  Well, certainly my parents. My mother was a very strong but quiet  woman   very capable. When she was not teaching she ran a White   s  auto store that my folks owned for a while. Certainly my dad, who I was  very close to, he coached girls basketball. And, I jokingly say,    Yes I  played because I wanted to stay at home,    but that was a close  relationship. We had a female school principal, Robena Andrews. I  thought that everybody had a female school principal. She lived next  door to us   good friends with my folks. So, in a very quiet way, she  also, I think, influenced me. We had a minister at the Methodist church,  Gilbert Brothers, who took an interest in me and encouraged me in some  leadership activities in the MYF  Methodist Youth Fellowship . When  you grow up in a small town back in the 40   s and 50   s, everybody  thought it was their responsibility to help you grow up and look after  you. And that was a blessing, really. So those people, I think, probably  influenced me as much as anybody.  Are you an only child or do you have siblings?  I   m an only child, except when I was fifteen   we took a foster child into  our home and she was five at the time. She finished growing up with us  and went to Southwestern through the short course and did get married.  How important, on a whole, is family in your life?  Oh, very important. I was so fortunate to have the parents that I had and  to have the home environment that I had   very nurturing and was  7  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  always encouraged to do whatever I wanted to try to do. But we kind of  had one unwritten law. If you started something, you didn   t stop it   you  finished. And, if it was a success then you quietly celebrated your  triumph. But, if it was not a success, then you talked about it and you  learned from it.  After you graduated from Southwestern, what did you end up doing?  Well, I went summers and winters, so I finished my undergraduate work  in three years. I was barely 21 years old. Again my parents and a couple  of my professors, I think, knew I was not old enough to be in the  classroom, mature enough I guess I should say. They encouraged me to  apply for a graduate assistantship at OSU  Oklahoma State University .  At that time, OSU had a very strong business education program. So, I  applied for a graduate assistantship and spent the next year and summer  at OSU completing my master   s in business education.  Do you have any fond memories of Stillwater you   d like to share with  us?  Oh, that was a good year   good professors. I had such a good  experience and at that time, I don   t know what it is now but I taught a  class each semester. So that was good experience for me. I met one of  my long time friends, Betty Fry   she was also in business ed. She was  from Arkansas. We remain friends today but I guess it was the  opportunity. I cannot stress what good instruction I had at that time and  what a good opportunity to develop a professional relationship with  faculty members. Lloyd Garrison in particular was a real favorite of  mine and Gordon Culver. Those were names that people who went to  school at the time like I did, will certainly remember.  Do you remember what building you taught your class in?  Yes, the business building   Morill Hall.  And do you remember what it looked like inside?  Oh gosh, it looked like every other building (Laughs) on a college  campus. But I lived in North  Murray  Hall. That was the graduate dorm  at that time, I don   t know if it still is. That was another wonderful  experience for me because the floor that I lived on   Betty Fry, as I  mentioned, she lived across the hall from me and we were the only two  US citizens living on that floor. It just worked that way and for a little  gal from a little town in western Oklahoma, it was a wonderful learning  experience for me. The ladies from Pakistan and England and   all over  the world. The ladies from Pakistan were, in particular, good for Betty  8  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  and me. We both were good typists and they hired us all year to type  their papers so we had a good built in business.  See? It   s that business mode going    (Laughs)  That business mode going    (Laughs)     you were focused   (Laughs) No we just were hungry graduate students.  Did you, at that point, think you belonged in the classroom, or were you  leaning towards a more administrative role at that time?  No, I had really fallen in love with the classroom when I did my student  teaching in the Cordell High School back when I was working on my  bachelor   s degree. I had decided then that teaching was what I wanted to  do.  What did your parents think about that?  Oh, you know, I think they knew all along, but they were smart enough  not to say anything.  After OSU what did you go on and do?  I had my first teaching job at Altus High School in Altus, Oklahoma.  And at that time, the junior college was incorporated in the high school  so the business courses were offered to both the high school students and  the junior college students. During the day I   in my full-time job was  really with Altus high school, but I always taught adjunct classes with  the junior college, usually out on the Air Force base. And I was there  for four years and loved it.  And where did you move on after that?  Well, in 1965 I had applied to teach in the Air Force schools overseas. I  kind of had wanderlust in my heart. And Dr. Ward, who was the  chairman of the business division at Southwestern, called me. He had  been my academic advisor and offered me a job to teach at  Southwestern. That was back before you had to apply and all. I really  struggled in deciding what I was gonna do because I had been accepted  by the Air Force, but they couldn   t tell me where I would go and I would  go for three years. As I said, I struggled but I finally decided that I  would go back to my alma mater and teach business.  9  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  How did that feel, returning back home where you got that bachelor   s  degree? What was going through your mind?  Well, I walked in and there were all my professors that all of a sudden  were my colleagues. It could have been very awkward but it was not.  They were very accepting and I tried very hard not to, in any way, rub  them the wrong way as a returning student, so to speak. And they were  most kind and helpful. Interesting enough, I shared an office with the  one faculty member that I had not (Laughs) gotten along with when I  was a student, and you know as maturity helps, I ended up loving that  lady.  What classes did you teach?  Oh, let   s see   I taught typewriting, I taught business communications  and once in a while would teach shorthand. I was not a good shorthand  teacher   for one thing I   m left handed. Part of the learning process is in  a visual learning mode, and so my left hand was awkward and backward  for most of the students. I was trying to think what else. Oh, I taught  what was called secretarial training and I taught an office machines  course.  After your time in the classroom at Southwestern where did you move on  next?  Well, I spent all of my career at Southwestern. I did take a two year  sabbatical from    69 to    71. I was at the University of Oklahoma,  working on my doctorate. And, while I was there I was hired as what  they call a special instructor in the College of Business Administration.  But when I returned from my sabbatical, I returned to the classroom. I  also served as chair of the Office Administration and Business  Education department. That was really my first administrative  experience and it was a dual appointment, with teaching responsibility.  What prompted you to go and get your Ed.D.?  At that time, regional schools like Southwestern were in a mode that  they were encouraging their faculty to go and study and receive a  doctorate and there was a pay increase, a healthy pay increase. I think at  that time it was  3,000 and in the    70s that was quite a bit of money.  And, I guess I was smart enough to know that I was young enough and if  I was going to stay in higher education for a career, then I needed my  doctorate. You know, we jokingly say that it was our union card, but in a  sense it is.  So now you have some teaching responsibility and you have some  10  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  administrative functions, what did you like more?  The classroom. Very honestly, that   s the best job there is. I enjoyed the  administrative responsibilities. I don   t really realize it, but I guess I am  one of those people that kind of likes to be in control and run things.  Although it was not just something that was glaringly obvious to me.  But, I didn   t mind the responsibility. I kind of enjoyed being in a  position where I knew what was going on.  Did, at that time, Southwestern have many women in administrative  roles?  No, none.  Did you have any challenges as you started to take on these new  responsibilities?  I can honestly say I didn   t. People were very professional. They were  very good about recognizing if you did a good job. Either that or I was  so dumb not to be able to recognize it, but I never did really feel any  adversity or any attempt to throttle me in any way. I was always  encouraged by the Dean or the Vice-President or the President.  At what point did you move out of the classroom, and totally into an  administrative role?  Interestingly enough, I never did leave the classroom. I even taught a  class as the president.  Wow.  But my really full time administrative responsibility is when I was  promoted to serve as Dean of the School of Business. That was my  fulltime job. During that time, I developed a class for our graduating  seniors that we called professional development. It was a class on where  do you find a job, how do you get a job, and how do you keep a job, and  how do you live on what you   re earning.  Can you describe some of the most important places, where you learned  the background for your career in education?  Gosh, I think that just came with each job and the various opportunities  that I was given. I was one of these that would volunteer for a lot of  things just simply because I was interested. Sometimes I was guilted into  doing something that would turn out to be a good experience. And  sometimes, just working with people who have good leadership skills     11  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  you just learn from them, you pattern after them.  Can you go into a few key moments in your career that you consider  major highlights for you?  Well, certainly, when I was appointed president. That was certainly a  highlight, because at that time I was serving as Vice-President for  Academic Affairs, which by the way is probably the toughest job I had  in all of the different jobs I had. And I was very content doing that but  Dr. Leonard Campbell was president of Southwestern at that time. He  announced his retirement and he really is the one who encouraged me  strongly to apply for the president   s job. I really was not expecting to get  the appointment just simply because there had not been a woman  president and so many times   and I   m generalizing   but a Board of  Regents, their thinking is that we should bring someone in new, that if  there   s someone on campus, it   s going to be status quo. I remember  when I had my interview, that was the one thing I really tried to stress,  that if I was hired it was not going to be status quo, that there were some  things I wanted to try to do. So certainly that was a highlight when that  call came that morning and Regent Wynn asked me if I would accept it,  if it was offered. And, having the opportunity to call my mom and tell  her   my dad had passed away earlier.  While I was working as president, there were two or three things that  were really highlights in my career. One is we took the Southwestern  Foundation which basically was in name only, in case somebody came  by and wanted to make a contribution, we had around  800,000. When I  retired, there was  7 million there. So, I felt very good about that. We  did two capital campaigns and that had never been done at  Southwestern. And, we built a lot of alumni friends. We brought a lot of  alumni back to campus, and I feel good about that. Southwestern is  known for its School of Pharmacy and we have tried for nearly twenty  years to have a doctorate of pharmacy approved. We were edging  toward that time when the national licensing board was going to say,    If  you don   t have a doctorate, you can   t be licensed.    So it was critical that  Southwestern get that program approved, and we did. And that was  certainly a highlight, because that   s been the icing on the cake at  Southwestern   the School of Pharmacy. So there were so many things.  We were leaders in the   well I   m losing the term, but with our Sayre  campus and Weatherford campus, with interactive video there, let me  get that out. The day we opened the broadcast was wonderful.  That   s very cutting edge.  It was at the time but those are the kind of things that I think a university  president has to have in his or her life to kind of offset the everyday     12  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  not bad, but less than stimulating things going on.  You became the first woman in a fifty-five year span   that   s a huge  span   to serve as the president of a university in Oklahoma. Its 2007  now and women in Oklahoma now lead four out of twenty-five public  universities.  I know, isn   t that exciting?  Can you describe your feelings on this issue? Do you feel that there are  more opportunities now for women to crack that barrier in leading  colleges and universities serving as president?  Yes, I think there are more opportunities. Sadly however, I don   t see that  many women in positions where perhaps they can move into those  presidential positions because you have to have some background, you  have to have some credentials. I don   t think a woman has as near the  chance in Oklahoma of say, coming out of the private sector and just  being appointed a president, as a man does and has been. I think women  still have to kind of go through the steps, but I do think there are more  opportunities. I think it   s becoming a pretty normal thing to do   to have  women in those positions. With four of them, I just think it   s wonderful.  And, interestingly enough, you mentioned that fifty-five years. My  appointment was made in the Kate Zaneis conference room at  Southeastern, and that was the first woman to serve as a president in  Oklahoma.  Wow, what an honor that is.  I know, isn   t that interesting? Good history there.  Oh, yes. You mentioned earlier that you thought that having that Vice-  President of Academic Affairs job had a lot of challenges. Maybe some  more so than being president     Yes.  What were some of the challenges you encountered?  Well, as is most of the administrative jobs on a university campus,  you   re dealing with personnel matters. But that particular position,  you   re really in the middle. You   re answering to the president. So I  probably had less authority as Vice-President of Academic Affairs then I  did as Dean of the School of Business because I was working very  closely with the president. Also you   re dealing with faculty issues and  academic programs, which are the heart of your university. If your  13  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  academic programs are strong then they   re constantly changing and  whether its accreditation matters or whether you   re trying to hire quality  faculty or whether you   re trying to determine tenure and promotion  recognition. Those are just tough issues, in my estimation.  What is your advice for a woman who is involved in higher education  administration   what steps should women take if they aspire to be a  university president?  I think the more exposure that you can get to different people and  different situations will make you a stronger candidate. For example, as  the university president, you have to have some fund-raising experience,  you need to have academic experience, you need to be able to work with  the community, you need to recognize that students are the heart and  soul of that campus, and you need to realize that you are responsible for  the lives and livelihood of a lot of people. And I think you can do a  better job if you have taken advantage of all the different opportunities  that come along   you serve on the different committees, you make sure  that you are active in your community   so you get to know people, you  get to know the situations. I think that   s critical.  When you were notified that you were going to be inducted into the  Oklahoma Women   s Hall of Fame, tell me what was going through your  mind at that time?  Well, of course, I was very honored when the call came (Laughs) but I  also thought,    Oh my gosh, I   ve been retired six years. I   m not really  doing much that   s worthwhile.    But then, you know, vanity took over  and I quickly thought,    Gosh, this is gonna be nice   that some of the  things that I worked hard for, will be recognized.     What does this type of honor mean to you?  Well, it means a whole lot because I   m biased. I think women are many  times better judges and tougher judges of one   s accomplishments and  one   s contributions. And this organization has prestige with it and so it  was a very nice honor to be recognized by this particular group.  How do you feel now that women in both the classroom as teachers, and  as administrators are looking at you as that role model?  Well, you know, I   m humble about the opportunities that I   ve had. But,  if I   m realistic, I do know that I   ve made a little bit of difference and my  successes have allowed, I think, other women to maybe have some  opportunities, that those doors might not have opened as easily as they  have opened. And I don   t mean that in a bragging way. I just think we  14  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  all know if you see a success, it makes it a little easier for the next  person that comes along.  Can you tell me something about the people you would like to thank that  helped play an important role in your life?  Oh, my. Well, I would start with my parents, always, because they were  such good role models and were awfully good about saying no, when no  needed to be said, although at the time I didn   t appreciate it. You know,  interestingly enough, most of the people had been men. For example, I  probably would not have gone on to OSU to work on my master   s at the  time I did if it had not been for Dr. Ward and Mr. Crouch at  Southwestern. When I got to OSU, as I mentioned, Lloyd Garrison and  Gordon Culver were very encouraging to me and I had an opportunity  years later to continue working with them in the National Business  Education Association. When I got to OU  University of Oklahoma ,  Gerald Porter was very influential, and he was a national figure in  business education. Back on the Southwestern campus, I cannot stress  enough the help that President Leonard Campbell was to me as a role  model and also as a mentor. I don   t mean to discount  women , but just  because the positions that I was in, there weren   t other women in them,  it really was men that pretty much encouraged and promoted my career.  If you could give any piece of advice to fellow Oklahomans, what would  you tell them?  I would tell them to be proud of who they are and to embrace what I  think is the prairie spirit in Oklahoma. And to look at the good things  that we   ve got in the state. It doesn   t mean we don   t have things that  need to be repaired and fixed and promoted. But as an Oklahoman, I   m  proud of who I am and where I am.  What does Oklahoma mean to you?  Home. Friendly people. Hard working people. Kind of a   well as I said  kind of a prairie spirit. And a little bit of a wild spirit.  When history is written about you, what would you like for it to say?  Oh my. I guess that she was honest, she was fair, she had a sense of  humor   but I plan to take that with me.  Well, it is 2007, what are you currently working on and what   s next on  the agenda for you?  Well, I do a lot of nothing as a retiree, but I am very involved with the  15  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Women   s Foundation of Oklahoma, which is a relatively new endeavor  in our state. We   re working to set up a million dollar endowment. Our  mission is to help women become economically self-sufficient and to  help girls in our state have a brighter future. I   m also involved with the  Thomas P. Stafford Air and Space Museum in Weatherford, serving on  their advisory board and helping as a volunteer. I work as a board  member on the Oklahoma United Methodist Foundation. I have the last  five years volunteered with the early bird program out at Burcham  Elementary School. I go out at 7:30 and read with a first grader. So,  those are the kind of things that I still do so that I feel a little bit  worthwhile and have some responsibilities. I like to travel. I like to  spend time with cousins that I spent a lot of time with as a child, and  we   ve kind of reconnected with all of us retiring and having some free  time. And as I said, if I can sit on the back porch with a good book,  that   s still fun to me.  You sound like a busy retiree  (Laughs)  Well, you know people will ask this and say,    Oh I bet you   re busier  than you were when you were working,    No  (Laughs) As a university  president, you stay awfully busy   so this seems like leisure time to me.  You   re also currently serving with the Oklahoma Board of Regents?  Yes, the Regional University System of Oklahoma, serving as a regent  for the six original regional schools.  And how has that experience been?  It   s really a good experience, an interesting experience. I have to be  careful and realize I   m wearing a regent   s hat and not a president   s hat.  But I find it very interesting to be on that side of the table. And I must  say, the other eight people who serve on that board are laypeople and  very conscientious about their responsibilities.  I was going to ask you if you missed being in the classroom, but I see  you   ve still involved?  At least once a semester, sometimes twice a semester. Someone at  Southwestern is kind enough to ask me to come up and teach a class for  them for a day or two days   I love it. That   s still the best place to be.  What are some of your favorite topics you like to discuss nowadays in  the classroom?  Well, of course most of the time its on leadership and administration, but  and my friends will laugh at this   the last couple of semesters, I   ve  16  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  taught a class on etiquette to the business students. For example, the  leadership class was getting ready to have dinner at the governor   s  mansion and so the teacher, who was one of my former students, she  said,    You   ve gone to more banquets than anybody I know.    And it   s  been fun. I had to get my Emily Post book out, but gosh, I guess I   m so  desperate, if somebody calls me to teach a class, I   ll teach it. (Laughs)  How has business education changed over the years?  Oh, big time. So much of it is tied to technology now. Although, when I  finished my doctorate, two of the areas that I taught in that were new to  me were personnel management and office management   those, the  basic concept has stayed the same. But technology, the computer has just  incorporated into every aspect. Shorthand is no longer taught.  Accounting is computerized. You still have to have the concepts, but its  changed big time. I couldn   t teach a business course today. I would have  to really go back and restudy and retrain.  Do you still have a typewriter?  I do  I have a computer, but I did not give up my IBM Selectric. I used it  yesterday to fill out the form you sent me.  (Laughs) That   s great.  (Laughs)  I was wondering, because, you know, we don   t even consider typewriters  anymore in our daily business life. So     No, not at all. And one of the courses that I taught too was methods of  typewriting. In other words, teaching teachers how to teach typewriting.  Well it   s keyboarding now, so see   I   d even have to get the new label in  my mindset.  What characteristics does a good leader have?  Well I think you first and foremost have to be honest with yourself and  with other people. I think you have to be willing to listen and consider  everything that   s said to you. Doesn   t mean that you agree, but you  listen and you consider. I think you have to know that most of what you  are going to accomplish in some fashion is going to be a compromise. I  think it helps if you like people, if you enjoy seeing things happen, if  you   re willing to work hard. Those are the things that I think will get  you the furthest, for the longest time as a leader.  17  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Hibler  Nykolaiszyn  Well, now I can see why you   ve taught so many leadership classes.  (Laughs)  Well, thanks. It   s fun, it really is you know. If you   re just living your life  and going about your daily activities   I don   t think you   re really  conscious about the effect you may have on somebody or the  opportunities that you   ve had. I think a busy person is usually so busy  that you don   t take time to really step back and kind of celebrate the  things that have happened that are good and productive. It   s just there,  you do it, and tomorrow is another day with some more challenges or  opportunities.  After all you   ve accomplished and pioneering several roles in higher  education, how do you measure success?  I measure success if when I get up in the morning, I look in the mirror  and I   m okay with what I see. And when it   s time to go to bed at night, I  sleep like a baby. Those are probably the two best measuring sticks I  have. I can look back and I can recognize accomplishments but I think  I   m not successful if I don   t feel right within myself.  I just have one more question. Do you have anything I haven   t covered  today that you   d like to add at this time?  Thank you. I really don   t. I appreciate the opportunity to visit with you  and I certainly appreciate the recognition that the Women   s Commission  has given me. If there   s anything that I   ve done that somebody can learn  from, success or failures, they   re welcome to give it a whirl.  Well thank you very much for sharing your story with us today.  -------  -------  
