 Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University  Library. Today is Monday, February 25, 2008, and I am in Oklahoma  City, Oklahoma interviewing Dr. Kay Goebel.  That   s right.  This interview is being conducted as part of the Inductees of the  Oklahoma Women   s Hall of Fame oral history project. Dr. Goebel was  inducted into the Oklahoma Women   s Hall of Fame in 1997. For more  than 35 years, she has served as a counseling psychologist in Oklahoma  City. Thank you for joining us today.  Thank you.  Let   s begin by learning a little more about you. Could you tell us a little  bit about where you grew up and your early life?  I grew up in northeastern Montana. When I was born, my parents lived  on a wheat and cattle ranch and so I, very early, developed a love for  horseback riding. My mother and father, and then later younger brother,  through my grade school years and high school years, rode horseback,  skied, and had a very active life. Then when I was 11, we moved near  Boise, Idaho where my mother   s people had grown up. My grandfather   s  people had come over from Denmark and homesteaded in Montana, and  my mother   s people had come from England and homesteaded in Idaho.  So we had deep roots in both areas.  I went to a very small school. My graduating class from high school had  17 in it and then I went to a junior college in Boise which later became  Boise State University. OU  University of Oklahoma  remembers them  very well (Laughs) from a year ago at the bowl game. I went on and got  my first degree from Oregon State. When I married my husband in 1951,  he was in the oil business and we   ve moved many, many places. During  5  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  the first seven years of our marriage we had five children and ended up  coming down south in the middle 1950s. Then in 1967 we moved to  Oklahoma City and we   ve lived here ever since. So that   s kind of the  geographic journey of my life.  Well back on the farm, (Laughter) did you have a specific role, a specific  duty you had to do?  Oh, you were expected to help out. I was born in 1929 so it was during  the Depression and it was a very difficult time. I remember my parents  working very hard and I was expected to help around the house and do  the chores and feed the chickens and feed the calves and those kinds of  things. Mainly I was a helper, and I believe in that philosophy of  children helping. I carried that on with my own. (Laughs)  Now tell me a little bit about the schools you attended growing up. Were  they large schools?  No, they weren   t. The first school that I went to the first five and a half  years   I moved the middle of my sixth grade   was a school that had  one room for each grade. It was in Fairview, Montana. Then when we  moved to Boise. It was a little larger school and there were probably two  classes to each grade. Then my seventh grade year, it was very  interesting. We were literally in a two-room schoolhouse. The male  teacher taught grades five through eight, and the wife taught one through  four. I would get through with my schoolwork and I   d tend to talk to  others and pester people, so this school teacher was very wise. Every  week he   d go into the library in a local town and he   d bring home books.  So I read all the classics   Dickens and all the women   s books   Jane  Austen books, all those things. So, if I   d finish my schoolwork, then I  got to read a book and I wrote a book report. I read 72 books that year. I  thought that was so creative of him to find something for me to do that  was so enriching to me. I loved to read, and so he knew that about me. I  got a good education and then I wasn   t bothering other people. (Laughs)  When I was in junior high, the next year, we moved to a little town,  Morsing, Idaho. I graduated from that school. It is a town of about 900  people so it was, again, a small school. There are certain advantages to  small schools. You can do anything you want to do. If you want to be an  athlete, you can, and be on the school paper and be in school plays and  so on. So it was a very enjoyable experience.  When you were in high school what activities were you involved in?  Everything. (Laughs) I was editor of the paper. I was in the school plays.  I played some basketball. I wasn   t any star of any kind in sports. I did  ride horseback a lot, and any activity that was around, I would be in it. It  6  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  was quite a change to go to college. I always loved school. I thought  school was fun. When I went to college, it was a whole brand new world  of all kinds of interesting classes and interesting professors. It was a very  enjoyable experience for me.  Was education very important in your family?  Extremely. My mother had gone to college, in fact was close to a  master   s degree in math. She had been a school teacher before she  married and then when my brother and I were older and were going to  college, she went back to teaching school. As long as I could remember,  I knew I was going to college and get a degree, which was fine with me.  I mean that was an absolute. There wasn   t even any question about that  one. (Laughs)  When you were younger what did you think you would grow up to be?  Well, I was certainly of the era when women expected to grow up and  have a family, and that   s what I wanted to do. When I went to Oregon  State, my degree at that point was Foods and Nutrition because I wanted  to be married, and I had started dating a boy that I later did marry. When  we were 14, we went to the same high school together. Then the last two  years of college, he went to Colorado State and I went to Oregon State,  but I   d never, ever thought that I would have a profession at all. That  didn   t even enter my mind. And most of our peers were having children  and having four or five kids. The true    50s era was the environment at  the time. So it   s quite a shock (Laughs) to find out that here I am with a  PhD and I   ve had a career for 35 years. This isn   t what I thought I   d do.  Was college different back then than you think it is now?  Oh, I don   t know that it   s all that different. It was really interesting.  Luckily, I   d done very well in school. School was easy, and I would  always take 19, 20, 22 hours just because I liked it. And when we came  here in 1967   of course we had these five kids, the youngest was in the  second grade and the oldest in the ninth   and so college was looming,  which meant we   d have two or three in college at the same time. Harry  and I had talked about it and I thought,    Well I really needed to do  something,    and I wanted to work at that point. I   d done all the volunteer  stuff and everything. I thought,    Well, let   s see what I can do.    I really  didn   t have any clear idea, but I thought,    Well, with all these children,  maybe some counseling training would be helpful.    So I found out very  quickly that to be a school counselor, you had to have a teacher   s  certificate. I went down to Oklahoma City University and found out they  had a program where you can earn a master   s in teaching.  7  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Let   s see, I moved here in March so I went summer, fall, spring, summer  and got my master   s degree and my teaching certificate and then I got a  job teaching at the school where my youngest son was going, quite close  to our house. But I already knew that I didn   t want to stop there, and so I  went down to OU and found out they had a PhD program. To go back  again, more directly to answer your question,    Is school much different,     I really was wondering after being out of college for 15 years, even  though I   d always done well, I thought,    Oh my gosh. The kids today  are so smart, and oh, dear, dear.    Well, it didn   t take me very long to  figure out    piece of cake.    (Laughs) I had 15 years    experience. Yes,  they   re bright but there   s nothing that beats experience and living life  and moving to all parts of the United States and having five kids.  I think there   s a lot of pressure on kids now to succeed, and maybe more  so. In my experience when I went down to OU in the PhD program, the  kids would kind of blanch when they   d see an older woman come in  because they knew she   d set the curve. (Laughs) Those women know  what to do. In college they had learned to manage their time, and if  they   re back they   re really motivated and focused. I   m certainly not  taking anything away from the kids today but I think a bright motivated  person can do well anywhere, at any age.  So you had really no trouble returning to the classroom in your 30   s and  then later   wow.  I thought I would, but it took me about two weeks to figure out that this  is not a problem (Laughs) and I loved it. It was so much fun to go back  to college. And, of course, that was during the 1970s era, the Vietnam  War, all this excitement going on, on campus. It was a very different life  than the suburban housewife life I   d been living. I   m also grateful that I  was home for those 15 years with my kids. I really enjoyed all that. It  was fun. It was fun to be with them and see them develop and mature. I  just happened to be at the right place at the right time.  You know you wanted more when you started out in the local school  here   what did you have your sights set on?  Well, I thought I   d just go down to OU and see what kind of programs  they had. I didn   t know. And when I got down there and found they had  a counseling psych program. They   d had a clinical program, but it  wasn   t really functioning as far as training to be a clinician. It was more  research oriented. I thought,    Well, I really would like to be in private  practice.    But I really enjoyed my graduate training. I was so lucky. I  was the first intern that the OU Health Sciences Center took in the  counseling psych program. They had only accepted clinical psych  students before and that was a marvelous experience, the year of  8  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  internship at the Health Sciences Center. I had some marvelous  professors, really interesting exciting things were going on at that time.  Then luckily   two psychiatrists had just set up practice called the  training director to see what psychologist he would recommend that they  would take into their practice. Well, I was probably halfway through my  internship and I found out that,    Hey, I can go into practice with these  two men.    Well, then I find out I have to have my dissertation completed  before I can do this. Okay, this is about January, so now I have five kids  at home and in the meantime, my husband temporarily had to go to  California on his job. Then I had to devise and write, do the research and  complete my dissertation, which I did between January and August of  that year. And I   m telling you, never in my life have I cranked it out like  I did then. (Laughs) The kids laughed. They didn   t see the dining room  table for months. It was just piled with research papers.  So then I got that all done, and passed. Then I find out the licensing  board was really unusual and decided I needed 15 more hours. So, okay,  fine. So I took 15 more hours down at the Health Sciences Center and  just worked in their walk-in clinic, which was great experience. You just  see everything. I learned a lot, and so it worked out fine. Then January  of 1972 I went into private practice and I   ve done that ever since. You  can see things kind of happened. It isn   t that I had a grand plan. It just  kind of evolved.  Right place at the right time.  Right time. (Laughs)  Well what   s the best part about being a psychologist?  I absolutely love what I do. I have always been interested in people, and  I always loved to read and it   s almost like just reading multiple novels.  You get to know the characters. You begin to see what   s happening in  their lives. People have a lot more capability to resolve their own  problems than they think. I do not tell people what to do, that is not my  job. If I can help people first figure out the problem, discover what part  they played in it then they start to have control. Then instead of just  sitting here bitching about, you know, the spouse or the boss or  whatever   mother, dad   they can say,    Oh, okay. I can do this.    And  then you begin to see people grow and change and become more self-fulfilled,  and their lives are going better. So it   s a very rewarding work.  People ask me if I don   t get depressed. I said,    Well, no. First, it   s not  my problem, it   s theirs. And second, I know that they can learn to handle  things better.    So you hear a lot of uplifting stories as well as the  9  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  struggles. But it   s fun to see people   something would block them and  they couldn   t figure it out and then they realize,    Hey, I can do that.    So  it   s very delightful work to me. Then another thing I did, several years  ago OU Health Sciences Center was chosen as one of three research  sites in the country   University of Pittsburgh and we were one and Yale  was another one to do a major Depression Research Study. We did a  two-year pilot study, then we did a three-year research study. So for five  years, we were involved in this research and I really began to get the  statistical data and the facts to back up what intuitively I   d been  thinking. As we would go through this, you could measure it and  quantify how people learned new skills and how they could change. So  that was a fun experience, too.  Is that when you were on faculty?  No, I never was on the regular faculty. I was on adjunct faculty which  means you work for nothing. (Laughs) I never was paid faculty. I   ve  always been in private practice. That   s my source of income.  At what point did you go solo?  Well, really I   ve always been by myself. I shared space with these other  doctors, but I   ve always booked my own appointments. People pay  when they come in. I don   t do insurance. I don   t take credit cards. They  pay when they come, and that   s the way I   ve done it for 35 years. It  works very well.  Now when you   re first starting out, is it hard to get new clients?  It would be much more difficult to do now what I   ve done because  insurance wasn   t much of a factor way back then, but now it   s a big  factor. And because I was with the psychiatrists, that helped me some.  The way you build this practice is satisfied customers. I have never  advertised. My name   s in the Yellow Pages. Patients refer people. If  you   re starting out today, it would be more difficult. Most young  professionals would feel it   d be hard not to take insurance. I think you  could do it, but you   d probably have to be more pro-active in going out,  talking to schools   if you   re working with children, working with  teachers, letting them know that you   re willing to work with them. I  mean, you   d have to do a lot more marketing and networking.  Well we learn the skills we need for our professions in different places.  Where did you learn the background you needed for your career? Was it  all in the classroom?  Well looking back, my mother was a woman way, way ahead of her  10  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  time. I mean, she was always questioning. Living in a little town is like  living in the middle of a novel. I   d come home with some story and  she   d say,    Well, where did you hear that? How do you know that?  Check out your facts.    And living in a little town is a very good  experience. Looking back, I can see that   and being in a small high  school. Then really I learned a whole lot by having five kids in seven  years. Luckily, my husband, Harry, was a marvelous dad. This may  amaze you, but we never had one discussion about him sharing or  helping. He just did it. If a child needed to be fed, if laundry needed to  be done, if a meal needed to be cooked, if the dishes needed to be  cleaned up, he just did it. So that was a tremendous help. I learned a  tremendous amount through that. Then we moved. I think we moved 35  times. We lived all over Wyoming, Colorado, and New Mexico. He was  in oil exploration. Well you learn a lot that way, too. And then I did have  a good graduate education and especially that year as an intern. We just  were so lucky to have the experiences we had, so I learned a lot there.  Then your patients teach you a lot. They   re good supervisors (Laughs) if  you listen to them and learn from them. Nothing beats life experience, I  think. That   s been a big help to me.  Tell me about any stumbling blocks or adversity that you   ve faced along  the way or was it all smooth sailing?  Well as far as academically, that was never a problem. Probably the  biggest thing, especially when I went back, is just juggling all of these  things because Harry and I had a pretty active social life. We were  involved in our church   the kids   you can imagine (Laughs) all these  kids and all their activities. So just keeping all that going   that was a  challenge. That was the most challenging thing. But as far as actually in  my career field, I   ve been quite fortunate. The psychiatrists that I officed  with were very good and very fair. We worked out our arrangements that  way. I think really it was just learning how to manage my time. That   s  probably the thing that was certainly the most challenging. But over time  I learned how not to over-commit myself and also when to say    yes.     It   s kind of became a balance for me.  Then another thing that I think has helped me a lot   probably 20-some  years ago I basically cut my practice back to half-time because Harry  and I liked to travel a lot. Also I   m very involved in the volunteer world  here in Oklahoma City and that has been a tremendous pleasure to me.  So I really kind of went from full-time mom, full-time professional for a  few years   maybe ten   then part-time professional and almost full-time  (Laughs) community volunteer. So it   s been kind of a    phases of life     thing.  Well speaking about your community involvement, you have been very  11  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  well involved in the arts through the years. How did your interest in art  come about?  Well when I was a kid I always liked to tell stories and I liked to kind of  fool around with drawing. I thought I   d be a journalist and draw or paint  and illustrate my own work. Well you can see where that went. It didn   t  go. And my dad was an artist. My grandmother was an artist. So I   ve  always been interested in it. In fact, it   s kind of a funny little story.  When I was in the sixth grade in this Boise school one of the classes we  had was an art class and so this teacher thought I really showed a lot of  talent. She thought I ought to go to the local junior college and take  some classes. Well my mom checked into that and I was too young to go  by myself, so my dad, who   s always enjoyed painting, went with me.  Well he really picked it up, and he became a very good painter later in  his life (Laughs) and I kind of piddled around. That was kind of one of  those things where I thought I   d do something and then ended up doing  something else kind of a situation.  How did you get involved within the arts here in Oklahoma City?  Well let   s see, really   (Laughs) this is funny. I had made some friends  at the place I worked out and one of them was Executive Director of the  Arts Council, Jackie Jones. And so I said,    Well, I   d like to be a  volunteer,    and I started selling popcorn (Laughs) as a volunteer. Have  you been to the Festival here yet?  No.  You need to come down. It   s the third week in April. It is just a  wonderful experience. So then I just started working my way up through  the Festival chain and became a member of the Board and then on the  Executive Committee of the Arts Council. Well then when David  Walters was Governor, a friend of his asked,    Is there anything you  would like to do?    I said,    Well I would really like to do something on  the statewide level,    and they said,    Well, what do you think you   d like  to do?    I said,    Well I   d really enjoy being on the State Arts Council,     and so, lo and behold, Governor Walters appointed me to that. Well I  really enjoyed that. Betty Price was the Director. She   s just recently  retired   fabulous woman   and became very good friends with Betty  and within a little over a year I was President of that Board, or Chairman  of that Council. And I did it for four years. Well I just loved it, and as  part of that, you   re part of the Mid-America Arts Alliance, so we went to  the six surrounding states to meetings   went to New York, went to  Chicago to meetings and so on.  And then another kind of a sidetrack on the art thing, I   d been one of the  12  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  people who brought world-famous speakers in here about eight or nine  times a year for what we called a    Saturday Seminar.    It was continuing  education for psychiatrists, psychologists, social workers and so on.  Well, as I started getting these speakers, one of them   Dr. Dick Simons,  head of the Department of Psychiatry at Denver at the time   told me I  needed to look into speaking for the American Institute for Medical  Education. Dr. Barry Panter from L.A. runs that. So I started doing that,  and I probably have done maybe 20 talks for him all over the world.  We   ve been to Europe, we   ve been to Spain, we   ve been to Greece,  we   ve been to Aspen, Santa Fe, Hawaii, South America. That has  become fascinating.  The one artist I   ve talked about the most   and there   s a chapter in the  book Creativity and Madness about Michelangelo. Well the first time I  spoke on Michelangelo, I was in Florence. He has one painting there, but  a lot of his sculptures there. The second time was in Rome. When  someone speaks on an artist then the trip is set up so we can see the  original work. In Rome we went to the Sistine Chapel, and we went to  see the Pieta in the Catholic church there, St. Peters. When I spoke in El  Greco, we went to the Prado across the street, saw his paintings, went  down to Toledo where his home is. That has been a wonderful  experience. And I   m speaking this fall in Australia. We   re going to New  Zealand in Australia and I   ll be speaking on Jorn Utzon, who is the  architect for the Sydney Opera House. So that   s been kind of another  way I   ve brought psychology and art together because when you talk  about an artist, then you use their work to illustrate your points. So it   s  really fun. It   s a lot of work but it   s a lot of fun.  Great for somebody who loves to travel.  (Laughs) And I love to travel. And then here in town right now, I   m  involved in the Allied Arts 2008 campaign. I   m the co-chair along with  Fred Hall. In fact, Thursday night we   re going to have a dinner. Jeannine  Rainbolt, who died last fall, and her husband, Gene, were the honorary  chairs, so we   ll be having a big function for him. So I   m involved right  now with Allied Arts. I   ve been on the Oklahoma Arts Institute Board. I  was on the Oklahoma City Arts Council for years and, of course, I was  on the State Board for six years. So that   s where my volunteer work and  my art interests have combined.  Where   s your favorite place to travel?  Oh, that is so hard. I do love Italy. But probably the most interesting trip  I   ve taken   Harry and I and one of my daughters and some friends from  Oklahoma City spent a month in Africa, and we went to Egypt for 10  days and we were in Cairo. Then we went down the Nile on a boat that  13  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  this Abercrombie and Kent owned. Went to the Aswan Dam, flew back  to Cairo. Then we flew to Kenya and were in Nairobi for a couple of  days and then picked up a    Wings Over Kenya    safari and that was  really an out-of-this-world experience. And then I have been to China  and southeast Asia. I would like to go back to China again. I haven   t  been to India yet. I want to go there. (Laughs) So I   ve got a list of things  I   d still like to do.  (Laughs) That   s great. Going back to art for a second, in 1996 you  received the Governor   s Arts Award. What was that like for you?  Well it was certainly a great honor. When you get an award like that, or  like this Hall of Fame, you just feel so humble because you think,    My  goodness. I know so many people that have done more than I have.    So  you feel like it   s just a really big honor for something like that to  happen. I   m just glad that someone thought I would have deserved it. I  appreciate it.  Now in addition to art, you are involved in many, many community  groups. Why is it so important to be invested in the community?  Well, I have been very lucky. My life has been fortunate. I have five  wonderful kids. Four of them live here in town still. One son lives in  Midland, Texas. There isn   t any reason that you or I weren   t born in  Darfur or somehow our life didn   t go well and we   re down at the city  rescue mission tonight because our husband got sick and we lost our job.  So I feel like, for me, I feel so good about giving back. And people ask  me,    Why do you do all that?    Juliana, I get so much more back than I  give out. I have made such wonderful friendships and I   ve kind of been  involved in the arts volunteer world but I   ve also been interested in the  other side. I was President of the Calm Waters Board, which is a support  center for children and families going through grief and loss through  death or divorce. I   ve been very active in Planned Parenthood for years.  Also now, a new interest of mine is Girl Scouts. I   ve been on that Board  a little over two years. I just last Tuesday chaired their big luncheon, and  we had about 450 women there   great success. To think that there   s a  program that really is reaching out to help girls be leaders. That   s really  rewarding. But I think those of us that are gifted, talented   time, talent  or treasure, we just need to do that for our own good and hopefully  making Oklahoma City a better place and the world a better place.  Now were you a Girl Scout growing up?  No, I wasn   t. They didn   t have Girl Scouts where I was, but my girls  were all involved in it and so I was troop leader and helped them sell  cookies and did all that. I took a big gap here, but now I   m back into it.  14  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Now spanning your career and community involvement, can you go into  either one or a few, if you have more than one   key moments that you  consider some of your biggest highlights?  Well honors like the Women   s Hall of Fame and the Governor   s Arts  Awards are the kind of things. To go back, the most important decision  you ever make is who you marry, and luckily I married a very good guy.  Without his support and help, if you   d had a husband who wasn   t willing  to work with you and help, this would be really hard. And then Harry  and I believed in child labor. (Laughs) We believed in those kids  helping, and to this day they are great help   Harry died a year ago, just  a little over a year ago   but the family and friends are such a support.  Career highlights   I   ve loved doing the speaking that I   ve done for the  art talks.  Right after the bombing, I was very involved in that process, too. I was  on that Board for five years, and I spoke to over a thousand people in  Santa Fe at this medical conference talking about the bombing and the  impact and what had happened in our community and how our  community was growing and changing. I was part of the committee that  was helping to choose the memorial design. So that was certainly a  highlight. And then doing those seminars where we brought these top-notch  people here to Oklahoma City. We had some of the very best in  the world coming in here eight or nine times a year, and that  professionally was very rewarding.  I   ve been lucky. I   ve received many, many honors. I was honored by the  OCU Society last year as one of their honorees. Each time I get  something like that, whether it   s a byline or award   or the Oklahoma  Academy is another thing I   m very involved in and got their Key  Contributor Award. It just makes you, again, feel kind of humble and  think,    Oh, my. I   m so lucky to have       I feel very fortunate to have had  all these good things happen.  One other thing. This is kind of an interesting story   highlights   has  nothing to do with my career, maybe it says something about my  personality, but. As I said, my family and I all rode horseback. In fact,  we had two horses each because we rode so much. So anyway when I  was 15, one of the local rodeos   Nampa, Idaho Rodeo   decided for a  PR event, they   d have a hundred mile horse race and you started out in  Nampa and then you rode up into the Idaho Mountains. Well, my mother  was very smart and so if we   re going to do this   I was the one to do it     she got books on endurance rides. She found out, How do you train a  horse to do endurance rides? So we trained two horses, the one I was  riding and the one she was riding, and then we decided to use hers  because he was a little stronger, sturdier horse. So we started out on the  15  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  race and it was a warm summer day in July. I think there are about 15  women and the rest are men   65 people   started running their horses.  I   m going,    This is pretty stupid,    so I quit that. So I just started kind of  riding my own race.  Well, I was riding by myself and it was a 50-mile ride the first day. It  was quite a ride, and so I got off the trail. I was so mad. I   m still mad  (Laughs) to this day that I missed a marker. So I got off the trail and then  I had to figure out where I was. Luckily, I had ridden around that  country some. So I came in later than I should have. Well, the next day  five or six of those horses died because they hadn   t been trained right  and they were ridden wrong. And only 12 people started back. I was the  only woman, and I was 15 years old, (Laughs) and my horse was in the  best shape of any horse there because he   d been trained properly. And  that night when we came into the rodeo arena, the other horses are kind  of like this  motions  and my horse was strutting along like this   motions    but that was quite an experience.  Then what was interesting, some of those cowboys that I rode with my  dad had told them, he knew them because he had an International  Harvester shop and they   d come into the shop, and he   d say,    Well  Kay   s going to ride in that race,    and they   d go,    Oh, yeah. Sure.    Well,  (Laughs) I sure gained their respect. Then they asked me to come the  next two summers and ride the two-week round-up up in the mountains  with them while they   re rounding up their cattle from all these ranches.  So that was pretty interesting. I love a good fight, and I don   t lose.  (Laughter)  That   s good to know. (Laughs) Well going back to your family for a  second, did you have any siblings?  I have a younger brother who   s five years younger. He is married and  still lives in Idaho. And my mother was certainly my major role model. I  mean, she was bright, very good-looking. She was just strong on every  issue. She and my dad started a historical society there. He was president  of the school board. So this community involvement and giving back  was certainly there, and she was very opinionated. She was way ahead  of women   s lib. The idea that a woman couldn   t do anything she wanted  to do was just   she didn   t believe that for a second. So that sure helped  me. This whole thought that men are superior is like,    whatever    kind of  thinking. Men certainly have their strong points, but no woman needs to  ever take a back seat to anybody, in my opinion. I think sometimes  we   re our own worst enemy. We think we can   t, but just make up your  mind to do it and figure out how to get it done and you can do it. I  believe that thoroughly.  16  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Did your mother teach in schools?  Yes, she taught before they were married, and then when I started back  to college, to help with that expense, she went back to teaching high  school. Then she stayed on so my brother could go to school, too.  And tell me about your family, do you have children?  I have the five, and the oldest daughter is Kathi, she lives here in town.  And then the next daughter is Kristi and she lives in Oklahoma City.  Then the oldest son Dee lives in Midland, Texas, and he has one son  Grant that   s a senior in high school this year, and then the next two  children live eight doors apart in a subdivision out in northwest Edmond,  and Jake was 22 this past week   a junior at OU   and Lexie, Bart   s  child, is 16 and a sophomore at Edmond North. So we have two  grandkids here and four kids here, and then Jim and Karen and Bart and  Tracy are both married, and we have their spouses here. But we spend a  lot of time together. We were all together Thursday night. We were all  together again last night. So we have a lot of fun.  They still play a big role in your life?  Oh, extremely so. And then three of us have homes at Grand Lake just  within steps, almost, of each other. So in the summer we go up there a  lot on the weekends and, again, it   s good family time.  Well, tell me how you met your husband.  Well I met him when I was seven years old. (Laughs) He was a friend of  my cousins and when we could come down from Montana to Idaho to  visit, Harry would be around. I don   t really remember him very clearly.  When we were in high school together and were both 14 we started to  date, and we dated through high school and junior college. Then, as I  said, he went to Colorado State for two years and I went to Oregon  State. And then after we finished that, we got married and been  together   well it would have been 56 years last March if he hadn   t died.  Now how did you get to Oklahoma?  Harry was in the oil exploration business and, as I said, we   d been all  over   literally all over Wyoming, Denver, in and out of Denver five  different times, lived in Cortez, Colorado, Farmington, New Mexico. So  we   re back in Denver and one of the men he worked with had a crew  going out in Winfield, Louisiana, and he wanted Harry to go down there  and run the crew. And we thought,    Well, that could be interesting.    In  fact we were planning to build a home in Denver and we thought,    Well,  17  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  we   ve never been south. We   ll just go down there for awhile.    (Laughs)  That was 1956, 1957 I guess. And so we went down there and ended up  in Shreveport, Louisiana for seven years and just loved it. I mean it was  truly    Leave it to Beaver    neighborhood, you know. The kids were all  playing with all the neighbor kids, walked to the school. They   d ride  their bikes to the swim club. Then Harry had gone to work for a major  corporation and they transferred him to Oklahoma City March 3, 1967.  Then we settled in here and now we just love it here. This is home. We  have so many good friends here, and frankly I think Oklahoma City is  just a renaissance city. I think it   s really on a roll and can only get better,  so it   s fun, too, to be part of that.  Do you consider yourself an Oklahoman?  I   m an Okie now. (Laughter)  That   s good. Moving to the Hall of Fame, when you were notified that  you were going to be inducted into the Oklahoma Women   s Hall of  Fame, what was going through your mind at that time?  Well I was really surprised. I mean, I just thought,    Oh, my gosh. I don   t  really deserve this.    I remember that thought very clearly. And then I  realized one of my friends had done it and I thought,    Well I really  appreciate that if she thinks that highly of me, (Laughs) maybe I do  deserve it.    But it   s really an honor to think that you   re chosen as kind of  representative of the women leaders here, and we have got some  wonderful women leaders in this state   this city and state. One of the  things I liked about being state chair is I got to know people all over the  state. Then the Oklahoma Academy, I   d been on that Executive  Committee for about 15 years now. That   s another thing I like is meeting  people from all over the state. It   s very rewarding and very interesting  and I   m truly impressed with the many exciting things that happen  everywhere in this state. I think we   ve been overlooked, but it   s partly  our own fault. (Laughs) I think we   re getting beyond that, and look at  what   s happening in Stillwater. My goodness, just all kinds of exciting  things going on up there. Burns and Ann Hargis are good friends of  mine so I think you   re very fortunate to have them be part of your OSU  family.  I think Burns will do a great job as President coming in. Now 1997 was  a long time ago.  Seems like it. (Laughter) Seems like it to me.  I   ve heard from many women especially back in the    90s who   ve been  inducted. Some could remember the ceremony. Do you remember the  18  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  ceremony?  I do.  Could you take me through how it was structured?  Well it was in Tulsa at the Gilcrease  Museum . Each person that was  presented had someone that would get up and introduce them. And  what   s interesting about something like that, I   m not sure at the time if I  knew all the women but even women that I think I know, when you hear  them inducted into something or receive an honor, you always learn so  much that you didn   t know about them. To me, that   s always one of the  really fun things about that. If you ask me specifically beyond that, I  don   t know. Several of my friends came from Oklahoma City up there,  and that was nice that we had family and friends there that evening to  enjoy it. So I remember that part.  Do you remember who presented you?  I   m trying to think. He was Speaker of the House at the time, wasn   t he?  (Laughs) I was kind of surprised they asked him to do it because there  were so many people that knew me better.  I   ll have to look it up.  Maybe it was the Senate, because I didn   t know him really well, which I  thought was kind of curious. He did a good job. I guess he did his  homework. (Laughs)  Well, how do you feel that now people look at you as a role model?  Well, I   m honored. I think that through my experience, my professional  training, my life experiences, my knowledge of people   I probably have  something to offer to women. One thing I think women need to get over  the barriers in their own mind more than anything else, and I   ve thought  that for a long time. To me, your attitude is the key to everything and     Oh, I can   t do that    or    Oh, I   m too tired    or    They don   t want me     or    it   s your own self-talk. Pay attention to what you say and how  many times. This really irritates me. I   m 78. I   m perfectly healthy, I  have no health problems, take no meds. Well, a lot of it is I work out  really hard three times a week   and I walk in between, that   s number  one. My mom and dad were both very active.  Then number two is don   t say,    Oh, I   m 50 now. I can   t remember. Oh,  I   m getting old.    You talk yourself into being old.    I can   t remember. I  don   t have any energy.    The only thing I can   t do now that I could do 70  19  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  years ago, or 60, is have kids. I can do everything else. You know, it   s in  your mind. I am so strong about that. I was working with a young  woman, a marvelous director of an agency that came in as our director  and she   s,    Oh, I   m 50. I   m getting old.    I said,    I don   t want to hear  that ever again (Laughs) and every time you say something like that I   m  gonna jump on you.    (Laughter) So she quit and she says,    Thank you  very much.    She didn   t even realize what she was doing to herself by  programming yourself.  And    Oh, these young people today    yes, they   re great. I mean, the  young people in my family are fabulous, but so are we. I   ll tell you this,  if you learn the lessons life has to teach, it just gets better and better. If  you refuse to learn the lessons, it   s probably not going to be so good.  (Laughs) Several times a week you get a lesson. If you choose to ignore  it, things won   t go so well.  Do you have any advice for women who want to go into the field of  psychology?  I would certainly check out the training programs. They vary. Right now  if you ask me which program is best, I wouldn   t know, but I   d check it  out. I   d talk to the faculty. I   d find some students that are in the program  and I   d go out with them and say,    What do you think of so-and-so?  Who are the good professors?    That   s one thing I   d do. Then I would  also see what kind of life experiences   I maybe would be a volunteer,  go to a mental health clinic, maybe be an aid in a hospital, maybe what  kind of work are you interested in   child advocacy. If you had to, even  volunteer, just take a little pay. I would try to really get a feeling for  what it   s really all about and get some experience that way.  Then I would talk to some professionals. What   s their experience? What  are the things that hinder them? What are the things they enjoy? I do a  lot of research on that. I didn   t do all that, but I would do that now if I  was a young person. Just scope it out, you know. But as soon as I got  down to college, I very quickly started talking to the graduate students  who were already there and saying,    Okay, who is really good down  here? Where are the best places to get our practicums?    because the  students know. The students know more than anybody   your fellow  students. I would certainly do a lot of snooping in that category.  (Laughs)  That   s a good way to put it   snooping. Now if you could give advice,  I   m gonna call them now your fellow Oklahomans since you   re an  Oklahoman, what would you tell them?  Oh, try to make the world a better place in whatever corner you   re in,  20  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  whatever your talents are. It may be mentoring a child in school, it may  be giving a big gift to some charity you care about, but try to make a  difference in a positive way, and I think we can all do that. You don   t  have to have money. You don   t have to have training. You can do  something, whether it   s taking a meal to a homeless person or working  at one of the rescue missions. There are just endless opportunities to  help. Calm Waters is one Board that I serve. We train volunteers to  come over there and work with our groups of kids. That might be  something people would enjoy. But every day and   I don   t know if it   s  every day, but at least once a week in the Daily Oklahoman there   s a  whole list of places where you can give your time and talent. I think  people would be happier if they gave more. I think the less involved you  are in yourself, the more likely you are to be a happier person. This is  something research has shown. People who are involved and connected  are happier and healthier and have fewer health problems, physical  problems.  Well, what does Oklahoma mean to you?  Home. Energy. Here Oklahoma still is so small   as a state   that if you  want to make a difference in this state, you can. Now if you and I were  in New York or California, it would be hard to feel like that unless you  just go out in your own little community. But here, if you want to get  involved and get to know the Governor or the Mayor or some executive  in this state or some big company, you can. I think the opportunities are  here for people to do so much more than some of the more populated  older states. So I think it   s endless opportunities in this state and that  means a lot to me, and I think that   s a unique thing.  Another thing   and you hear it, too, I know   people, over and over,  that come here say,    These Oklahoma people are so nice and so  friendly.    I   ve met several young execs. I   ve mentored to some of the  younger women that come into town, career women in various fields not  just psychology. Some of them have come from California, New York  and they just love it here.    Oh, my gosh, I can   t imagine going back to  the big city life and the traffic,    and    We can have a beautiful home here  for so much less,    good education. If you can   t find something to do,  you can   t read. (Laughter) There is so much to do in this town, and  something that the Oklahoman has started this new Wimgo   have you  paid any attention to that?  No.  It   s a new kind of a web site they   ve just launched   www.wimgo.com.  You go in there, and it is an absolute across-the-board   and they   re  trying to make it a statewide thing, it   s starting here   of everything  21  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  there is to do. If you want to go to a game down at the Ford Center and  you want to click    within two miles    where are the restaurants, if you  want to schedule an event, you can go in there and put your event in to  see if something else is scheduled. Try it sometime in the next few days.  Just see what you get. You   ll be surprised. It   s really interesting. As I  said, they   re trying to make it a statewide thing. So you want to go to  OSU to a game, click what restaurants are there. If you want to stay the  night, what places are there to stay? You know, it   s going to be pretty  cool. So, again, if you can read, you can find things to do. (Laughs)  I know we made mention of your parents and your husband and your  family, but would you like to make mention or say anything about the  people who have helped play an important role in your life?  Well there have certainly been several of the people in the arts field     Betty Price would be one. Jackie Jones and Liz Eickman, who have been  the Directors of the Arts Council, I   m very involved with them. Julie  Knutson, who is head of the Oklahoma Academy, has been a fabulous  friend and I really enjoyed working with her. And then I   ve had several  male friends. Gene Rainbolt is a good long-time friend of mine, and he   s  certainly always a wise person to talk to. James Pickel is my co-chair at  the Arts Festival for two years. We were chairs of the Festival the year  of the bombing, and then we had to cancel it, so then we did it again, and  he and I have worked on things together.  Oh my goodness, in the Girl Scout world, which I   ve just gotten into the  last couple of years there   s Karen Luke, Ann Bohannan, Meg Salyer,  Cathy Stackpole, the director. She   s a fabulous woman and someone I  hope you get to meet because she is taking the Girl Scouts into the  schools, which is a whole new thing. Nobody in the country is doing it  as well as we are here. In fact, we   re the first. So those are people     Barbara Butner at Calm Waters. These are people that I   ve worked very  closely with just in the recent years.  And, oh my, I could probably talk another ten minutes about all the  women and men that have been really close, good friends and mentors.  You can   t get any of these big things done if you don   t have lots and lots  of help. What I   ve found is anytime I do anything, people hardly ever  say no      Would you like to help with this?    and the answer is usually     Yes.    When Pickel and I shut that Festival down, the next year only  two people didn   t re-up again. One moved out of town and one was  having a baby about the day of the festival. We have the most terrific  volunteers. This Girl Scout Juliette Low Luncheon we just did, we had  70 volunteers working on that, and you   d think it was their professional  job. They were so top-notch, so professional. It   s just truly amazing the  volunteers and the people in Oklahoma City. So I   d have to say all those  22  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  people that have helped me throughout the years do all these events. I   ve  co-chaired so many events, but I couldn   t do it if I didn   t have this great  resource of people that are friends and are willing to help me.  You made mention of the bombing, do you think Oklahomans have fully  healed at this point?  I think for the most part. To me, I stayed on that Board until the  memorial was built, that took us five years, then I resigned it. I   m not as  closely involved with the people who were in the bombing itself as I  was. I think for the most part we turned it into something that was a  source of pride, and that memorial, whenever you go down there, there  is someone down there, no matter the weather, no matter the time of day.  I don   t think I   ve ever driven by there that there wasn   t somebody there,  and I think it really touched the hearts of people across the country. I  think in a way we realized we were better than we even knew we were.  When that outpouring of help came within hours, I wasn   t surprised, and  people around the world said,    Oh, my gosh.    And the rescuers   you   ve  heard this story   the rescuers came here. They couldn   t believe how  they got treated. So I think that all helped us heal, to see that we can do,  we can pick ourselves up, and build something beautiful out of a horrible  tragedy. When we traveled several times abroad after that and we would  say we   re from Oklahoma City, people all over the world would say,     Oh, we remember that,    and comment on it and be complimentary  about it. So I think that has helped. Were you here when the bombing   ?  I was not.  You weren   t here then.  I remember watching it on television though.  Yeah.  Yeah.  Well, you couldn   t believe it. At the time, my office was six miles from  downtown in an office building over there at 63rd and Grand. My  building shook so hard I thought it was an explosion in my building.  And one of my children, the one that has the girl who   s now 16, she was  taking a bath and was in the tub   she was a little girl   she came  running out and said,    Mommy, my bathwater   s wiggling.    That   s from  downtown to Edmond, and I think in Stillwater it set off some seismic  shockwaves even up there. It   s just incredible in that this guy knew  exactly what he was doing. He   d scoped it out. He knew that children   s  23  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  nursery is there, and just went right ahead. It   s pretty incredible. And my  husband was downtown at the time, and he thought a gas explosion had  gone off downtown. He walked over there and he was so close to it that  glass was still falling out of the buildings. He said by the time he got to  the site, which is about four blocks from his office, they already had it  cordoned off. I mean, we really showed our rescue people know what to  do and how to do it. It was pretty incredible, but to answer your  question, I think that the city and state overall have healed. Now whether  there   s some individual people that are still struggling, I don   t know     could be.  Well, what is next on the agenda for you? You stay pretty busy.  Well, I do, I do. Well, as I said, I   m co-chairing the Allied Arts Fund  campaign right now, and it   ll go on for another couple of months. Then  the next thing I need to do is get to work on that talk I   m going to give a  talk for the American Institute for Medical Education in Australia and  New Zealand this fall. That   s probably the biggest things. Then I   m on  all these boards. I was going through my tax records and I   m either  going out to eat or going to a meeting almost every day to something.  (Laughs) So being involved in the community, I   ll still do that and who  knows? You know, I   m always open for options so something else  probably will show up.  Well, when history is written about you what would you like for it to  say?  Well, the shortened version is I   d like it to say,    She lived a full and  happy life. She was greatly rewarded by having a wonderful husband  and family and great friends, and she made a real positive difference in  this city and state.     And finally, is there anything else you would like to mention that we  have not spoken about today?  Well, I think you   ve done a very good job of interviewing. I think  you   ve asked all the questions that helped me kind of put it all together,  and I   m just grateful you   re doing it. I think it   s really important that  women really are seen as the leaders they really are. There   s been, I  think, some kind of a push-back when women kind of came out of their  bondage. (Laughs) We got to vote, we got to own property, and more  and more women are going into positions of leadership and power. And  I think things like these encourage other women to think they can, too.  When I was down in Shreveport, I loved it but I thought,    Golly, there   s  got to be more going on than this.    I had a great marriage, had five great  kids, involved in all this stuff, playing bridge all the time. I   m so glad I  24  Nykolaiszyn  Goebel  Nykolaiszyn  found a career that has been so rewarding, and then I found this whole  volunteer world. So, I think things that you   re doing and your group is  doing to help women understand,    You can do that. Don   t take no for an  answer. You can do anything you want to do.    Now I couldn   t go  compete in the Olympics. I   m not saying that (Laughs) but you can do a  whole lot. We all can.  Well, I appreciate you taking time out to meet with me today.  Well, it was fun to meet with you.  Thank you very much.  -------  -------  
