 Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University  Library. Today is Monday, May 16, 2011. I am in Lawton, Oklahoma,  interviewing Dr. Cindy Ross, President of Cameron University. This  interview is being conducted as part of the Oklahoma Women   s Hall of  Fame Oral History Project. Dr. Ross was inducted into the Oklahoma  Women   s Hall of Fame in 2011. Thank you for joining us today.  Thank you.  Let   s begin by learning a little bit more about you. Could you tell us  about where you grew up and give us a little insight into your early life?  I am a fifth generation Oklahoman. I am very proud of that. My family  came to Oklahoma with the Cherokee Strip Land Run, settled in north  central Oklahoma in a little town called Wakita. I went to elementary  school in Wakita and then I went to junior high and high school in  Medford, a town about eleven miles away. Wakita has a population of  less than five hundred when I was there. Medford had a booming  population of about 1,100 when I was there. Medford was the Grant  County seat. That is where I am from. I am very proud of my roots there.  Well growing up, tell me about the schools you attended. Were they big,  were the small?  The schools were tiny. The towns were tiny. I love rural Oklahoma. I  love the rural Oklahoma environment I grew up in. You knew everyone  in town. When I was in elementary school at Wakita, the school was  literally about a half block from my house, so my sister and I would  walk to school every day. For lunch we actually would walk to my  grandma   s house which was across town about another six, seven  blocks. We went to church every Sunday sitting next to Grandma in the  pew. Went with her frequently on Wednesday nights as well and  certainly Sunday mornings and Sunday nights. Even when we moved to  5  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Medford, being from a small town with a small school, you not only  know everyone, you get to participate in everything. I played basketball.  I played softball. You literally get to do everything. It   s a wonderful  environment.  Were your parents very encouraging about education?  Neither one of my parents had a college degree. I was raised in a very  traditional household. My dad was very hard-working. He worked with  my grandpa and they had the local service station and he worked hard,  worked seven days a week, long hours. I developed a strong work ethic  from my dad. A college education was not something that was strongly  encouraged, and it wasn   t something that was regularly discussed.  So you are growing up. You are little girl running around the streets of  Wakita, from school to Grandma   s and back home. What were you  thinking about? What were you dreaming about? What did you want to  be when you grew up?  I don   t know that I gave a lot of thought to it at that particular point in  time. Life was just so good. We rode horses. My older sister was a  tomboy and she would play football and I would alternate between  playing football with her and wearing my mother   s high heels. It was  just a wonderful, carefree time. I can remember that when it snowed my  dad would build a long sled and of course, too, in a little girl   s eyes it  appeared to be twenty-five or thirty feet long. But he would chain it to  the back of his pickup and we literally would go around town and pick  up every child and we would all ride on the sled behind the back of the  pickup. The nights were starry. There were lots of school activities,  church activities. It was a wonderful carefree time. I was raised in a  traditional household. I have two sisters, an older sister and a younger  sister. I don   t recall ever really aspiring to be anything or have a  particular profession. I just assumed I would graduate from high school  and marry soon and have children.  Favorite subjects in school?  Science, reading.  You go on to high school. How did you get to college?  I went to college directly out of high school and the primary reason that  I chose Oklahoma State University was that was where my boyfriend-to-be-  husband was attending. I attended one year, my freshman year, and  then I dropped out of college and got married, which again was not  atypical during that point in time. Certainly that is something I  6  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  discourage all college students from doing now at every opportunity, but  it was something that was very typical then. I went to work, my husband  at that time had a year of school to finish and I didn   t really aspire to go  back to college. I was so fortunate because I initially went to work at a  nursing home because I had worked at a nursing home as an aid during  my years in high school. That is very hard work but probably the most  important job I have ever had. Then once I got married, I tried to find  other jobs and as I found other jobs I realized that I enjoyed working a  great deal. There was a lot of satisfaction. The harder I worked the more  opportunities I was given, promotions I received, and then after seven  years it occurred to me, hey, I would like to have a college education. I  went back to school and I worked full-time, attended college part-time,  had two children during this period of time and completed a bachelor   s,  master   s and doctorate working full-time.  Well that   s hard.  It is worth doing. I was firmly convinced that I would be ninety-two  years old and still be going to school. That it would absolutely never  end, but it was worth doing. I don   t recommend it, as I indicated. I  strongly encourage students, the last thing you do is drop out of college,  but I recognize the value of a college education. The transformational  powers of a college education, the doors that it opens. Certainly that   s  been true for me.  Now your area of study was?  My master   s and doctorate are higher education administration.  What steered you in that direction?  That just evolved. I would like to tell you I had this great plan and all  these goals and achieved them with a steady path, but that is not how it  happened. Things just evolved. When I initially went back to school I  thought I would be a nurse. Then as it turned out, we moved back to  Stillwater and a nursing program isn   t available at Oklahoma State  University in Stillwater. I went to work for the Academic Vice President  and started going to school there and taking classes as I could. I  discovered I really enjoyed the work that I did, academic administration,  working with faculty, working on student academic issues, working with  programs for at-risk students. I was fortunate to have a great boss who  gave me extraordinary opportunities, saw something in me I didn   t see  and just provided opportunity, opportunity after opportunity. At that  time I completed my bachelor   s, master   s and doctorate. The more  education and the more degrees I received, the higher I went on the  administrative ladder. I enjoy higher education but it was something, if  7  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  you will, I fell into but it quickly became my passion. I see higher  education changing students    lives. That is what I love about Cameron  University. I literally see the magic of higher education every single day.  In those early years was it tough juggling family, schoolwork?  Yes. I have tremendous respect for students who try and balance it all. It  is very, very difficult to hold a full time job, to be a parent and go to  school. It is tough. It is worth doing, but it is difficult.  So you kind of had a nontraditional student experience.  I had a very non-traditional student experience.  You were not partying every night. (Laughter)  No.  When you were in school did you ever think, higher education   that is  where you want to be? Did you think you wanted to be a college  professor or just remain in those administrative ranks?  I love academic administration because you have the opportunity to  really impact the quality of education that a student receives and after  all, that is the most important part about going to college. I have had the  opportunity to teach courses. I have had the opportunity to be a faculty  member, but academic administration was really where my passion was.  Of course now I am fortunate to be President of the university, so I   m  not so actively engaged on the academic side but that is still where my  top priority is.  When you were working at Oklahoma State, you were known for many  things, one of which was centered around the sexual harassment cause.  Can you talk a little bit of how that evolved?  Again, I was raised in a traditional family. I was not raised with an  awareness of issues related to women, but as I worked in a variety of  environments, I could see inequities. I could see salary inequities. I  could see workplace and environmental issues that impacted women in a  negative way. In many ways I was fortunate to grow up in a time when  those issues were coming to surface and I had the opportunity to work  on those issues. Now mind you, not everyone was receptive to hearing  about those issues. Not everyone was receptive to addressing those  issues, but the inequities were real and sometimes are still real. It was  important to try and raise the awareness and to surface those issues and  to address them. Sexual harassment was one of them. Quality childcare  8  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  is another and quality childcare is still a struggle. My daughter has my  first grandchild, a granddaughter, she is sixteen months and finding  quality affordable childcare is as difficult now as it was when my  children were small. I don   t see that that has improved. It is so  imperative that we give all children the opportunity to grow and to  flourish in a nurturing educational environment. It is just very difficult to  find quality affordable childcare.  When you were bringing these issues to the forefront in the    80s and not  many women had many seats around the table, was it hard for you?  You   re right. I again was so fortunate to have a boss who was  instrumental in providing me forums and platforms and opportunities to  do those kinds of things. In addition to that, during that period of time,  Dr. Larry Boger was president of Oklahoma State University, and he  equally provided those opportunities. I would meet regularly with the  Dean   s Council and the academic vice president, my boss Dr. Boggs. Of  course, the only member of the Dean   s Council who was female was the  dean of Home Economics and me. So throughout my professional life,  even to this day in most of the meetings I attend, it is predominantly  male.  Is it a little easier to get those ideas across today? I mean, there are still  issues. We have made a lot of headway, but I just feel we still have a  long way to go.  I agree. I think we do have a long way to go and I would suggest to you  that sometimes our greatest education with today   s college age students,  there are so many young female students who really don   t recognize  how different it was for their mothers and their grandmothers. They take  some of the equality that has been achieved for granted and don   t  recognize some of the more subtle inequalities that still exist. So  sometimes I think our biggest awareness issue may be with today   s  traditional aged college students.  It is a whole new ball of wax today.  It is.  If you could, just take me through some of the stops along your career.  You are at OSU working. What is the position you held and approximate  dates?  I started at OSU as an administrative assistant, so really more of a  clerical position in Academic Vice President Dr. Boggs   s office. That  was about 1978 and I left there in 1990 with two children and three  9  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  degrees and a wealth of experience that has just proven invaluable to  me; wonderful, wonderful memories. In 1990, I went to the Oklahoma  State Regents for Higher Education, the coordinating board in Oklahoma  City. I started out as Associate Vice Chancellor again on the academic  side, and after I was there about four years I was promoted to Executive  Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs, which is the chief academic  officer for the state system. My primary responsibilities were the  development of academic policies and standards at the state system  level. That was a wonderful position. Again, I had wonderful  opportunities and wonderful bosses in the State Regents. It gave me the  opportunity to really see all twenty-five public colleges and universities,  the differences, the uniqueness and the value of all of them.  I had grown up, if you will, at Oklahoma State University; all three  degrees are from Oklahoma State University. I knew about the  comprehensive research university and frankly thought that was all that  existed. So when I went to the State Regents    office, I got to see what  the community colleges do and how they really touch so many students  who are first generation college students with their own unique  challenges and the regional universities, as well. My heart really found  its home at the regional university level, because we are smaller,  teaching is our primary mission, student learning is what we are focused  on; you have the opportunity to know the students; not only know their  names, know their challenges, know their goals. There is an intimacy at  the regional universities that doesn   t exist other places. Then I was at the  State Regents for twelve years. In 2002 I became the president of  Cameron University, so I just completed my ninth year.  Wow.  I am old. (Laughter)  Don   t say that, now. Wise.  Someday, maybe. (Laughter)  Working for the Regents, what were some things that you considered  highlight moments for you?  The State Regents really had a commitment to increasing academic  standards, and there was some resistance to that. There were those in the  public, in the legislature, on the university campuses in some cases who  felt like if you increased the academic standards more students would be  excluded, that students couldn   t rise to the occasion. Based on my  experience, I found if you increase the expectations, if you increase the  standards and if you provide the students the way to get there, to achieve  10  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  those standards, it will always work. Even the most financially  disadvantaged students will be successful. That was probably the biggest  challenge as we try to increase academic standards.  One of the programs I am so fond of that I think is transforming the state  of Oklahoma is OHLAP, Oklahoma Higher Learning Access Program. I  can remember when that was first being discussed at the state level and  then the legislature. There was the thought that it would be throwing  money away because it essentially provides a free college education, or  at least a tuition-free college education, to those students who are most  financially disadvantaged. I can remember the naysayers would say,     You are investing in students who won   t be successful.    But standards  were set. Students have to meet a seventeen unit high school core  curriculum. They have to meet it with good grades and they have to stay  out of trouble. If they do those things, they can get a tuition-free college  education and those students are the most financially disadvantaged  students in the state of Oklahoma and are succeeding in college at higher  rates than in general population. I don   t think there is any better example  of proving a point than OHLAP.  What a great program. I am sure it was a battle in the legislature, but  education helps move us forward.  Education is an investment. Every dollar spent on education is an  investment. It is an investment in the individual. It   s an investment in the  state.  So, you are working for the State Regents, the Cameron position  becomes available. Did someone say    Dr. Ross, you should do this?     Interestingly I had been approached about other college and university  presidencies and I didn   t have a burning desire to be president. It wasn   t  something I was negative about but it just wasn   t a great passion. When  I had been approached previously, I had not applied. When the Cameron  position became open I thought, that is a university I would like to be  president of. I could see long distance from Oklahoma City that it had a  rich history and I believed it had a lot of potential. One of the things that  strongly attracted me to Cameron was the diversity of the students.  Cameron has a very diverse student population and that was very  appealing to me, so it was the first presidency that I applied for.  Was the hiring process a tough one?  Yes. They had a number of strong candidates. As I recall they  interviewed five. Cameron University reports to the OU Board of  Regents   a great board. In fact, that was another thing that was  11  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  appealing to me about working at Cameron University was working for  the OU Board of Regents. They had a tough decision to make and I was  just so fortunate they chose me.  Now, looking at the history of the state of Oklahoma, you have become  the third woman president hired to such a post and nationwide, women  aren   t always tapped for these positions. Going in, what was going  through your mind?  Well, you are right, third woman president in Oklahoma; the first  woman president at Cameron University. I didn   t really think about  being a woman. I don   t really think of myself as a woman president. I  think of myself as a president. So I didn   t really think of myself as a  woman candidate. Now that said, I know from personal experience and  observation that being a woman can make a difference, but I had every  confidence that the OU board would try and choose whom they believed  to be the best qualified and best fit irrespective of gender.  So going in, what were some of your early goals for the University?  One of the things I noticed prior to the interview was Cameron  University   s centennial was approaching its hundredth birthday. I knew  that would provide a great opportunity for the university, an opportunity  to raise money which is so critical in this day and time, an opportunity to  focus attention on the university. So that was one of the things that I  talked about during the interview process, and that was an early goal.  Another goal was to be very inclusive; inclusive on campus with faculty,  staff and students; inclusive with the community to make sure that  Cameron University was an integral part of this community, was a  leader in economic development, was a great partner with Fort Sill, with  the high schools in the area; just generally a leader in the community.  So evaluating your presidency after the first year, what were you  thinking?  I was glad to drive by and the see the University was still here.  (Laughter) It was a whirlwind. It was an absolute whirlwind.  Do you work a lot of hours?  I work a lot of hours, but I like to work.  Dealing with the partnership with the military being so close, tell me a  little bit about that. Obviously the Fort Sill community is a big part of  Lawton and also Cameron.  12  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  It is, and I didn   t realize how very much I would enjoy and value the  opportunity to work with Fort Sill and the soldiers and their families.  Now, about 11 percent of our student population is soldiers or their  families. When I came, it was actually about 31 percent. The reason in  the drop was, I came in August 1, 2002. Of course, September 1, 2001  was a little less than a year old, so during the subsequent time I have  been here there have been multiple deployments. As a result of the  deployments, soldiers are gone and family members have often moved  back home. So that has certainly, dramatically impacted Cameron   s  enrollment. Now we have replaced those students with traditional age  students directly out of high school and our enrollment has grown at  record levels. But I share that with you in terms of the university   s  relationship with Fort Sill.  I am a frequent visitor on post. I enjoy the opportunity to go out there  and visit with soldiers and visit with the leadership. We have multiple  partnerships. One of the most recent partnerships is what we call  Freedom to Learn, where Cameron University provides a computer to  any solider deploying and that solider can take six or more hours of  online courses and they get to keep the computer. We have had  computers in Iraq, Afghanistan, literally all over the world, so we are  doing whatever we can to be helpful to the soldiers and their families. I  don   t think the general public recognizes the sacrifices our soldiers and  their families have made; the multiple deployments, the missed family  reunions, missed birthdays, missed graduations, missed christenings, on  and on and on and on, in addition to the emotional wear and tear of war  on the family and on the solider. I have a tremendous respect for our  soldiers and their families as well as all branches of the service, but of  course the Army is what   s located primarily in Lawton.  We are going to talk about the  Oklahoma Women   s Hall of Fame   induction ceremony in a little bit, but I thought it was very nice that you  had representation there from Fort Sill at the ceremony.  It was important to me to have someone there from Fort Sill, to have our  soldiers represented, because not only are they so important in the life of  southwest Oklahoma, and in fact all of the state of Oklahoma, they are  important to me personally. They are a high priority for me.  Well that is good to hear. In this time, we always think about our  soldiers and appreciate what they do but they are right here in your  backyard and a part of your community and it is nice to see.  I have had to attend too many funerals of soldiers. People just don   t  realize the sacrifice they make.  13  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  And they have honored you as well. Would you like to talk a little bit  about that?  I have been so fortunate to participate in a nationwide program that they  have that is operated by the Secretary of Defense. It is called the Joint  Civilian Orientation Conference. It was a weeklong program where we  started out in Washington, D.C. At that time it was Secretary Rumsfeld.  It was a group of individuals, about fifty individuals from across the  United States, and we had the opportunity to visit all branches of the  service from the Coast Guard to the Navy to the Army to the Air Force.  It was just a trip of a lifetime. In addition to that, I was honored to be  inducted into what is called St. Barbara   s. St. Barbara is the patron saint  of the field artillery. That was very special to me because primarily that  is reserved for active duty officers. Not too many civilians are inducted,  though some are. Fewer women are inducted. It is to recognize the  support to the Army and to the Marine Corps. So that was a very special  and humbling honor for me.  But very telling of you commitment as well.  Yes. My dad was very patriotic. He served in the Navy, but his military  service was very important to him. In part, I come by that naturally and  the familiarity and the closeness that I have gotten to experience here in  Lawton has just cemented that early feeling.  Well one of the other things that you have done here at Cameron is your  ability to really go above and beyond your early fundraising goals when  you first started. Can you talk a little bit about fundraising and your  campaign?  It is really a tribute to the people who live here in southwest Oklahoma. I  mentioned earlier the Centennial and the opportunity the Centennial  provided, one of which was to raise private money for the University,  which is now so critical in terms of operating a university. So we put  together a campaign for this Centennial celebration and it was originally  an  8.5 million campaign. It was to fund student scholarships, endowed  faculty positions and two pieces of construction, the Centennial gardens  and a new student union. We called it a student activities complex. I can  remember doing a lot of this very quietly on weekends at home alone.  When I initially shared it with just a few select people, they thought I  had lost my mind, which needless to say shook my confidence. But then  I shared it with some others very selectively and I had some people grab  hold of it and say yeah, I think this may be doable. The McMahon  Foundation was the first group; wonderful group of trustees. It   s a local  foundation.  14  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  I shared my vision with the chairman of the McMahon Foundation, Dr.   Charles  Graybill, and he latched on it immediately. He said,    We will  help you with this.    And of course, they were just pivotal to the success  of the campaign. Then I went to McCasland Foundation in Duncan and  they too agreed to be a significant early supporter. With those two  foundations on board it became much more doable and possible, and of  course you do a quiet phase with the campaign. You never announce it  publically until you have over half of the money raised. That is what we  did, but there were still plenty of naysayers who just said,    You can   t  raise that kind of money in Southwest Oklahoma. This is a working class  community. The money is simply not here. It has never been done  before.     It was a three year campaign. Two years into a three year campaign we  were over  8.5 million so we increased the goal to  10 million. At the  end of the three years we ended up with almost  12.6 million, so 48  percent over goal. It just speaks volumes about Southwest Oklahoma.  We were fortunate. We had donors from Wichita Falls, we had donors  from all across the state of Oklahoma but the predominance was in  southwest Oklahoma. It really speaks to their appreciation of Cameron  University and their belief in Cameron   s future. It has been  transformational.  So now on campus we are seeing capital improvements?  Yes, we have done over  55 million in capital improvements. We have a  brand new business building that was funded by the legislature   s Capital  Bond Program,   8.7 million facility, technology rich, simulated Wall  Street trading floor, faculty-student interaction areas, just a gorgeous  building. As a result of the Centennial campaign, we have our new  student union or student activities complex rightfully name the  McMahon Centennial Complex in recognition of the McMahon  contribution, and we have the Bentley Gardens. We took a 2.6 acre  asphalt parking lot right in the center of campus and transformed it into  gardens with a pond, gazebo, lots of green area, flowers, trees. That is  named for Don and Steven Bentley who made the major contribution to  this project. We also have planted over five hundred trees primarily  through the generosity of Regent Jon Stewart, who is one of the OU  regents who lives in Tulsa. We built a new student apartment complex  and that includes what we call a learning center with a faculty member-in-  residence. The Lawton voters passed an increase in their property  taxes, which is extraordinarily unusual to fund a conference center. We  have been very fortunate that we have had so much external investment  and really the campus looks very different now than it did just a matter  of years ago.  15  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  And student scholarships are up?  Student scholarships are at all time highs. In fact, our student  scholarships have grown over 180 percent. We are recognized  nationally, we are number three in the nation based on a study by U.S.  News and World Report in its best college publication. Number three in  the nation out of 572 universities with our students graduating with the  lowest debt. Sixty-five percent of our students graduate without any debt  and that is because of student scholarships.  That is saying something.  We are real proud of that.  Just nine years on the job?  Just completed my ninth year.  So you have done a lot in your nine year span. Wow.  I haven   t done anything. (Laughs) Faculty, staff, students and the  community have accomplished a lot.  You have guided the ship.  It has been fun.  What are some of your everyday challenges? It is an interesting time in  the nation, economically. As a college president, what are some of your  challenges?  Money is always a challenge. We have had state budget cuts almost  every year I have been president at Cameron. In fact, the first state  budget cut came six weeks into my presidency and there were three that  first year. They are real and they are hurtful. They impact our services to  students. Services that are badly needed. Again, with my academic  background, we do all we can to protect the academic quality of what we  do. We don   t do it if it is not at the level of quality it needs to be to serve  the students. But our students at Cameron and our students at so many of  the colleges and universities across the state, excluding the two research  universities, they need these services. Many of them aren   t prepared to  go to college; they need to be in remedial course work. They need  tutoring opportunities. They are single parents. They have other  challenges, so services really make a difference in their ultimate success  in college, and those are dramatically affected every time we have a state  budget cut.  16  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  We have been very careful at Cameron to be cautious too in raising our  tuition in response to state budget cuts. We are the second most  affordable university in Oklahoma and as I indicated, we have a strong  scholarship program as evidenced by the fact that most of our students  graduate without any debt. But it   s a real struggle to provide the services  and quality of education in light of the state cuts that we have had.  Cameron is known and has a statistical record for being a very safe  campus, and that is something that we are very diligent about. But, that  is something I think about in everything we do. The safety of our  students, the safety of our faculty, staff and visitors. For example, when  we built our student apartments, we steel reinforced our hallways on the  first floor for serve weather. I don   t know of any other university that  has done that. Perhaps many have but I am unaware if that is the case.  We really put a lot of emphasis on safety of everyone at the University.  As you know, in recent legislative sessions, there has been legislation  introduced to have guns on campus. That is frightening to me, so safety  is a concern and those things that are out of your control in terms of any  initiative that might make the campus more dangerous by putting guns  on campus. Those are two of the issues that I worry about.  Well, as you look toward the future of Cameron University, what do you  see? What is your vision?  Cameron has a very bright future. I think we have laid a firm foundation.  We were very pleased. We had our Higher Learning Commission  accreditation visit this past fall. Something that occurs every ten years.  Cameron University was deemed to be a role model institution by the  team, and we had an unconditional reaffirmation of our accreditation.  The best accreditation report in the university   s history. The deficiencies  that existed ten years ago, all of those were addressed and many of those  were even moved to a strong strength for the university. So the  foundation I think is very strong, and that is the academic side of the  institution which I focus on more even than the visual, physical  transformation. But there is much to be done. We don   t have a childcare  center on campus, and that is something I would ultimately like to have.  Only this past year did we add a student wellness center on campus.  That had never existed. There had not been counseling services for our  students. There had not been access to acute medical care until we  established that. Just this spring we added a central academic advising  center to help students succeed in college. Our retention and graduation  rates must improve and we are focused on that. So there is much work  left to be done.  When you look back twenty years from now, thirty years from now     17  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  I will be dead  (Laughter)  No, no. (Laughter) What do you think your legacy will be?  One of the things I try and remind myself daily (and I remind the faculty  and staff probably more often they want to hear it) is that Cameron  University is only temporarily in our care. We are stewards of Cameron  University for only a short time and we need to leave it better than we  found it and with the prospect of a bright future. So what I hope my  legacy will be, not all the buildings we have done, but rather that we  have provided access to more students primarily from Southwest  Oklahoma to college, because so many students in this area don   t  prepare to go to college, don   t aspire to go to college and don   t go to  college, so to raise those expectations to go to college; to literally change  the culture of the community, and to provide students access to a quality  education that will transform their life. I hope that would be my legacy.  Now looking back on your career, I have noticed that you were on  budget committees. (Laughs) Not usually a place that women, I know  back to the woman thing, but not normally a place where women get to  serve. Do you think that is a place that is important for those who look  forward to trying to get a post as a president to serve on those types of  committees?  Absolutely. You have to understand the budget process. You have to  understand the legislative process in terms of allocating money. You  have to understand the State Regents    process. You need to be familiar  with your own institution   s budget. You can   t make decisions for the  institution if the money doesn   t follow the decisions. You have to be  well-grounded and well-versed and know where the money is. In  addition to that, you need to know how to build a building. You don   t  need to know how to hammer a nail, but you need to know the process.  You need to know what to ask architects; you need to know what to ask  construction managers and what to look for. You need to be willing to  wear a hard hat, and go around and look at the construction site and see  what   s going on, see if it   s on schedule and if it is within budget. Those  things that often times, I don   t think that some women have experience  in. You have got to find the opportunity to gain that experience and latch  hold of it to be successful, I think.  Any other words of wisdom for those who are looking to do what you  have done?  (Laughs) Take risks knowing that not all of them will pay off. Listen to  everyone. I get some of my very best ideas from custodial crew  members, from students. You really find out what is working at the  18  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  University and what   s not. Laugh; don   t take yourself too seriously.  Remember that the university is only temporarily in your care. Work  hard.  Is it hard to find that balance between work and family?  Yes. Sometimes, but I also think it can be very compatible and that is the  way I look at it. When things may not be going right at work or at the  university, and at first I had children to go home to, now I have a  granddaughter that I can Skype with. It just puts everything in  perspective.  Well in 2011, you were inducted into the Oklahoma Women   s Hall of  Fame. Were you shocked when you got the call?  I was shocked. I was in Texas visiting my son and my sister and I  received the phone call. Mrs. Walker told me I was one of this year   s  recipients. I was shocked, I was surprised and I didn   t even tell any  family members about it that day. I waited a full twenty-four hours  before I mentioned it and then I swore them to secrecy. I don   t know  why. (Laughter) I guess it was the thought that it may not be real and I  didn   t want to be embarrassed, but I was surprised; very surprised. I  know many of the past recipients and if I don   t know them personally I  know of their work and their contributions to this state. I   m simply not  in their league, so I was surprised.  Now at the induction ceremony not too long ago, do you remember who  presented you?  Yes. Glen Johnson, Chancellor of the Oklahoma System of Higher  Education.  What was that like hearing him say all of those kind words about you?  He was overly generous. He is a great friend. I have known Chancellor  Johnson since he was Speaker of the House of Representatives, and then  of course he was President at Southeastern Oklahoma State University  for ten years and I worked with him in that capacity. Then he became  Chancellor. Through the years I   ve had the opportunity not just to work  with him but to observe him. He is such an effective leader and  articulate spokesman on behalf of higher education, and just a solid  quality good person. To have him nominate me and have him also  present me for induction made a special day extraordinary.  You had a lot of people in attendance. Some family, colleagues and  maybe students?  19  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Yes. I did. I never go anywhere without Cameron University students.  They are too important to me. So the president of the student  government association, Cody Gardner, was there and I was so grateful  that she came.  I am sure as kids are growing up and they look at women of Oklahoma  history and they come across your name, they read your story, they  learn more about you. What would you like to tell them?  To remember who they are and where they came from and what their  values are and how very fortunate we are to be from the great state of  Oklahoma. That is how I feel, and I encourage them to share that  feeling. It is a feeling of warmth and love.  An Oklahoma girl born in Wakita, and a college president now.  I have been very lucky; very, very lucky.  What does Oklahoma mean to you?  Oklahoma means Wakita and Medford and Grandma and opportunity  and hard work and Cameron and my kids. It is just everything.  Everything one could wish for in a life has been Oklahoma.  Is there anybody you would like to make mention of or thank who have  helped play an important role in your life?  There are countless people who have played an important role in my life  without which I certainly wouldn   t be president of Cameron. In fact,  every person who has been in my life I thank because in some way or  another they have touched me in a permanent way.  Favorite part of the job?  Students. That   s easy. If I am having a bad day and things aren   t going  right, if we are getting another budget cut, faculty member dismissed  class too early, whatever it might be. It is just not going right. All I have  to do is walk out of my office and walk across campus and see students  and say hello, and stop and visit, and I come back a different person.  Life is good again. Students are wonderful. I feel so blessed to have the  opportunity to come to work every single day where there are students  and committed faculty and staff and a supportive community. It   s  wonderful.  What is next? What do you hope to do?  20  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  Nykolaiszyn  Ross  The University has to continue to move forward. You can   t ever become  complacent or even take a deep breath. You have got to continue to  move forward. I think that is true for Cameron University. I think that is  true for each of us. As professionals, each of us, as human beings, we  have got to continue to move forward. There are always new challenges.  There are always things that need to be done. There are always new  ideas. There is always a problem to be solved and there is no time to  waste.  Well before I ask my last question, is there anything else you would like  to add that I have not made mention of today? Anything else you would  like to tell me?  I am very grateful to the Commission on the Status of Women; those  individuals who volunteer their time, their energy and their effort to deal  with women   s issues, to raise the awareness of woman   s and children   s  issues and to recognize women in the state of Oklahoma. I am very  grateful to them. Not just for including me in this year   s Hall of Fame  induction class, but what they do every single day with the Commission  and what it means to this state.  When history is written about you, what would you like for it to say?  This sounds like death is right around the corner. (Laughter) That I am a  small town girl from Wakita, Oklahoma, who loved her children and  grandchildren and had a passion for education.  Well President Ross, thank you so much for joining me today.  Thank you.  -------  -------  
