 Nykolaiszyn, with the Oklahoma State University  Library. Today is Wednesday, August 17, 2011, and I am in Oklahoma  City, Oklahoma interviewing Dr. Laura Boyd. This interview is being  conducted as part of the Inductees of the Oklahoma Women   s Hall of  Fame Oral History Project. Dr. Boyd was inducted into the Oklahoma  Women   s Hall of Fame in 2011. Thank you for joining us today.  Thank you Juliana. I am looking forward to our visit.  Well, let   s begin by learning a little bit more about you. Could you tell  us where you born, and could you give us a little background into your  early life?  I was born in Charlottesville, Virginia. My father was a chaplain at the  University of Virginia at that point. From there, in my very young years  we went to New Jersey where he was the director of a YMCA. Then,  when I was six we moved to Raleigh, North Carolina, which is where I  really grew up until I went to college.  Take me through your early schooling experience, big schools, small  schools?  Public schools. Went to public schools, and so I think they were  probably very similar to what we are finding today in terms of  population. There was elementary, there was junior high, there was high  school, but they were public schools. I was a good student. That was  very important to me as a way of indentifying myself. That was to try to  be a good student and put my attention to my grades and to the band and  orchestra, which I think probably really molded me as much as anything  in my school career was being very, very involved in marching band,  concert band, orchestra, and anything with those friends, those kids,  really, whom I was relating with from fifth grade through graduation as  we all grew older.  5  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  What instrument?  Started out with trumpet. I was a tomboy growing up. Started out with  trumpet and was probably mediocre, and so in seventh grade I switched  to French horn, which hardly anyone played but allowed me to excel.  French horn is a difficult instrument, but it still was something I decided  to tackle, and I played it on into my first few years of college.  In those early years of schooling, did you have a favorite subject that  you gravitated towards?  I had a couple of favorite teachers whom I gravitated towards, which  made science my favorite for a couple of years. It made history a  favorite one year. I had teachers whom I really enjoyed. One subject that  I went into as a career was teaching German. I really admired my high  school German teacher. I had one in junior high   I started to say middle  school, which we have now in junior high. But in high school my  German teacher was really known as an extreme disciplinarian of the old  Austrian kind, and he demanded perfection. I loved his class. I even  came back to do my student teaching with him my senior year of  college.  For you, what really stood out in your mind when you thought of,    Wow,  this is a great teacher     during those early years? What did you like  about their teaching style?  He knew how to bring out the very best in his students. He was not  willing to settle for anything less. He seemed very tough and seemed  mean. Kids were all scared of him and yet, right below that there was a  softness. And you knew that it wasn   t meant to be mean. It was meant to  say,    You can do this. You can do better, and I demand that you give me  everything you   ve got.    So, I think the kids knew that. Nobody wanted  him to be mad at you. Nobody wanted him to call on you because you  might not be perfect but Herr Watts, as he was known, physically, he  was a strange little man. He probably weighed about ninety pounds. He  always wore the same black suit, white shirt, and black tie. He carried  what we called a Stock, a stick, Stock. He would just slam it down on the  desk to get people   s attention if he wanted to or needed to. So, I know  part of this was performance. You never got a sense it was performance,  but I am sure he was like running a three-ring circus and the animals  were going to do whatever he wanted.  Well, during this time were your parents encouraging of education?  I think it was never assumed that I wouldn   t do very well in school. It  6  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  was never assumed that I wasn   t going to go to college. So, yes, they  were encouraging. I don   t remember   it had to be there. I mean, it had  to be there from the time I was a little kid because it never was a  possibility that I wasn   t going to work really, really hard at school. That  was also   our family had pretty high standards for everybody. All of my  siblings have degrees and graduate degrees. I think the place that I felt  safe was academia. The place that I could identify a uniqueness was  academia, by just cranking out those A   s and trying to win those  scholarships. That mattered. My family had a lot of chaos in it too, so it  was very, very important for me to find someplace that was safe.  How many siblings?  I have two sisters and a brother.  Where do you rank?  I am the oldest of the three girls. My brother, my half-brother, is eight  years older than I am.  So, as you are growing up and you are thinking about college and doing  well in school, what are you thinking about maybe for a future career?  Any thoughts?  In the old days, women of course were going to be secretaries or  teachers, and that was pretty much it. I did not want to do that. I thought  for a long time that maybe I wanted to be a physical therapist. I was a  little worried about medical school and the cost and how long that would  take, so I thought about physical therapy. I didn   t want to be a nurse. I  wanted to be more the boss than the secretary, but I really didn   t know.  Then I went into teaching German because I did love German. I was  good at it, and I do remember very clearly in those days that was  supposed to be the fallback for women as a career. You could always  teach.  So, I wanted to but I didn   t know what else I wanted to do. I thought I  wanted to major in psychology. I got to Duke, and my freshman  psychology class had five hundred students. I didn   t feel like I belonged.  In the German department we had about eight professors and five  majors. So, I went over and majored in German and moved in that  direction. Then continued to take some psychology courses but then my  masters, my doctorate, are in psychology. So, I went back to really what  I think I had wanted to do when I had a little more confidence that I  could do it and truly felt like I had a little more of my identity at the  level of a master   s and a doctorate, too.  7  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  How did you decide on Duke?  I grew up in North Carolina, which was very much like Oklahoma in  terms of sports was very important between UNC and NC State and  Duke. My father was a Methodist minister, so I was able to qualify for a  full ride because of his being a Methodist minister and my grades. And  Duke just seemed kind of a notch above at that point, in terms of the  local feelings. So, I went to Duke. It was a beautiful campus, and I had a  great time.  So, you started teaching. How long did you remain teaching German?  I taught for three years, until the birth of my first child. I taught for three  years, loved it, loved the kids, supervised the student newspaper and the  German club. Then a few other things during that period of time and  really enjoyed, again, the individuals in my classes. That was just so  important, the people contact. I think that   s been a theme throughout my  life in whatever career has just been that the relationships matter.  So, take me through what happens next.  Okay. Had a child, put a husband through seminary. We served a couple  of churches, and during that period of time I got my master   s degree.  Also taught at Lafayette University in Pennsylvania. Then after that  period of time we divorced. I moved to Oklahoma, did my PhD in one of  the very first   now, I think we call them virtual universities, but it was  one of the long distance kinds where I would do residencies in the  summer and then be able to take classes in different ways during the  year. So, I did my degree from here, remarried, went into a practice of  counseling, training, and psychotherapy. I was doing that for a number  of years, and then we fast forward up to 1992 when I ran for the state  legislature, spent six years at the state legislature. And then after a  wonderful and failed attempt to be governor in 1998, I have been very  much involved in child welfare, foster care, and the political aspects of  that since that time.  I am going to pull you back a little bit. You spoke about during your  college years, you took a couple of psychology classes, and you were  interested. What really drew you back to counseling?  I used to tell my supervisees that I think that all of us who became  professional counselors were doing that as part of our own healing and  growth. My father was a minister. He was involved in the Civil Rights  Movement, very, very intimately and highly into the sit-ins and the  restaurants and in sit-ins in the drug stores back then where blacks were  not   and we didn   t even call them blacks at that time   were not  8  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  allowed to eat. I was sent to a camp, a summer camp each year, day  camp, where there was a white congregation and an African American  congregation that the kids came together. The church got on the bus and  went out to the day camp. All of those were very, very formative on me.  There were also some dangerous times during that.  My parents had a very rough marriage and there was quite a bit of  disharmony, and I was sort of the family rescuer, trying to take care of  both of my parents and my younger siblings, as well as my brother  actually. So, there was a lot of that worry growing up, going to sleep  worried at night. And counseling was a way to work all of that through  myself, but also take what I had learned and take just some of the ability  to be empathic and sit and be with others as they were in their own  moments of suffering. So, that   s what got me back there. That   s what  made me good at what I did. I really thrived in that profession.  I was the healthiest and my marriage was the healthiest when I was  doing it for eight hours a day for other people. I can promise you that  because I would sit there and think,    Now, how can you be mad about  the laundry being done when this person is talking about so and so?     (Laughter) So, it was really a wonderful, wonderful career. I think I was  good at it. I think I was very healthy during that time, but I think it was  because of what I could learn from others and having to remind myself  to live as I spoke, to be as I would share with others that they could be.  Well, you opened your practice in Oklahoma. What got you to  Oklahoma?  A relationship. A man that I had dated and met on the national lecture  circuit. He was from Oklahoma and that got me here. My parents kept  saying,    Come home, come home,    meaning North Carolina. And I said  to them,    I am home.    Oklahoma had the best people from the moment I  got here, the best people. You can see the sky from anywhere in  Oklahoma. I really was home. I had never heard of Oklahoma. The older  sister of a guy in the band that I hung out with in high school came out  to OSU to vet school. I remember thinking,    Where in the heck is  Oklahoma? Why would she go to Oklahoma?    I don   t know what she  did other than graduate. I have not kept up with them, but that was the  only other reference I even had to this state. It didn   t take long until it  took my heart.  You opened your practice and then, one day you decided to run for the  legislature? How did that come about?  Well, I opened my practice and one day decided I had to get a PhD. Here  I was young, female, had my master   s. I had practiced on the East Coast.  9  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  I am working with good ole boys in Oklahoma, and I decided that I  couldn   t get older. I couldn   t change my gender, but at least I could be  Dr. Honey instead of just Honey. So, that really did help me at age  twenty-eight get some more credibility with traditional Oklahomans,  men Oklahomans in particular because my specialty is marriage and  family. You don   t just work with women, so that really did help a whole  lot.  I was doing that and then one night I got a phone call, late one afternoon  I got a phone call from Carolyn Thompson Taylor. She said,    Laura, I  am not going to run for my seat. Will you run for my seat?    I said,     Carolyn, I don   t know anything about roads, bridges, taxes. I don   t  even vote regularly. I don   t know how to do that job.    She said,    No.  You are smart. You learn quickly, you like people, you can do this job.     So, I said,    Can I have overnight to think about it?    She said,    Well,  filing closes in about an hour and a half.     So, my husband went back and forth and back and forth, trying to  decide. And the last thing he said was,    Look, you see your first client in  the morning at eight, you are home by six, life   s good.    We were raising  two kids.    Life   s good, let   s just leave things as they are.    I was thinking  that, too. But when he said that, then I realized this was an opportunity  that had been presented to me that I had not sought, and I just sensed  that it was one of those leaps of faith that I was supposed to take. It was  a door I was supposed to walk through. I did. I have no regrets. I gave up  two-thirds of a salary to take the legislative salary. But I have no regrets,  and so that is how I got into it and loved that career as well.  Did you continue to practice while you served in the legislature?  I did for a few years. I tried to. I did for a few years, and it worked out  very well. But when I ran for governor I could not be available to my  families in any way, shape, or form if there was an emergency. There  wasn   t even the idea of practicing Sunday afternoon. That wouldn   t have  worked if that is what you wanted to do because you were always  moving and traveling and always gone. So, I had to give up my practice  completely when I ran for governor.  I am going to get to governor in a second. During your time in the  legislature you were known for championing many issues. Could you  touch a little bit on the Ryan Luke Law for us?  That is probably, I consider, one of the highlights of my career is Ryan  Luke. I had tried to pass a number of child protection bills prior to 1995,  and all of them failed miserably. There was an adage at that time around  the Capitol that a kid bill was dead on arrival. We could talk about the  10  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  length of quail season for three or four days, but a kid bill didn   t even  get anyone   s attention. In 1995, Ryan Luke died in January, we had the  bombing in April of    95, and in August in    95 we found the body of  Shane Coffman, eastern Cleveland County. That was an opportunity  when Oklahoma was just mortified that these kinds of events happened  to our innocent children.  I was able to take everything I had worked on for three years and put it  together. I held a number of hearings at the Capitol, invited all different  kinds of people to come and give input and learn from their ideas. We  put everything we could possibly think of in that bill. I knew it would  pass. It did, and that was not without difficulty. We had our opponents  about different things because we were requiring, for the first time,  certain accountability from the judiciary, certain accountability from the  D.A.s. We were trying for the first time to give the opportunity to social  workers to have some say-so about children in courts. There were a  number of things that were with difficulty. Shane Coffman, by the way,  had been supposedly homeschooled. That was the guise under which he  was allowed to go missing for nine months even though he was dead.  So, I brought in homeschoolers thinking this is a terrible thing that we  do. We have to have some accountability in homeschooling. Well, they  taught me about the accountability they do have.  There was a great learning all the way around, and there was still  resistance all the way down to the Ryan Luke Bill from certain areas that  had not been under scrutiny before, had not had any accountability. At  the same time, there was no way   I knew in my heart there was no way  that we weren   t going to pass the Ryan Luke Law. Not with what we had  been through. In fact, we had passed the House ninety-nine to one, and  we passed the Senate with fifty votes. So, that was a very, very  important time personally to me, in my heart. It was also a very  important time for Oklahoma to step up and to really account for our  children. I believe to this moment that if I, as the State, whether I am  DHS  Department of Human Services  or a law maker or whomever, if I  am going to take a child from the current care givers for whatever  reason, I believe it is in the best interest, for that child it   s important to  remove that child, I have an obligation to provide better for that child.  And hopefully, what I would provide for my own child. We had never  done that. We still don   t do that very well in this state, and so my work  continues.  Well, you spent six years in the House.  Yes.  One day you wake up and you say,    You know what? I am going to run  11  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  for Governor.    How did that come about? How did the whole thought  process   because that is a big deal.  It is a big deal.  No other woman has tried it before.  It took another twelve years to get one elected. (Laughter) Yes, it did. It  is a big deal, and I didn   t start out thinking I wanted to run. I started out  thinking at that point that I wanted a governor who was from Oklahoma.  Frank Keating had come here, come home to run, and I felt he was going  to go back to Washington,  D.C.  when he finished his term. I felt that  we needed someone from Oklahoma, in Oklahoma, to be the governor of  Oklahoma. So, I went to the usual suspects to see who was going to run  and wanted to be helpful. I went to the leaders of the House and the  Senate, went to other state elected officials. Of course, all of these are  men at that time. Went to them and said,    Are you going to consider  running?    Of course, it would be an incumbent race.  They were actually much smarter than I at that point. They knew it  would be an incumbent race, they knew it would be difficult, they knew  that raising money would be difficult, and all of them said,    No, I am not  going to run.    At that point, I thought,    Well, someone has to,    and so I  decided that I would. I had talked to a number of people by that time,  seeing if they would run. And then I talked to a number of leaders of the  Democratic Party across the state and said,    If I run, will you support  me?    So, I went ahead and threw my hat in the ring, and I have never  regretted a day of it.  Was it difficult campaigning throughout Oklahoma?  It was a wonderful campaigning throughout Oklahoma. I got to learn so  much about this state. I mean, I loved this state anyway, but I was in  every county. I never spent the night in a hotel. I only spent the night in  people   s homes. I had a great field team who just set it up. These  weren   t people we knew. So, I stayed in a home in some little town  outside Atoka. I stayed in Tulsa in some very nice homes. I stayed in  Tahlequah in an African American home. I will tell you to this moment,  I do not know where the lady of the house stayed that night. It was a  small house. I had the guest of honor room because the plastic was still  on the mattress and one of two TVs in the house was in that room. I  don   t know where she stayed because there were grandchildren staying  with her, and she put my driver up in another room at that point. And so,  when people went out of their way to welcome you in and tell you about  their lives and tell you about their town, it was just amazing.  12  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  You can also drive forty-five minutes anywhere in Oklahoma and the  topography changes. It is a beautiful state  Most people don   t know.  They don   t realize that. It   s not all flat. It   s not all hills. It   s not all  deserts. In about forty-five minutes it changes completely, so traveling  was really fun. Meeting the people was really fun. One of the worst  experiences was going near the Texas border on a hot afternoon. I show  up in a field and they opened up this metal barn with hay to sit on where  everybody was coming to hear me speak. It had to be a 150  degrees  in  that barn, I think. I mean, it must   ve been. This was the summer, though,  that we had many, many days over 100  degrees . So, it was hot.  I remember having on a skirt. I don   t remember the skirt as well as I do  very well remember the sleeveless, navy blue silk shirt, and it took me  about three minutes to look like a nursing mother. (Laughter) I  remember just kind of having to laugh through that because I thought I  was dressed up. It might as well have been a wet t-shirt contest, as far  as   it was just so hot. So, what I learned on that trip is that you always  take a change of clothes or two and you never wear silk on a hot day.  Either a cotton t-shirt or cotton blouse will do you much better. I just  have stories from everywhere. Great people, great times, and listening to  them. I remember hearing chicken farmers in the northeast saying to me,     Please, don   t get involved in this because we are afraid of the out-of-state  growers. We   re afraid, and we don   t want our life to be any worse  because this all we can do.    Just people who are sharing how hard they  were working and what their worries were.  What did you take away from that race?  I took away from that race that you have to have a message that  resonates with the people, and I think I had that. I think I learned  running against an incumbent that you have to have enough money, and  it is very difficult for incumbents to raise that money. So, I knew that  hard work, belief, really listening to the people, and if you were going to  represent the people that will take you everywhere, everywhere. I did not  win that election, but I won so many things through that process. And I  changed the content of the discussions for the second term of Governor  Keating. There were things being talked about in terms of the  environment and growers and incubators. There were issues about  children and education that were being talked about in ways that they  had not been before.  And now, look   Now, we have a woman governor. We had two women candidates for  governor. I mean, we are on our way   13  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  You have to start somewhere. It was interesting watching that campaign.  In the back of my head I   m thinking,    Boy, I wonder what Laura Boyd is  thinking?     Yes.  So, after the run for governor, what did you do besides take a little  break?  Well, I didn   t take a break by choice. I mean, one of the things I didn   t  do, which I encourage women to do, I think men already do this   I was  focused on that race. I wasn   t assuming I would win, but I focused on  that race, which means when you don   t win, there is no plan. The script  had run out as far as that was at that point. I didn   t know whether I  mattered anymore. These are all things to me because I had always  worked. I had always focused in on some job or some goal, and now  there was nothing that I either had to do, was expected to do, and  actually could do. I mean, I was unemployed. I had not set it up to have  something in the wings.  So, it was about six months of really trying to come to terms again with,     What do I want to do with my life? Am I significant in the world, in my  world anymore?    It was not necessarily pleasant, but it was important  because if it did nothing else, it let me rest. One of the things I did  during that time was I just happened to find on the internet one day a  fellowship called the Eisenhower Exchange Fellowship. I applied and I  won a fellowship to Peru the next fall to work with women who want to  work with their government, really, and woman advocates who were  trying to figure out how to have a voice in the political system. So, that  was probably the real hidden treasure that came in that period of time.  And it was just a fluke of,    Nobody loves me      crying voice  and  looking around on the internet. I thought,    I am going to apply for this. I  don   t have a job. I am going to apply for fellowship,    and I got it.  How long were you in Peru?  I was in Peru   the fellowship itself on the ground in Peru was about six  weeks. With the way the Eisenhower Fellowship works   and it has been  an important part of my life   is there are probably about thirty-five  leaders from around the world who come to the United States each year.  There are five or six U.S. citizens who go somewhere in the world each  year. I was in that class in 1999 and since then, most years I have spent  some time hosting someone from some foreign country here in  Oklahoma for anywhere from two days to five days of their tours across  the United States. It has just been wonderful to spend some time with  someone from Indonesia here, from Turkey, from Peru. This past fall I  14  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  had someone from Palestine. It   s just been so rich to show them about  Oklahoma. And the feedback that I hear from Eisenhower people in  Philadelphia, their home office, consistently, is that their time in  Oklahoma was the highlight of their trip or was among the highlights of  their trip. I think that says that what those international visitors pick up  on is the same thing that I saw when I came up from North Carolina.  There is a quality of the people, there is an genuineness and an openness.  There is a sense of volunteerism and we   re all in this together. It is an  Oklahoma that is unique not only to the United States, but probably to  the world.  So, what is next?  Well, I am pretty happy with what I am doing at the moment, which is I  own a company, a consulting company. But my two major contracts in  that company, one is Executive Director of the Oklahoma Therapeutic  Foster Care Association. So, I spend much of my time representing  thirteen agencies that deliver therapeutic foster care across the state. All  of those are DHS kids. They are all high-level foster children with  mental health issues and behavioral health problems that require  intensive services beyond traditional foster care. So, we are like a mini-  DHS. They are all DHS custody kids, but we recruit, train, supervise,  deliver services for our children all across Oklahoma.  I also spend a week a month in Washington in my other major contract,  which is representing Therapeutic Foster Care nationally. Representing  it to the administration and to policy makers on Capitol Hill and  consulting for the fifty states about issues of foster care and child  welfare. And helping them navigate some of the same issues that we do  here, but able to share with any state about what many other states are  doing so that we can hopefully, really respond to this level of future  citizen that, again, we have taken them from another situation. We must  provide better for them than they have, and we should provide for them  as if they are our own child.  Is it difficult lobbying at the national level with some of the things going  on with our government right now?  Well, it   s certainly frustrating at this very moment when there   s   all you  hear is blame. And frankly, when the issue   what   s vulnerable on the  chopping block are the constituencies who have no voice of their own,  and that is children. Seniors at least band together and speak for  themselves. I am amazed that when most people, the majority of people  in the world are parents or have been parents, there is no voice for  children. There is no voice for children. So, that was true before, it has  just gotten more intense. It was true during the health care debate for  15  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  two years.  My work nationally was I just wanted to make sure that foster children  were included in whatever came down the pipe for healthcare reform  and Medicaid. Today, that has morphed into discussions with the  exchanges that are being set up in each state, the health care exchanges  and the basic benefit packages to make sure that the needs of foster  children are included in those. It is frustrating, but one of the things that  is exciting is that when I go into D.C. and have meetings, it really is all  about the kids. They couldn   t care less  about my party affiliation . And  more and more I see this here in Oklahoma too, but I have no history  that I bring with me. I   m not a democrat or a republican   children, I am  there advocating for children, and I relish that. I take great joy in being  able to say,    This isn   t about politics. This is about what   s right and  what   s wrong. This is about saying what we owe our most vulnerable  citizens.    So, I like that.  Well, tell me about Policy and Performance Consultants. Is that a group  you founded?  Yes. That is the company that I founded. Actually, I founded that  company in 1994, and it was pretty much just me doing a few little  things while I was in my political career, all during that period of time. I  have six other consultants who are a part of that consortium now. They  are not employees. We are all independent contractors. But what we  have found is that, again, as a community we have more to offer as each  of us has certain things that interest us or opportunities that come our  way. There are strengths that one of our colleagues has that the other one  can build on, or build into their program or their dream of how this could  happen for a particular organization, or a particular branch of  government, or a particular private business. That has also felt like just  another way to be more than we are individually and to have a great  collegial, professional relationship and friendship.  Now, during that time did you ever think,    Maybe I want to get back into  politics   ?  I thought it for a long time. I thought it for a long time. The only thing  that probably kept me away from it is I knew it would kill my husband.  (Laughter) I really did. He was always very, very supportive. But one of  the things most people don   t know is when I ran for lieutenant governor  in 2002 that was a very difficult time. First of all, it was supposed to be  an open seat. See, I have learned. It was supposed to be an open seat,  and so I had announced. Then Mary Fallin decided not to go for  governor, but to run for a third time for lieutenant governor. So, here I  was, back right again with the incumbent situation and therefore, with  16  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  the difficulty of money.  That was in February, late February I believe it was, maybe even early  March that that happened. March 18 my husband was diagnosed with  stage four throat cancer. So, in the next six months of the campaign we  went through more than fifteen surgeries. Probably the equivalent of  eighteen to twenty days full time in the hospital overnight with chemo at  different points in time. The whole summer he had chemo and  radiation   chemo once a week and radiation twice a day for six weeks  in Midwest City. So, I had to hire a driver who would pick him up in the  morning, and then I could work on the campaign. And then I would pick  him up and bring him home. So, it was an extremely difficult time.  What I said during that time was that it made it possible for me to  survive both. I couldn   t focus only on the campaign because I had my  husband. But I couldn   t get swarmed under cancer because I had a  campaign. I think I told myself that to survive, or to make it as healthy in  a difficult situation as I could. What I know in retrospect was that I did  not run a good campaign. I couldn   t run a good campaign. I would not  have changed that because my commitment was to be with my husband  first. So, when I say it would kill him, I mean, he still suffers the  ramifications of all those years, although he is in remission. I think if it  didn   t kill him, he might just find a way to help it kill him if I went back  into public office. (Laughs) I just don   t think his health could take it. I  don   t think he   d want to do deal with it.  What I have learned in the last couple of years is how I can still really  affect   and in fact, even in more significant ways the area of child  welfare by what I am doing now. So, I may not be able to save the state  of Oklahoma or save the world. I can   t be spread out in all the many  things that interest me and I might   ve wanted to do in political office,  but I can do even more in this area of child welfare and foster care than I  could do in an elected office in that realm.  And maybe even a little more.  I think a little bit more, and it has been very satisfying and very exciting.  When it is not totally frustrating, it is very exciting. (Laughs)  Well, we learn the background for our careers in many different places.  Sometimes it is in the classroom, a lot of the times not. Looking back on  your career, be it education or counseling or politics, where do you  think you   ve learned the skills you needed for your career?  In retrospect, I think I learned it all from my parents. I really do. My  father was a peace maker. My father was a counselor as a chaplain. My  17  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  father took on challenges and represented the underprivileged, being  African Americans at that time. My mother was a secretary for the North  Carolina legislature for thirty-five years. So, it was only after all that     because I had no interest in politics. My mother made her paycheck in  politics. My father was very politically involved in policies, in terms of  public image and awareness of what was going on and the culture at that  time. I very independently had no interest in politics. And then low and  behold, I think it was all that upbringing as well as my political role in a  dysfunctional family that totally primed me for politics as well as for  what I am doing now.  Looking back, we don   t like to dwell on the negative, but I am sure there  has been some adversity that you have had to overcome. Is there  anything that comes to mind off the top of your head, as you look back  on your career?  I think my husband   s cancer. I think my mother   s mental illness. I think  those were two big things that stand out for me. I think some very  positive things are my children, my husband. I think there are some  really rich things that have formed me into who I am now. But if I were  just   right in the top of my head in terms of my own personal  experiences and adversities are probably my mother   s mental illness and  my husband   s cancer. I was still young. I was only like forty-four when  he got cancer, so still young.  Well, tell me a little bit about when you look back, career highlights,  things that you just think,    Wow  I did that.     Running for governor, the first woman to run for governor in the state of  Oklahoma. That is probably the first or the biggest wow. I think Ryan  Luke was a big wow for me. That matters a whole lot to me. When I  taught at Lafayette College, I was on faculty with just a bachelor   s  degree. I didn   t even have my master   s at that point. That was a pretty  big wow for me. I applied for a job, I interviewed with others, and I was  chosen, and that was important to me. I think I was tickled pink when I  got my first teaching job. I had my German degree. I supposed to go  work for a travel agency. I was going to work six and half days a week.  We had to work on Saturdays, and my salary was going to be eighty-five  dollars a week. The week before I was supposed to take that job, I  interviewed for this opening about forty-five miles away   I had to  commute while my husband was in graduate school   for a German  teacher. I was just tickled to death to get that. So, each of those were  very important in terms of my feeling like,    Wow  I got that. I did that  I  can do this     and moved me on to whatever was coming next.  Well, in 2011 you were inducted into the Oklahoma Women   s Hall of  18  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  Fame.  Yes.  What was going through your mind when you got the phone call?  I was thrilled. I was humbled, and I was honored. I didn   t tell anybody  right off. I didn   t know what to say or how to say it. To this day, a lot of  my friends find out later or don   t know unless they were reading the  paper or happened to be in my most inner circle, in which case I invited  them to come. So, I was really surprised. I have always been  somebody   I want to be noticed, but I don   t   I mean, I want to know  that you notice me, but I   m real uncomfortable at the time of being  noticed itself. That kind of thing. I don   t know how to explain that.  I am thrilled I am in the Hall of Fame. I dreaded getting the award. I  dreaded getting the award, in the sense of I just didn   t want to be up  there and be that focus of attention. But I am so delighted to be noticed.  And I am so proud that somebody nominated me and that folks selected  me for that esteemed honor. It was hard to know what to do at first, but I  was so proud the day of actually, the induction. The girls came up and  told me that my husband cried. And he has gotten to an age where he has  gotten very emotional about a lot of things, so he   s back there crying.  Our fifteen-year-old granddaughter whom we have raised was just up all  the time taking pictures, very few of which actually came out, but it was  fun seeing her up there. (Laughs) The family was so happy, and they  were so excited that that helped me get over my self-consciousness, but  also any self-absorption about what is going on with me. That just really  wasn   t important. What was really important was just letting that day  happen and enjoying it and taking it in and seeing other people   s joy,  too. It was just a wonderful experience.  Do you remember who presented you?  Yes, Cindy Cason presented me. She is one of my colleagues in Policy  and Performance Consultants. She is   and I can say this because she  says it, it gives me much permission   her family was one of my client  families about eighteen years ago. I got to know them all very, very  well. The first time I met Cindy   she has heard me tell this story, too.  Usually, if you   ve had somebody who   s a client, you are not supposed to  say this stuff, but this is public record. She is fine with this. I wasn   t sure  I liked her too much. Her husband brought her in for marriage  counseling and I thought,    Oh, I think I can see why.     Her husband a few years later was diagnosed with leukemia, and so I  spent about nine years really work   in fact, she called me on Christmas  19  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  Eve. He had been diagnosed. She said,    What do we do?    I said,    You  don   t tell the kids. Tomorrow is Christmas. You do not tell the kids.    So,  anyway, we just kind of walked it though for nine years. For nine years  we walked it through. Of course, over that period of time the  relationship was still very much   I was the therapist for the family. And  then with Robert   s passing, we became friends very, very quickly.  Friends and colleagues. So, yes, Cindy Cason nominated me and that  also was just so special, so special.  Throughout everything, your work is so varied from education to public  policy to politics, when people look at you now as a role model, even  though you may not directly see that every day, what goes through your  mind?  Well, here is what I hope they would see. I would hope that they see  someone who is enjoying working hard. I would hope they recognize  some sense of competence. I would hope that somehow, though, I do  that in a way that   s still feminine, that there is some sense that,    She can  be competent and a woman.    I hope that they see that. I hope I project  that. I hope I project that and therefore, I hope they see that. I hope they  say,    I can, too. I can work hard. I can be happy in what I am doing. I  don   t have to do the same thing all of the time. I can do what I am  passionate about and what I think I am supposed to do.    I hope I give  that out to them.  You have mentioned your parents, your German teacher, and I am sure  the list is very long. Is there anything you would like to say about the  people who   ve really played an important role in your life?  There have been many. There have been a few who stand out and few  who are key. I think one of the things that I   ve always done and one of  the things I coached clients to do was you can learn something from  everybody, and look for what it is that you   re wanting to learn. What I  am learning right now and what I am looking for and have been for a  few years now, I am watching folks in their seventies and eighties,  whom I feel are aging with elegance and with real competence. I am  watching them because I want to learn that. I want to be that. There is  not just one person that is going to teach that to you. I want to take the  best of all of them, and then I want to be the one person who has got it  all, so to speak. (Laughs)  I think whatever it is, you learn something from everybody and  especially the people you don   t like, especially the people that are the  hardest to get along with. If you will pay attention, you will really learn  something. If not about them, then about you. I think I have lived that  way for so long that one of the fantasies I have along that line is,    Okay,  20  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  at my funeral, who will care to come? Who will care to come?    I don   t  know. When I get the snapshot of who was there, then I   m going to go  through,    I guess I did matter to them. I had no idea that what I said was  important for her.    (Laughs) That is the fantasy that I play with myself  all the time, is learning from anybody I can learn from and then trying to  give it back.  If you could give any advice to Oklahomans, what would you tell them?  I would tell them to hold on to the roots and the traditions and values  that make us unique, like caring for each other, caring for one another.  Respecting independence and self sufficiency, but being there for each  other so that someone is not alone and that help is available, our  generosity. Hold on to those things. Don   t hold ourselves back from  morphing into new people as well, though. We can have our roots and  our values. And we are smart, unique, and creative with the ability to be  outspoken and to be on the cutting edge, whether it   s science, whether  it   s human services, whether it   s politics, whether it   s education. We are  able to do those things. We can be progressive, and we should be  progressive because who else is going to lead us into new areas with that  value system if we don   t do it? Just those who are probably either purely  entrepreneurial or purely out there to satisfy their own egos. No, we  have to create and lead and voice and forge that newness with that value  system. And then I think we   ll be the very best of America if we do that  all the time.  And for women who plan on maybe following in your footsteps, any tips?  Yes. You can do it. You can do it. We have made the way work. The  cloth is cut. Okay, you can tear it a little further. You have got every  ability to do that. And anybody who wants to run for public office, I  don   t care what party, I would be glad to talk to them individually and  tell them the same thing. Not only can you do it, but if you   ve got  inkling, let us support you because the world needs that female  perspective. We just do things differently, different things matter, and  things matter in different ways. The world needs both, the male and the  female perspective, ego, vulnerability, strengths, and we are not there  yet. We haven   t contributed our half. We need to do that.  I know you are not from around here, but you have made Oklahoma  your home.  Absolutely.  What does Oklahoma mean to you?  21  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  Well, it is my home. I have been here more than half my living years.  What does it mean to me? It means all kinds of possibilities. It means  just beautiful terrain. It means seeing God everyday in the sky because  of the sky. It means hard work. It means hard life, but a rewarding life. I  don   t think things are easy in Oklahoma. If there is a value in working  for what you   ve got   and whether that is just the paycheck at the end of  the day or the family that you   ve managed to keep together through bad  times or the election you win   there is a sense here that you can make  happen what it is you believe in. To have a belief system is important.  Oklahoma is   we are just good, good people as well as smart people,  energetic people. We are good, good people. In Oklahoma, if nowhere  else still, your word is still who you are. Oklahoma is a wonderful   and  I just giggle when   I love it when somebody comes to Oklahoma for the  first time because they might as well go to Disneyland. They might as  well go to Disneyland. They are just that impacted.  We haven   t really touched upon the many groups you   re involved in  within the community, the many awards you have won, the list goes on  and on. What is next for you? What is the next big thing on your radar?  You continue to advocate for our children, not only here in Oklahoma  but nationwide. Is there anything you have out there on your agenda?  Well, when you say big thing, I don   t know. I think there is going to be  another chapter. I sense there is another chapter. One of things that is  kind of big that I am delving into right now is really kind of working  with tribes about their foster systems. How we can maximize the state     tribal relationships, maximize the resources that the feds might have. But  it   s my experience that the best place for tribal youth in foster care is  with the tribal family. I want to see that capacity happen for our tribes as  well as I have been asked to look at tribes in some other states. I believe  that is important. We haven   t done that in this country.  We take care of tribal children, and we deal with the Indian Child  Welfare Act, and we deal with the rules and regs. But most Native  American foster youth are with American Caucasian or other families,  who are doing their best to take them to powwows or to do this. That   s  not the same. These children have already been traumatized. And to be  taken away from their identity, even to a wonderful, wonderful foster  home is not giving them the best they should have. It   s not the way I  would want my Native American child, if I had a Native American  child, to be taken care of. So, that   s an area that I am moving into. I  think there could be some really exciting things there. I think it will take  us a long time and a while, but that   s what   s on the horizon within the  last month, and I think it   s going to go somewhere.  That sounds exciting.  22  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  Nykolaiszyn  Boyd  It   s going to be fun. It is going to be good for kids.  Oh, yes. And it is just right up your alley.  It is going to be good for kids, yes.  Before I ask my last question, is there anything else you would like to  make mention of today that I haven   t covered?  The only thing I can think of is really thanking the  Oklahoma   Commission  on the Status of Women  for the award and thanking OSU  for the oral history project. I think this is a way we leave a legacy for  those to come. And it will be through the eyes that you are making  available to future generations. They are going to know, and they are  going to have the opportunity to take something I have said and that  each of us has said and say,    Wow  That makes sense for me. I can do  that, too.     When history is written about you, what would you like for it to say?  Oh, Wow  (Laughter) I hope it will say,    She lived and loved with her  whole heart. And she never backed down from a fight when it came to  sticking up for kids.     I think that is a good way to end. Thank you for your time today.  Thank you, Juliana. I appreciate it very much.  -------  -------  
