 Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University  Library. Today is Thursday, June 19, 2008, and I am in Ardmore,  Oklahoma interviewing Mazola McKerson. This interview is being  conducted as part of the inductees of the Oklahoma Women   s Hall of  Fame Oral History Project. Mazola McKerson was inducted into the  Oklahoma Women   s Hall of Fame in 1997. Thank you for joining us  today. Well let   s begin by learning a little more about you. Take us back  to where you grew up and your early life.  I was born in Bluff, Oklahoma. You probably haven   t ever heard of  Bluff, Oklahoma. (Laughs)  I have not. Tell me about Bluff.  Bluff is down close to Hugo. It   s   let   s see   southwest   real west of  Bluff.  Okay.  Go 70 Highway in Hugo and then when you get to Hugo, you take a  little exit in Hugo and go about 18 miles southwest of Hugo and you   ll  find Bluff, Oklahoma   hadn   t been on the map too long. (Laughs) I  don   t know what they called it when I was growing up, but anyway, my  mother was Daisy Turner and my father was Calvin Holman. And this  sounds funny, but my mother married my daddy Holman, and she had  two children. Then my daddy dies and she remarried and started another  family. So she turned out to be a Turner instead of a Holman (Laughs)  so all of my brothers and sisters are half.  Wow.  I didn   t have but one whole brother, and I never did see him. He was  born before me and he passed away before I was born, as a baby. So I  5  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  grew up   should be about seven years with my mother and then my  daddy had passed away. I had an aunt who could not have children   or  didn   t have children   and she decided that since Mother was married  again and having another family, she would take me. So my aunt reared  me. Her name was Pearl Ray. She and her husband were getting along  fine, I guess, when she decided to take me. Then soon afterwards they  separated and she came to Ardmore because this is where her daddy  lived, my grandfather, and she decided to come here and live. So she got  me and brought me to Ardmore. I came here in 1929   a bad snowy day  in the wintertime. I haven   t seen anything like it since in Ardmore, and  I   ve been here since.  We lived   oh, about three different places across the track, and she  worked for people out in this area. So she finally got a really good job  for a really wealthy family and moved us to live in their servant quarters  up over the garage and this is where I really spent most of my high  school was living in this area, going to school and helping my aunt with  her chores, which was working for the Smith family. And of course this  is where I learned a lot of my knowing how to keep house, answer the  telephone, iron linens. I do very well with all linens, tablecloths and  napkins   take care of her fine things   polish silver, brass   everything  that was good and pretty   because these people had everything. They  had a beautiful home   oh, dining room, drawing room, upstairs was  bedrooms and bathrooms   a lot of work.  They had a man at one time who did most of the cleaning, but when I  came along I was given most of the job. I really didn   t like that very  well, so my aunt, who was the cook, started teaching me to cook because  I was pretty nosey anyway and I wanted to learn. She was a really fine  cook. But then I learned most of her traits and decided finally to get  married to this guy over here  Referring to her husband, Alfred    and  by the way, we will be married 70 years the 20th of next month.  Wow.  And after we got married, times were really hard then. We were working  for nothing. He could not find a job, and I was doing a cake and baking a  ham and doing something like that for people   they would come and get  it   but finally I grew into really liking to cook and decided that this was  what I wanted to do. So I started in our home just baking cakes and pies  and things, and people would come in for them. Then that got me into  their house. They started wanting me to come to do meals at their house.  So one day one of my customers Miss Abby Riesen, who was the  daughter of John Riesen who owned the Daily Ardmoreite, her maid was  sick. She had the flu and she could not come to fix their lunch on this  6  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  A. McKerson  McKerson  particular Sunday, and Miss Riesen called me and asked me if I could  work a few days, come by and cook a meal. This particular weekend  coming up she didn   t know whether her lady would be well enough to  come and cook Sunday dinner so she wanted me to come and do their  dinner. So they had two boys and one girl, and of course they always  had their company on Sunday, and it was a big thing. So I accepted. She  asked me if I could do it again and I wasn   t sure I could do it. So she  said, well she knew I could do it, and I needed to start a catering service.  Well I didn   t even know what the word    catering    meant then. I told her  I didn   t know what the word meant. So she told me she would look it up  and find out and let me know what it meant. So she came up with a  definition which was from Webster   s  dictionary , and I started from that  day, fixing her meals, the catering service. Before I knew it, she put an  ad in the Ardmoreite and let it run a week and then I was so busy I  couldn   t do all the work. And he  Mazola   s husband  never could cook,  but he started trying to help me as best he could. (Laughs) I have to give  him credit for that, and he was desirous of me learning because it was  pretty good money.  So I did the catering about 10 years and it had just gotten to be a big  thing   the only one in Ardmore really. I was going to all the towns like  Duncan, Madill and Marietta and Ringling   all the area towns   got to  Oklahoma City and to Atlanta, Georgia, Duncan   just pretty well busy,  busy. So we bought a station wagon and I had a sign made and put on it.  I was just going night and day, and the customers decided that I needed a  place where they could come and eat. I thought, well I couldn   t be  bothered with that, but in the meantime, I was needing a place to do my  catering because I was just messing my whole house up, just terrible.  You were just using your kitchen?  My kitchen at home, cooking the food and they   d carry it out. So I  started to try looking, and I found   you know where The Gourmet     Budro   s is?  No.  Well, Budro   s is a club up on     1606 McLish.  If you go to the highway and go down that way, it   s white with   well,  let   s see, aqua   it   s real deep pink and green building on this side over  here.  7  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  A. McKerson  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Okay. And that   s the site of The Gourmet?  That was The Gourmet, so I called the lady that owned The Gourmet. I  thought that would be a good location for me, and I asked to buy the  building. So she said they wouldn   t want to sell the building because it  was   her little daughter   she had a little daughter that was   oh, she  had health problems, and that was her kind of little pet place she was  wanting to keep it for her   the little building. She didn   t think they  wanted to sell it. Well she went home and talked to her husband about it,  and in a few days they called me and they said they would let me have it  if I wouldn   t sell liquor and there   s a few    if   s    in here. So they were  getting on in age and I said, well, I would abide by the rules. In 1962 we  purchased that building and started the catering service and the  restaurant. I used that kitchen for both and built up a real big  restaurant   lots of people   and had a real thriving business.  What did it look like inside?  Oh, mostly homey. I had carpet, and the chairs were light   lighter wood  than that, but then they had white cushions. It was just like in a dining  room. They still have white leather up there. At one time, I had cloth in  the back of the chairs and the seat, and it was just real fancy for  Ardmore. It was the fanciest thing we had, and it really went over big.  And how big was the kitchen?  It was 18 feet one way and 12 in one area when I first went there, but I  had to enlarge it and make another kitchen. So we had that one and then  I put in a big kitchen. I think it   s 34 by something, I don   t remember.  We added a dining room that would seat 75 more people. So we worked  from    75 till    98   all those years, 36 I believe, it was there. It was all we  could do to keep up with it. It was just very rewarding.  Was it lunch and dinner service?  No, we started out lunch and dinner. Finally we had to drop dinner  because they had so much     How many employees did you have?  The most I had was 14     Wow.      and I did that for      8  A. McKerson  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  How many cooks?  I just had one cook.  Just one cook? Who was that?  Me.  Wow.  I had some cook helpers who were people that could do   when I got  through with them they were really good. I taught them to do what I  could do. So it made it a little easier for me.  Now when you first opened, Ardmore was segregated?  Yes.  And how did that work with the restaurant?  Well, you would think it would not work, but I had very wealthy good  people and they just loved it and treated me like I was their little maid.  The first night we opened, we were supposed to open on a Saturday I  can   t remember whether it was a holiday or whether somebody died,  something happened and I couldn   t open that day. It had to be the next  day, which was a Sunday, and we had our grand opening on that  particular night. One of the men that   he   s dead now   came in     carpeted floors and had beautiful chandeliers and just a pretty dining  room, and he just said that,    Ardmore was to be blessed to have  Mazola,    and he had everybody to stand up and give me a     Applause?  Yeah, and that made me feel real good like I hadn   t done something I  shouldn   t   and it just went on and on   made good salaries and  everything. We were there for 36 years, and finally I began to kind of  break down and retire because at one time I was doing all the cooking. I  was working really, really hard and decided to retire. So in 1994, we  started trying to get rid of it. We   d first sold it to the Ledbetter   s. Do you  know them?  No ma   am.  Well anyway, they were out at this special place up here on Rockford  Road. Are you an Ardmore native?  9  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  I am not.  Oh well. What was that place called? It   s there now, but it   s not a  restaurant.  Okay.  But they were supposed to be a fine restaurant. They built after me, and  they came in with all kinds of things, and it didn   t work so they had to  give it up and they came down. A doctor here in Ardmore   well he   s  not now here, was supposed to have bought it for them. Well it didn   t  work out for them. When I saw that they already got the down payment  and they didn   t give it back when they didn   t, so that started me moving.  The next person that we sold it to was from Bulgaria and he did Italian  and they had pretty good food. He worked up a good business. He got  behind with his rent and I believe it was three months that he was   the  contract said   but anyway had to give it up, and I had his down  payment and didn   t give it back.  Then we had a Mexican come along, and he bought it and was doing  really good, paid his bills on time and everything. And one day we came  home and the key was in the mailbox, wasn   t it? I believe the key was in  the mailbox and a note that said that he was gone. So he just left, and  took all of my flat silver I had and I had just bought over  500 dollars  worth of new stuff and I never did get to use it because he took it. I said,     Well, this is it. I   m through with trying to sell it. I   m just going back to  work.    So I went back up there in    98 and I worked with one of my  cooks, the one who is at Two Frogs now, Russell. And I tried to make  him buy the restaurant but he didn   t want the responsibility so he went  and hired out and got a good job, so I didn   t feel bad about it. After this  Mexican place   Mexican was there and he just left. I went back and  worked awhile, and then we sold it to Budro. Budro has been there since  2001, and he   s about to get it paid for. So I guess it   s gone.  What were the popular foods you made?  Turkey and dressing, good roast beef and mashed potatoes, and I had a  special vegetable I did with corn, and had a special squash casserole. All  of my food was just good home eating. I made my home rolls   we  didn   t have any bread other than what I made. That was our buffet, and  then on Sunday we had a special buffet. We   d have roast of lamb, whole  salmon, and we used to have cod fish. I would have a special, one entr  e  that was special every Sunday. Roast beef and turkey was every Sunday,  regular. Fried chicken was a special Sunday, but we had roast beef and  turkey and dressing and fried chicken.  10  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  What   s your favorite recipe? Out of all of the recipes that are in your  head, what   s your favorite recipe?  I guess my squash. I don   t care about any of them because I   ve made  them so much, they don   t look good to me anymore. (Laughs) But  whatever I made was special to them because they did not have cooks,  and it just turned out to be Ardmore   s   it has a record of being  Ardmore   s best restaurant. When I closed up, they just had a fit. They  came crying,    You can   t do this. We can   t have you leaving us. It   s  really sad,    but I was ready to go and I just came on home.  Well let   s back up just a little bit. How did running for city council come  about?  Well, we have four children and I had always been very active with the  school, with any of their activities. I got to be known through the school,  PTA and that sort of thing. I got interested in politics and I was not even  thinking about running for anything, had never crossed my mind. Mr.  Slaughter, I don   t know what the company that he had, had a company  and he hired people. It had to do with electricity. But anyway, he came  to me one day and asked me about running for the city council and I  said,    Oh, Lord. I don   t want to run for city council. I can   t handle that.  What could I do?    So he sat down and we had a little visit, and he  thought it was good for my business.  Well, that pulled my leg (Laughter) so I said,    Well, I don   t have any  money to do anything like that.    He said,    Don   t worry about the  money.    He said,    If you just will say you   ll do it,    he would take care  of money and sure enough I had to give people back their money. They  just gave me so much, so I just decided to take him up on it, and he got  the cards and got everything going. I never had to spend a dime. Then  mail started coming to the house to help, and it just started piling up, and  after the election I had to return the people   s money.  Wow.  I got in there. We had a minister in there that, I think, was prejudiced  and then had another man that had been on there for ages, and he kind of  thought he owned the place, and I got on his case. And of course we  didn   t ever fall out, but kind of kept him walking straight. Kind of wind  up a few things down there, and that only just went well. I didn   t have  any problems. At times   let   s see, I think there was one time someone  approached me kind of in a bad way. It was a lady   you remember that?  What did that lady say? She asked me,    What did I think,    or    Who did I  think I was?      or something like that, trying to be on the council. I can   t  remember her name. In fact, I just kind of put those things out of my  11  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  mind anyway.  Well, was it tough   I mean, because not only were you the first African-  American, but you were the first woman     Right.     in that role. I mean, was that tough? Was there a good old boys club  in place?  Well, not really because I   ve always been able to stand my ground, and I  had to learn to do so because I had the restaurant. Had I not had the  restaurant, I might have had a lot of problems, but I was very well-known  through the restaurant and respected, and I think that helped me a  lot.  Because now you were the influential business owner?  Right. Right. So I just didn   t have any problems.  Well, how did the whole mayor thing come about?  Being mayor? Well after I was on the council   our city has a city  manager and four ward council members and one at-large. When you   re  on the council, there are the four wards, and the one at-large makes  five   and of course the mayor is elected by the council members so they  have to vote you in. In other words, the city council votes in the mayor  and I don   t know how they decided to have me mayor but I was on the  council the second time, and I became mayor on the third round. There  was only one on the council I thought might not have wanted me to be  mayor, and that was the preacher. I stayed on his case, so he finally  came in to be quite nice, and I didn   t have any problem. They were all  men, and the last time I ran it was five people. I was the only woman,  and it was four men, and I came in strong and beat everybody out so     That says something.  Yeah. It was kind of shaky there for awhile. I felt like I wasn   t gonna  make it the last go-around, but I didn   t have any problem. But anyway, I  would think at night here at home   I   d get to thinking about I wasn   t  gonna make it. Well, I came out   I think I was the only one that didn   t  vote for me.  Really? Why didn   t you vote for yourself?  I don   t know whether we could. I might have voted for myself, I don   t  12  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  remember. So it just got to be kind of a joke to me. I had roses all over  the house people sent me. They just were easy going, but I was thinking  it wasn   t gonna be, but it turned out to be easy.  Do you have a favorite memory from your time in public office?  Well, not really.  Not really?  Well, I guess my really favorite memory was when I went off   when I  left, I got roses and I felt like it was as tall as me, but they weren   t. They  were in a vase, and when they stood up by me   I got so many flowers  and cards and letters and notes and money and stuff   that was quite  something for me because I didn   t think they would have thought that  much about me. But I gained a lot of friends, and they still are really  good friends. They carry us to dinner and do for us all the time. You  know, I   ve been sick with arthritis and had the flu   in fact, I think I   m  just getting over the flu   and when I first came down sick, every day  this house was just full of beautiful   they had come in and brought food  and they   d just done everything. They call every morning to check and  see how I   m doing and just treat me really great.  What does Ardmore mean to you?  Everything. It   s my home. It   s my life, my love. It just means everything  to me. It   s just been great for me, and I   m just thankful to have been  brought to Ardmore. I   d like to see a lot of things happen here that I  don   t see happening, but you know it   s kind of hard to get on the other  side of the fence and get to raising sand and changing people   s mind,  trying to. So I just think, well as long as I   ve been treated right, people  are nice to me, I   ll just have to forget about it. Ardmore has meant all to  me because had I not gotten to Ardmore, I don   t feel like I would have  been able to gain the respect of people as I have, and I certainly couldn   t  have done what I   ve done. I just am so thankful that the people accepted  me as they did because they could have not accepted me because I   m  just a little black gal running around.  Who has done big, huge things.  Yes, yes.  All here at Ardmore.  I even went to Washington, I think it was in    76 but I   m not sure. I went  when Carter was president. I was sitting in the dining room. We were in  13  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  the other house across the track, and the mail came. Well, I just thought  I   d go out and get the mail, and there was an invitation for me to come to  Washington, D.C. I don   t remember the date, but I have the picture in  there and everything, and represent Ardmore in a conference on family  life. President Carter had at the White House different things, and I was  selected to go. Governor Nigh, who was a real good friend of mine   I  knew him really well when he was up there when he was governor   had  made it possible for me to go. I said,    Well, I can   t afford to go to  Washington. They didn   t send me any money.    He said,    Don   t worry  about it.    The money was coming if I   d say yes. So I said yes and pretty  soon I had a check in the mail, and they paid for all of it. I got to see  President Carter and have lunch with Mrs. Carter and all those things I  never would have gotten to see and do had I not been on the city council.  That   s the way I got to meet the Nigh   s, and I just have lots of good  thoughts.  You were appointed to the Commission on the Status of Women. Do you  remember that?  Right.  And I believe you were the chair?  I was     Were you the chair the first year?  Right. Right.  What was that like? What did you guys do as a body?  As a body, we tried to have an open ear to the things that went on in  your city that concerned women, and all the political things that they did  and just how they handled themselves in general life. So we met once a  month and reported on women that were active in the community and  doing things that should be, and we kept up with the legislature and what  they were doing. We would tune in on things that they had coming up,  like maybe they were gonna vote on childbirth or whatever. We sent  them a letter ahead of time stating how we felt about it and anything that  we felt that they weren   t doing right, we   d send them. We tried to keep  them from not forgetting about us.  Then we had the Pioneer Women. We had a Lady of the Year, I believe  it was   but anyway, we would select   I believe it was a lady every  year. Every year we   d select women in our area that were doing things  and would try to bring their name forward. I believe we had a little book  14  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  every year that we   d make with them   had their lives   and we would  vote on them. It would finally name a Lady of the Year and we would  have a big banquet or something for them. We were interested in  children, trying to see what the legislature was doing or could do for  children. It was very, very wide open, but to try to not get on their nerve  but be helpful as a woman. I enjoyed that. And then I was appointed into  the  Oklahoma Women   s  Hall of Fame     Right.     and that   s the year our daughter died.  In 1997   and you couldn   t attend the ceremony?  Right. And I finally came home   I was in Washington at that time with  her. When I finally got home, I went to Oklahoma City thinking that  they would give me the honor, but they didn   t want to do it until I could  get to Stillwater so I went over there and received it.  And who presented it to you in Stillwater? Do you remember?  I thought I   d never forget that lady   s name, but I do have her picture and  stuff. I have a notebook.  Claudia Tarrington?  Yes, I believe that was the lady. It was a nice life thrill, being on the  Status of Women. I still get mail from them   from the committee or  something, but I don   t drive on the highway anymore. So I just kind of  fizzle out on things. I don   t know that I   ll try to get back because I   m 87  and it   s just hard for me to get out there driving and doing   and he   s not  able to do it either. So, I guess I   m just gonna kind of lay back and  watch the others now.  Right. Well if you had any advice for others now, what would you tell  them?  I would tell them to be themselves and put God first in their life. Try to  find something that they were really interested in, regardless of what it  is   if it was cleaning toilet stools, but be the best. Do it the best that  they could do and make the best of something because God gave all of  us a talent   everybody   and there   s no need to just lay around and not  have a good job and not make a mark. Everyone   s got a talent     something that they can do to make their life really better. There   s no  need to blame anybody for anything. Just get out there and get ready and  do something yourself. Since I was little, I can remember   I can always  15  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  find something   keep plugging the nails in, they   ll bud out eventually,  and I still feel like there   s something there.  And is family very important in your life?  Very. We have a very nice family. We have three children living. We  had four   we lost our oldest daughter   and a husband who   s pretty  good when he wants to be   a good life. And be a very good neighbor  and just be happy. That   s all you can ask for.  Do you have   through all of your years, your 80-plus years   do you  have that favorite story that rises above all the other stories that you like  to tell or that you like to remember?  Mine as a whole   the whole thing. I haven   t got any special story. If I  look back, this is all on one sheet but it   s kind of one thing after another,  one thing brings on another kind of thing. So I guess the most shocking  thing was when I was elected to the city council. It wasn   t something  that I wanted to do, or I had aspired to. I just hadn   t thought about it. It  was a great surprise. I guess that would be the most     Well when history is written about you, how would you like for it to  remember you? What would you like for history to say about you?  Oh, that I was kind and very considerate of mankind, all people; that I  learned something about them, because everybody has something to  offer. And respect   you should respect everybody   and I was loving  and I believe that if one would put God first in their life, their life would  be wonderful and different and they   d have a good life. I would  encourage all young people to have a family because your children are  very important. Since we   ve gotten older   in fact I just live for night  because my daughter, she calls us every night. One of them shows up  around here every day or so, and we just really   family is really  important.  How many grandchildren?  We   ve got 10 grandchildren and 11     Great-grandchildren?     great-grandchildren.  Oh, my goodness gracious.  Yeah, we   ve got more great-grandchildren than we have grandchildren.  16  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  Nykolaiszyn  McKerson  They   ve come along. We had a grandson to finish college this year.  We   ve had two that   s got their master   s degree already, my oldest  daughter had a master   s and the other daughter that   s living has a  master   s. The boys didn   t get a master   s degree. But family is really  important   most important.  Well is there anything you   d like to add that I haven   t asked you today?  Anything you   d like to tell us?  Not really. (Laughs)  Okay. Well that sounds good. I   d like to thank you for giving us just a  little glimpse into your life because you   ve done so many great things     Yes.     but I appreciate you taking the time out to talk with us.  Well it   s my pleasure.  -------  -------  
