 Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University  Library. Today is Tuesday, May 24, 2011, and I   m in Tulsa, Oklahoma,  interviewing the Honorable Stephanie Seymour. This interview is being  conducted as part of the inductees of the Oklahoma Women   s Hall of  Fame Oral History Project. Judge Seymour was inducted into the  Oklahoma Women   s Hall of Fame in 2005. Thank you for joining us  today.  You   re very welcome.  Let   s begin by learning a little bit more about you. Could you tell us a  little bit about where you grew up and give us a little insight into your  early life?  I grew up in Battle Creek, Michigan, a town of about 30,000 back then,  sort of halfway between Detroit and Chicago on the lower part of  Michigan. I am one of four children, second oldest. I have an older  brother, a younger brother, and younger sister. Neither of my parents  went to college. My mother had a nursing degree. She was a nurse. My  father, well, he was an interesting character. His father was a lawyer and  a judge, but he broke his ankle ice skating when he was in the ninth  grade. So, he was out of school recovering from that. And then the  summer after that, he contracted polio, which really knocked him flat.  He had a leg brace on. He never went back to school. So, he did a lot of  goofing around, running around the country until he married my mom, at  which time he was working for a bank. He saved some money, bought  some land at the end of the war. He couldn   t be in the war because he  was disabled, basically, and started getting into the businesses of having  houses built for returning service people. So, he made a good living.  One thing I did in my childhood that is so memorable to me is that we  traveled all over the country, mostly in the wintertime, mostly going  south. But this is with four kids, and up until I was about in eighth grade.  5  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  I was in every state except three by the time I went to college   by car. I  was basically homeschooled in the car for the three months we would  take off in the wintertime. So, that was an adventure, one that I really  appreciate more now that I   m older than I did when I was younger, but  we had a great time.  Do you have a lot of memories of visiting the different states?  I do. I do. I remember seeing the Grand Canyon, Florida, Fort  Lauderdale when there were no high rises on the beach. I mean, there  was just nothing on the beach, just acres and acres of beautiful sand. I  remember New Orleans, that was a wild place. I remember getting stung  by a sting ray in water off of Texas. Just things like that. Getting up  really early, we would travel early because there was no air conditioning  and quit early, tried to find a motel with a swimming pool, which we   d  all jump in. Yes, I remember a lot of places and things, and we always  did museums. One year we spent a month in Florida, and then went all  the way up the East Coast and did Savannah, Georgia, did Washington  D.C. and all the monuments and museums, New York City, Boston, and  then up   by that time it was spring   into Montreal and Toronto and  Canada and came across the bridge to Detroit. Another year we went  across New Orleans, across Texas, up, spent a month in LA, and then  came back through the Grand Canyon and all of that. It was great.  Did you have a favorite place?  Oh, gosh. I don   t think so.  Well, what a good adventure to have as a     It was a great adventure and made me want to   my father was  extremely well read   well, both of my parents were. But he encouraged  all of us to get as much education as we could. I grew up thinking I  could do anything I wanted to do.  So, when you settled back down for school   I take it in Michigan?  No.  No?  No, I went to public high schools, and my father wanted somebody in  the family to go to an Ivy League school, and women were not admitted  in those days to places like Harvard and Yale. So, I went to Smith  College. Back then, there were seven women   s colleges, all women,  known as the Seven Sisters. I went to Smith, and I loved it. It was the  6  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  first time I was among all these terrific, smart women from all over the  country. It was great.  But before Smith, where were you going then?  I was going to public school in Michigan, in Battle Creek.  So, when you were going through high school, were you gravitating  toward any special subjects?  I was always interested in English and literature, and I thought I was  pretty good in math until I took it in college. Got disabused of that  notion, but primarily, not really sciences, although I took basic courses.  Did you do anything special in high school for fun?  I was a cheerleader, and so I did all the sports events. I also swam. I  dived. I was a diver. That was the only thing girls could do. They didn   t  have basketball or anything for girls back then.  So, it seems your parents fostered this education     Yes, both of them.  And so when you were in high school getting ready to attend Smith, what  were you thinking about what you wanted to be when you got older?  I had no idea. And Smith is a liberal arts college, so you didn   t have to  pick a major until entering junior year. So, it was basically   in fact, we  were required to take courses in everything, including language and  science and math, at least one year worth of everything. I   d taken Latin  in high school, which was I think was the only thing offered, and I took  French in college. And we continued to travel. My father took all of us  to Europe when I was seventeen, the summer I graduated from high  school. We went by boat because he didn   t like to fly, which is why we  drove all over the place. He bought an English Ford, which we brought  back with us. It was made by Ford, but made in England. We traveled all  over Europe that summer.  Not too bad.  No, it was great. I continued to do that. Got a great education at Smith  and really learned. There, they fostered the notion that women could do  whatever they wanted to do, even though women really weren   t doing  all that much back then.  7  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour   Were there any  instructors at Smith that really made an impact on  your life?  Yes. The first place I found out that, even though I   d gone to public  school, there were a lot of girls there who had been to boarding school.  At first, it was a big shock, but I discovered by the end of one year that I  could compete with them. I had a lot of professors that were just terrific.  It was constant learning experience, but the fellow that made the biggest  impact, I guess, was a   I was a political science major. My junior year, I  took a political science, a Constitutional law, course, and that   s what got  me interested in going to law school.  Going back to your siblings, are you the oldest, the youngest?  No, I   m second oldest. My mother had a whole   had us all, and when  my youngest sister was born, my brother was six. He   s about seventeen  months older than I am, and then my next brother is about three years  younger, and my sister is five years younger than I am. My mother was  Italian, so we had a lot of cousins. I have thirty-two first cousins on my  mother   s side.  Big family get-togethers.  Yes, mostly in Bessemer, Michigan, which was in the upper peninsula,  which was fun.  So, holidays were probably pretty lively.  Holidays were great. I come from a very close family, and we had a  great, raucous time together because we did all this traveling.  Did your brothers and sisters also go to college?  Yes, my brother went to the University of Michigan, which is probably  why I didn   t. He went to law school there, and my younger brother went  to   he was the goof-off in the family, probably the smartest of us from  an IQ standpoint. He got sent off to Culver Military School when he was  in high school because he was goofing off. He talked my father into  letting him come back his senior year, and then he went to the  University of Michigan where he goofed off some more. So, he dropped  out and joined the Army. They sent him to language school in Monterey.  He took   he had his choice of Russian and French, as I recall. He  became an expert in French, and then they sent him to Vietnam where I  think he did intelligence stuff. He came back, went to Harvard Business  School, finished college at Georgetown. Actually, Bill Clinton was a  classmate when he went to Georgetown. He   s lived all over the world,  8  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  married a Swedish girl. Has done bank-related computer stuff. I couldn   t  tell you exactly. He   s landed in Colorado. My younger sister was a  teacher.  Getting back to your Smith years, you   re now kind of inspired to go into  the legal profession?  Yes.  So, you   re probably trying to look at graduate schools?  Yes.  What was your thought process? What schools were you looking at  applying to?  I applied to Michigan, Harvard, and Yale. I got into them all, and I  picked Harvard. I was one of twenty-three women, as it turned out, in a  class of about 580 when we started. So, that was a whole new life. I  went from an all-women   s college to an almost all-male environment for  law school, which it was a lot of fun. I was very comfortable in my  shoes by then because   I just learned that. When you go to an all-women   s  college, it   s all about competing with each other and getting a  good education. So, I had classmates in law school who asked me how  come I was there taking the place of a guy. And I would say,    Well, how  come you   re here taking the place of a woman?    I really enjoyed law  school. I have more of an intellectual interest in the law. So, I loved my  courses, did moot court, got on the winning moot court team, but the  teams had eight, and I was the brief writer. I was not the oralist. So, I  had a good time in law school.  In the typical classroom at Harvard, where would you sit?  We had assigned seats.  Really?  Yes, because in our classes, we were divided into four sections, I think.  So, our classes were pretty big, but it was all Socratic Method. The  teacher called on you, so you had to know where you were sitting.  So, you spent a lot of time studying? Or did it just come really easy to  you?  No, law is not   it   s like a foreign subject when you first start, most of it.  You just have to learn it.  9  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  As you   re nearing the end of law school, what are you hoping for in  terms of a career?  When I entered law school it was with the notion of getting a law degree  and going to work for the government in Washington, DC. I had done a  research project in the summertime when I was a junior, working for  the   I had a Ford Foundation Grant, but working with   actually, it was  the New York City government in connection with the public housing  program. I just had an interest in going to DC and working for the  government, but I met this guy from Oklahoma and got married and  moved back here. I got my first summer job because the lawyer here,  who ended up being my early mentor, wrote my husband and wanted to  know if he wanted a summer job, and he already had one. So, he said,     No, but my wife does.    (Laughter)  That   s how I got my first job. There were not very many women in  Oklahoma, lawyers, at the time. There were a few older ones, which I  hadn   t really known. I think when I came back here these women were  in their sixties. There was a period of time when women went to law  school and became doctors and then it sort of slacked off. In the    50s,  really, was a time when women stayed home for the most part and didn   t  do a lot of extended educational work. So, women lawyers, there was  nobody here my age. There were a couple people a few years older and  then there were these two older women, and that was about it.  What part of the state were you in?  I was in Tulsa. I started in Tulsa and then my husband got transferred to  Houston. He worked for an off-shore drilling company here in a  combination legal/business position, so I lived in Houston. I worked for  Baker Botts, which is now a huge firm, had about a hundred lawyers  then. But when I interviewed at Harvard for a summer job after my  second year, there was a possibility that my husband would be sent to  Houston because there was an office there. So, the way it worked back  then was these firms came, and this partner spoke to the group who  showed up, and then if you wanted an interview, you signed up. I went  up to him afterwards and I said,    Does your firm hire women?    This was  before the Civil Rights Act passed in    64. He thought about it for a  minute and he said no.  I said,    Does your firm have anything against hiring women?    And he  said,    No, but I do.    So, I said,    Okay, well, I guess I won   t sign up for  an interview.    And that was that.  That was the firm I went to work for. Because I had a baby at the end of  10  my first year here, and I was off in the summertime. My mentor had a  Princeton roommate at this firm. He called him up and said that I was  moving to Houston, and they should hire me. So, this guy, a different  person, cold-called me (I had no idea that my mentor had contacted him)  and said that they heard that I was moving to Houston, and they were  interested in interviewing me. My first child was about three months old  at the time and I said,    I really do want to go back to work, but I don   t  think I   m interested in working more than three days a week.    Then  there was this silence then he said,    I had them all talked into  considering a woman    (they didn   t have any)    but they   ll never hire a  part-time lawyer.    I said,    Okay. Thank you, bye.     So, I moved to Houston in September, got a call from this fellow just  before Thanksgiving. They were obviously desperate. Somebody had  left their labor law department suddenly, and they needed a body. I had a  little labor law experience, and so he said,    Will you come in for an  interview?    I said,    Sure, three days a week?    He said,    Yes, they   ll  consider that.    So, I went in and interviewed. Some hiring partner   I  can still see him   who really couldn   t look me in the eye. He sat with  his chair kind of sideways behind his desk, fiddling with the cord on the  venetian blind behind him, and he made it very plain that they were  desperate or they wouldn   t be hiring anybody part-time. And this was  absolutely no commitment for anything long term. This was a big  experiment, but they were willing to hire me.  So, I said,    And what will the pay be?    And he told me, and I said,    I   m  not working for that. I   m not working for a penny less than three-fifths  of what my Harvard classmate    (whom I   d called, and who was working  there)    is making.    Fiddle, fiddle, fiddle,    Oh, okay. We need you to  start next week.    I said,    I can   t start next week. My parents are coming  for a month over Christmas. I can   t start until the first of January.     Fiddle, fiddle, fiddle.    Oh, okay.    So, I got hired to start in January and  found out sometime in mid-December that I was unexpectedly pregnant  with my second child. (Laughs) So, I had to decide if I was going to go  to work. And I thought,    Well, he said no commitments, big  experiment,    so I just went to work and didn   t tell them.  I was about five months along when I told the very nice partner in the  little labor law department that I was going to have to take off because I  was having a baby in August. He started laughing and he said,    I can  hardly wait to go tell old John McCormick    (who was this crusty old  hiring guy)    that our lady labor lawyer is going to be going into labor in  August.    (Laughter) So, I took off for a year. I quit. There was no  maternity leave back then. And I quit a week or so before my daughter  was born. My first two kids are thirteen months apart, which is not  something I would recommend. I was off for a year. They called me and  11  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  wanted me to come back and I said,    Three days a week?    And they  said,    Yes.    And I said,    Do I get a raise?    And they said,    Yes.    So, I  went back to work, hired a nanny, and then my husband got transferred  to Singapore, where we moved that December. So, that was Baker Botts  first experience with a woman.  That   s interesting that you were bold enough to negotiate.  I didn   t have anything to lose. I just had the attitude that,    I   m not  working for less than you pay a guy, period.    By that time, the Civil  Rights Law had passed, which was putting the pressure on them to start  hiring and be reasonable about it.  So, the family packed up and moved to Singapore.  Family packed up and moved to Singapore, where I lived for a year.  Then   let me see. It was about a year. For all kinds of reasons, my  husband and I separated at the end of the year. He left his job and stayed  over there, and I came back here. I had come back for Christmas  vacation, and so I had these two little kids and went to work for a  different firm. The firm that I   d worked for had kind of split up. And the  guys that I worked with, including my mentor and a couple other people  that I worked closely with, were all in different law firms. So, I went to  work for one of those firms.  Was it tough trying to raise your young family and working?  Yes, of course, but it was really interesting because there still weren   t  very many women here. And the more senior lawyers didn   t really know  what to do with me. (Laughter) Because they really thought I should be  at home, taking care of my kids. So, I worked normal work hours. I   m  pretty efficient. I brown-bagged it. Brought my lunch, didn   t work on  Saturdays, took work home if I needed to. I was working full-time, but it  worked out well. And then a year or so later, I remarried my current,  wonderful spouse, and we are facing our thirty-ninth wedding  anniversary in June.  He was in that firm when they made me a partner. I was the eighth  lawyer   was that? Yes. And I was made a partner. Well, I had another  baby. Yes, it was after Sara was born, and I was working four days a  week after that, after a six month maternity leave. And there was no  maternity leave. I just quit each time, and they hired me back. I was  working four days a week when they made me partner. And one of the  big discussions, I found out afterwards, was,    Oh, my gosh. Is Tom  Seymour going to have two votes because his wife is a partner in this  little law firm?    But at our first partnership meeting, my husband made a  12  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  motion that died for lack of a second. And they decided, well, maybe he  wasn   t going to have   maybe he didn   t have my vote in his back pocket.  (Laughter) So, I worked four days a week for them, had another baby  three years after Sara was born, so I have four children. And the firm  was very accommodating.  So, you   re practicing, raising your family, what happens next?  Oh, the years go by. Tom and I married in    72, and then I had two more  children. We   re doing soccer games. And then Jimmy Carter set up  merit nominating commissions for choosing Federal Court of Appeals  judges. No president had ever done that before, and no president has  done that since. The Justice Department, there was a committee for the  Tenth Circuit, which consists of six states, Oklahoma, Kansas, Colorado,  New Mexico, Utah and Wyoming. There was a committee for the Tenth  Circuit, which consisted of eleven people from the six states. Six of  them were lawyers, five of them were laypeople, and there were several  women in the group. I didn   t really find all this out until I went through  the process, but the caseload was increasing and the court was given a  new position, and it was designated to Oklahoma, which had one at that  point. I was just thinking, as I said, I was the eighth lawyer in my firm,  this was the eighth judge on the Tenth Circuit, this position.  So, I applied, and it was designated here. President Carter did this  because he was looking for women and minorities. And before Carter,  there had been two women, ever, on the Courts of Appeals in the U.S.  One that I   d never even heard about, who was appointed to the Sixth  Circuit, and she was from Michigan, I think, by FDR. And there was a  sitting judge on the Ninth Circuit, Shirley Hufstedler, appointed by  Johnson. So, my husband encouraged me to apply, and I did.  Was it a tough process?  Tougher than I realized when I heard this story afterwards. It was an  interesting process, I mean, you did an application, and you put down  your qualifications, and you had to list cases you   d worked on and  judges you   d worked for, lawyers you   d worked with. Then the  commission was charged with sending three to five names to the  president. I had an interview and got on that list. I think there were four  of us as I recall. There was one other woman who applied, who did not  get on the list. She was a trial judge, and she ended up on the Oklahoma  Supreme Court after that. The story that I was told, after the fact, by   it  was actually first told by a friend of mine. She was a friend of this  woman on the committee, a woman from Colorado. She was not a  lawyer. I was told this by my friend and then subsequently, by this  woman herself.  13  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  The chairman was a seventy-year-old trial lawyer from Wyoming, who  wore his cowboy boots in the interview. I remember that. And  apparently, the same committee had proposed judges for Kansas and  Utah and had no women applicants. So, the chairman called a first  meeting, and he   d never done this before, according to this woman. He  said,    Well, we have thirty-five applicants, and we   re going to have to  winnow it down. So, let   s go around the table and everybody will throw  out somebody who   s obviously not qualified.    He said,    I   ll start.    He  threw my name out. She was sitting halfway around the table, thank  goodness. She said,    I was stunned because I thought you were pretty  well qualified. So, I said,    Why   d you do that?    And he said,    Because  she has four children and couldn   t possibly handle the job.       She said,     Then I was really stunned.     It was going around the table and when it got to her, fortunately for me  she was a very smart lady, she threw out the name of a sitting justice on  the Oklahoma Supreme Court, who as it turned out, was the chairman   s  favorite candidate. Then he was stunned and he said,    You can   t do that.  He   s obviously well qualified.    She said,    No, he   s got five children and  couldn   t possibly handle the job.    So, they had the discussion about  whether that was a disqualifying factor, put both of our names back in  the pot, and he and I both ended up on the list of names that were sent to  President Carter. So, but for her quick thinking, I would have been in   I  was in file thirteen until she got me dragged back out. (Laughter)  And then from that list, Carter makes his decision?  Yes, and I was the only female. That   s the reason I got the job. I was  young. I was thirty-nine, which was really young. There have been some  younger ones since then, but I think at the time, that was   well, and I  was one of three, as it turned out. I was one of eleven women that Carter  nominated. There were a couple of African Americans. Harry Edwards  on the DC Circuit was one of them. Mary Schroeder was one of the  women from the Ninth Circuit, and the three of us were all born in 1940.  We were all thirty-nine, as it turned out.  How did you receive notification?  I got a call from   oh, well, then there was the whole ABA  American  Bar Association  process. Do you want to hear this story? It   s another,     You can   t handle the job because you have children    story. Each circuit  has a representative to the ABA committee, which assesses lawyers for  the American Bar Association. The one here was another older trial  attorney, and he had a favorite on the list who was not me. I was called  by somebody in the Justice Department and told that my name had been  14  Nykolaiszyn  forwarded to the FBI and the ABA, which is the way they do it before  you get officially nominated. The FBI did a check, and I got all kinds of  feedback from people they called, and they were done really early.  I was informed by the Justice Department, I think, in January of the year  I turned thirty-nine. So, I guess I was thirty-eight when I had my  interview and nothing happened. Nothing happened with the ABA.  There was deafening silence. I had listed all these lawyers I   d worked  with, judges I   d worked with, nobody   I had no feedback. So, I didn   t  know what was going on. Then one day this guy called me in  September, the  ABA Committee  representative, and said,    I   m going  to be in Tulsa this afternoon. I want to come interview you.    I said,     Okay.    He came and interviewed me, and all he asked me about was  my family. He didn   t ask me anything about how I would handle the job  or what I thought. It was a very short interview. Then he leaked to the  press that he was proposing to rate me unqualified for insufficient trial  experience. That was what he said.  So, it turned out that the Justice Department, the attorney general had  appointed two women to sort of mentor the women going through the  process. One of them was Barbara Babcock, who was subsequently a  professor. She was working in the Justice Department. She was  subsequently a law professor at Stanford. I don   t remember the name of  the younger one, but the younger one called me and said that the Justice  Department had done their own background check. Because of the  length of time, they were concerned, and they had called my references.  The ABA contacted them and said that they were proposing to rate me  unqualified. Carter wanted to withdraw the name, and they said,    No.  She   s perfectly qualified for the job.     By that time, as soon as he leaked to the press, I got hold of the ABA  rules for the process. They   re supposed to inform you if they think  you   re not qualified, in the interview, and tell you why and give you a  chance to respond. Well, they hadn   t followed their own rules, and I  immediately wrote a letter to the head of the ABA, the head of this ABA  committee, the attorney general, the nearby world, saying that the ABA  did not follow the process. (Laughter) So, when the ABA went to the  Justice Department, the Justice Department said,    Nope, we did our own  background check. You didn   t follow your process. We   re objecting.     So, they appointed another guy who had been chairman of the ABA  committee previously, who then did his own background check. I started  getting calls from lawyers who were contacted. He came out to  interview me, and I passed. They rated me qualified.  Was that a concern, your trial experience?  15  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Yes. I had not had a lot. I really hadn   t, but you don   t need a lot to be an  appellate judge because you need to be familiar with   I had taken  depositions, and I had argued motions, and I had sat through trials, but I  had never tried my own case. Most of my firm, most of my work was  defense-oriented. I had won a lot of great summary judgment motions.  But I really did not have a lot of trial experience.  So, you   re in the post, a new judge, what is a typical day like in those  early years?  Really crazy because I didn   t have an office, I had temporary space here.  You   re really behind in the law clerk hiring process. I hired a woman  here who lived in Tulsa, who   d gone to the University of Tulsa, and she  ended up staying with me for twenty-something years. She was my first  hire. Then I got two fellows who, one graduated in the middle of the  year from the NYU Masters in Tax Program, and then I got a fellow  from Michigan. They were my first law clerks. And then Joan, my  secretary, came with me from the law firm. So, she   s been with me for     she   s worked for me for probably thirty-four years now. She   s fabulous.  We didn   t have computers back then, and I pretty much was in the dark.  I got confirmed at the end of October and I sat on the court for the  November term. They gave me a couple of days of cases and an en banc.  What   s that?  That   s when   we sit in panels of three. We had eight judges back there,  and you sit in panels of three. And the senior judges helped out back  then, so they sat. So, a case gets en banced if the losing party petitions  the whole court and claims that the panel opinion is contrary to other  circuit opinions or is wrong for this, that, or the other reason. And then  somebody has to poll the court. That   s the process. If nobody polls the  court, the en banc court, for a vote, and that would be either the dissenter  on the panel, most likely. Sometimes it   s somebody off the panel who is  interested in the issue. And then the active judges vote, and if a majority  of active judges vote to rehear it, there is a rehearing en banc, and the  whole court sits for oral argument and then for the opinion.  So, are you hearing cases the whole year or just certain times?  The circuits, I discovered early on, all operate differently. We are one of  the few circuits that come together for a term of court, all of the judges,  the same week, and we have those weeks every other month. We hear  six cases a day, which is sort of like final exams when you first start, but  you get used to the process. We sat five days. We sat every day when I  first went on the court. Now, the active judges tend to sit four days and I  sit two, which I get to spread out. That   s because we have oral argument  16  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  only in about 35 percent of the cases, 30 percent. Maybe not even that  these days, the rest are on what we call on the briefs, submitted on the  briefs. All the cases have briefs. Fifty pages a side, plus a twenty-five  page reply brief, is what   s allowed. They can be less than that. It often  is, but sometimes not. And sometimes you have amicus briefs, and  sometimes they   ll come in and a stack for one case, it   ll be like this  because of motions and all kinds of stuff. (Gestures)  The panel will hear the cases, three judges will hear the cases that are  assigned that they   ve read the briefs in, and then they have a conference  afterwards and tentatively say which way they think the case will come  out based on the briefs and the oral argument. And then the Chief of the  panel, which is the most senior active judge on the panel, assigns the  cases for writing purposes. Then you go back home, and that   s where  you write them. And you get the record in the cases assigned to you.  Plus, then you have all these cases on the briefs that just   you   re on  separate panels for those, and they get sent to your chambers. And those  are done without oral argument.  And are you hearing cases in Denver?  Yes, that   s the seat of the court.  So, you have lots of traveling?  Yes, but only every other  month for a  week. I do, and at the beginning,  that was   I was leaving my husband here with children ages two to  twelve.  Fun times. (Laughs)  Fun times, but he likes to cook, and it was great for all of them. I have a  great family.  Any challenges during those early years?  I loved the job because it   s very academic. It   s reading and writing and  asking questions about what you   re reading, and then talking to your  colleagues about a particular case. Of course, it was challenging. I had  not done criminal law and 20 percent of our cases are criminal cases.  They were then, still are, so that   s a learning curve. But they tend  ultimately to be the easier of our cases because of reoccurring issues. So,  after a year, I was comfortable doing that. But every day is a new day.  We have a broad range of cases in federal court. Every law that  Congress passes can become something in a lawsuit.  17  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  We also have what   s called diversity jurisdiction, which means we get  state law cases if one of the parties is from Oklahoma or one of the other  six states and the other party is a non-resident. The non-resident is  entitled to   or even the resident, if they   re suing a non-resident, are  entitled to file it in federal court. Where if a local resident sues  somebody from another state in state court, then the person from the  other state is entitled to file a motion to remove to federal court. That   s  from the notion of not getting home towned. So, we   ll have actual state  law questions in those cases.  So, you really have to keep up with everything.  It   s on-the-job training on every new area of the law you get. For a  period of time we   ll get a series of cases, like when Penn Square went  bankrupt, we got a whole series of these cases. In the early-   80s, when  we had energy problems, we had a whole slew of energy-related cases.  Then we got a whole slew of sentencing issues, criminal sentencing,  when the Congress passed a Sentencing Reform Act and set sentencing  guidelines. So, you tend to get those, but otherwise you   ll get an  environmental case or an Indian law case and then when you get  subsequent Indian law cases, you have gained some familiarity with the  area, but it could be on a totally different issue. So, it   s a fascinating job.  And eventually, you became the Chief Judge?  Chief, yes. Not by popular acclaim. It   s because the Chief Judge in a  circuit is the senior most active judge, which means you haven   t taken  senior status. The next senior most active   so, when my senior takes  senior status or retires, that   s when I    Monroe McKay, who was a  Carter appointee from Utah, was the Chief before me, and he quit early.  He quit when he turned sixty-five and took senior status. If he had  stayed his full seven years, which is the term, I would   ve become the  Chief Judge when I was fifty-eight and served my seven years and been  able to take senior status. As it was, I became Chief before I turned fifty-eight.  I don   t remember how old I was, but it was in 1994   well, fifty-four.  I served from then until 2000. Then I was followed by Deanell  Tacha, a Reagan-appointed woman in Kansas. So, our court had fourteen  years of feminine reign, and we shaped them up.  How is the job different when you   re Chief Judge?  You get a lot of administrative work that   s annoying. As Judge McKay  said when I got sworn in as Chief, that he was handing me the reins of  power that, unfortunately, weren   t attached to anything, which is true  because you have no power over your colleagues, in a sense. They   re  independent judges. What you have is a lot of administrative stuff and  18  Nykolaiszyn  judicial misconduct complaints. The Chief Judge has to decide and sit on  every one of those. There are a lot of wacky ones, pro se prisoners and  all kinds of stuff. So, that was annoying, and I didn   t like that part of the  job. But you sit on the Judicial Conference of the United States as the  representative of your circuit, and that body is a policy-making arm for  the federal courts and consists of the Chief Justice of the United States,  who chairs it, the Chief Judge of each circuit, and then a district court  judge representative from each circuit.  In our circuit, the district judges pick their own representatives. And  when I first went to my first meeting, I was seriously considering  quitting being Chief because it   s all this   you have to cut back on your  legal stuff because it takes up so much time. I seriously thought about  quitting until I went to my first judicial conference. And I think out of  this body of   there were twelve circuits, so that   s twenty-four, plus the  Chief, plus the federal circuit, and court of claims   there were maybe  about twenty-eight or twenty-nine voting members. And in the first  batch, there were two other women besides me. So, I decided I owed it  to women in the federal judiciary to stay on as Chief, so there would be  a female representative to the judicial conference. I really enjoyed that  part of it.  When Rehnquist became Chief Justice, he was a very, very good  administrator, and he opened up the committee system. Before that it  was all good ol    boys. The committees would get appointed, judges  would be put on, the Chief Justice picks the judges for each of the  committees, which are broad, and they do have power over rules,  recommending federal rules, evidentiary rules, and all kinds of other  things, the budget, the judiciary budget. And before Rehnquist, each of  these committees was composed of guys, and the chair would stay in for  years and get reappointed.  Rehnquist totally opened it up. He sent out questionnaires to ask people,  judges, what they were interested being on and set a rule that you can   t  be on a committee more than six years, two three-year terms, even if  you   re chair. I had actually been appointed to a committee by Chief  Justice Burger, the Defender Services Committee, before Rehnquist  became Chief Justice. Then he appointed me chair of that committee.  That committee governs all of the federal defenders   indigent defense,  the federal defender offices and the panel attorneys   and was really an  interesting, fun thing to be doing. When you sit on the Judicial  Conference, you vote on proposals from the committees coming out, and  so you get involved in all of the really interesting policy decisions for  the federal courts. That was fun.  Just right up your alley.  19  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Right up my alley. Administrative stuff was     Not so much. (Laughter)  I   m talking judges fighting over whether they get parking spots, all kinds  of stuff. Space and facilities for the whole circuit and misconduct  complaints, not just against judges on my court, but against a federal  district judge, a federal bankruptcy judge, or a federal magistrate judge.  And there are a lot of those judges in the circuit. It   s just a constant     mostly annoyance.  So, you were happy when your time as Chief Judge     I was very happy when my   and employee disputes and all kinds of  stuff.  You left the Chief Judgeship in 2000.  2000.  And then you assumed senior status in 2005.  Yes, on my birthday.  Really?  When I turned sixty-five, yes. That   s when you   re eligible.  Wow. What   s the difference now in your role?  I don   t sit en banc. I don   t get to vote on en bancs. I can poll the court if  I   m on the panel. If I   m on a panel and the case gets en banced, then I  can sit as a senior judge. But otherwise, senior judges don   t participate  in the en banc process, which is just fine with me. I am perfectly  comfortable letting my colleagues make those decisions. I had people  telling me   George W. Bush was president when I took senior status. I  had people telling me I should wait until a democrat got in, but I don   t  believe in that. I think the system works fine the way it is. It   s gotten  much too politicized. I think people who are good, who are proposed by  either president, who are nominated, should be confirmed by the Senate,  unless they   ve got problems with their abilities. But I don   t think they  should be picked apart for their   really for the president   s political  views, because we   re not supposed to have any. And in most cases, it  makes absolutely no difference when you   re deciding an environmental  case or a corporate case or energy law case.  20  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Politics shouldn   t even come into play.  No. And they really don   t come into play. So, I gave up my seat and was  replaced by a republican who is a super terrific judge. Deanell, my  republican colleague and friend since    85, just took senior status in  January, and then she   s retiring to go be  the law school  dean at  Pepperdine. She told me, she says,    I   m following your lead.    And she  gave up   she   s a conservative-republican, and she gave up her seat  because the system really works. I have great colleagues. We do not  decide cases because of our political views. We just don   t.  So, looking back on your career,  what has been the  best part about  serving on the bench?  It   s just the world   s greatest job if you like the law, which I do. It   s fun,  it   s interesting, it   s different every day. I get to hire law clerks from all  over the place, and I hire clerks who are smart, and we have an  overabundance of applications from smart law clerks. So, I tend to hire  people that I want to spend a year with because I work in a very small,  cloistered environment. I like my job. I like my colleagues. I love going  to court and doing oral argument. I get great cases on all kinds of fun  issues, including constitutional ones.  Do you have time to mentor?  I don   t get much opportunity to mentor, other than my law clerks. I   ve  had a couple of interns, or externs, from the University of Tulsa over the  years, but we really don   t have the space to put somebody, so that makes  it difficult. And when you   re working full time in this job, it   s a heck of  a lot of work. In fact, after I took senior status, ever since then, I   ve  wondered how I did this job full-time. But my husband and I are  traveling a lot, so that   s fun.  So, are you looking at retirement soon?  No. No. I like doing what I   m doing. My husband is finally slowing  down, but we have nine terrific grandkids. Our kids are scattered all over  the country, and so we visit them a lot. They visit us, and we spend the  summers in the mountains of Colorado, which I love. And I can do work  from there because of laptops and FedEx.  And this is a lifetime appointment?  This is a lifetime appointment. I can die with my boots on if I want to. In  fact, a fellow judge from   we have district judges sit with us, senior  21  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  district judges, especially, but also new. After a district judge is  appointed and has worked for a year, we have them come up and sit with  us just so we get to know them, and they get to know how we operate.  The first time I ever sat, Judge Brown, Wes Brown, from Kansas, had  taken senior status, so he was a senior judge thirty-one years ago. He is  still sitting. He is a hundred and three.  Oh, wow.  Yes.  Wow   Terrifically neat man.  Still sharp as a tack and   ?  Still sharp as a tack. I went to his 100th birthday party. There was an  article about him in the paper recently. But he still takes cases.  We interview a fair amount of older folks, and I   ve only seen a couple  still really, really sharp at  that age .  That   s become a huge problem because the Federal Judiciary has really  changed, and so judges tend to be hanging on longer, and you have some  health issues. A number of judges are quitting because of the pay these  days. We have not had a pay raise since 1989.  Wow.  We   ve had some COLA   s  Cost of Living Adjustment , but Congress     they set up a commission that said we get paid the same as Congress,  and they don   t want us to get ahead. So, when they don   t give  themselves a COLA, they take ours away. So, we   ve gotten kind of  behind, and that   s become an issue. But aging is an issue, and we had     and I was on it   a judicial health and wellness committee created to  make recommendations, because you don   t want these judges to have  misconduct complaints filed against them because they   re falling asleep  on the bench or whatever. You want it to be raised as a health issue and  deal with it as a health issue, and so that   s what     And I guess there are things in place to     Well, there weren   t.  Oh.  22  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Yes, there weren   t, but there will be, in process.  Good. That   s good. You   ve had a strong educational background at  Smith and Harvard. Can you describe some of the places where   we  don   t always learn it in the classroom   where you learned the  background you needed for your career?  I learned a lot in my travels. We traveled to the south when I was in one  of these early travel days, when it was a very segregated place. I  learned   both my parents are very   I went to totally integrated schools  in Battle Creek. There was one high school. Integrated teams, integrated  cheerleading squad. So, going south was like a foreign country back  then. Seeing signs that there are no black people allowed, that kind of  thing. So, that became part of my education. Traveling all over the world  and seeing different cultures really expanded my horizons, I think. That  was part of my education. That was a big part of my education. So, I  tend to pick up probably a broader view of things than I otherwise might  have.  I   m an adopted Oklahoman. When I first came here, it was also like a  foreign country. But I was coming from Cambridge, Massachusetts, and,  of course, there was no liquor by the drink, which meant there were no  good restaurants. It was just a real change for me, but Tulsa is a great  place. It   s been a great place to raise kids and, as you know, things have  changed over time in that regard, and we now have some great  restaurants. A lot of interesting people have moved to Oklahoma. The  energy business has brought a lot of people from other places here. It  was a great place to raise kids. It was a great place for me to be able to  have a career because the work   people here don   t work like they work  in New York and California. If I   d gone to work for a big firm in New  York, I would have had a much more difficult time having four kids and  taking those maternity leaves and coming back and working part time. I  probably couldn   t have done it.  Well it   s probably also a good statement to your work ethic when you  were working, before maternity leave, because they obviously wanted  you to come back.  Yes, they did. No, this was a great environment. We bought an older  home near Philbrook when nobody was buying in that part of town, and  that   s where we raised our kids. They went to Lee Elementary School,  which was in between there and my office downtown and then here. So,  it was easy to take off for school conferences and all that kind of stuff.  It   s just been a great place to have this kind of job and have a family.  23  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  We   ve talked about some instances in your career that were a little bit of  a stumbling block. Are there any that come to mind that we haven   t  spoken about?  Oh, just odd comments from people from time to time. One of the  partners in the firm I ended up working almost ten years for before I  became a judge wanted me to go by my first initial and my middle name  and my last name, so clients wouldn   t know I was female. Although,  they found out if they showed up in the office. I got comments from  guys from time to time about what I was doing, but nothing horrible. I  tend to sort of laugh off those kinds of things. When I went to court here,  I was treated very favorably. There was a trial judge, the only federal  district judge here for years, liked women. He liked me, and it was  always    Gentlemen and Mrs. Seymour    in the courtroom.  One time, I was in a conference with other lawyers. We were having a  pretrial conference in his conference room down the hall here. We took a  break, his career law clerk (we called her Judge Marilyn), would run  these things. It was a big bank case, as I recall. We took a break to go to  the bathroom and make phone calls. I had been to the bathroom and I  was coming back down the hall and the judge came out of his chambers  and he threw his arms around me to give me a hug. I was looking over  his shoulder when the lawyer from Oklahoma City on the other side  came around the bend and went    (Gestures) (Laughter) So, it kind of  worked both ways.  When I went on the court, there was one lovable Irish judge from  Colorado, who was senior and getting a little irascible, let   s say. On a  case, if you disagreed with him, he   d take after you personally. It could  be nasty. So, when I was on a panel with him and another judge, if the  other judge wanted to raise some disagreement after the fact, he   d call  me and have me call Judge Doyle because Judge Doyle was this Irish  Catholic gentleman, and he didn   t believe in treating women like that.  So, he was always very nice to me even though he would ream out my  colleagues. So, we called it hiding behind my skirt. It hasn   t always been  a disadvantage to be female.  Sure. You were a trailblazer for many others, I   m sure.  Only because I came first and there were so few, literally. When I  graduated from law school in 1965, only 3 percent of the law school  graduates in the country were women. By the mid-   70s, it had gotten  close to 50 percent. Certainly by    80, it had changed that rapidly. So, I  was just the beginning of a huge tide of women starting to go to law  school. But when I first came here, the other thing about it is I couldn   t  get   I was separated from my husband, I was back here with two little  24  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  kids. I went to get a Sears Credit Card. I had filed for divorce, and they  wouldn   t give me a card in my name. It had to be in my husband   s name.  I said,    He   s in Indonesia. We   re getting divorced.       We don   t care.       If  you   re married, it has to be in your husband   s name.     So, all of that was    Then the Fair Credit Act got passed and all of that  was changing, really, in the    70s when I was practicing here. So, my  firm, if we ever got an employment discrimination case, an employment  issue against any of our clients, I was the one that would get it just  because they figured   I don   t know what they figured. But I was on top  of those things, shall we say, since     Right place, right time.  Right place, right time, absolutely. And a president who was interested  in   I   m sure he was getting kicked by Rosalyn   was interested in  putting women on the bench. I didn   t have political contacts here. I  wouldn   t have gotten my job but for that. It was totally right place, right  time, and I was young. A lot of my career has been right place, right  time.  Career highlights, looking back?  Oh, gosh. Hard to say. Being the first woman in a lot of things is fun. It  really was. And talking to younger women coming along. It was  interesting because somewhere after this great surge of women, women  began to think they couldn   t have families, couldn   t see how they could  do both. So, I   ve spent a lot of time talking to women about that. I think  women should start their own law firms if they   re in firms that are not  family friendly. You just have to because I think people should have a  balanced life. Women should not turn into workaholic guys in their  careers. And I don   t think workaholic guys, family men, should be  workaholics either. I think that   s changed some. I know my daughters, I  have a son and three daughters, and I can tell you that my daughters     husbands would not get away with putting everything on their wives to  handle. Times have just changed, and it   s been fun to watch that. It   s  been fun to see. When I first became a judge, there were hardly any  women in the courtroom, and that   s changed drastically. Lots of women,  in the criminal cases, lots of women assistants and U.S. Attorneys and  federal defenders and panel members and lawyers for corporations and  just a lot of women. It   s been a really fun thing to watch.  One case that always pops into my mind is Brown vs. Board of  Education, which I sat on in the early    90s. Looking through my briefs  for oral argument, Brown vs. Board of Education, and I   m thinking,     How can this be?    It was the daughter, Linda Brown-Smith, who was  25  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  the little girl in that case, filed on behalf of her daughter, claiming that  the Topeka public schools were never integrated, and the case had never  been closed. It came back from the Supreme Court, and I don   t know,  they made a few changes in the school system, I guess. The district court  never gave up jurisdiction in the case. I don   t know why. She just  reopened the original case on behalf of her daughter and had been  through federal district court. She lost, came up here on appeal, and we  reversed and said   they threw her out on summary judgment, saying  there weren   t sufficient facts to raise a claim. And we reversed and said,     Yes, there are.    They ended up settling and creating the magnet school  program in Topeka. But imagine my surprise. I just had a lot of  interesting cases. I got an award from the Federal Bar Association a few  years ago, a civil rights award, which pleased me. I liked that.  Now, you were inducted into the Oklahoma Women   s Hall of Fame in  2005. What does this honor mean to you?  It meant a lot. I was surprised and very pleased because, as I say, I   m  happy to be an Oklahoman now, and I   m happy that women were being  recognized. And when I looked at the women who had been given this  award, there are a lot of great women in this state and a lot of them were  pioneers just because they were getting into areas that women hadn   t  previously been accepted in. It   s a nice group to be among, and I think  it   s really neat that Oklahoma does that.  As a transplanted Oklahoman, what does Oklahoma mean to you?  It   s totally different as a state than the one I grew up in and other ones  that I visit on the West Coast and the East Coast, but people here are  extraordinarily nice and friendly. My law clerks come from all over, and  they invariably comment about how nice people are here. And it   s very  noticeable now when I leave and go someplace else like New York City.  In fact, my daughter, my oldest daughter who lived in New Jersey,  married a guy in college who was from New Jersey, they lived there for  a while and came back here where they lived and worked for about four  years. She said the first time she went to work out, she came home and  she said,    Oh, my God, I love this place.    She said,    I went to reach for  the weights and a guy got there first and handed them to me.    She said,     If I   d been in New Jersey and I   d gone to reach for the weights and I   d  got there first, the guy would have snatched them out of my hands.    I  think that   s a perfect description of the difference in people   s attitudes  here. It   s just a great place to live.  If you could tell Oklahomans anything, impart some wisdom, what  would you tell them?  26  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  I would tell them to broaden their perspective because if you grow up  here and you never travel to the other states, you have a totally different  perspective than if you go someplace else to visit, to live. You just do.  People come from all over and, of course, we have people here who  come   a lot of people come in with the petroleum degrees who come  from the Middle East or Asia, and you can learn a lot from them. I   ve  just learned traveling around that people are basically people wherever  you go. They   re all interested in their families, their children getting  ahead and having a good job and having a decent life. It doesn   t make  any difference if they were born in rural Africa or New York City or  Timbuktu. You don   t really sense that unless you go to those places and  learn that even though their culture may be very different, they are  basically   people are people.  Of course, many people look at you now as a role model for everything  that you   ve accomplished. How important is that?  It   s been nice to be a role model. As I said, it sort of, I feel like an  accidental role model. But it   s nice to think that I may have influenced  younger women to do something that they might not otherwise have  done, like apply for a judgeship, take a chance on something, realizing  they can have a career and have a family, anything in that regard. It   s  been very nice. It   s been fun to be a   I have all these great stories about  stuff I went through. I took exams, I took four-hour final exams in an old  building in Harvard Law School that had no women   s bathrooms, for  example. I mean, times have changed. I think a lot of women don   t  realize how lucky they are. How different it was in a pretty recent past.  Would you like to make mention of anybody who has played an  important role in your life?  Yes, my dad and my husband, both of them. My father encouraged me  to do   he did, even though he hadn   t gone to college. He encouraged all  his kids to get the best education that they could possibly get. My  husband has been so supportive of me in everything that I have done,  which is really nice considering he came out of a different era, as I did.  And he still is, it   s great.  Family is still a big part of your life right now.  Family is an enormous part of my life. Love those grandbabies. Well, I  enjoy my kids. We talk on the phone all the time. It   s fun to watch kids  grow up, become their own person.  Well before I ask my last question, is there anything else you   d like to  add that I haven   t asked you about today?  27  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Seymour  Nykolaiszyn  Good grief, I don   t think so.  Well, when history is written about you, what would you like for it to  say?  I would like it to say that I was known for respecting every human being  as a human being and respecting other people   s views, even though they  are directly contrary to mine. I think that   s missing a lot in our society  today. But it   s what this country was founded on, and I think it   s  important. It means a lot to me to have an open mind about things.  Well, Judge Seymour, thank you so much for taking time out to meet with  us today.  You   re welcome.  I really appreciate it.  -------  -------  
