 Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University  Library. Today is Wednesday, July 18th 2007and I   m in Oklahoma City,  Oklahoma interviewing Dr. Kay Martin. This interview is being  conducted as part of the inductees of the Oklahoma Women   s Hall of  Fame Oral History Project. Dr. Martin was inducted into the Oklahoma  Women   s Hall of Fame in 2007. She has played a pioneering role in the  field of technology education since her appointment as CEO and  superintendent of Francis Tuttle Technology Center in 1997. Thank you  for joining us today Dr. Martin.  Thank you, Juliana.  Let   s begin by learning more about you. Could you start with where you  grew up, and give us a little insight into your early life?  I was born in Bartlesville, Oklahoma and moved from Bartlesville to El  Dorado, Kansas when I was four. My father worked in engineering in far  petroleum industry. So we moved to El Dorado, Kansas and it   s a small  town about 30 miles from Wichita. I grew up with a very, probably,  nondescript lifestyle. My mother was a homemaker. My father traveled  somewhat but was always busy with work. I have one brother, a year  younger than myself.  My mother was always there when I got home from school everyday  with cookies and milk, which is so different than what so many young  people grow up with today. My father was very, very supportive. We did  lots and lots of family activities so it was really   pretty nondescript, just  a very wonderful childhood.  Could you describe for us the types of schools you attended growing up?  5  Martin  Nykolaiszyn  Martin  Nykolaiszyn  Martin  Nykolaiszyn  Martin  Nykolaiszyn  Martin  Nykolaiszyn  I attended public schools. I attended three different kindergartens  because we moved three different times. I started kindergarten when I  was four, so I was quite young to begin going to school a half day. Then  I went to the traditional junior high school, traditional high school and  graduated from the public high school in El Dorado, Kansas in the time-frame  in which students graduate.  What were some of your favorite subjects in school at that time?  My favorite subjects   I think science was one of my very favorite  subjects when I was younger. Then as I got into high school, I started  taking some business courses. I thought business was so fascinating and  just took every business course they offered so that was really, I guess  the most interesting. I liked English because I love to read, but to start  off really, I had a real passion for science but decided business was even  more exciting.  Now outside of school, what were the types of activities you liked to do  for fun?  As I was growing up?  Sure.  One of the things I loved to do was swim and we would go to the public  swimming pool and I just thought that was great fun. As I got a little bit  older, my dad bought a boat. We would go to the lake on a very regular  basis in the summer. We did a lot of camping. My dad, he never told me  there was difference between boys and girls and because he taught my  brother to fish and hunt, he did that with me. We did a lot of that, a lot  water skiing and a lot of picnicking, and then in my free time I liked to  read, and of course hang out with my friends. That was kind of fun too  but it was the days before malls, so we didn   t we didn   t do that.  Now when you were younger you liked business and you liked science,  what did you think you would be when you grew up?  Well, you know, I guess because of the time-frame when I grew up it  was   first of all career wise, you were either a nurse, teacher or perhaps  a secretary. Those were the three options really when I grew up if you  were wanting to go into a career. I think, because my mother had been a  housewife, early on my plans were just to fall in love, get married, and  have two children and stay home and take care of the house. So that was  an earlier mental image of what I thought I would do in my future.  And also, when you were growing up, can you tell me who some of your  6  Martin  Nykolaiszyn  Martin  Nykolaiszyn  Martin  role models were?  Well, my dad was certainly a huge role model. Again as I mentioned, he  never discriminated against,    Boys do this, girls do that.    He was a very  hard worker. He was very dedicated, a loving family man and he  definitely was a role model. My mother was a role model in that she  knew how to take care of a house and keep a family happy in that  respect.  In school, I always had many role models. It seemed that I was a good  student and teachers liked me and they would take me under their wing.  I remember in third grade, one of my teachers took me to an opera and it  might have been a little young for me to do that because it wasn   t  something I appreciated much at that age. But, there were always role  models in high school. I hadn   t planned to go to college and two of the  business teachers took me under their wing, took me to their college and  showed me the ropes and gave me some opportunities there. I think  those are the ones I remember the most but certainly there were a lot of  others.  When you started to visit these colleges with your instructors, did it click  that you could possible go in another direction in your life?  It really did. I had not planned to go to college in that I didn   t think my  parents could afford it at the time. I didn   t know about scholarships. I  didn   t know of any available and I didn   t want to put a financial burden  on my parents. I had the skills because I had taken all these business  courses and I thought I will be able to be a secretary and I   ll be able to  support myself.  Then, I remember, during my senior year my dad sat me down and said,     You know, have you ever thought about going to business school, a  business college?    I said    You know, I really haven   t.    He said    That  might be something you want to think about.    So, I kind of had planned  that. Then when I visited the colleges with my teachers, I realized I  could take business courses there and so that was kind of what I planned  to do, that I would go and maybe get an associate   s degree because I  never wanted to teach, but get a business degree and then I would be, I  guess more value added in the workplace.  Tell me a little bit about you family. Tell me a little bit about the impact  and how important they are in your life.  Well the family that I grew up with, my mother, my brother, and my  father and then extended family with grandparents   they were always  extremely loving and supportive. I can never remember my parents  7  Nykolaiszyn  Martin  Nykolaiszyn  Martin  Nykolaiszyn  Martin  Nykolaiszyn  having an argument, so it was a very loving, wonderful family life. My  dad   s still living today so we still continue that. It   s something that, you  realize as you get older how very precious that family is. Family today is  even more important to me than ever. I have one child and an extended  family with my husband   s two children and grandchildren. I realize just  how important that is. It   s something I think we value more and more  everyday and particularly, as we get older.  Let   s fast forward a little bit. I know we focused a little bit on your early  life, tell me a little bit about your experiences in college.  As I started my freshman year, I didn   t have a lot of information about  what to expect because no one in my immediate family had graduated  from college. My father had attended early on, but because of the war he  wasn   t able to complete college. So, I guess I didn   t know what to  expect. I was again a pretty good student. I pledged a sorority and  actually became president of the sorority at the end of my sophomore  year (Laughs) and my junior year.  I was concerned about the financial part with my parents paying for my  way to school. I worked part time in the maintenance department on  campus in the office to pay for my sorority activities and my clothing,  but I worried about my parents just sacrificing and also knowing I had a  brother a year younger to go through school. I decided I wanted to finish  school as quickly as I could because it would be less expensive. I asked  my advisor if I could finish, because I looked at my schedule   if I could  finish in three and a half years versus four years and she told me no, that  wasn   t possible. So I decided I would do my own advising and then I did  finish in three and a half years. It saved a semester of college.  And you went to school at?  I went to school at Emporia State University for my undergraduate.  And what was your major?  My major was business education. I started as a two year associate  degree because I was just going to get the two years. And then I had a  sorority sister who said,    If you go ahead and get your teaching  credentials you could teach.    That would be (Laugh) the last thing I  wanted to do, I did not want to teach. But she kind of said,    Just go  ahead and do it, you could always fall back on that and have a career if  you needed it.    And so I did and when I did my student teaching, I fell  in love with teaching and found my passion.  Well, that plays right into my next question. I was going to ask you how  8  Martin  Nykolaiszyn  Martin  Nykolaiszyn  Martin  Nykolaiszyn  Martin  Nykolaiszyn  Martin  you ended up working in education and did you always want to be a  teacher or more of an administrator?  I wanted to be a secretary. That was my vision and again I did not think I  wanted to be a teacher. At the time women weren   t administrators. I  knew of no female administrators and that was not a goal I had in mind.  How did you end up in graduate school? How did that come about?  When I first started teaching, obviously I started at the semester because  of finishing up in January. I taught for one semester and then the school  where I had done my student teaching, offered me a job. So I moved  there and they told me I was the only person they had hired who did not  have a master   s degree. And at the time I thought,    I just finished my  baccalaureate degree why would I want a master   s degree?    They really  felt like that was extremely important, although I wasn   t able to start at  that time. I felt like if I was going to stay in teaching, I really did need to  get a master   s degree. It was an opportunity later on for me to do that.  Can you describe some of the most important places where you learned  the background you needed for your career today?  Well, obviously in the classroom. But I think the most important place  was from mentors, from other people who would tell me how important  a certain degree was or a certain class or a certain activity. I think most  of that was learned just from other people, not necessarily from     although the classroom certainly gave me that basic background.  You got that practical knowledge, that hands-on knowledge elsewhere.  Absolutely.  If you could, just tell me a little bit about the Francis Tuttle Technology  Center. Tell me a little bit about your students, the area that you cover  here and some of the programs that you offer.  Oh, you want me to talk about my favorite subject? (Laughs) We have  been in operation for our daytime classes for twenty-five years, so  during that time we have grown tremendously to approximately 3,000  students in the daytime. We also serve our adults in daytime and  evening, our short term people who come in and want to take just a short  term class and then we do economic development for business and  industry. So, during a year   s time we   ll serve over forty thousand  people. That part has really grown. We have a diverse program of  offerings everything from a drop out program for high school students  who have dropped out of high school and they really don   t have any  9  Nykolaiszyn  Martin  Nykolaiszyn  Martin  place to go. They come to us, they take their academics and they also  take a CareerTech program. That   s one end, and then we have at the  other end students, for example, in pre-engineering who are high school  students who are going on into collegiate level programs in engineering.  Next year, we   re going to open a bioscience and medicine academy for  the same purpose. These students will be going into collegiate level  programs when they finish. At the same time we have adults who are  returning to school. Many of those adults are in the same classes as the  high school students. Some of them want to upgrade or retrain. Some of  them have lost their job and they need to come up with another skill. So  we have what we call our career programs which are those primarily day  programs, although some of them also are available in the evening.  Then we serve our business and industry clients. We have about 500  core businesses and we do everything from safety training to  individualized training to help them with their workforce needs so that  we can really make our economy stronger. That   s kind of it is a  nutshell. I can certainly elaborate on that however you   d wish (Laughs)  because we do a multitude of things.  When you were appointed CEO and Superintendent of Francis Tuttle  back in 1997, did you feel any added pressure, since only one other  woman at that time had been named to such a post in Oklahoma?  I didn   t feel the pressure as a female, maybe just pressure because you  kind of realize the buck stops here and there   s not anyone else that can  say,    Wait a minute,    and maybe,    That   s not my responsibility.    I   ve  been here 25 years and had certainly started when the institution was  small and all along pretty much prepared for that position. I was the  second in command for about 13, 14 years, so it was really a smooth  transition in that respect. My supervisor, my boss, had really prepared  me to take his position.  Any stumbling blocks or adversity you faced along the way?  Certainly. When I was teaching in the areas of marketing and business, it  was again, a male-dominated area. I think there were not role models in  those days to say,    Here   s how you handle yourself as being the only  female.    I wasn   t quite sure if the group went to coffee or somebody  asked me to go to coffee, am I supposed to go? Does that mean it   s a  date? I worked through it. I was just trying to be as professional as  possible but it was really awkward.  When I decided I wanted to be a college professor. I needed the  credentials to do that. I really needed the doctorate so I researched it. I  10  Nykolaiszyn  Martin  Nykolaiszyn  found out that the best place in the nation to do this at the time was Ohio  State. I was living in Arkansas. I had a three year old son and a former  husband who told me that,    Women don   t do those things.    So it was a  real big dilemma to figure out how I am going to get this degree, if that   s  what I want to do for the rest of my life and how do I handle all this. It  was a huge decision to go to Ohio State. I had planned to take my son  with me while I did that, and then get my degree and come back. There  was going to be one job in the state of Oklahoma that possibly would be  available, that I might be able to qualify for. So I went based on that job  being open and obviously it was and I did get the job.  After I got there it was, again, a male dominated program. I thought,     What am I doing here as a woman who left her family because she  wanted to get this degree for the future?    I did not know of any other  women and that was what my ex-husband told me. He said,    Name  another woman who has done this.    I could not come up with one, so I  thought,    This is really unusual.    When I got the job as a college  professor, I was the only female in the college of business. And it took  me awhile to figure it out, but I was sexually harassed for a period of  time, and I kept thinking,    Something   s wrong with me, I   m causing  that.    For a while I just didn   t know what was going on. I finally  realized that   s what it was. So I went and talked to the dean about it and  he took care of it right away. But, it was a little painful to go through  that because I respected the person and yet I thought it was me and  didn   t realize that there was more there. So, that was painful.  I think sometimes just not having that female role model to say    Yeah,  somebody has done this before, and somebody has left their family to go  do this.    It   s not,    I   m not abnormal,    and to work through the sexual  harassment. Then, once I came here and was in the CareerTech field, my  former supervisor and mentor, Bruce Grey, took me under his wing. He  took me to the superintendent   s meeting and again, there would not be  women there. But he treated me so professionally. Everybody else  treated me professionally and it was very smooth and so I did not feel  tremendous pressure for being a woman, necessarily.  Nowadays the climate has changed     It has changed, it has. There are those women out there and those  administrators, and it is different.  I was doing some research and I think something that you do here  at  Francis Tuttle  that   s really important to you is educating young girls  and minorities about non-traditional career fields. Can you touch upon  that for me please?  11  Martin  Nykolaiszyn  Martin  Nykolaiszyn  That   s been one of my passions because, again, when I grew up you  didn   t go into a non-traditional field. From my vantage point, because I  didn   t know anyone who had these other positions   but the teacher, the  secretary or the nurse   those were the jobs for women. And so I have  felt really passionate about giving women opportunities for other  positions because they can do any of those jobs.  So some of our non-traditional programs for women would be, for  example, the engineering program. I   m very passionate about the  number of women, they tell me there   s about 25 percent, but I think  there   s less than that because, again, so many young women don   t grow  up with the female role model of an engineer. We started a program  called GirlTech and each girl who is in one of these non-traditional areas  is paired with a mentor who helps them through some of those tough  times or gives them somebody to talk to. For example, the girls in pre-engineering  will be paired with a female engineer and that gives them a  huge opportunity to work through some of those challenges. In our  automotive technician program, there   s tremendous opportunities for  women because they can be so skilled in those areas. But it   s a tough,  tough thing. Our society still does not look favorably, sometimes, upon  women being automotive technicians or they, again, could be harassed. I  try to encourage any of those women in those areas because they   re  great paying jobs. It gets them out of a financial hole and gives them a  tremendous opportunity.  Can you give me, it could be more than one, a key moment in your  career that you consider one of your biggest highlights?  It probably would be   and there are many, but I think when I got my  PhD after thinking I might not have been    normal    when I left my  family to go get that. I also really didn   t have the background for that. If  I were advising somebody today, I probably would be a little more  hesitant about telling them to go the path that I did.  I had had high school Algebra 1 and that was my math background.  During the PhD program, because it was at Ohio State, a very  statistically based program   they would say,    Let   s review our  calculus.    I did not have that background, so I got books and just learned  much of that on my own without the formal training. I think just getting  through that program and I saw many people fall by the wayside. Or  they came out and the All-But-Dissertation piece, the ABD part, they  didn   t go ahead and finish it. So because it was a big sacrifice in my life  with my family and with my child, I felt like that was a huge  accomplishment for me at the time.  So what   s the most rewarding part of your job right now?  12  Martin  Nykolaiszyn  Martin  Nykolaiszyn  Martin  Nykolaiszyn  Martin  The most rewarding is seeing the success of the students and just like the  Project Hope, the drop out alternative program   seeing those students  that dropped out of high school, they have come back to school, they  have gotten their academics, they have a career. Many of them go on to  college and they   re so successful. You just can   t ask for much more.  That   s a huge reward. So many people, when they come here they  have   everyone has their own story, they have their own life   s  challenges   helping them get through those so that they can, at the end,  have that career and be able to support a family   that   s huge.  When you were notified that you were going to be inducted into the  Oklahoma Women   s Hall of Fame, what was going through your mind  at that time?  Well, first I thought they called and were going to ask me for money or  ask me to do something, (Laughs) and then when they told me that I was  going to be inducted, I obviously did not know I had been nominated so,  it was a huge surprise. My first thought was,    Why me?    There are so  many women who should be acknowledged and they are so outstanding  and it made me feel, I guess that, you know, that   s a difficult thing to  focus on   on yourself, when there   s so many that should be included.  Overall, what does this type of honor mean to you, and to your family?  Well, at first I wasn   t going tell anyone, because I (Laughs) thought that  I would be bragging if I told people about it but, the people who had  nominated me obviously knew about it, and so it was quite rewarding in  that I just did not realize there was so much support. I had people who  supported me, who came to the induction that   I just had no idea would  take time to honor me. So it was a huge honor. I think the biggest honor  is just to women in Oklahoma and certainly, there are so many that  should be honored.  How do you feel now that you have students, you have I   m sure  instructors here, fellow administrators that look at you as a role model  and leader in your profession?  Well, I know I can   t do anything alone. None of us does that and so I  know that success only comes when people are working together, trying  to achieve the same goals, and that   s exactly what we   re doing. I do  know, because of my position, that many times I am singled out and  people do look at you sometimes a little differently. And, in that respect  I try to be a role model to others. I take the mentorship thing very  seriously. And I also, I try to walk my talk because I think that   s just  critically important.  13  Nykolaiszyn  Martin  Nykolaiszyn  Martin  Nykolaiszyn  Martin  Can you tell me something about the people you would like to thank, that  have played an important role in your life on a whole?  There would be certainly a roomful and I would start with my father,  who   s going to be 85 and living today, again one of my biggest  supporters. My mother passed away seventeen years ago and she  certainly is to be thanked. My son   s been a great role model. He   s  always been very encouraging and just very supportive. My ex-husband  who told me women don   t do those things also told me that I didn   t  always have to have a class in order to know how to do something and I  guess that being in education, sometimes I thought I had to take that  class in order to know how to do it. But he was always very  encouraging, very supportive after we kind of got through that one little  hitch. And then my husband today has been a technology center  superintendent. He   s retired today, but he certainly knows what the job   s  about and he is so supportive, and I would thank all the mentors I   ve had  over the years and that has been just a huge number. I one time tried to  list all of them and it was huge. My former boss and superintendent  Bruce Grey, who has passed away, was a huge mentor for me and then a  person that he worked with who is now the superintendent at Tulsa,  Gene Callahan was a mentor. The staff that I work with on a daily basis  is so encouraging and so supportive as is my assistant, Judie Harris. She  is just always there to help support whatever needs to be done, so that  number is huge.  If you could give any advice to fellow Oklahomans, what would you tell  them?  Wow. I   d tell them to be proud of our state. Here we are in our  centennial year, and we   ve had so many of these centennial moments to  look at, and there have been so many people who have come before us  who have done so many wonderful things. I   ve been involved in  Leadership Oklahoma, Leadership Oklahoma City, and I think when you  get involved in those activities and realize the power of our state and all  the wonderful aspects of it, I think that we have so much to be proud of.  And so, you know, when you are sitting by somebody on an airplane and  they don   t even know where Oklahoma is we should focus on all of our  assets. I like to tell people how wonderful Oklahoma is and I think we  should be proud of it and if there   s something we don   t like then we  need to try to help work on making it better.  What does Oklahoma mean to you?  Well, it   s my birthplace, and it   s where I plan to be buried, so (Laughs)  it   s a pretty important piece for me. I think it   s a wonderful state. It   s  interesting with just being 100 years old, that we   re a baby state. And  14  Nykolaiszyn  Martin  Nykolaiszyn  Martin  Nykolaiszyn  Martin  Nykolaiszyn  when you travel to other countries and they talk about how young the  United States is and then you talk about how Oklahoma is only 100  years old, it kind of puts it in perspective. But I think there could not be  any better people. I think that just the generosity of our people   I think  we   re like number two in the nation in giving and philanthropy. It tells a  lot about the people and their passion. It   s a state I want to continue to  live in and talk to others about.  What would your advice be to other women who plan to follow in your  footsteps?  Well I   d tell several things. Number one, I   d tell them to get their  credentials. Many times I have phone calls from women who want to go  into administration and they   ll say,    When I get the job, I   ll go get this  certificate or this degree or whatever,    and that   s not the way it works.  You need to get all that together and be there so when the time does  come you   ll have those credentials and be in the right place at the right  time. And I   d also tell them that I think the key ingredient in the success  of women or people in administration is that relationship building and  the positive attitude   the glass is always half full instead of half empty.  Those are just really important aspects in order to go where they want to  go.  How do you measure success?  I think overall its probably success with what you   ve left behind,  whether you   ve left that idea for that program that made the difference  in the students lives, whether you have touched somebody else in some  respect as far as pulling them up when they needed to be pulled up.  Whether you have helped grow other people, whether you have  mentored them. As women we really, really need that, not that men  don   t, but I think its something that we need even more. Success in  feeling like you   ve done the best you can do, whether it be your family  or your job or whatever it is. I think if you look back and say,    I did the  very best that I could,    then you   ve been successful.  When history is written about you, what would you like for it to say?  Well, (Laughs) I think I   d like for them to say that I was passionate  about young people. I really cared about them. I cared about helping  them have a better life. I was passionate about my family, and that I was  a good friend. Somebody who could be trusted, somebody who could be  relied on, and that I had high ethics, and I guess overall feel like I was  value added to this world.  What is next on the agenda for you? What do you think you   ll be doing  15  Martin  Nykolaiszyn  Martin  Nykolaiszyn  Martin  Nykolaiszyn  Martin  Nykolaiszyn  in the next few years?  Well there will be retirement on the horizon sometime in those next few  years. That   s something I   m thinking about because, again when I didn   t  really plan on a career of   it   s been 41 years last January   it has been a  long career and it   s not quite over, I hope. But I think that I want to  continue to add value to   if I can help other people, if I can add value to  our state, if I can just make a difference in people   s lives, then I want to  do that. So, I   ll need to find another aspect and another vantage point  and a way to do that. It   s something I am thinking about and trying to  figure out and how do you get there and how do you do that?  Is there anything you would like to add that we have not touched upon  today?  You touched on a lot more than I wanted to talk about. (Laughter) I   d  rather talk about you. I   d rather ask about you. I can   t think of anything  else that you want to ask? I don   t think so. I appreciate this. I think it is a  great opportunity for women. In the 41 years in my career, how things  have changed. When I couldn   t think of a role model who had done this,  or even a woman who had a doctorate, well what a change now.  I think it   s our responsibility to mentor others and I guess a piece of  advice I would have to young women who aspire to be administrators or  CEOs, superintendents, whatever   ask someone to mentor you, ask that  person. I   ve had people ask me before and it   s a pretty powerful thing  when they ask you. You feel that responsibility and of course it has to be  a two way thing. You want to mentor that person and they want to have  you mentor them. But, I think that   s really a very powerful thing when it  happens. So, ask that person you admire to mentor you and you might be  surprised.  Over the years, have any of your mentees gone on to bright futures,  bigger and better things?  They have, they have.  And how does that make you feel at the end of the day?  Oh, it   s huge. I mean again, that   s how do you want to be remembered,  that   s what it   s all about. How you make other people feel and how you  might have contributed to their success   the little piece that you might  have had in making their future brighter. So, that   s huge.  Well, we do thank you for your time today.  16  Martin  Nykolaiszyn  Martin  Thank you and this is great. I appreciate you taking your time to do this  and I know it is time consuming but it will be a piece of history. I want  to look at everyone else   s  (Laughs)  Well, we do thank you very much  Thank you and thanks to the Oklahoma Commission on the Status of  Women.  -------  -------  
