 Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University  Library. Today is Thursday, March, 4, 2009, and I   m in Muskogee,  Oklahoma, interviewing Ruthe Blalock Jones. This interview is being  conducted as part of the Inductees of the Oklahoma Women   s Hall of  Fame Oral History Project. Ruthe Blalock Jones was inducted into the  Oklahoma Women   s Hall of Fame in 1995. Thank you for joining us  today.  Thank you. Nya-weh.  Well let   s begin by learning a little bit more about you. If you could tell  us a little bit about your early life growing up?  Well I have to talk about my Indian heritage. I think that   s primary. I am  Shawnee and Delaware and Peoria. I was raised in what I call a  traditional home in that, although my parents spoke their tribal  languages, they didn   t speak to each other because they were different  tribes, but we children did hear the language spoken by the extended  families. We participated in various cultural activities such as the  ceremonies of the Shawnee. We participated in the Native American  Church, we participated in the stomp dances, and later on in the  powwows. My parents were, I think now that I look back on it, they  were somewhat different in that they did produce crafts. But we were  busy every day. If someone wasn   t sewing or reading or drawing or  something like that, you had work to do. We never sat around, as I look  back on it.  My father was a bead worker and a feather worker, and he also made  German silver jewelry. And he was a roadman in the Native American  Church. My mother did beadwork and sewing, and the difference here is  that she only did that for the family, for us. My father, while he did those  things for other people, he didn   t sell them but he perhaps was given  5  something in exchange for his work. He may have been given a set of  feathers or a buckskin blanket or something, but he never charged for his  beadwork or any of the things that he did, even though we can say that  he produced for the public.  My mother was a shell-shaker in the stomp dance, and she participated  in the Native American Church, helping my father. We attended the  Shawnee ceremonials at White Oak because that   s where my father  came from, and his mother, my grandmother, was one of the old ladies.  This is a ceremonial distinction or honor in that we have six old men and  old women, and they are, I don   t know how you could say, they   re  selected. They   re not elected, but they   re selected by the leaders of the  grounds, and they are the leaders of the ceremonies. So my grandmother  occupied, we call them, a seat on the bench, because they sit at a certain  place in the ceremonies. I   m very proud and honored that I now occupy  the seat that my grandmother had so many years ago, so I am number six  at our ceremonial grounds.  This is a life time position.  I   m very proud  that my daughter and granddaughters also are participating and  following in that cultural activity.  Also, again, about my grandmother, coincidentally, at this time in  history, her grandmother, I believe it was, came from Kansas before the  Removal   her grandparents or parents, I   m not sure. But her  grandmother, I guess it was, or mother, is the namesake for the town of  Lenexa, Kansas. The town name has been changed to English, I suppose  you would say, or anglicized. There is a statue of her there in the town  square. But the other thing is that her grandfather, or our great-grandfather,  is similarly being honored this year. They   ve been talking  about it for some time, and I suppose many things were delayed after  9/11 because of finances, and even now we have another recession, so  other things are delayed. But our grandfather, the husband of Lenexa, is  being honored this year, and they   re building a park in his honor. So our  Blalock descendants, my grandmother   s name was Black Hoof, and so  in May   the tentative date is May of this year; it was to have been last  November   but they   re building a Black Hoof Park in the Kansas City  area  of Lenexa , so we   re making plans to attend that dedication and  opening of the park.  He was a Shawnee Chief.   All of those things are part, I guess, of my early days, and I primarily  identify through Shawnee culture because sadly, there is very little left  of Delaware culture. My mother was a fluent speaker. She was one of  the last ones. We did hear the Delaware language spoken in the home,  and we learned a few words ourselves. We knew about some of the  cultural traditions only through the family, and so we know something  about the burial traditions, for instance, and we learned about some of  the foods and things that they did. But as a tribe they really don   t have  6  any culture left. They do have a powwow, but all of that is learned or  adapted. But on the other hand, our Shawnee traditions have flourished  and have remained alive, even though we do have fewer and fewer  speakers. And I sadly am not one of the speakers. I do know some of the  words and can follow along, but I am not a speaker.  I attended public schools; I attended an elementary school that was a  rural dependent school in Ottawa County. It was called Lincolnville  District 20, and it is no longer in existence, but as I look back now I was  very fortunate because that   s a part of history. It was a two-room school.  It wasn   t one-room, we had a two-room school. We had the upper four  grades and the lower four grades. It went to the eighth grade, so my  elementary years were spent there until about the seventh grade, and  then I attended school at Miami, Oklahoma, for a time,  until I went to  Dewey, Oklahoma Junior High for one year . My high school education  was actually here at Bacone under Dick West. The high school was since  discontinued, and  Bacone  just then was a two-year college. It   s now  four years, and of course there is no longer a high school. So that   s a  little bit about my early days.  Along the way of, course, I also then began painting and started to  exhibit. I was still at Lincolnville in Ottawa County, and my influence  there and a friend of the family   of my father, and now my own  friend   is Charles Banks Wilson from Miami, Oklahoma. My father  thought that I was spending a lot of time drawing, and my parents were  very supportive of anything their children did, and so my father took  some of my drawings and showed them to Charles Banks Wilson in  Miami. I was unaware of this. He was very encouraging, and he gave my  father some used Strathmore drawing tablets, I guess from his students  at the college in Miami   there were a few pages left in the drawing  pads   and he gave me boxes of pastels. I still remember them; they  were Eberhard Faber. And he gave   and I don   t think I had pencils. I  just used number 2 pencils, but when my father brought those to me I  could not   I mean it was just earth-shaking to have real art supplies, a  real drawing pad.  Wilson   s instructions were to fill it up and bring it back, and so that went  on for some time, and I would take my little drawings up and show them  to him, and he was always very encouraging. And they encouraged me  to enter little local shows. One was sponsored by the American  University Women, and so I entered that. I think I won a prize, and then  they were instrumental, he and his wife, in informing us of the Philbrook  Annual in Tulsa, Oklahoma. They thought that I should enter that, the  Indian Show. Well, I didn   t know what Indian art was, other than I  thought it was Indian subject matter painted by Indians, I didn   t know  there was a formal description of it. So I did enter the Philbrook Annual  7  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  when I was fifteen years old. One of the judges was Acee Blue Eagle,  and he did purchase my little painting. Well, it wasn   t little at that time.  It was like a 16x20 or 18x24 watercolor painting. I think it may have  even been on newsprint. It wasn   t on really good paper. It was of  powwow camps. He purchased that for the magnificent sum of  15; that  was a large amount of money to me at the time.  And also, I didn   t realize it until later on, but the Philbrook Annual was  for adults who were professionals. And so not only was my painting  juried into the show, but I was given an Honor Mention. I was so silly, I  was disappointed that I only got an Honor Mention and thought I should  have had one of the places, not knowing that, you know, it was quite  something to even be in the show. Happily, just a few years ago, I was  able to see the painting. I never knew what happened to it, but it   s in the  Blue Eagle Collection in the Museum of Natural History in Washington.  One of my friends, Candace Green, there has told me about it and  actually sent me a digital image of it. So it was kind of fun to see that  again and relive, I guess you would say, the first Philbrook entry.  So that   s kind of how I started, and eventually then, because of Blue  Eagle, we became friends. We saw each other occasionally at powwows.  My mother and aunts would always see that I was able to visit with him.  He made references for me, he made suggestions and so on that I come  to Bacone to study with Dick West. At one point in time, I suppose I  must have been getting somewhat obnoxious, I told my mother I was not  going to school another day in public schools. I wanted to study art, and  they did not have any. If I couldn   t study art, I was going to quit school.  I was not going another day to public school. So she and my aunts went  to the Bureau of Indian Affairs in Tulsa, and they were making  arrangements for me to go to the boarding school at Chiloeco. That was  the plan, but when they got there they had information that there was an  art program at Bacone, and they said,    No, she needs to go to Bacone.     We had never heard of Bacone, you know. And so eventually, as a result  of the social worker at the Bureau of Indian Affairs and also the  insistence of Acee Blue Eagle, I came to Bacone as an art scholarship  student, and it was just life changing. It   s a path that I   ve never varied  from.  When you were back in that two-room schoolhouse in Ottawa County,  what were some of your favorite subjects?  I don   t remember the school, per se. As far as classes, I don   t know, I  guess we had spelling or arithmetic. I don   t remember. I remember  standing at a blackboard, I don   t know what I was doing up there   I  suppose arithmetic. I remember always making posters or making  drawings in colored chalk on the board, but that was just me, and I  8  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  remember other things about the school.  I think we had spelling bees.  I  remember that we had baseball teams, I suppose it was softball, and we  played other country schools. It wasn   t any type of a formal league, I  don   t think. I think it was probably an informal association, so we would  go to other schools in the county, and sometimes they would come to  our school in the spring. I don   t think it was a calendar or anything  regular, but occasionally we had ball games like that. And we always  had programs, Christmas programs. And we had, I think now, it must   ve  been political candidates or something to do with the elections, because  we frequently had what we called pie suppers. People would take boxes,  decorated boxes, decorated with cr  pe paper and so on, and they would  be auctioned. It was quite a festive occasion at night, and I guess it was  raising money for political candidates, but that was a fun thing.  It seems  like there were musicians sometimes, a square dance probably for the  adults.  Occasionally we had programs where one had to memorize  something. I know the parents would come. We also were active in the  4-H, and that took us again off into Miami or to another school. It was a  fun time.  When you were younger, what did you aspire to be when you grew up?  Well, actually I always say that I never said,    When I grow up I am  going to be an artist.    I always said,    I am an artist.    I   ve said that from  about the age of eleven, so that would   ve been about the time my father  began my association with Charles Banks Wilson, and so that went on  until about the age of fifteen. But I never   and I guess, when I got those  actual art materials that pretty much solidified it that I was an artist. I  never ever said anything other than,    I am an artist.     Tell me about some of your early role models that you looked up to  during that time. You mentioned many early names.  Well, Charles Banks Wilson, of course, and the other thing that he did  for me was that he was on the library board in Miami, Oklahoma. I was  already an avid reader, but at some point I became aware of art books  and magazines in the library and the fact that they were available for  check out or to read in the library, so I became aware of the great artists  and even the working artists of the day. As I look back on it now, I was  exposed to nudes early on, which I thought was fascinating. At first I  was somewhat disturbed, I didn   t want to do anything like that. But then  I thought,    But artists do that. You have to do that.    So I jumped in then;  that was through the reading of the art magazines at the library. Then at  another point when I was in his studio, he probably stepped away for a  few minutes, and when he was gone, I was looking around. And I guess  some of his student works were in there, and again I saw nudes, and so I  was very intrigued and vowed again to pursue that study.  9  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  So except for Wilson, and then later on Blue Eagle, it was really just the  artists in art history. When I got to Bacone of course, and then at the  Philbrook, I became aware of other Indian artists. I became fascinated of  course with Dick West and Blackbear Bosin, for instance, and Oscar  Howe. I was always fascinated by the women artists such as Pablita  Velarde and the idea that they could stand right up there beside the men.  There was an Osage artist, I don   t think I ever met her, I may have met  her, but she was always intriguing to me because she lived in New York  and exhibited in New York and that was Yeffe Kimball. She was a  pioneer artist. There were others as well, but I think I was influenced, or  interested, not so much in what they did or how they did it, but more in  their personality or their philosophy, the way they approached life and  their dedication to what they were doing. I never attempted, for instance,  to emulate them, because they had different experiences than I did. I  tried to paint my own surroundings and experiences, but I always maybe  had them in the back of my mind.  Also, it wasn   t until much later that I realized who Charles Banks  Wilson was. To me he was just a family friend, he was very kind, and he  was an artist. Had I known at the time how well known he was and how  famous he was, I would   ve been very intimidated and I wouldn   t have  been able to interact with him. Even though some of the things, it wasn   t  unusual for me to see some of the things in his studio. Like some of the  paintings that he worked on were of famous people, I guess it didn   t  occur to me that he actually knew those people. It was just a painting,  because I had painted some things that I had not seen before or that I had  learned about in magazines or books such as scenes and so on. It didn   t  occur to me at the time that he knew those people, so it was later on that  I came to realize who he was and appreciated him of course all the more.  I take it your family was very supportive.  Oh yes. As I look back on it now, I don   t actually know   we didn   t have  much money, so I don   t know where they found the money to buy me  little sets of paints. That would have been an extravagance. I know at  one point they bought me little jars of poster paint. I didn   t buy art  materials, but I did buy packages of paper at the office store, and I  would buy manila drawing paper and some white bond paper, I suppose,  and you could buy it in small packages. I suppose it was under a dollar,  probably fifty cents or so, so I would use that. The manila paper is like a  heavy newsprint, and it   s just used as scrap paper, or yellow sheets, I  guess, were used at the time. So my art supplies came from  Charles  Banks Wilson , the Strathmore drawing pads and so on. But I often look  back on that, and I wonder about that myself. I never asked my parents  how they were able to do that or why they did it, other than that I wanted  it and they were encouraging me.  10  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  Now when you attended high school here at Bacone, did your family  move with you?  Oh no. It   s a boarding school. No, no. They remained in the Miami area,  and then they moved for a short time to the Bartlesville area, and then  eventually they moved back to the Miami, Oklahoma, area Quapaw,  Oklahoma, actually.  Was that tough being on your own in high school?  No, it was really exciting, exhilarating, you know. Because first of all I  had formal art classes, and I was in with other artists  for the first time ,  as well as the other activities. No it wasn   t   I know that I was exposed  to some people who were very lonesome, but it was a broadening  experience because there were people here from all over the place. There  were people here from Mexico and Panama, as well as many states. The  people from Virginia, they didn   t even get to go home at Thanksgiving.  Sometimes they would go home at Christmas, but many times they  would come in August and they wouldn   t go home until June. I was  always amazed at that. And there were people from Arizona and New  Mexico and California and Florida. That was pretty exciting to me, just  coming from Oklahoma,  and not having traveled at all .  We were treated to many adventures while we were here in that we  made trips to places in Texas and Chicago and places like that where we  put on programs, so it was quite exciting.  I was a dancer with the Indian  Club which was sponsored by Dick West.  I wasn   t lonesome because I  wasn   t that far away from home. Well, I was far enough away that I  could go home for the occasional weekend or certainly for the holidays.  So no, I wasn   t. It was the exact opposite, I guess you would say.  Seems like it was a nice broadening experience.  Yes, exactly. It certainly was, yes.  So was college always in the plans? Did you always plan on going?  Yes, I think so because I was influenced by Dick West who had  completed a master   s program at OU. So I began to   well, in those days  people, particularly Indians, they were not what you think of as full-time  artists. Everyone had a day job. And so the idea, as Dick West would  always tell us,    Get your bread and butter and then you can do what you  want to,    in other words paint and so on. So that was always in the back  of my mind and also, at that time, there were not a lot of opportunities.  You were a teacher, for instance, or you worked maybe in the office for  the Bureau of Indian Affairs or something like that, or you could  11  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  specialize perhaps and be a nurse, but there weren   t a whole lot of  variations on things that you could do. So I somewhat aspired to follow  Dick West into the education field, but also in my mind I had the  realization that there were just very few positions available and at the  time they were all filled.  After I received my degree, I worked for a time at DPW, what   s now  DHS  Department of Human Services , as a social worker until an art  position opened up, but at the time I fully expected to retire from  welfare. I did not ever expect to get back into art on a formal basis  because I just didn   t expect it to ever open up. And my family was stable  and there were no plans to move anywhere. One did not in those days  necessarily follow what the woman wanted to do, so there was just no  thought of moving or, as I said, of leaving the welfare department. I was  secure there, and I was able to paint at night and weekends and had some  disposable income to buy materials and to enter competitions and so on.  So I didn   t really see anything changing.  And then when did it change?  Well in 1979 is when I came here  Bacone College in Muskogee,  Oklahoma , when this position became open. It had opened up a couple  of years before, and I did apply, but I wasn   t selected. When it opened  up again, well I made another application and I was selected. But in the  meantime I had, as I said, continued to paint and exhibit and kept my  name out there before the public, in the art world.  How was the University of Tulsa?  It was as exciting as Bacone was at first. Because, again, I   ve always  said that I was fortunate in my instructors, that all of my professors were  working artists. Not only was Dick West a working artist and then also  Charles Banks Wilson was a working artist, that was true at Tulsa with  my professors also. The professors at Tulsa were similar to the ones I  had already encountered in that they were very helpful. My primary  professor at Tulsa was Carl Coker, and he has since retired and moved to  the Taos area. I see him occasionally. But I developed other friendships  also at Tulsa, particularly with Garrick Bailey who is in anthropology. I  did take anthropology classes, only to enhance my art, to study for my  art, but Garrick Bailey gave me a fellowship in graduate school so I was  able to do a research project on the Delaware tribe. We have remained  friends since then. And others also from that time, such as the librarian  Guy Logsdon and some others   Brad Place, who was the head of the  school  of art . I never took classes from him at all because his area was  commercial art or design and I was in fine art. We   ve remained in touch.  And some others as well, and also some students. I   ve always said that  12  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  lifetime friendships formed at Bacone, but then there were also some  from the time at Tulsa. And this is not unusual; this is the college  experience universally. So I did have that also. I   m very proud of my  association with the University of Tulsa.  So nine years after receiving your associate of arts degree here at  Bacone, you   ve returned now. What was that like for you?  It was very exciting, and I was worried at first. I talked to several  people   Charles Banks Wilson was one   because I didn   t have an  education degree, I had a fine arts degree, and what I was worried about  was, well what do I do about all those grades and papers? And I don   t  know anything about education, you know, and that worried me a little  bit, but I did jump in. I remember Charles Banks Wilson saying to me,     Well you had teachers, didn   t you? You were taught.    So he was just  saying to do what you know, or,  What did your teachers do?  So that  was my guidance there for a number of years until I finally did receive  an education degree or education courses at Northeastern, but by that  time I had developed my own pattern of how I was doing things. It was  primarily just painting and drawing and interacting with the students. It  was quite exciting.  Now Bacone has a rich art tradition here.  Yes. Yes.  Tell me a little bit about the rich art tradition and how it continues on.  Well it was very exciting, because having been a student here I was  aware of it and I was very humbled and conscious of it and realized the  place that I was stepping into, and I wanted to make sure that it was kept  intact and that it would grow and other students would participate and  have the rich experience that I did. I was just talking to my class this  morning about the Kiowa artists and telling them that until they came  along there was no Indian art. All Indian art that exists today comes  from the Kiowa tradition or the Santa Fe tradition. Even though they  don   t paint in that style or sculpt or whatever they do, they still owe  those people because they were the first ones to exhibit their work and  bring it to the public. So there   s always been an association between the  University of Oklahoma and Bacone, because some of the descendants  of the Kiowas came to school at Bacone and went to school at  Oklahoma. All of the early instructors here came from Dr.  Oscar  Brousse  Jacobson   s instruction at the university, such as Blue Eagle and  Crumbo and Dick West and Terry Saul; those were all Jacobson  students. You mentioned reading the cornerstone out here, the dedication  of the building. When this building was dedicated, the speaker was Dr.  13  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  Jacobson from the University of Oklahoma, so there   s always been a  cooperative spirit there.  We were always aware of the Kiowa artists and the Kiowa tradition, but  also we were aware of our instructors, our professors, and what they  were doing. And as I said, they were working artists. We   ve tried to  build on that and keep the students    work before the public and enter  competitions and so on. Some students have done that, others have  worked in different ways in that they   ve gotten book illustration  contracts and so on. I think we   ve been able to maybe work in a different  way, but it   s a different time today from when I was a student here and  even when I   well when I came the Philbrook Annual had just stopped,  but as a student here, one of the things that we would do would be to  prepare our entries for the Philbrook Annual. And so when I came   back  there was no Philbrook Annual, but there were other shows, and  my students then worked to exhibit in those shows, such as the Heard  Show in Phoenix and the Scottsdale shows sometimes or the Red Cloud  Show in South Dakota, so we always had something to work toward.  And then there were local shows such as the ones here at the Five Tribes  Museum and the ones in Tahlequah for the Indian students who  qualified. So it   s always been part of this school to keep your name out  before the public to make a name for yourself in those shows. We   ve  tried to keep that up. Then in later years it changed to there was not so  much emphasis on the traditional style of painting. There were other  styles, so there were other opportunities for exhibits and so on, but it   s  still art, and it   s still Indian Art, and it   s still Bacone art.  Tell me a little bit about the different media that you worked in.  Well I guess first of all I worked in water-based media. It could be  watercolor, or primarily it   s gauche, which is opaque watercolor. It   s  generally on paper, and I continue to work in the traditional style that I  learned here from Dick West, but I also work in acrylics and oil and a  larger format on canvas or board. I also do prints such as linocuts,  linoleum block prints, and wood cuts and silk screen or serigraphs.  When I was at the University of Tulsa I did lithography, which was great  fun. I   ve never been able to return to that since that time; I   ve not really  had access to stones or printing presses. I   ve also in later years become  interested in the monotype, so I   ve taken a workshop on that in Santa Fe  and I   ve also done some work in Tulsa with Maxine Richard, she   s a  well-known printmaker in Tulsa. I also do drawings, pencil drawings,  and ink drawings. I work in one area, such as watercolor or something  that   s very demanding because I tend to put in a lot of detail. When I  finish that, I go to something a little more free, such as the print or  maybe a drawing or an acrylic painting, usually larger, and so I kind of  move back and forth. Or I may do a series of watercolor, paintings, and  14  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  then move over to something else or do a series of acrylic paintings and  then move back to watercolor or something like that.  Do you have a favorite?  No I don   t, and I don   t have a favorite painting either. It   s just whatever  I   m doing at the moment. I guess if I had to, you know if someone told  me I could only do one thing, I suppose it would have to be the  watercolor, the gouache, and that would just be because I feel so much  of a sense of responsibility to keep it going, to honor Dick West and  some of those other artists.  What is it that inspires you to create the work that you do?  Well I always say, I guess, that I   m just amusing myself because I paint  things that are interesting to me, things that I   ve experienced, things that  I love, such as the clothing, certain dances   just things that interest me.  I   ve done a series on the grand entry at the powwows for instance, I   ve  done a series on the Native American Church, I   ve done a series of  Shawnee ceremonials. All of these are open-ended. I could return to any  one of them tomorrow and do another painting. They   re not finished. I  also have done just some little designs or things, just little whimsical  things such as horses and scenery and designs and all, just for fun., but  again, it interests me. Last year I did some small horse paintings, and I  called them    Ponies for Max,    and so they   re in the colors of Peter Max.  But the ponies are Indian ponies, and I do use the horse motif often  because that is my clan, and so I like to include a horse now and again.  Do you feel it   s important to paint in this traditional style? To maybe  pass on     Yes I do. I certainly do. It   s become apparent to me in recent years that  there are very few of us who are still doing that. And some are passing  on, such as Valjean Hessing  who  died recently. She was one of the  foremost proponents of that style. And of course Blackbear Bosin and  Oscar Howe are gone and others. Pablita Velarde passed away a few  years ago. There is a lady in the Santa Fe area; as far as I know she still  is alive, named Geronimo Montoya, she was a student at the Santa Fe  Indian School, and then she took over the teaching of the classes when  Dorothy Dunn left. And so she continues in that style, and as far as I  know she   s still alive. A couple of years ago I saw her at Santa Fe, and  her exhibit, she had like seven paintings. She must be in her nineties,  and she   s still painting.  Others, I just heard last month, one of my former students was working  in Arizona out on a project on the Navajo reservation, and she said,  15  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  Nykolaiszyn  Jones     Ruthe, did you know that Harrison Begay was still alive?       No.    And  she said that she had a person who was helping her in her project, and  her name was Begay, and she would paint, and she would talk about her  grandfather. So she said,    Well who is your grandfather?    just making  conversation, and she told her,    Harrison Begay.    And Harrison Begay  of course was one of the stars and one of the originals from the Santa Fe  studio. I don   t imagine he   s painting now, but he is in his nineties, and I  think she said he was in a nursing home. But his work, it   s seminal as far  as the style of painting. But most of them are gone and there   s what we  call the second generation or maybe even third generation of us who are  continuing that style of painting.  You mentioned earlier that you could go back to any number of works  and keep adding to them.  Yes.  How do you know when one is complete?  Well, I guess you would start out in the beginning saying,    I   m going to  do X-number,  or,  I   m going to do this and this and this.    I could paint  from now on on the grand entry and never finish. I could probably do the  same with the Native American Church. As far as the Shawnee  ceremonials, possibly there as well. I guess it   s just myself, as long as  my interest remains. When I get tired of doing it or   at one time I said  on my Native American Church things, I was doing a woman for  instance, and I said because of the significance of the number four that I  would only do four of them. Well I haven   t done the fourth one yet, I   ve  done three, so possibly if I do another of those women that will end that,  but I can still do other imagery. I don   t have to stop at four either, I  guess, but that was just what I said to myself when I started out, that  maybe I would do four. And then other people have done things that had  to do with the seasons or they have to do with the ages of people. I  haven   t done that, but I just do what interests me I guess at the time.  Tell me about some of the places you have exhibited your work.  Well, most recently at the University of Arkansas in the Bill Wiggins  collection. He is a great friend, and has collected many of my pieces. I  also have some at the museums in Oklahoma. Last week we were at the  Gilcrease Museum for an event   actually it was the opening of the  Willard Stone show, who also attended Bacone. I have pieces there and  was able to see some on exhibit. I have pieces at the Philbrook, but they  weren   t on exhibit when I was up there. I have pieces at the Sam Noble  Museum at the University of Oklahoma, as well as at the Fred Jones,  both at Oklahoma. I have pieces in the Department of the Interior in  16  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  Washington and at the Museum of the American Indian, also at the  Heard Museum. I can   t think of all of them. At various colleges that I  have spoken at, they have purchased a piece. I think Hampton  University, for instance, in Virginia purchased one for their collection.  They didn   t purchase, but I did have an exhibit in Massachusetts at  Endicott College, I was invited to come and speak and also did a show  there. Several places like that.  Going back to your work here at Bacone, what do you find most  enjoyable these days when it comes to teaching your students?  Well it   s exciting when   any teacher I   m sure would tell you this   at  some point, they get it. You don   t know how it   s going to manifest itself,  but at some point you realize they get it or they   ve gotten whatever you  said. Sometimes you will be working with a student, and you   re just so  thrilled with what they   re doing, and you tell them to keep on, go on and  finish it. And then they bring it back, and it   s a completely different  thing, and so then you realize they didn   t get it. It   s an entirely different  thing. But then other times, as I said before, you can see. Sometimes  they have an expression on their face, other times it   s just the work that  they do. So I guess that would be   and then of course other students,  usually past students who have made a success.  I mentioned earlier this past fall I was honored at the Heard Museum in  Phoenix, but a great part of that for me that was enjoyable was that one  of my former students was sent here from the University of Arizona, and  much like you   re doing, he did a video, and so that was a part of the day  at the Heard. But it was very thrilling for me to be working with one of  my former students in that way. Things like that come up occasionally,  and it   s very exciting, and I guess you would say in some ways it  reinforces maybe what you   ve said or done. It gives you a good feeling  that you have accomplished something or passed something on. I have  this great feeling of debt to pass it on because of these people who have  helped me and have invested in me, and so I want to try to do that to  others   particularly early collectors who were not just collectors but  were friends, as well as my teachers, and I want to, I want their interest  or their investment to not have been in vain. And I   ve tried to pass it on  the best way that I can, and so when I see a student succeeding like that  it   s a very exciting time.  That painting out there in the hall of the men, that   s part of that Grand  Entry series that I was talking about. I   ve also done women of course; I  don   t have any of them here. I guess I   ve also done a series on  princesses too. Again, those are just favorite things. I like princesses, so  that would be another series I guess.  17  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  Well I guess it   s good to work on things that you really enjoy.  Yes.  If I were to paint, which I don   t, I think it would be important to pull  from my past or what I remember. For me, it   s always about food. I  always want to make the food that I can remember that my grandmother  made. I think it   s very important.  Sure. It hasn   t been a series, but several of my paintings have included  food because, just as you say, meals are a very important part of culture,  I think. So it could be a subject matter, but I haven   t made it so yet, but  not to say that I wouldn   t.  Can you tell me about any stumbling blocks or adversity that you   ve  faced along the way?  Well, early on, through my teenage years I was exhibiting at Philbrook  and different places. I always think back to that time, and it was very  different from today. When I began signing my paintings, for instance, I  kept my maiden name and just added the Jones, but I often wish I had  never added the Jones. But it was not done back then. It was just not  socially acceptable. There were some women artists who kept their  names, but also they were frequently married, let   s put it that way, so  they would   ve kept their name whether they were artists or not. There  were other artists who signed initials, like BK or RB Jones, because  there were some doors that simply were not open to women. And I just  led into that. That was completely innocent. I forgot about this project,  but that   s just something I say.  I wrote a chapter in the book about the Philbrook Annual. The book is  Visions and Voices  :Native American Painting from the Philbrook  Museum of Art . I wrote a chapter in there and part of it is from my  viewpoint as a woman artist, and then some of my friends also, and  some of the things that we experienced. There were some doors that just  simply were not open to us, and sadly Oklahoma is backward. We   re  very   even to this day I   m sure there are women who are held back here  who would not be in another place. But one of my professors, for  instance, I said,    Why is it that when a man wins an award or has a sale  or something, everyone is excited and is congratulating him and all.  When a woman does that, it   s as though we   re taking food off the table  for a man artist?    And he said to me,    Because you are.     I haven   t had it as hard as some people, but I guess it   s also because I  haven   t really been that aggressive as far as exhibiting and so on,  because I did have a day job. The people who maybe did not have a day  18  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  job or had to really scrap to make a living for their family and really  depended on selling their work and all, I   m sure they had a much harder  time than I did. Some of the things that I already mentioned was that  they would sign their names so that at a glance it wasn   t apparent  whether it was a male or female, or sometimes there are names that can  go either way, so that was a help to them also. But in my case, I did sign  my full name, but I was too, I guess I would say, afraid, I was reluctant  to just sign my maiden name. I guess I thought it was legally binding or  something, something that I had to do.  There have been a number of stumbling blocks, and there were some  times back in the early part of when I was painting that there were just  some things that were not open to women. They were for men only; it  was just understood. We didn   t question it. That   s just the way things  were, and I don   t think it   s correct to say that we accepted it, although  we did, but it   s just the way it was. We didn   t question it. We weren   t  even to the point of questioning it. We didn   t know we could question it  or that it could be any other way, but on the other hand, there were so  few of us. There were so few Indian women artists, or women artists in  general, not only were they able to get away with it, but also it didn   t  really matter to us, because as I said, that   s the way it was and we would  just go another way. Most of us continued on with what we were doing,  but of course there were a few who found it difficult and just simply did  not continue. I guess I would say I don   t really respect those people. I  would think that maybe they weren   t committed in the first place or they  weren   t really artists to begin with. I don   t know how to say it, but I  think if they were determined to do it that they would   ve found a way. I  think some of the people that I know who have had, as I said, worse  experiences than I did have managed to stay in and find a way.  Well now that we   ve talked about stumbling blocks, I always like to  follow it up with something positive and happy. Can you go into detail  about, it could be one moment, or several moments, that you consider  key highlights in your career, those great moments?  Well early on I mentioned, as a young girl, getting the real art materials  from Charles Banks Wilson, and then of course the Philbrook  experience, which, overall, it was over a number of years. I continued to  enter   I   m thinking that was around 1952. I could look it up, but it was  somewhere along 1952 until it closed in 1979, so I entered every year,  and there were a couple of years where I was rejected from the show. I  don   t think there was ever a year when I didn   t enter at all, but for the  most part I was a part of Philbrook for that length of time. And as I said  in the essay, this was so important to Indian artists, and not just women,  but that time was measured    before the Annual    or    after the Annual.     That would enter into the conversation. You know, you would say,  19     before Philbrook,    or,    after Philbrook.    It was so important.  So that was a very important thing for me, also some of my sales. I was  thrilled the first time one of my pieces was added to a collection, which  was Philbrook, and then later on in other collections. I was thrilled to  meet some of these artists at the annual. They would come to the  openings, such as Pablita Velarde and Blackbear Bosin and some of  them, and Alan Houser and R.C. Gorman. I didn   t develop a friendship  with them at all, but I was acquainted with them, some of them more so  than others. Others were just simply a handshake, and I was just  terrified, it was so emotional for me. But I always say that everything     I   ve travelled a few places, and I   ve always said that everywhere that  I   ve ever gone, it has been because of art. Art has taken me many, many  places   places I wouldn   t have gone otherwise. I   ve gone to different  museums and cities and so on because of art, so that   s also important,  and also the fact that I do love to travel.  I   ve always enjoyed the fact that, for the most part, Indian people don   t  buy art   they don   t have means for the most part   but I   ve always  enjoyed the fact that they like my paintings. I guess you could say it   s a  validation. They compliment me, so I enjoy the fact that they are  pleased, that I haven   t offended my people yet. (Laughs) I say    yet     because I   m still painting. I   ve heard little comments and one especially.  I have a painting of a line of people dancing, and I   ve heard a man look  at it and say,    I know that guy     or someone else would say,    I used to  go with her     you know, and they   re just composites. They   re not real  people. They just exist in my mind. They   re made up, but I love the fact  that they like them. Or others have looked at some of my Native  American Church pieces and just simply stood there and stepped back  and said,    She knows,    they   ve said. So they have accepted it, and  they   re not accepting it on a formal art basis, but they   re looking at it as  culture. They   re looking at it as imagery. They   re not art critics, but they  like what they see, and so I enjoy that. And then on the other hand, some  critics have also liked it, so it   s very enjoyable.  And then as far as some really exciting moments, I guess this past year  for instance I was   I mentioned the Heard Award. I was completely  blindsided by that. I had never heard of it, I didn   t know what it was, and  I looked it up on the internet and my gosh, all of these people were  humanitarians. What am I doing in there? They   ve saved a culture,  they   ve saved a language, they   ve saved songs, they   ve built nursing  homes for elders, and they   re teaching the language. I just paint  I felt  entirely out of place in that company. But then on the other hand, also  here this same year at Bacone I was given the title, again just out of the  blue, of art director emeritus, and so that was completely unexpected.  Never, ever expected anything like that, and then I was also honored at  20  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  the powwow, so that was a great reward. I loved every minute of that.  Other times when I   ve won an award or, as I said before, been included  in a particular collection   I was very thrilled to be in the Sam Noble  Collection, for instance, at the University of Oklahoma and other places.  It   s just kind of a summing up of different things that have added up to  maybe I   ve done some good things, you know. So it   s been a rich life,  and again, it   s all because of art. I   ve gone to some of these places as an  exhibitor or as a speaker or as a judge on the art jury or on a panel, to  talk about art. I was going somewhere, I don   t know where it was, and a  friend said,    Ruthe, what are you going to say? Do you know what  you   re going to talk about?    I said,    I just know one thing.    (Laughs) So  it   s pretty much, art has been my life. It   s been a very fulfilling life. I   m  pleased with what I   ve done. I think I could   ve done more. Sometimes I  feel very lazy, but when I do see the things added up, I do have a feeling  of satisfaction I guess. And then again, as I said earlier, Indian people  have liked what I   ve done, and as far as I know I haven   t offended  anyone. And it   s always thrilling to see your work in print, when you  have something published or a few of my little writings have been  published. That   s a great thing. As far as the publications, the first time  that I saw that, that was very rewarding.  Well it   s definitely nice to do what you love.  Yes. Yes.  Speaking of highlights and awards, when you were notified   now it was  a long time ago,    95, and we   re in 2009 now. When you were notified  that you were going to be inducted into the Oklahoma Women   s Hall of  Fame, what were you thinking? If you can remember.  You know, I don   t really remember. I do remember that I was aware of  the organization, it   s a loose organization, but I was aware of that. I  don   t remember why. I think I submitted something to them, not for  myself but for someone else, so that   s how I was aware of it. So when it  came about it was unbelievable, I guess you   d say. Of course I was  thrilled, but it was unbelievable. I just never expected anything like that.  Any of these   I   ve tried to do my paintings, and I have concentrated  on   there are awards and prizes, so these others are something that are  entirely I guess out of my thought pattern. I just never expected anything  like that.  It   s a group of many amazing women in the Hall of Fame. What does  this type of honor mean to you?  It   s just like the Heard. Those people were humanitarians; it   s the same  21  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  thing here. I don   t know why I   m in there, because we have attorneys  and judges and people who   ve really fought for the state and causes and  people who have made a difference. I   m proud and thrilled to be counted  in there, but I sometimes wonder how did it come about? I   m really  mystified there.  We talked a little bit about your role models early on. How do you feel  that now people look up to you as a role model?  Well I don   t really know. I guess that   s something that I don   t  consciously think about. I hope that it   s positive. The only way that I can  relate to that is occasionally one of my former students will be talking,  perhaps formally, or even informally, and they   ll say,    I remember when  you said...,    or,    I remember when Mrs. Jones said...,    and I   m always  kind of nervous about what they   re going to say. And sometimes they   ll  say things that I do not   I can   t believe I said that, I don   t remember  that. But this is things that have stuck in their mind, and they can quote  them verbatim, so that   s impressive I guess that I did make some  impression on someone there along the way. But sometimes they   re just  silly remarks, they   re just silly things, but they   ve remembered them.  (Laughs) It   s interesting.  Well let   s hear some of those remarks. If you could give Oklahomans a  piece of advice     (Laughs) Oh, a piece of     What would you tell them, Oklahomans?  Oh, a piece of advice is   it   s just like what they   ve always said to  writers or to musicians or artists is do what you like. They tell a writer to  write what you know. I try to tell students to paint what you know. The  most painful thing is to go and judge a show, and see an image, and you  know that person has never ever seen a tepee in their life. They   ve  certainly never been in one. You go and you   re in the middle of the  country here, and they   ll have a mountain scene or a   I mean we don   t  have Alps here. Or you   ll see seascapes. Paint what you know, or write  what you know, whatever. And if you want to paint seascapes, go there  and investigate and research. Don   t just have a surface image, because  it   s apparent to the viewer. So write what you know, paint what you  know, is my advice.  Earlier in the interview you mentioned some artists who are painting  well into their nineties.  Yes.  22  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  Do you hope to keep on trucking?  Well yes and no. To this day when I see some of my old pieces, so far I  have not been embarrassed or ashamed of anything. So far I have liked  or approved of what I   ve seen. But on the other hand, I do know of  people who someone should have stopped them, that they have kept on  and their final pieces were not up to their earlier quality, and in some  ways it can devalue your whole body of work. So I   m hoping that when  I get to that point, if I haven   t already, that someone will stop me or not  allow me to exhibit the work. So far I   ve been able to continue to work. I  work less and less each year, just physically impossible, but for the most  part, I have been able to continue. But I do have poor eyesight, and I  suppose it   s declining every day, so that   s a problem, and it will  continue to be a problem. My children, I   m not sure, I think they may  say something. I don   t know, but I do hope that I don   t get to the point  where   I said earlier that I   m amusing myself, and I hope I don   t get to  the point where I am just amusing myself and devaluing my earlier  work, which some of it I think was important.  Again, back to when you said something that was important and I  mentioned the publication, but one experience was making an  illustration on my Shawnee tribe for the Time Life books, and that was  very rewarding and fulfilling. But it was an interesting experience too,  because we have practices and some of our things are not for outsiders.  They are a part of, I guess we would say, secret. And the Time Life  people, I can   t say they didn   t understand,  but  they refused to accept it.  They kept saying,    But can   t you tell them that it   s for education?    Well  they don   t care if it   s for education. It   s not for the public, so I had a  little bit of a problem there. And I know other people have, not with  necessarily Time Life, but in other things, because what we paint or what  we sculpt or what we write is, particularly when it   s something that you  know or have experienced, you do have to straddle the fence, and there  are certain things that you can reveal and certain things that you cannot,  and you always want to keep that in mind.  Are there certain things that you paint that are part of the closed  tradition that you just know you could never exhibit?  No, I don   t even do that. No, I don   t do that. I do know some artists that  have paintings like that, and as always happens, they tend to come out  after their death. But no, I don   t do it at all. If I know that it   s  unacceptable, I just don   t do it. But I do get right up to the edge a lot of  times. And I put little secret things in my paintings that only the people,  the initiates I guess you could say, only those people know about, but no  one else knows. Or I might put a little message in to a certain person or a  group or something, but it   s not apparent to the general public. And  23  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  again, it   s just a personal thing.  Would you like to make mention of anybody that has helped really play  an important role in your life?  Well of course I   ve already mentioned my parents and Dick West here at  Bacone and Acee Blue Eagle and Charles Banks Wilson. All of those  have been, you know, I couldn   t be where I am without them. There  have been also people along the way such as Betty Price at the State Arts  Council in more recent times. In earlier time there was Don Humphrey  who was at the Philbrook Museum, and he was also my art history  professor at the University of Tulsa. And I   ve also previously mentioned  Garrick Bailey at the University of Tulsa.  A dear friend and patron, who bought many of my pieces, was Loia  Alexander in Okmulgee, Oklahoma, and she   s been dead for a number  of years   about twenty years actually, over twenty years. But she was a  dear friend, and there   s not a day goes by that I don   t think of her. You  know she was an artist, but she also was a great supporter, and she knew  everyone in the world. I mean, she lived all over the world. She lived in  Saudi Arabia; she knew the sheiks. She was a writer, and she had lived  in Washington, D.C., New York, Paris and in Hollywood. She knew  people such as Gertrude Stein. She knew her on a personal firsthand  basis. She knew Helena Rubenstein and other people. She knew she  would speak of these people on a firsthand basis. But she was a great  friend, and she would encourage what I did. Everyone has an angel I  think, or several, and she was one of mine. And then of course later on  here is Dr. Bill Wiggins at the University of Arkansas, who has also  been in a similar way   he   s purchased a number of my pieces and made  opportunities for me. Any number of people like that, but those two  come to mind right away.  Dan Swan was at the Gilcrease Museum. He moved away   he   s now at  the Sam Noble Museum in Norman   but he was also one who would  make opportunities for me or sales, and he saw that I got to travel with a  show to Minneapolis and New Orleans and some other places. I don   t  remember everything. He was also the one who saw that I went to the  show in Japan and was a speaker there, so it was a great thing that he did  for me. And Don Humphrey, as I mentioned earlier, when he was  president or chairman of the Southwest Art Association in Santa Fe, he  saw that a number of us Oklahoma artists were invited to participate in  the Santa Fe Indian market, so I   ve been there since that time because of  Don Humphrey. Other people frequently have put my name down for  certain projects and so you   it   s a small world, and it   s very rewarding  when people recommend you for something and then it comes about. I  hope I can do the same with others or with my own students.  24  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  Nykolaiszyn  What does Oklahoma mean to you?  Well it   s my home, and it   s where all of these things took place. It has a  rich history. It   s a short history when we look at the world stage. People  take notice when they know that you   re from Oklahoma, particularly if  you   re an Indian. I think by and large maybe in recent times anyway   of  course there would be some argument that the Indians have always been  appreciated perhaps on some basis, but I think in recent years they have  taken more closely their rightful place in the state   s activities and so on.  So I   m pleased with that, and I think there will be no turning back. I  don   t think we   ll ever be pushed back or held back. I think it   s similar to  what I   ve said earlier about the women, that that   s just the way it was.  And I think Indian people for a long time were not included in things,  and that   s just the way it was. I think that   s changing. I won   t say it has  changed, but it   s come a long way, and it is changing, and Indian people  are making their voices heard, and not only that, but they are being  listened to, so I   m proud of that for Oklahoma.  I always tell my students that some people are upset when they come  here. There are no mountains, and I try to tell them that everyone has a  home, and you   re out of place if you   re not home. And so some people  miss the mountains, some people miss the sea or the ocean. Other people  feel very constricted when they come here. They feel that the trees are  coming in on them. It   s much like people from this area when they go  into the metropolitan cities are just overwhelmed by the buildings. We  have people who come from the deserts, and they feel that way about the  trees. The first time I heard that I couldn   t understand it. They can   t find  their directions because they can   t see the sky; there are too many trees.  And then on the other hand, we want to see trees when we leave this  place, and we like to see grass. It   s just home, and everyone feels that  way about where they are from, whether it   s the Badlands of South  Dakota or the inner cities of any major city in the country or the world.  It   s their home. And we even have, you know people say,    Why would  you want to live here? How can you stand it?    It   s your home.  So I love Oklahoma. I love the activities and events that I participate in  and they don   t occur anywhere else in the world. Many people come  home for certain events in Oklahoma even though they   re from another  place. Sometimes they call them Homecomings, and they actually have a  formal title, but other times they come for ceremonies. I   m talking about  Indian people. They come for ceremonies, they come for funerals, of  course, and memorials. But it   s home. It   s just a part of who we are, who  I am. It   s a great experience.  So what   s next on the agenda for you?  25  Jones  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  I   m continuing to paint, I   m continuing on those series I was talking  about. I   m still doing the princesses. I think I will probably be doing a  monotype shortly with Maxine Richard in Tulsa, and then I   ve been  working on a manuscript for a number of years on teaching Indian art or  the traditional style of painting that we do here. I think I might get back  on that, and actually last week when we had the opening at the  Gilcrease, I had participated in a small video that they did on Willard  Stone, and because I did know him, I was one of the participants. In  speaking later with the Swearingens, who are the film producers, we  discussed the possibility of that manuscript being a how-to video instead  of a book. I hope it comes to pass. It isn   t anything formal at the  moment, but I   m going to go back to my manuscript and spend some  more time on it and eventually get with the Swearingens and perhaps  come up with a how-to video. Many of the things they have produced  have been in that nature, such as how to make moccasins or how to  make shawls or how to make ribbon work or different kinds of  beadwork and things, so it would be in there along with something  they   ve already done. So it may happen, I don   t know. I   m just keeping  on keeping on, I guess you would say.  Well when history is written about you, what would you like for it to  say?  I   d like  it to say  that I recorded my own time and place, I guess.  Something like that. Obviously I   m a painter, I   m a teacher, I   m a  Shawnee traditionalist. Those types of things, I guess. I tried to do what  I thought was right, what I thought was honorable, what I was taught. I  tried to help others along the way. I don   t know. I will leave that to  others, actually.  Fair enough. Well is there anything that you would like to add that I  have not asked you today that you would like to make a part of the  record?  I   m sure there is, but my mind is blank at this time. No, I can   t think of  anything. I   m just very grateful to those people that I have mentioned.  I   m also grateful to Bacone College and various museums and  institutions around the state that I have worked with   the Oklahoma  Historical Society for instance. Just as I said before, I   ve enjoyed what  I   ve done, and I   ve had a great time. I think I   m pleased with what I   ve  done for the most part, and I think that I have done some good in  preserving some things, and as I said before not offending, to my  knowledge. But I hope I have done something that is worthwhile,  something that will last, something that will maybe teach or preserve  something in the future after I   m gone.  26  Nykolaiszyn  Jones  Well we appreciate your time today. Thank you very much.  Thank you. It   s my honor. Nya-weh.  -------  -------  
