 Nykolaiszyn, with the Oklahoma State University  Library. Today is Wednesday, December 15, 2010, and I am in  Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, interviewing Esther Houser. This interview  is being conducted as part of the Inductees of the Oklahoma Women   s  Hall of Fame Oral History Project. Esther Houser was inducted into the  Oklahoma Women   s Hall of Fame in 2003. Thank you for joining us  today.  You   re welcome.  I   d like to begin by learning a little bit more about you. Could you tell us  about where you grew up and give us a little background into your early  life?  Okay, well, whether or not it   s appropriate for someone in the Oklahoma  Women   s Hall of Fame, I was born in Lancaster, Pennsylvania, and  raised in a little town outside Harrisburg, which is the capitol. The little  town was New Cumberland, Pennsylvania. I lived there until after high  school graduation, and subsequently moved to Oklahoma. I was raised  in just sort of a normal 1950s/1960s small town atmosphere with nothing  much going on in the town, and no big crises or exciting events taking  place. Nothing historical, I don   t think, ever happened in New  Cumberland since the settlers took it over sometime in the, I don   t know,  1400s, 1500s, 1600s. It was a beautiful sort of bucolic area that was a  pleasant place to grow up.  Well tell me a little bit about the schools you attended growing up.  I started in an old school house in New Cumberland, a little brick  building called the Fifth Street School, I remember, because we used to  always walk to school. But a new elementary school was built, and I  started second grade there, Hillside Elementary. When I was a toddler, I  used to go over and watch the workmen building it, not knowing I   d be  5  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  Nykolaiszyn  trapped there for several years. When I was in third grade, we moved  across town in New Cumberland and I had to change schools, but I went  to a place called Manor School that was torn down since I left. It   s very  shocking to not be able to find it, at least it wasn   t in my memory when I  went back to look for it, that it wasn   t there.  Graduated from high school at Cedar Cliff High School in Camp Hill,  Pennsylvania, which was alleged to be one of the top three schools in  Pennsylvania. It was a public school, very academically oriented. The  junior high that I went to and Cedar Cliff both had accelerated programs.  I feel like I had pretty good teachers, and kind of a fast program of  trying to teach us, whether it was advanced math, which didn   t work so  well for me, or science, language. There were many more languages  taught in the public schools in Pennsylvania, I think, than in Oklahoma. I  took Latin for three years in junior high, and Spanish and German in  high school. Could   ve taken more Latin, but that was a pretty neat part  about the high school. Then coming to Oklahoma, I expected, I guess, a  more rigorous academic environment based on the high school I   d  attended, and was sort of perplexed and disappointed when I enrolled  and started at OU  University of Oklahoma .  Going back to those early years, what would you do for fun?  I think I could be safely categorized as a tomboy. I did have dolls and I  played with them for endless hours. I loved to read and liked nothing  better than to be left alone with a good book, but I went on bike hikes.  Used to like to ride my fat tired, heavy women   s Huffy bicycle around  town, and Pennsylvania, unlike many places in Oklahoma, has a lot of  hills and mountains, so there was a lot of topography to accomplish.  I liked to go play in the woods. There were some woods near the house.  I had a friend in third grade through about seventh grade, when she  moved to Virginia, we called ourselves Trouble and Trouble,  Incorporated. We would go on bike hikes or explore the woods and we  weren   t really getting into anything bad. I don   t know why we thought  we could rise to the level of Trouble and Trouble, Incorporated, but we  had a good time. I had lots of friends and, you know, just enjoyed mostly  playing outside.  The fun things: with my father, I went with one brother and my father on  fishing trips, camping. Dad took us on walks in the woods every Sunday  afternoon for a long time that I remember and taught us woodcraft and  animal track and all sorts of things that have still stuck with me.  Lots of time outdoors.  6  Houser  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  Lots of time outdoors.  You mentioned your father. How big was your family?  I had two brothers. I called them the Good One and the Evil One, once I  learned to differentiate. I had an older brother who was eight years older  that was always very kind to me and another brother who was just a year  older who was just mean as a snake. We fought, and actually went to  fisticuffs practically every day of my young life. Mother and Father  lived in the home, and it was usually just us. On occasion my  grandmother would come from Pittsburgh and spend a few months, but  it was usually just the five of us.  And your parents    occupation?  Mother was a housewife. I think she would   ve done better and been  happier if she   d worked outside the home, because I think she was an  excellent manager, and she got bored with housewifery. Dad started, I  guess, as a mechanic, but he went to work at Olmstead Air Force Base,  civil service with the Air Force in the first year of my life, which is why  we moved from Lancaster County to New Cumberland. He worked first  in the shops doing aircraft part repair, and gradually progressed,  although I   m not sure he enjoyed it as much as hands-on work with the  machinery, to a level of management. He was in production control,  civil service, and that   s how he came  to Oklahoma . He was transferred  when the Air Force base was closed down, transferred to Tinker.  That would explain how you ended up in Oklahoma.  Well, I graduated from high school, and my mother waited back there  with me. They didn   t sell the house, although I would   ve been happy to  have stayed with friends instead of with Mother for the last year of high  school. Because I was in such a good high school and because other  students that had migrated with that base closure to Oklahoma had found  themselves in the position of being a year or two ahead or further ahead  from the schools in Midwest City, they let me stay back and graduate  from Cedar Cliff. But I thought,    You know, I   m not staying in my  small town where I was raised my entire life.    I   d expected to go to Bryn  Mawr or someplace, but I thought,    You know, shoot, might as well see  what Oklahoma   s like.    I had heard it alleged that they had a good  school of archeology, and so I came here.  I want to take a step back for a second. So when you were growing up,  did you want to be an archeologist? What did you want to be?  Oh, from the time I first laid hands on a National Geographic and saw  7  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  the digs in Egypt and Greece and those places, I think from the time I  was five, I just believed I was going to be an archeologist. I didn   t know  that social workers existed, but no, I   d always anticipated, even my high  school yearbook, I think, mentions archeology because I just always  expected to do that.  So you get to OU, and where did the change happen?  Well, I majored in anthropology, and had some friends in the Women   s  Honors Housing who were also in anthropology. I had some of those  first classes, the basic classes, I will not name the professors, who were  just tearfully boring, and wanted us to memorize all the artifacts found at  certain digs. I   ve always been a person who wanted to know why, and I  never really got the sense at eight o   clock in the morning in those classes  of why exactly the professor needed us to know that. It was not what I  had expected. Social anthropology was even scarier, but that was the  people. The linguistics courses that I had in anthropology were the most  interesting.  But in the meantime, one of the women who was in this configuration of  friends had changed to social work as a major. I had no idea what that  was, but I realized in talking to her that that   s what I   d been doing for  free my entire life. People had always come to me, and whether I was a  good listener or not, I don   t know, but they would pour out their secrets,  pour out their hearts to me. I   m not a gossip and I don   t tell those things,  and so I would, I guess, feed back to them what I heard, and sometimes  provide some suggestions. But I thought,    Shoot, with this kind of  training, this kind of education in anthropology, I   m going to end up in  the back room of a museum for the rest of my life. I will never see the  light of day in the Middle East, or in Europe or Greece.    I didn   t know  you could actually make a living, not that it   s a good living, but you  could make a living in social work. So I took one course and was just  sold. And the professor, Judy Norland, was very inspirational, and I  made that change of major, I think it was, in my second year at OU.  And during that time were you working as a student?  I worked in the summers. I thought, you know, this is probably my last  chance facing adulthood to not have to work the entire year round. I had  one very productive and much brighter than I am, I assume, friend, Gail  Fites, who worked during the school year in the cafeteria and did that  sort of thing, and who would go on trips in the summer. I, instead, didn   t  work during the school year and then had to work in the summer. My  first summer here was abysmal. I was just in deep culture shock. We   d  moved a week or so after my high school graduation, so the dead of  summer in Oklahoma, from Pennsylvania, where winter had been my  8  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  favorite season. I would complain and whine if it got to be eighty  degrees in the summer, and moved to Oklahoma and it was just beastly.  The wind blew, it was flat, there were no trees, it was hotter than Hades,  and I thought,    I have made a serious tactical error, and there   s no way  out of it.    Because I had, of course, no money, no plan of escape.  I worked at Braums  Ice Cream  the first summer and developed a good  forearm muscle, but the summer after my freshman year, I got a job at  Tinker, a summer job, and as luck had it, because my father had no pull,  was in a work area fairly near him. Of course, he   s an early shift sort of  fellow, and I got to ride to work with him and have lunch with him every  day. He would walk me around to meet people, he would hold my hand  and introduce me as his daughter, and I would have to tell people what  my name actually was. But it was a lovely summer because I made good  money and I got to spend that time in a very different setting with my  dad. And then the following summer they had implemented programs  that said that those jobs are only available to low income students or  children, and they had no idea I had no access to any money. My parents  might have, so I ended up struggling the next summer, but I worked  every summer. My career goal as a teenager was to emancipate and to  never have to rely on my parents for anything, which I didn   t achieve  until the summer before my senior year, to never have to look back,  never have to move back home, never have to be asking for assistance  again.  And was that independence something they instilled in you, or     Well, I think so. I think that was instilled in my brothers and me. I don   t  know what motivated them. What motivated me probably more than  anything was that my mother was such an unpleasant human being to be  around that it was a career goal to get out of her way, and to never have  to ask her for help. She was a very bright woman, very nice to people  who weren   t her family, and pretty much a terrorist in the home. So it  felt like a good plan to not be there any more than I had to.  So you   re in college, you   ve switched your coursework to social work.   Who were some  professors that made a profound impact on you?  I think Judy Norland for certain, in the School of Social Work at OU.  She subsequently became the chair of the department, and I believe  she   s retired by now because that was a long time ago, but the  enthusiasm she had, and the things I learned about a profession I didn   t  know existed were just very interesting to me. Whether it was the  settlement houses, and I didn   t have any inner-city work or that sort of  thing, but I basically just wanted to have an opportunity to help people.  The notion of working with elders in that line of work didn   t formulate  9  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  in my brain until later.  You graduated in what year?     72.  Okay, so upon graduation or near graduation are you thinking     Oh Lord God, I don   t have a job.  Exactly.  Interestingly, back then, the main source of employment I learned as we  had job fairs at the college was then it was called the Department of  Institutions, Social and Rehabilitative Services  DISRS . It was DHS on  steroids. DHS when Lloyd Rader was the director and the legislature had  given, besides a dedicated portion of the sales tax in the state, they   d  given the hospitals and they   d given different programs, rehabilitation  services, all sorts of things had been glommed on to the basic  Department of Public Welfare that had started back earlier, I think in the  1930s. And we were told straightforwardly, by people who came to talk  to us about employment opportunities, that in order to work at DISRS,  as it was then called, you had to have a letter of recommendation from a  legislator. That befuddled me because although I had gone out of my  way to vote against Richard Nixon when I turned twenty-one, and I was  against the war in Vietnam and all those things, but I hadn   t thought  about the legislature at all. I tried to navigate that and find out,    Well,  who is our legislator from Norman?    I got a letter, and then the fellow  apparently had no power in the legislature, and he unfortunately  subsequently committed suicide. I did not know him personally, but that  sort of left me high and dry, and I asked my parents    legislator,  Representative Howell in Midwest City, and he said just flatly no, he  wasn   t about to do that. So I was thinking,    Okay, I guess I have a  problem here.     In the meantime I worked in a nursing home, just as a nurse   s aide after  graduation, trying to find a real social work job, and I loved it. I just  loved it. I had spent a lot of time with my grandmother when she stayed  with us, including when she was, I don   t know what the issues were,  whether she   d had a heart attack or a stroke, but she would repeat  herself, and she told more stories from her early days. She was born in  the 1880s, and she would recite poetry and do those sorts of things, but  what I realized working as a nurse   s aide was it   s very hard physical  work, but I loved the people. In    72, and until the late    80s, many or  most of the people who lived in nursing homes in Oklahoma were very  much with it. They were often physically able to get up and around, and  10  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  they just needed certain kinds of either supervision or assistance that  now would be provided through Home Health or other even lesser  interventions. But then, nursing homes were the principle source. So I  worked in the nursing home, and if it hadn   t been for the  1.75 an hour  salary I might   ve stayed there longer, but it was not enough to live on.  And I thought I wanted a real social work job.  A friend told me that there was a new program coming into Oklahoma     you will laugh   food stamps. It was a brand new program in the  country, and they were starting it up in Oklahoma County first, and that  if I went and spoke to the county administrator, Myrl Hill, and sold  myself, told him why he should hire me, that he could arrange for that  because they needed new workers. I thought, I couldn   t sell Girl Scout  cookies as a child  I was embarrassed to ask people to buy Girl Scout  cookies. I have no entrepreneurial inclinations or talents, and I thought,  this is just real scary. But I went and did it, and he hired me, so I was  hired to help put in food stamps in Oklahoma County as my first social  work job.  Now, as part of that job, did you have a caseload, did you meet with  people?  I had a caseload. I had a wonderful supervisor, Doris Ausbie, who  helped me, and there was another recent School of Social Work graduate  who was hired at the same time. Mrs. Ausbie helped us understand that  providing eligibility to people who were in need was the greatest service  that we could render. We had a caseload in that unit, each of us, of  people who were not on public assistance, and in 1972, I mean the  salaries sounded abysmal then. Of course, state salaries, especially in  DHS even now are lower than the norm, but the people that I was  serving, I remember, included people who made fifty dollars a month  junking cars, taking apart cars. It wasn   t a chop shop, but it was to sell  cars for scrap and for parts, and lived in little shacks along the riverbank,  down in what used to be Sand Town, it   s now the River Redevelopment  Project. I had women, widows, on seventy dollars a month Social  Security widows pensions, living in Community Camp, which was a  neighborhood, or living in the Shartel Towers, which was a senior high  rise housing. But we would identify their income. In those days you had  to see their social security check, or whatever their check was I learned  then why I should   ve learned how to figure percentages in junior high  math. It was a mystery to me before that, but I learned to do percentages  in that job.  I loved the people I worked with. I loved the clients. No matter how  boring a life an older person had had, just mundane day-to-day work-a-day  world, they had at least one interesting story, and that was what they  11  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  told you. I mean, there were people who were very very welcoming, if  you don   t count the very first field visit I made with a more experienced  worker, when a dog bit me. But I learned to wear heavy jeans, sturdy  shoes, and watch for the dogs. The experience was just great. And  whether it was going into really questionable neighborhoods, or whether  it was trying to talk somebody who had paid taxes all their lives and  might   ve used the commodity program before food stamps, trying to  help them understand that it was not shameful to apply for this  assistance, and it might assist them in getting through. But there were  lots of interesting older people that I met because of the area of town  that I worked in and the nature of the program. I think that may have  convinced me early on that I really really enjoyed working with older  people, and I knew nothing about babies. Having been raised by my  mother, I never anticipated becoming a mother, and didn   t know  anything about children because I was the youngest. Baby-sitting, I   d  done that with eight- and twelve-year-olds and whatever, so I had no  interest in doing the daycare and working with the children   s programs,  but I loved working with the older folks.  I worked a year in food stamps, went to a public assistance social  services social work position, and I got to deal with a lot of children  then, and helping parents know about whether it was the daycare  services or the early childhood medical screening and their  immunizations and that sort of thing. Then went from there, after a year,  to a voc ational -rehab ilitation  social work cooperative project, and  worked there for just over a year. It was all in the same building, and at  some point during that time, I realized that, and I told the supervisor for  the Social Services Division in Oklahoma County DHS office, or DISRS  office, that they needed to create a group for social services workers that  worked specifically with the elders. There were a lot of people in social  services and DISRS that didn   t like old people, didn   t want to work with  them, only cared about working with children, and there were others of  us that were the exact opposite. They could save a lot of people a lot of  negative experiences, including our clients, likely, if they would have a  specialty group. That   s what subsequently brought me back to this  agency, but after those three years in Oklahoma County, after graduating  with my bachelor   s degree in social work, I split the state. I applied for  graduate school and moved to Austin. I never really expected to come  back.  So you knew you wanted to get a master   s degree.  I figured that out when I was trying to help a family in which the  mother, I guess, I don   t know who was the primary client trying to get  some education through voc-rehab. But it was a multi-generational  household with a teenage daughter who had had a baby and then her  12  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  mother, and the rest of the children of the grandmother of the baby, and  they had a very fractious kind of family relationship. I tried to do some  interpersonal helping with them and tried to help them figure out better  ways to work with each other, and I realized that I lacked the skills to go  beyond a very rudimentary stage. I studied before I had the sessions with  them, and I knew I needed to learn more. At that point I really thought  that I wanted to go into clinical social work or interpersonal helping  when I went to Austin to University of Texas, and discovered that that  just wasn   t real enough. Working with Texas hysterics didn   t move me  like working with people who had real survival issues and more  mundane problems of getting food on the table and getting assistance in  knowing what resources were there.  And you graduated from Austin in   ?     77.  So you could go anywhere now? You could work anywhere?  Oh, yes.  Anywhere?  Anywhere. I said that to myself. I expected to be anywhere except here.  As I explain it to people, I had so disliked Oklahoma, or living here, that  I had plotted my escape for seven years, and when I finally left, I really  missed the people. I missed my friends. The summer between my years  in graduate school, I had the particular fun of going on a cross-country  camping trip, a five-week camping trip, with a dear friend from  Oklahoma who had a camper. He had a pickup truck. We   re still friends.  You know, there wasn   t a romantic relationship. We barely could  survive the friendship after five weeks with a camper, but we did five  weeks of going to every state west of here and British Columbia. We  even went to the Island of Victoria on a ferry from western Washington  State. But I was specifically shopping for a place to move to, and I had  written letters to little towns in Oregon who never wrote back. I figured  out why on that trip, because they had no post office barely, I mean they  had just a crossroads and maybe a little store or something. They weren   t  really towns.  I had longed to live back where there were mountains and trees and not  the blistering hot summers and those sorts of things, and what I realized  on that trip was there were many beautiful places in the country. There  are many beautiful places in the world, but a place was only as cool to  live in as the people you knew there, and the best people I knew were in  Oklahoma. I missed my friends. And what I realized also was that in  13  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  Austin, and in bigger towns, bigger cities, there were lots of  opportunities for parallel play, but in Oklahoma, at least the years that I  went to college here and lived here right after graduating, there was  almost nothing to do unless you created that fun time with your friends.  And so, rather than sitting side-by-side and watching, whether it was a  play or a concert or whatever, it was pretty much an interactive  experience. And in order to have a good time, you got close to people, or  I did, and I missed them. Of course, I moved back here, and a couple  years later most of my friends moved out of state, which was ugly, but I  was already here and in love with this job, and so it goes.  So you came back to Oklahoma, and this is around     1977.  At what point are you developing the adult protective services program?  I guess spring break before I graduated in Austin, I came up to  Oklahoma City and I was looking for jobs. I thought I was most  interested in the health care side of things, but I knew that because I had  worked three years at DISRS that I was entitled to reinstatement as a  state employee. So as my failsafe plan, among the other applications I  put in, I came to Oklahoma County DISRS, and the person to whom I  spoke was then the assistant county administrator. He had been the  Social Services Division supervisor who had done a survey of the social  workers back in 1974, I guess. And although I didn   t remember, he said,     Esther, I remember that when we did a survey of the social workers,  you said that you thought we should create a special group of social  workers to work with the elders. You may be interested to know that the  legislature has just passed a bill to create protective services for the  elderly, and the very first protective services for the elderly social work  group in the state is going to be formed here in Oklahoma City, in  Oklahoma County DISRS.    He said that the effective date of the  legislation was, I don   t know whether it was May first now or June first  or July first, but he said,    So we   ll be doing that. Would you be  interested in becoming part of that?    I said,    Yes, that sounds wonderful,  as long as you don   t make me supervisor.    Because I really wanted to do  interpersonal work. I had not taken the systems track, or the  administration track, or whatever they called it at UT-Austin. I really  liked working with the people.  So I started at that group, and Rita Hutchins was my first supervisor. I  don   t know what happened or who said what to whom, but I   d been  there maybe three months, give or take, and I got a call from Kate Gault  at the state office, which I thought of as the Land of the Living Dead,  and we talked for awhile. She   d actually grown up in Austin and she  14  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  asked me if, since I had a master   s degree and blah blah blah, I   d be  interested in working to help coordinate the program state-wide. I   d  gone to see her, and that was before DHS was under the merit system. I  mean, there was a lot of informality in the hiring and the promotions and  whatever at that time, which is totally gone now, but I went to the state  office. I think one of the selling points was that I would hear the hardest  issues, the hardest cases, the most difficult things, and be able to assist  the local social workers with their cases and put together the policy and  work on the legal papers and that sort of thing. So I expected to do that  for a little while. I mean, it wasn   t like I was expecting to live my entire  life in that job, and I   d proved to myself that I would get bored in jobs  and move on, but I loved that job.  But there was a change in the balance of power within the Division of  Social Services at the state office, and my boss got strange, and started  not telling me about it when social workers called in, and I   d find out  later that they hadn   t gotten the guidance. We had a few talks, she and I,  and I was determined I was going to leave this agency. I wasn   t going to  be someone   s full-time scapegoat or do something weird. In the  meantime, Mr. Keen, who was the head of what was then the Special  Unit on Aging, what now is the Aging Services Division (I   d been to  some of their meetings and spoken to their advisory council and  Protective Services for the Elderly, and done various things with his  staff) he called and asked me if I would be interested in talking to him  about a brand new program that had been mandated in the Older  Americans Act Reauthorization of 1978. When I talked to him, he told  me it was an ombudsman position to put together a program of advocacy  for elders in nursing homes (it was focused mostly on nursing homes  then). It was a grant program, and I would be sharing a fifty thousand  dollar grant with the Legal Services developer, and would I be  interested. I said yes. So it was like, I started in January of 1979 in this  job, expecting to be bored in a couple of years, get the program set up,  get it under way, and move on to something else. I haven   t been bored a  day since, and it   s pushing towards an embarrassing thirty-two years.  Well in those early years,  did you have a  large staff?  Oh heck no. (Laughter) We were in the basement. The whole Special  Unit on Aging was in the basement of the Will Rogers Building, neatly  tucked between the women   s bathroom and the elevator shaft. We were  sort of step-children then, still called DISRS, and it was a good thing,  because Mr. Keen was a great boss, but I was it. I traveled the state. First  I had to figure out what in the world the program was, and contacted,  back then it was the typewriter with the carbon paper, although we did  have a steno pool, you know, people to type the letters and send them to  various other state ombudsman programs. In the 1970s, the ombudsman  15  program nation-wide had been through demonstration projects in  different states, and I think that every state except Oklahoma had wanted  an ombudsman program. Perhaps the rumors about Mr. Rader owning  shares in nursing homes were true, I don   t know, but in addition, DISRS  at the time was the state Medicaid agency. There wasn   t a separate state  Medicaid agency, so they paid the nursing homes for their services. It  was me and a telephone and a metal desk and a little glass cubicle, and I  traveled the state and did information workshops.  By February of 1980 I was ready to do the first   I guess I wasn   t doing  many information workshops then, but I did my first volunteer training,  because I realized that if the program went away the next year   because  it was a grant, you never know what   s going to happen. If it went away  the next year, what would matter to people? What would leave a lasting  legacy or be of assistance to the residents? What I learned from talking  to people around the state and going to public hearings and describing  the program was that people didn   t know they had rights in nursing  homes, and there were really serious problems. People really felt like  they were hung out to dry, that they weren   t being protected at all. And  there was nothing to protect them.  I   m trying to think of what my brain did, but in February of 1980, I did  my first volunteer training with the help of a community service advisor,  Carol Toews, in Enid. The eleven Area Agencies on Aging had  identified staff around the state to work cooperatively with me to try to  get the word out. In some parts of the state I was coordinating with  RSVP volunteer programs, or sometimes the Area Agency on Aging and  their outreach workers, or there were the community service advisors or  Legal Aid or other people, so it was a very mixed bag. But forty people  showed up on an icy day for this training, and about half of them were  nursing home operators, and half were people interested in being  volunteers. And you know, fortunately because of the snow and ice  storm, I was able to say,    Let   s not do this tomorrow,    because it was  supposed to be a two-day training.  What I learned from that was that the providers had as many questions  as the consumers, and they were essentially the same questions. Will you  take anonymous complaints? Do you duplicate the Health Department?  What do you do when you hear a complaint? What   s the approach? I had  worked on all that, and had figured out that if we were going to leave a  legacy, it had to be information. Information about people   s rights,  information about the fact that there was a law, although it was skeletal  at the time. Ombudsmen were intended to make up for the fact or be  there for spokespersons for the residents, to help them have someone  who focused on them. The incredible failure of the enforcement system  nation-wide, the reason for demonstration grants for ombudsmen had  16  been born out of the scandals in nursing homes in, I guess, the early     70s, late    60s. It was intended to be a voice for the residents, as well as  someone to monitor not just the providers of care, not just the nursing  homes, but also the alleged enforcement system and the people who  were supposed to be inspecting, the people who were supposed to be  protecting the rights and wellbeing of the residents in the nursing homes,  finding out many things the hard way about what went on in nursing  homes.  The best part of the job for me in those early days was getting to visit  old people in nursing homes. I loved that. I can   t get out of a nursing  home even now in less than two hours because I just enjoy hearing from  the people, talking to them, and trying to assist them, whether it   s with  information or just someone to talk to. But the notion of working with  volunteers was we would have a community presence that was a local  community presence. What I figured out at some point was that nursing  homes are only as good as the communities in which they are located  demand that they are, and that there are very definite community  standards and community expectations that nursing homes will meet if it  means that   s the only way they get business.  It was harder for the community to have a major impact in those days  because there were very few other resources for in-home or community-based  care. We didn   t have the ADvantage waiver program. Actually I  helped to write a waiver application back in the early 1980s, but Mr.  Rader wouldn   t let it move forward. Trying to get in-home and  community-based services. There were some personal care services or  telephone reassurance, maybe home delivered meals or senior centers,  but there wasn   t much else, so people were pretty well trapped with the  choice of nursing homes. And there was, I thought, a great need to train  local people to go in   it   s kind of like the difference between how your  house looks if you   re not having company or how your house looks if  someone   s coming. The inspectors weren   t unannounced at that time,  even though the law said they should be, and so there were many things  that were bad about the system.  So I wanted trained volunteers who knew what the residents    rights  were, who could help inform people of their rights, and who could assist  the residents in either having their problems handled anonymously or by  someone who doesn   t identify them. Ombudsmen don   t identify the  source of their complaints unless we have the person   s permission, and  also could help them by giving them the courage if they needed it or the  information if they needed it about what their rights were, what the law  was, what the rules were of someone to sit with them face-to-face with  the administrator or the director of nursing or the dietary supervisor and  try to resolve the issue. Ombudsmen don   t have enforcement authority,  17  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  and that   s one of the joys of the program, because the attempt to  cooperatively resolve an issue is often successful.  In those early days people would look at me like I had three heads if I  talked about residents    rights, but in 1987 the Federal Nursing Home  Reform Law upgraded residents    rights and quality of life to be  equivalent in importance under the law as quality of care. So the person,  the whole person who moves into the residence is supposed to be  adapted to by the nursing home as opposed to all the adaptation and  adjustment and giving up being done by the person who moves in. So  there have been major changes along the way in the way residents are  supported in the law and in the rules, but the early days were quite  interesting. I think I only almost lost my job once for talking back to  someone with a great deal of power in the nursing home industry.  In those early days, how did operators take this program?  Ooh. Jearl Smart, who is now deceased, was a great leader within the  nursing home industry, and then it was pretty much just the for-profit  nursing home industry was the industry here. And he called me    Little  Bit.    It took the Chief Counsel for DHS, or DISRS back then, he had  several, I think he called them late night drinking sessions with Jearl,  trying to explain to him that this was a federal law. In order to have all  the nice programs that they wanted, like nutrition sites and senior  centers, they had to have an ombudsman, and, you know, that I had a  legitimate right of access to the facility and all that. He was sort of the  archetype of the powerful nursing home operator. After doing several  dozens of information workshops around the state, once I realized that I  needed to do those in advance of the volunteer trainings, he invited me  to speak to the Nursing Home Convention. It was 1980, it was the heat  wave that went on and on however many days, dozens of days of over a  hundred degrees. It was in the Myriad, and I remember that Governor  George Nigh, which didn   t give me comfort, Governor George Nigh was  the keynote speaker for the Nursing Home Association Convention. It  was a big, big convention. I was booked in the only room in the place  that had no air conditioning during this heat wave. I think it was broken,  they may have just turned it off, but it was a room for three hundred, and  I did the same presentation about the Ombudsman Program two days in  a row.  The first day   and I hated public speaking. I was just nervous as a cat  even standing up in class talking. So my only hope was that I knew more  than they did about the program and could therefore maybe present it  adequately. But I got up to speak and talked about the program and why  it wasn   t a duplication of the Health Department and how we handled  complaints and the volunteer component and all these different things.  18  And I took questions. And the very first question from, I   ll call him a     gentleman    in the front row, who I learned later had been head of the  National Association of Nursing Homes, whatever they called it then, at  one point, and was an owner of nursing homes in northeastern  Oklahoma. I don   t remember his name, but he raised his hand and he  said,    Well, young lady, I think you   re a very nice young lady and I  think you mean well, but I think your program is stupid and duplicative  and I hope it goes away soon.    And I looked at him, and I thought,     Great first question.     I didn   t say anything, and in the back of the room someone yells,     Repeat the question.    And I said,    Repeat the question?    And I turned  to my handler, who was a very nice lady from a nursing home, and I just  rolled my eyes. I said,    Well, the gentleman in the front said that he  thought that I was a very nice young lady and he thought that I meant  well, but he thinks that the program is stupid and duplicative and hopes  it goes away soon.    And it brought down the house. And of course, it  cracked me up because I figured that,    Why not tell them?    Because  probably three quarters to ninety percent of them were thinking it, too.  But that sort of broke the ice, and afterwards, I mean I thought it had  been because of the stroke that I didn   t recognize anybody, but people  would come up to me for years and know who I was and talk to me by  name and know what I did and I finally had to start saying,    Do I know  you? Have we met? Have we been introduced?       Oh, no, but I heard you  speak in the Myriad back in 1980.    So people remembered me and that  sort of bridged the gap.  But oh, it could be unpleasant. And then there were the administrators  who tried to co-op the volunteers, and after a year or so, I told my boss,  Roy Keen, who was a very supportive, amazing, amazing boss,    I am  not training any more volunteers. I   m not doing anything else to expand  the program until I get some hired help.    I said,    I need someone here to  work with me, to coordinate the program, and we need to require some  staff out at the Area Agencies on Aging.    And so we were able, I mean,  Mr. Keen believed in mandates, and there was money going out in Title  III, which was the portion of the Older Americans Act for various  supportive services. Money was allocated to the Area Agencies on  Aging, and they got to select the first person, but at least a half-time staff  person, to work specifically on the Ombudsman Program.  I was able to hire Eleanor Kurtz, who became, I mean, she and I were  two halves of one brain. We just were absolutely the program. For  twenty-six years we worked together, and she was actually one of the  people who nominated me for this award, which (and I think I said it in  my presentation when I was inducted) it just didn   t seem right that I  wasn   t standing side-by-side with Eleanor. She had gotten her master   s  19  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  degree from the Center for Studies in Aging at North Texas State in  Denton and she had taken the administration track. She had taken the  nursing home administration track and she had worked in every part of a  nursing home in her internship. She actually thought that she wanted to  do that, but then she thought she needed to see the other side and wanted  to be a nursing home inspector. What she realized was the nursing  homes in Oklahoma were inspected and treated very differently than  they were in Texas, and she wanted to try to clean that up. Well, she  didn   t get hired on there, but she was a perfect match, a much nicer  human being than I, and taught me a lot, you know, just personally as  well as her analytic skills, her abilities. She is a very person-oriented  individual, and we balance each other, I think, very well.  She finally left because there was just no money in the Ombudsman  Program, but after twenty-six years, she hung in there a long time. But  Eleanor and I worked to train a staff around the state. It wasn   t too many  years before we realized, and those people were doing the volunteer  recruitment, volunteer training, that we taught them to do. We worked  on complaints with those local staff. They were only half-time at the  time. Most of them worked far more than half-time for piddly salary. We  were eventually able to get full-time staff in the mid- to late    80s.  You mentioned before your staff person was hired in your department  that operators would co-op volunteers?  Yes.  Could you explain what that means?  I think the point at which I realized I needed local supervisors for  volunteer ombudsmen, and desperately, was when I got a call from a  volunteer, one of the first volunteers I   d trained. I believe she was in  Holdenville, and I   m not quite sure who told me, whether she told me  this or whether someone else told me, but that she was actually filling in  for the administrator, sitting behind the administrator   s desk while the  administrator was off for a few days. And I thought,    Well that ain   t  good. I mean, that is not acceptable. That is so wildly inappropriate for  an advocate for the resident.    It was before the Older Americans Act  spoke to conflicts of interest very specifically. It was very clear to me  that the advocate isn   t there to be an adversary to the facility and  certainly isn   t there to be the operator. The advocate is not there to be  the operator of the facility.  In a classic sense, an ombudsman is, in the Swedish model, absolutely  neutral, and is a formal go-between, a bridge for communication  between, in the original sense, the citizens and the government. In the  20  university it would be between the students and the administration, or  whatever, prison, whatever your setting. In the Ombudsman Program in  the Older Americans Act, the long-term care ombudsman is clearly there  as an advocate for the resident, and to intervene on the resident   s behalf,  with the resident   s permission only. To be a spokesperson for, as well as  to identify issues that affect the residents, either individually or in a  wide-spread group, and make recommendations for the resolution of  those kinds of issues or correction of problems. We are not there to take  over the facility, and we are certainly not there to tell the residents what  they should want or what they may have, and we   re not there to direct  the staff. We   re there to inform the staff, encourage the staff, put the  staff on notice if need be that violations are occurring, and give them an  opportunity to correct those, or we   ll make a referral. We are not there to  be the administrator, or the director of nursing, or the dietary supervisor,  or the nurse   s aide, nor the laundress. We are not there to take the  resident to the bathroom or to change her clothes or to help her get into  or out of bed. We are not there to provide hands-on service.  I had never even conceived of a volunteer ombudsman that I   d trained  thinking that it was appropriate for her to sit for the administrator. So  that was my moment of truth, that this is not going to happen again. I did  learn some things about program management and protecting the  program in order to be able to serve and protect the residents in those  early days. In fact, one of the early attacks came from someone that I  thought was on the same team, someone who investigated complaints  against nursing homes in the Medicaid program, and he said,    You  better protect your program, little girl.     And so what I learned was, because he was accusing some informants to  the programs, just complainants, not even volunteers, he was accusing  them of having done some things that interfered with an investigation  that he was carrying on, and his unit was carrying on, with the FBI that I  had no knowledge of. We were just investigating complaints that were  brought to us and referring them. I had referred these complainants and  complaints to him, actually, in his unit. Instead, he was all up-in-arms  because they were ombudsmen. And I was able to prove, fortunately,  that they weren   t, because I had done letters of introduction that we call  a certification for the volunteers who had been trained and was able to  defend what the program status was relative to these complainants. In  fact, the operator of the facility they were complaining about did go to  federal prison and had to divest himself of his facilities. This was back  in 1980. Robert J. Stephens was the operator. These were just women  from the community who had loved ones in Hukill   s Nursing Home in  Kingfisher that was operated by this fellow who had twenty-three  facilities around the state.  21  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  But figuring out ways to protect the program was something I hadn   t  anticipated having to do. I was glad I   d had that early training, because  there were other states that didn   t adequately identify who was an  official volunteer for the program and who wasn   t. And so we did letters  of introduction that became certification notices, and could keep track of  them. That was the point in time when I said,    I need local supervision  for the volunteers, in addition to assistance with recruitment and setting  up trainings and all the logistics, which take time and take staff.     Supervision of volunteers rose to a higher level of importance for me,  besides just them being able to call me and my seeing them on occasion  when I could drive out to whatever remote location they were in. We  had volunteers, I think, in Enid, Holdenville for a brief time, Durant, and  some other places there at first. But that was when we got half-time staff  at the Area Agencies on Aging.  In those early years, you   re trying to figure everything out. Who would  you go to for help or guidance, or is it just learning on your own?  It was mostly learning on our own. Now there is a National  Long-Term  Care  Ombudsman Resource Center. There was a loose network of  ombudsman around the country, and I could at times ask for assistance.  It is more of my nature to puzzle something through and come up with a  solution that fits the situation locally. Every state was different, every  state still is different. Some state ombudsman programs are in state  governments, some are in free-standing agencies. Some are parts of legal  groups and other things, but there was no focused resource.  I was able to join, the first year I was State Ombudsman, the National  Citizen   s Coalition for Nursing Home Reform, also known as  NCCNHR, and now called National Consumer Voice for Quality Long-  Term Care. They had an annual meeting, and I went there the first year, I  guess in May or so, and I thought,    Oh my God     I learned about issues  I didn   t even know were issues. Fortunately or unfortunately, that   s  happened every year since that I   ve been able to go. There   s always been  something breaking on some poor practice or some dire problem that  breaks out on one of the coasts. Generally it takes it awhile to make it to  Oklahoma, just like fashions, and learning about how the different states  handled it helped.  We did form a National Association of State Long-Term Care  Ombudsman Programs, and I don   t know if I was the second or the third  president of that. I know I did two terms, broken by a period of time, but  that was before fax machines. It was before I even dreamed of having a  secretary or an administrative assistant all to my own, and it was also  before e-mail. So it was the long, hard way to do anything, but we tried  to organize so that we could not just put pressure on but interface with  22  Nykolaiszyn  the Administration on Aging in Washington, part of Health and Human  Services. Whether it was to get regulations written, get support for the  programs that were being attacked in their own states by a Governor   s  office or a state legislature or the agency they were placed in. There  were all sorts of things befalling ombudsmen because the program easily  and readily becomes a political embarrassment when you   re essentially  pulling the skirts up of state governments saying,    Here   s what the law  says you should be doing to protect the citizens of the state who live in  these facilities. And this is how you   re failing to do that.    And so  protecting the ombudsmen, as they   re trying to be advocates, and do just  their job that   s in the federal law, very clearly in federal law; trying to  get amendments to the Older Americans Act, when it was re-authorized,  and it is re-authorized periodically; trying to get the Administration on  Aging to stand up for state ombudsmen, whether it   s your own or  someone else   s makes no difference. Those points of vulnerability affect  you as well as others.  We started with the local staff, very small, and it was just the biggest  blessing. Of course, then when you have staff, you have to be an  administrator, which is not my favorite thing to do. But we implemented  then, and still do, quarterly meetings to bring the ombudsmen in. They  were the only people they knew  doing this work . I was the only person  I knew doing this kind of work in the entire state for a year and a half  until Eleanor started in September of 1980. I knew what it was like to  feel alone and be the odd person out, in a big way. Bringing the  ombudsmen in, the area staff in, for support and training, as well as the  mental health needs to communicate to someone, someone you could  talk to about issues that were very confidential, it was an important  component of the program for me. It   s proved to be a very unifying  force.  I don   t think it should be an accident of birth what kinds of services you  get from an Ombudsman Program in what part of the state, or what part  of the nation, for that matter. There is, I think, more continuity and  teamwork in our program because of the ways in which we   ve brought  the people in. And actually, they helped. Like the volunteers did  initially, wanting a letter of introduction, they   ve helped to create their  own forms. I would just say,    This is what I need for you, this is how  often I need it. It   s up to you to design what works for you for collecting  that information.    You know, we had a complaint form and we had just  the quarterly report form of the information they had to gather. They  created their own forms, and then they decided they wanted uniform  forms. So the program was sort of a living, breathing thing, and still is  because they still have a lot of input and guide the work of the program.  Complaints in the early days versus complaints today?  23  Houser  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  Oh.  How many on average?  Oh, numbers. Oh gee, 6,000 to 9,000 problems. The volunteers are not  required to make a formal complaint out of everything. They do a lot of  informal problem solving. I could have started there, but the goal of the  program, in my way of thinking, is to help the resident get what she  wants, help the resident if there   s a problem or a question, get it resolved  at the earliest possible time frame at the smallest possible stage before it  becomes a huge gaping wound, whether literally or figuratively. If you  can answer someone   s question or get them connected to the right  person in the facility to answer their question before it becomes a  complaint, before it becomes a problem, that works for me. So provision  of information to consumers, provision of information to the providers  of,    These are the things I   m seeing in your facility. You might want to  take a look at hall four and what the afternoon shift is doing instead of  keeping people cleaned,    or whatever. Or    I   m hearing a lot more things  on this wing than this wing about food service or them getting assistance  to eat if they   re eating in their rooms,    or whatever it is. If you can give  that information, head off a complaint, yea. The goal is not to cause a  big scene or to get the facility in trouble with the state. We give them an  opportunity to work cooperatively with us to prevent or resolve  problems.  I think in the early stages, well, we kept the complaint log with hash  marks on a grid that we created with pen and ink on sideways legal-sized  paper, and you know, I   m real proud it worked. Everything was by hand  then. I think we got our first computer sometime in, may have been the  1990s. I got my first desktop in 1998, but we used the mainframe for  some complaint entry for our annual report. It was just not the same  environment that it is now with a computer in every purse, and you  know, you do all of your own work. I can   t even say. I think the first  annual report that Eleanor and I published in 1983, the first text report  was, oh, there may have been four-hundred-and-something complaints  that rose to that level, and that was with just the early stages of half-time  staff.  In 1980, after the passage of the Nursing Home Care Act in Oklahoma  that Representative Don McCorkell and Senator Bernest Cain authored,  and the Oklahoma Alliance on Aging was created as an advocacy  organization to get passage of that law. That created an opportunity for  the Ombudsman Program, and a requirement that other state agencies  that inspected or investigated complaints in nursing homes in Oklahoma  had to forward complete copies of their inspection or complaint reports  to the State Ombudsman office. And so we took that to mean that we  24  were intended to be a clearinghouse of information. We also thought that  that intended for us to provide information to those agencies about what  we saw in their reports, as well as putting that in a document for public  consumption.  What we learned in that, and that was the first year that we wrote as an  issue, because we do systems advocacy as well as personal advocacy  and provision of information. One of our most important system issues  was the failure of the state to enforce, and you know, from the written  record, from their own inspection reports, the ombudsman would see  problems with care, with service delivery. We   d get complaints and the  special medical services unit that now is called Long-Term Care  Investigations of Adult Protective Services, it   s another part of DHS,  they would find four untreated bedsores, and a person who hadn   t been  taken to the hospital after a fall, and cockroaches, and whatever else, and  the Health Department inspection would say,    Well, there was some  cigarette butts left in an ashtray in the hall, and that area was messy and  hadn   t been cleaned.    We would hear these terrible complaints about  lack of personal hygiene care. The nurse   s aides didn   t know what they  were doing. There were many times when nurse   s aides would pull  people up by their arms and leave bruises, or not clean someone up after  they were taken to the toilet, or just not take them to the toilet. And so  we began to work on those issues for nurse   s aides, who actually  supervised two out of three shifts in Oklahoma nursing homes, as  opposed to in other states where they had nurses around the clock.  We had intermediate care facilities that had been created to allow a  nurse to be on duty seven days a week on the day shift and then a  certified medication aide, who was actually just trained by the Nursing  Home Association, who didn   t have any basic nurse   s aide training to  begin with, was in charge of the facility the rest of the time. And so we  started working on, as an issue, getting nurse   s aides trained. It took a  decade. It took the entire decade in the 1980s, and an act of Congress to  get nurse   s aides training in Oklahoma, even though some of the  providers were for it. There was the Board of Health that had created a  committee to work on it, and the Commissioner of Health then, Joan  Levitt, until her attorney told her she had to let me speak, I would   ve not  even gotten to speak to them about the fact that this committee did  recommend nurse   s aide training be required, and she wouldn   t let it  come to a vote of the board. And the board wouldn   t stand up to have it  happen, so we wrote that up many times in our annual report. We  identified the Health Department many times in our report. We  sometimes could get DHS as the Medicaid agency, until that was taken  away from them in 1995 and the Health Care Authority was created, we  could get regulations written or enforced by DHS that paid the nursing  homes the Medicaid money to improve staffing or this and that, but it  25  was slogging in the streets, slogging through the legislature, bill after bill  that was introduced at our request, or the senior groups    request to get  nurse   s aides trained, or to get proper enforcement.  We turned in the lack of enforcement and the various pieces of evidence,  you know the huge library of evidence that we could produce, to the  attorney general   s Medicaid Fraud Control Unit. As soon as they were  created in the late    80s,    What are you going to do about the Health  Department? Look at this stuff.       What are you going to do about these  issues?    I talked to every fed I ever met, whether it was in Washington  or in Dallas, anyone I could find on the phone of,    What are you going  to do about the Health Department? They   re not enforcing the rules.  These are the rules, now we have this wonderful new law, it means  nothing.    Laws are not self-effecting. They have to be caused to go into  effect. They have to be enforced, and we had zip from the Health  Department, and we had various things going on, and finally, I don   t  know whether it was because I was handing out the HHS Tips hotline  number widely throughout the state. I was on e-mail doing that too,  because there were new networks in the late    90s. I don   t know how it  came about, but the FBI was involved, the Health and Human Services  Office of Inspector General opened a field office in Oklahoma City, they  were involved, and the Attorney General   s Medicaid Fraud Control Unit  as well as the U.S. Attorney was involved. Finally, I mean, the  d  nouement, the most wonderful moment, was May 2, 2000 when Brent  Van Meter, the Deputy Commissioner of Health, was hauled off in  handcuffs from the State Health Department, subsequently indicted, and  went to federal prison for solicitation and acceptance of bribes from  nursing homes.  One of Jearl Smart   s boys, Jim Smart, went to federal prison on the same  charges for buying off Brent. We had been chronicling nursing homes  that had multiple verified complaints, nursing homes with multiple  enforcement actions taken against them, in our annual report in  appendices for years. We had finally started putting in the names of the  owners in an appendix, trying in the absence of enforcement of the laws  and rules, we worked through public humiliation, public embarrassment.  The annual report was probably misused by the media, because they  would say the top ten or whatever worst nursing homes in the state,  when in fact it was just the most complained about facilities in the state.  It wasn   t necessarily the worst ones, but there was a lot of satisfaction  that came when the Health Department was purged, and some of the  people who were the most corrupt were just eliminated. Some of them  took plea deals, some of them went to prison. Brent Van Meter would  close a residential care facility, sell the residents to Dub Jiles. They  would sort of    launder    them, in the money laundering scheme of things,  through a residential care facility, and maybe to another one, and then to  26  Nykolaiszyn  his nursing home at Oak Hills in Jones that he had bought illegally with  a front. He used his daughter as a    front man.     There were all these different webs of intrigue and intricacy, and there  was just so much satisfaction, seeing some of those people actually held  to account. The day of the May 2,  2000  arrest, which happened  between four and five o   clock or so, we were in the office. Eleanor and I  were because we always worked late, and I got a call from the media,  one of the reporters, who said,    What   s going on, Esther, at the Health  Department?    I said,    What are you talking about?    I think it was a  Mick Hinton from the Tulsa World. He told me what had happened, and  I was just shrieking with delight because it was so long in coming, so  long in coming, and the subsequent years for the changing of the guard  at the Health Department, and the purging. I called it the pogrom,  because they just removed so many people; but there have been good  things come since. I couldn   t even tell you the number of complaints we  worked that year. There were people who said,    Finally, there   s  someone around to do something about these issues we   ve been having  for all these years in the nursing homes.    I   d been having the  ombudsman staff do monthly media releases for twenty years, but there  were still people who don   t know about the program. There are also  people who wouldn   t make complaints because they didn   t think anyone  would do anything. So the amount of public information that got out  there during the year.  The other remarkable  thing  was that after so many years of having  people at the Capitol look at me like I have three heads, because I would  go almost every day to the legislature during session to keep the for-profit  nursing homes from taking over everything, getting everything  they want. The Aging Network is terrific, and the aging advocacy that  they do to block certain things or advocate for certain things, but the day  after the arrest, I had my vindication, because people suddenly said,    Oh  my God, she was right.    You know,    She wasn   t just making all that  stuff up that gave us so much grief,    from all the nursing home operators  who probably were begging for me to be fired, or trying to figure out a  way to upend the program or to stop us from doing what we did. But the  important thing was I was asked what I wanted in some statutes in some  bills that were there that year, and got requirements for the Health  Department to have rules on conflict of interest themselves, and try to  require them to have an actual protocol for what they did when they  received a complaint. There were many things, many legislative changes  that we got in that year and the few years after. I fear that those lessons  have been forgotten ten years later, but you know, that was exciting,  exciting times in the Ombudsman Program.  You were probably, I   m guessing, pretty early on, realizing the  27  Houser  corruption at the state level. Did you think something would ever  become of it, or was it just a matter of time? It   s almost like you were  fighting on one hand, and it   s hard for change to happen, because     It is hard for change to happen. It doesn   t have to be hard for change to  happen, especially when the law is already written that tells you what  that change is and should be, or shall be. I   m an optimistic person. I  actually said to someone, it may have been the director of the agency  once, that if I weren   t an optimist, I would   ve thrown myself off a tall  building years ago. I have no suicidal tendencies, fortunately, but just a  dogged determination that if something is wrong, I   m going to say it   s  wrong. I   m not paid to describe the emperor   s new clothes if he   s  walking down the street naked, and no one at the Capitol or anyone in  this state is as scary as my mother was. So in facing down those people  who were trying to do this or that, I guess it   s the sense of having the  moral high ground, which is a great motivator for me.  And the people that we serve, the point of all this is that during the ten  years of trying to get nurse   s aide training as a requirement in Oklahoma  nursing homes and actually get it implemented, there were still  individuals living in nursing homes lying in their own waste or who  weren   t being taken to the toilet, who weren   t having their hands washed  before meals, who weren   t properly positioned in bed. Those people still  needed the individual advocacy. The systems advocacy can   t take the  place of that. So while you   re trying to move the mountain, you   re still  doing the one step at a time in each nursing home, because each of those  residents is entitled to be treated with dignity and respect and some  kindness, and some consideration for their human needs. There   s no  excuse to not do that, even if it   s not required by law. That   s a human  being thing that should be a personal requirement.  I will say that we were gaining ground within DHS, in the Medicaid  program. The federal law that changed, the Federal Nursing Home  Reform Law (we call it OBRA    87, it   s part of the Omnibus   Reconciliation Act  of    87 in Congress) there were requirements for the  feds to create enforcement standards. For the first time there were going  to be intermediate sanctions, money penalties, the placement of a  temporary manager. Things that we had in our state law since 1980, like  petitioning the court to place a receiver to take over operation of a very  badly running facility, or an abandoned facility, to protect the residents  while smoother transition could be arranged. The feds were supposed to  write rules for implementation, and if they didn   t by 1991, I think was  the cut-off, the states were obliged to do it, and they were empowered   under  the federal law. It took us a couple years, but we were working  on that with the Medical Services Division, I think we called it, of DHS,  and Legal Division, and we wrote enforcement standards. All of us  28  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  worked together on it, side by side. Howard Pallotta, who is now the  Chief Legal Counsel for Health Care Authority, was part of that, and  Charlie Waters, who   s General Counsel for DHS was there, but we  worked on rules, and put them through the rule-making process and they  got through the legislative review, and Governor Walters vetoed them at  the encouragement of Brent Van Meter.  And so I had the interesting position of being quoted in the paper in  opposition to the governor. Fortunately, my boss is not an appointed  official, nor am I, and fortunately my boss was Roy Keen, who never  looked at me funny unless we stopped pushing. Never told Eleanor and I  we couldn   t, or we shouldn   t, or we would get in trouble if we did our  jobs. But when we were working on those enforcement rules, which we  never got past Governor Walters, who was subsequently charged for  taking contributions illegally from the nursing home industry, by the  way. Eleanor and I had a conversation with Charlie Waters, General  Counsel. He said,    Now you guys understand that this is a process, and  it takes some time, so I don   t want you to be disappointed if we come to  the end of the year and we don   t have those rules through the process  yet.    And I said,    Charlie, if we have them in place a year from now,  we   re going to count it as a win.    And he looked at us, and he said,    You  guys are scary. You   re like the Viet Cong. You never go away.    And I  thought,    Yeah, there   s a lot to that, you know, Chinese water torture  could describe us, too. Drip, drip, drip, drip.    And if you keep on saying  the same thing, I   ve learned, after awhile, people forget who said it. And  if you have no concern, no interest in who gets credit, if the change  happens, if the positive growth occurs, yea. It doesn   t have to be the  Ombudsman Program getting credit. I don   t care about that at all. I want  the residents to get what they need and what they want. That   s the point.  That   s the whole point of the program.     Well tell me how large your staff is today, and what it encompasses.  For quite a few years, we have hovered around 200 volunteers, certified  volunteers. We ask a lot of them, and they are the heartbeat of the  program. Because the trained volunteers are certified ombudsmen, they  visit a particular assigned facility at least two hours a week. Many of  them spend many more hours. They   re there whether or not there are  problems. They visit the residents and get to know the residents and the  facility and the staff and their policies, and they can assist the residents.  The residents know they   ll be back so they can trust them, and they  work through thousands of problems a year, and under the  Governmental Tort Claims Act, they   re considered state employees for  purposes of their civil immunity for good faith performance of their  duties. They have training requirements, they have monthly meetings for  continuing education and supervision that their ombudsman supervisors  29  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  provide, and those volunteers are amazing in what they do. We have  everyone from nurses or retired nurses. We had an assistant district  attorney once. Some of them are attorneys, some of them are  housewives, some of them are hardware salesmen. You know, it doesn   t  matter what your frame of reference is if they care about the residents  and will do the work.  The paid staff at the Area Agencies on Aging; there are twenty-four area  ombudsman staff positions at the eleven Area Agencies on Aging. In  2000, interestingly, after the arrest of Brent Van Meter, the nursing  home provider fee was enacted, and money for ten additional area  ombudsman staff was placed in that law for this program. Starting in  2000 we were able to hire ten additional people that brought us up to  twenty-four staff. Each of those staff is an employee of the Area  Agencies on Aging. They   re around the state in the eleven Area  Agencies on Aging, and they generally have 2,500 to 3,000 beds that  they cover. Our occupancy rate isn   t that high in Oklahoma, so it varies  how many residents they see, but they visit multiple facilities, generally  over a multi-county area and make routine visits, complaint  investigations as well as doing the volunteer supervision, the  recruitment, the training, the public presentations and in-service  trainings for staff. They are renaissance people. They do many many  things, and they do them very well.  At the state ombudsman office, there are six of us total, including me.  Two of them are support staff who maintain the files, the databases. We  have a lot of reporting to do on the nursing home provider fee and other  things, and I have two field representatives who supervise half the state  each, and the deputy state ombudsman. We   re just actively involved in  all sorts of aspects, whether it   s the personal advocacy, the provision of  information, or the development of ways to address system-wide issues.  So the reluctant administrator is still administrating?  Oh God, yes. I just like going out to long-term care facilities and visiting  with the older people. I so seldom get to actually darken the door of a  nursing home anymore, it   s pathetic, but I take those occasions where I  can get them, and I get to work with elders in the State Council on  Aging, the Oklahoma Alliance on Aging, AARP volunteers, the Silver  Haired Legislature. The Oklahoma Aging Partnership is a partnership of  the different groups that work as aging advocates, and so we work on  legislative issues together, or regulatory issues. Those are very great  allies, and very active, very thoughtful and hard-working retirees. I   m  terrified to retire because I see what can happen to you. I think they  work harder, they work more hours a week, I suspect   well, I don   t  know if they work more hours a week, but when I retire, I hope to  30  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  actually get to retire. There   s a theory.  Well, we learn the tools for what we do in our career in different places.  Sometimes it   s on the job, or in school. Where are some of the places  you have found that you have learned the tools you needed for this job?  Oh, interesting. I don   t know if I   d call them tools or skills. I guess the  problem solving process is a textbook style social work tool or system of  thought in which you partialize a problem and you try to identify all the  different issues or items within a problem, and identify what your goal  is   if it were right, what would it look like   and to then develop a  strategy to move to address those different partialized portions of the  problem. That   s actually the model we use for complaint investigation,  or for complaint resolution in the Ombudsman Program in Oklahoma. I  think it works extremely well because when people bring a complaint or  a problem, they   re often overwhelmed by it, and to talk through with  them, or to listen to them as they describe it, you know,    Is all the food  bad?    or    Breakfast is great, but lunch and supper   blah blah          Okay,  now if it were right, what would it be like? What do you want to work  on first? Do you want to work on that with me, do you want me to do  that speaking up for you, or do you want to take it from here?    and  empowering people. The notion of empowering people to be their own  advocates is another very basic social work premise and I think that  those have stood well in the program. They   re part of all of what we do,  whether it   s personal or systems advocacy.  I would also say this: my father, because of the walks in the woods,  looking at the tiniest little sign of an animal or a seedling tree or  identification of those small things within the larger pattern taught me a  lot about observations skills, and I also learned vigilance just trying to  stay out of my mother   s way, but that   s another story. So the being tuned  in to what   s going around you is important in the nursing home setting  and complaint investigation. It   s also very important in the legislative  advocacy, and the regulatory advocacy and working through a system  and trying to pull together all the different strings that may attach to the  problem.  Those as well as people skills. I learned a lot from Eleanor, just truly a  lot from Eleanor, and the learning, the team work, I don   t know if that  was learned or second nature, but the team work that   s required to  resolve an issue, no one person can do it. That   s one of my concerns  about the Oklahoma Women   s Hall of Fame. I am just the front man for  the organization. There are so many things going on, there are so many  people doing so many terrific things in the program that, you know, to  the extent that the recognition goes to the program, I   m okay with this.  31  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  I hear that from all of the inductees.  Oh good. That   s good.  You   re all so humble.  I don   t think it is humility, I think it   s reality. I mean, there   s no, I don   t  know, perhaps it   s trite by now, the,    It takes a village.    There   s not one  person that can do major social change. You may become people   s  lightning rod, or    If she can stand up to him, I can,    sort of point to look  at and to take some kind of either comfort or strength or,    Look at that  idiot, what she   s doing. She   s going to be dead before long.    I don   t  know what it is, but I know that I   ve gotten a lot of feedback directed at  me over the years that I know is not mine alone. It belongs to the  program and the wonderful people, the thousands of people who   ve  served as ombudsman volunteers, and the people who have spread the  word about residents    rights. I mean, when I for the first time, after  probably ten years in the program, heard a nursing home administrator   s  voice on the phone calling me to complain about something a city  council was doing, and that it violated the residents    rights, and I was  going,    I   m sorry. I   ve crossed over into the parallel universe where  everything is right and just and true. I   m lost here.    I didn   t say it out  loud though.  (Laughs) That   s a good feeling.  Oh yeah. Oh yeah. When people forget that you were the enemy and  start talking like you, even if it   s self serving, you know, it   s progress.  We   ve touched probably upon some of this, but  were there  any major  stumbling blocks or adversity you faced along the way?  Oh yeah, and I think that those people who, fortunately I was protected  as far as not knowing who might be trying to get me fired this week or  that week, because Mr. Keen, even when there was a full-frontal assault  on my job, didn   t tell me until a year later. I was grateful for that. The  resistance from a very powerful industry was the biggest stumbling  block, and the fact that so many people, including people in authority  and other parts of the agency that I work in, believed them, and thought  that every nursing home operator was well-intentioned and doing the  best they could, and I was asking the impossible. There were many ways  in which we were, I might even go to the word punished for doing what  our job was as stated in federal law and state law, which is to identify  issues, make recommendations, whether it   s in the facility or in the  legislature, to policy-makers and others, and to advocate for the people  we served. There were attacks from the provider organization, the  32  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  Nursing Home Association, and we would get challenged on this or that,  and we   d end up having to write, Eleanor and I, memos and pull  together. We kept such good documentation and had, you know, the  arsenal of information to support our perspective, but stumbling blocks  could be as simple as having to do it all yourself without a secretary.  We   ve re-entered that phase of the world where everyone   s expected to  do their own work on the computer, but having time to answer the  phone, for heaven   s sake, because for quite a few years, Eleanor and I  had one telephone. The black desktop that we shared with our metal  desks crammed together in the little cubicle. And you know, you don   t  even think of it as a stumbling block until later, you think back,    How  did you deal with that?     But there were many attacks, and part of the biggest barrier was  knowing what the law said and not being able to get it enforced, not  being able to get it done. I don   t have a place in my brain to formulate  how people think when they   re that corrupt, that their personal financial  gain is more important than literally the skin on the back of another  human being. That it   s okay for someone to suffer and die, to be  neglected, whether it   s strangle in their bedrails, or whether it   s just lose  all hope because of the indignities that they face through just poor care.  Just poor care. You don   t have to die to have serious harm come to you  in the hands of a bad facility, and how anyone could place money over  the well-being of fellow human beings is totally beyond my ken. I  cannot wrap my head around it.  I have come to a point of belief that I might as well forgive people, and I  try to practice, you know, some of these people that have really caused  harm to others, and terrible suffering, including suffering to their loved  ones, who had to place them in a nursing home. I   ve come to believe  that the great wheel of karma grinds slow, but it grinds exceeding fine. I  don   t necessarily believe that people are punished after death, but you  know, I just have to believe that there   s some kind of justice, and that I  might as well not hold personal grudges or eat myself up with  individuals and their wrongs. But I have had occasion, especially in the  last ten years, to rejoice very happily in people being taken out of the  business. If they   re not caregivers, they shouldn   t be in the business,  they should go sell cars, sell real estate   do whatever. Make your  money. Don   t do it on the backs of old people.  Well, that   s a good way for us to move into career highs. What are some  career highs?  I think you can   t beat the career high of Brent Van Meter being hauled  off in handcuffs. I still have the video tape, although I   m not sure we  have a machine any longer that   ll run it. Career high of being able to get  33  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  a staffing bill passed. I mean, there have been many, many little ones. Or  I guess they were big ones, but getting the, I have to call it recognition  for the program, not for me, with the Women   s Hall of Fame, was  absolutely an unexpected career high, and just sort of mind boggling, but  the joy of Dub Jiles being convicted for buying and warehousing  residents of nursing homes, and the jail sentence for just getting Brent  Van Meter out of the Health Department. I told the FBI agent who was  the agent in charge of the investigation that he didn   t even have to  convict him. It didn   t matter to me how much time he served. The fact  that they got him out of this position at the Health Department was the  most wonderful thing that they could   ve done as law enforcement  officials. And being able to have someone else with bigger guns or  greater power or a different approach be able to intervene and have that  much impact, that   s just huge. It   ll always be one of my favorite,  favorite memories.  Well, moving on to the Oklahoma Women   s Hall of Fame, did you know  Eleanor was going to nominate you?  Had no clue. Of course, I didn   t tell her the FBI was investigating Brent  Van Meter, either. I mean, when we   re told to keep something quiet,  we   re ombudsmen. We know how to do confidentiality. I had no clue. I  got the phone call and was just blindsided.  What was going through your head when you got the call?     You have to be kidding. You have to be kidding.    I thought, first, it  couldn   t possibly be true. I don   t know many people who do practical  jokes of that sort. I just had no, I guess I was oblivious to the award  being out there, although I   d heard of the Hall of Fame. Totally taken  aback. I think I may have said,    You   ve got to be kidding. You   re  making this up.     Well, you were inducted in 2003. Do you remember much from the  ceremony?  Yes. I remember having people that I really cared about able to come  and I was surprised by some of the folks that came. Ruth Knee, who had  worked in the Administration on Aging when the program was being  created, she may be the grandmother of the Ombudsman Program. She  passed away just within the last couple of years, but she lived in  Virginia. I had met her in Washington and talked to her over the years.  She was retired, I think, by the time I became State Ombudsman, but she  came to the ceremony. It was a surprise to me. She came with Elma  Holder, who was the founder of the National Citizens Coalition for  Nursing Home Reform, who was actually a Yukon girl who had retired  34  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  to Yukon, and I had invited her. But people I worked with as well as  personal friends were able to come, and I remember just how neat it was  to see them and to have them there and how terrifying   I mean, I had  spoken in the House Chamber before, because we have Senior Day at  the Capitol, and often I have the tail pinned on me to talk about  legislation, and that part wasn   t as mind-altering as just the weirdness of  the situation of being honored in that way. Eleanor introduced me, and I  think I said then,    Eleanor should be up here with me receiving this  award, because we have two halves of one brain.    We are, I mean, we  were just Tweedle Dumm and Tweedle Dee, I guess. But I remember,  and of course I have pictures, photographic evidence that I actually wore  a dress, which doesn   t happen very often, but I have some visceral  memories of the occasion, and it was surreal. It was just surreal.  What does this type of honor mean to you?  Well, it   s hard to not take it personally when people say such nice things  about you, and as I said, I mean, I know how to do a head-on fight, I  know how to do the trench warfare. Having people being nice is a very  different thing, especially nice in public, and in such a big way. It   s a  huge honor, and it   s also, in a strange way, maybe not strange, a  comfort. I have said in other settings, in other contexts, that there   s just  something to be said for being appreciated. And that was just a huge  statement that what I   d been doing had value and that I had done it well.  And you made me cry. It was seven years ago, and it can still make me  cry to think about.  How do you feel that now, even though you may not think so, people  look to you as a role model?  Well, is it too simple to say it creeps me out? I   ve had people tell me  that, and it   s just mind boggling. It   s very strange. I mean, I try to do a  good job of what I do, because I really care about the people we serve,  and if that comes across to some people as being worth modeling after, I  guess that   s okay, but it still befuddles me.  You   ve mentioned many people throughout your interview. Would you  like to say anything about those who have played a key role?  Without crying? Roy Keen, I   ve mentioned, who was my boss for  sixteen years. He died in 2005. He was a huge part of the success of the  Ombudsman Program, because he understood advocacy, he understood  that it made people uncomfortable. He understood the importance of the  program as far as advocating for people who were otherwise essentially  powerless, and he totally supported Eleanor and me individually, but  also just the whole notion of the program and what a political  35  Nykolaiszyn  embarrassment it could be if he chose to see it in that way. And he was a  huge part of the success for me and for the program. A different boss  may have fired me the first year for doing the job, but Mr. Keen knew  the purpose and supported it and wanted it done, wanted it to be  successful. Never said no. It was shocking.  Of course, Eleanor, I   ve mentioned Eleanor more than once. Eleanor  Kurtz, and you know, she   s just so much a part of the history of the  program, my personal history. She   s a person with whom   I would trust  Eleanor with my life. And just as far as being a committed professional,  she   s a shining example of how to do a job right and how to grab on and  take it as it comes, but always caring about the people that we serve.  Those two have been fundamental.  There are so many aging advocates that taught me things, whether it was  on purpose or accidental, about how to use the variety of skills and  backgrounds that folks come with to the table. Leslie Kelly, who was a  school principal, I think, maybe an elementary school principal, I told  her she was the poster child for old ladies with broken hips because she  never missed a meeting. She was there without a walker because she  didn   t want to be seen with a walker. She was at the Capitol every day  with me, too. Tiny, tiny little bird-like woman, and she would face down  anybody. Very polite, but just some of the very strong, stalwart  advocates, and there are too many to list them all. Whether they were  working on end-of-life decision making rights, like Horace Bliss and  others back in the early    80s, and trying to say that people should have a  right to say how they die and have a right to dignity and respect.  There are just countless older people that have been there every step of  the way and people who now are ombudsman staff and volunteers.  There are staff that have been with the program for over twenty years,  that remain committed to the service we provide, and there   s volunteers  who ended up going into nursing homes where they were with the  program so long, they became residents themselves. There   s just a vast  number of people that have had influence on me, of course, in the  professional world is what I   m talking about now, but the joy of the  people that we work with is just endless. You know, being a supervisor,  being someone who has to be an administrator, whether or not she   s cut  out for the job, and I   ve tried to make that as painless for myself as  possible. Being able to work to be part of creating a team, and  encouraging people to give me honest feedback, and to give me the  benefit of their knowledge, their perspective, their ideas, makes my life  just richer and better in all those different ways that you can imagine.  I know you   re a transplant Oklahoman. What does Oklahoma mean to  you? You   ve been here for quite some time.  36  Houser  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  Oklahoma is home. I may be perplexed and antagonized at times by  some of the political choices made widely in the state, but as far as a  love for the state, a love for the people, I have been at many national  conferences, and have just been really proud to be able to say what  Oklahomans have done, what laws we   ve passed, what kinds of  advocates we have in this state, as well as just my personal friends. I just  think the people of the state of Oklahoma are terrific.  Also, I always wanted to live in the country, and I bought land in  southern Logan County, south of Guthrie, and I couldn   t move if I was  paid to move. The intimate relationship with those several acres and that  forest, that spring of water, those animals, those birds, that nurtures my  soul in a different way than the work does, and shoot, I don   t even know  if I could move to town. When I   m very elderly, the prospect of having  to move to town is kind of daunting. There are things about the  Oklahoma countryside that although I may not have found it beautiful  when I moved here, I find it beautiful now. Even No Man   s Land, even  the Panhandle, certainly the mountains, but the state of Oklahoma is  home to me.  If you could give any words of wisdom to Oklahomans, what would you  tell them?  Words of wisdom to Oklahomans. Well, in the context of the  Ombudsman Program I would say, or maybe this is just as a human  being, trust your guts. If something doesn   t seem right, it likely isn   t.  Don   t be afraid to speak up, stand up for what you believe in. The  importance of having integrity, of being true to what you believe, and  looking out for each other should come naturally to Oklahomans, and  don   t settle for less.  And for those women and men who plan a career in social work, and  possibly doing what you do, advocating, what would you tell them?  Go for it. Go for it. It is extremely rewarding work, whether you   re  working on systems or individuals    issues, you   re still helping  individuals. Even if you have the ability to help one human being in  your lifetime, do it. Listen to them, take people where they are, but it   s a  good line of work. It doesn   t pay worth a darn, but there   s so much more  to life than that, and the rewards, personally, of being able to know that  you   ve made one person   s life even a little better, are just enormous.  Well, I have one more question, but before I ask it, is there anything else  you   d like to add that I have not asked about today?  Oh, I don   t know. I think we   ve covered a lot of ground.  37  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  Nykolaiszyn  Houser  When history is written about you     Oh dear.     what would you like for it to say?  Oh my.    She shook it    til it was dead. She didn   t give up.    That if you   re  in pursuit of a resolution about me, I think,    She didn   t give up. She  hung in there.     Any plans on retiring anytime soon?  Oh, I had plans of retiring before the house burned in a wildfire and now  I   m still paying that one off, so, you know, it   ll happen. It   ll happen. The  Deputy State Ombudsman said he   s not in any hurry for me to retire, but  that   s just because the budget picture is so bad. He doesn   t want to have  to face all that alone. You know, I had thought that I would retire,  actually, my plan was to retire just a few years ago. That was when I was  going to have the house paid off in 2002, before I had to build a new  one. I had sincerely thought about being able to do some environmental  advocacy, to perhaps go back to school in one of the environmental  sciences, whether for pleasure or for a line of work, but I don   t know. I  have no idea what   s going to happen. I anticipate living to be 135. I   ve  had both my hips replaced. I   m good to go, so I could work for awhile.  (Laughs)  We didn   t even touch upon your work with the Sierra Club, or     That   s just as well. I   ve tried to get off of every committee I could  possibly get off of.  But we do appreciate your time today and talking with us.  Thank you very much. I appreciate you.  -------  -------  
