
Kathleen Plunkett: This begins an interview on March 16, 1996 with Marie Griffin, taken in her
home in Vermont by Kathleen Plunkett. I guess we can just start by you telling me about your
parents.
Marie Griffin: My parents were Martha Picker and Walter Picker. My father was born in
Hamburg, Germany. He came to this country at about age thirty-seven. He used to tell stories
about Germany after World War I. Residents of Hamburg had to have a wheelbarrow full of
money to buy a loaf of bread. We didn't learn ‘till much later that my dad never knew his father.
Hamburg is a port city with lots of sailors. There's a Sau Pauli district where there are a lot of
night clubs, particularly, I understand, before World War II. His mother was Elisabeth Picker.
My mother's parents also came from Germany. My grandfather Becker came from Hamburg,
also. Because my father knew my grandfather's brother in Hamburg, … he came to visit the
Becker family. And that's how he met my mother. My grandmother Becker came from Bavaria,
in southern Germany. My grandparents were married in New York City on January 23, 1894.
Later they moved to Union Hill, New Jersey, where they had a hall in which they served meals,
sort of catered parties. My grandmother was a fabulous cook. My mother grew up there in
Union Hill. The Union Hill business failed, so the family moved to New York City. My mother
and one of her sisters had attended business school after graduating from grade school. My
mother was very proficient in shorthand and an excellent typist so she was able to get a job. Her
sister found a job in accounting. Her older sister and my grandmother lived with a family as
household servants. The youngest sister was still in school at that time. When my father and
mother were married on March 31, 1918, they lived in New York City in a small apartment. I
was born in New York City on February 3, 1919 ... across the street from NYU, which was
uptown at that time. My grandfather used to take me to the Bronx Zoo. According to my
parents, I don't remember any of this, I could read. My grandpa bought me little cards that said
rhinoceros, tiger, and elephant, etc. and I could read all those cards, [laughter] before the age of
two. That's the story that was told to me, and I don't know whether it's true or not. [laughter] …
When I was about a year-and-a-half, my sister was about six months, we moved to Hillsdale,
New Jersey. My father and mother bought a house there, and my father commuted into New
York City. He worked for Noe's as a lamp salesman. I grew up in Hillsdale; it was a real
suburban town, about 2,000 people. We had a relatively small piece of property, fifty by 150, I
believe. It was a quiet street, a dead end street. We had good friends on the street. The neighbor
girl next door, Florence, and the girl at the end of the street, Norine, and two children up on the
hill. At the end of the street was a big hill. It was wonderful to play on because it didn't go
anywhere. Now it does, of course. It's been built up. Also, there were woods beyond there and a
stream. I used to love to go in the woods and play things like Indians, and build camps, clearing
out a place in the woods. There was a family of older girls that lived around the corner, and they
used to, you know, be helping us. We liked that very much. Then I went to school. … School
was about a mile away, and we came home for lunch. We got out ten minutes early at lunch

2

time, so we'd have time to walk home and walk back. I think when I got into kindergarten, I
could already read. They put me in first grade. I loved school, and I loved to read, and I went to
the library. Then in sixth grade, I was reading about labor disputes and we had a teacher named
Miss Walker. She was very strict on discipline, and she used to say if the boys or the girls
behave better, the better behaved could have more time at recess, or something like that. I felt
she was unfair to the girls because when we won, which was often, she'd forget the reward.
However, when the boys won, she gave them an extra recess. So I organized a strike. [laughter]
That month I got my report card and I had As in everything except deportment, where I had a D.
The school decided that I was too big for my britches. They put me in the seventh grade. We got
promoted in the middle of the year, so that made me graduate in January instead of in June.
Among other things, I like to draw and paint. By some lucky chance, I was not really that good,
but I won an honorable mention or a third place award or something for a poster I did. So the art
teacher thought I should go to a different school than the high school that was ordinarily used.
So I went to Westwood High School, instead of Park Ridge High School, where everybody else
went. And I went in the middle of the year. It was a big adjustment. I liked school and I loved
to read, so the academics weren't a problem. But, I didn't make friends as quickly as I thought I
might. I joined a Girl Scout troop, and I had very good close friends, and I loved being a Girl
Scout. I loved going to Girl Scout camp. One summer I went to Camp Andre with girls from all
parts of the USA. I also worked on the school paper, sang in the glee club and appeared in plays.
I liked drama. When I was a senior, I was in a contest to decide who would be the editor of the
school paper. Three contestants each put out an issue, and I was chosen to be the editor. The
name of the paper was The Phoenix. The mythical phoenix, as you know, rose again from the
ashes. Towards the end of the senior year, we went to the Columbia Journalism Conference, and
our paper won first in the category for schools like Westwood. So that was pretty special, and
the fellow who was assistant editor, who was a good friend, went with me. It was my first big
date, we went to see the movie 42nd Street that night. It was very special. Lullaby of Broadway
always could bring Hal Fry to mind. What else did I do? I was on the debating team. We never
knew until right before the debate whether we would be addressing the stated question positively
or negatively. (One year the question was whether radio should be government sponsored.) We
used the same facts either way, just emphasized them differently. The depression affected many
people. The debate coach supplemented his teacher's salary by ushering at the movies. I didn't
go to the junior prom. I was asked by one boy, but he wasn't one of the big wheels, which I
seemed to feel wasn't whom I wanted to go with, so I declined. Then when I was asked by
somebody else, I felt I couldn't go. But I did go to the senior dance, I think with Halleck. That
was fun. I graduated second in the class. We had numerical grades at Westwood High. Mine
was ninety-six point three and Elsie Blank's was ninety-six point five, so she was the
valedictorian, and I was the salutatorian. I gave the opening address at the graduation. I don't
remember much about it, except that it was the 300th anniversary of the Boston Latin School,
and I started it off with something about the smell of onion soup pervading the air. [laughter] I
don't know why I ever used it, but I've always been eager to use graphic descriptions when I
write, and that's what I remember about the speech. I also won the Math prize. Those were the
Depression years. In my early years in high school, my father was doing very well, that was
when the stock market was booming. He was making, I don't know what exactly, but I had

3

horseback riding lessons and piano lessons, first with my aunt, then another teacher. We had a
car, things were going well. But then … the company that my father was with went out of
business. People don't buy lamps when they can't buy food. Lamps are not something essential.
Then he went into business with somebody else, and that business collapsed, too. So my father
was unemployed, my sister was diagnosed with osteomyelitis, and there was no health insurance.
People who have grown up with some kind of health insurance don't realize what a devastating
blow that was because my family didn't have money. My mother borrowed from her sisters. My
sister was gravely ill; … they used maggots on the bone that was affected. That was the new
technique to eat away the diseased portion of the bone, and fortunately, she recovered although
she still has a scar on her leg. It was no longer easy for us to finance things so … I looked at
Rutgers. It was then New Jersey College for Women. I don't know whether they would have
offered me a scholarship, but it didn't seem that we had enough money to do it. Then I got a
scholarship of fifty dollars at Bergen Junior College. I went one year. … The first half of the
semester, I thought it was just a great picnic. My grades weren't so good. I worked in the library
and I was taking typing and shorthand, as well as academic subjects, because it opened the
possibility of a job that women could get, a secretarial job. During my high school years, I was a
correspondent for the Westwood, New Jersey newspaper covering school news; I got paid a
nickel an inch. In the summer before I went to junior college, I worked at this newspaper. Most
of the time I did social news. I did some police work. I did some going to town meetings. I was
quite naïve. I went to a meeting one time, and they were discussing garbage. It seemed very
stupid to me, and I didn't report it adequately enough. So our story was lacking the most
important element of that meeting. I have since learned that garbage is a very important subject.
[laughter] Here in Vermont I've been serving on the Household Hazardous Waste task force.
Anyway, I ended up the year at the top of my class. I took Spanish. I was on the swim team. I
swam, mostly breast stroke in competitions, but I didn't compete too much because I had to go to
work. So I worked for the newspaper doing social news, and I worked in the Five and Ten. I
think we figured out I got fifty cents an hour. When my sister was ill, I gave her a transfusion
and went back to the Five and Ten to work and collapsed on the floor. That was my first and last
donation of blood. At the end of the year, our family finances were very bad, and I had to decide
what to do. I went into New York to meet with my aunt and ask her if she could loan me money.
And she said, “Why don't you go to work instead, and help your parents?” At the time it was
quite a blow. Anyway, I went to an employment agency that afternoon. I had an interview for a
job as secretary to the advertising manager of a trade journal for the paper industry. And I
walked into that interview, and here's this man with all these freckles on his bald head, which
struck me funny, so I think I smiled. Anyway, I got this job for fifteen dollars a week. I gave my
mother eight dollars. I had to pay transportation from Hillsdale to New York City. At that time,
you could have lunch for fifteen cents at Chock Full O' Nuts. You could have orange juice and
cream cheese on whole-wheat raisin bread and a cup of coffee, all for fifteen cents. So things
were a little cheaper. I worked there, and I decided to go to school at night. I think I also had
thought about living with my grandmother, but I decided against that. I was quite young. I was
sixteen when I graduated high school, so I was just seventeen [at that time]. I continued my
studies at Bergen Junior College by taking courses at night. I only attended night school one
year. I had extra bus-fare to get to school after work and back home after school. Also, I had to

4

eat lunch and supper in New York City. I was also giving my parents eight dollars a week, and
my fifteen dollars a week salary just did not stretch. I recall one cold night when I traded a pack
of cigarettes for a scarf. It was cold, and I had a walk of about a mile from the bus station to my
home.
KP: How did your parents feel about your decision to work, to help out?
MG: Well, they needed the money and children helping out was part of their upbringing. My
father was working in the WPA. Finally, he got a job in a restaurant, washing dishes and
cleaning up. When my sister recovered, she went back to school; she had lost a year of school.
My mother decided she would go to work. She worked in New York City at the branch office of
a North Carolina hosiery firm. And then I gave eight dollars at home. My sister finished school,
and also went to work and we began to do pretty well. I worked at … the trade paper, The Pulp
and Paper News. The editor of the paper used to go to Artists and Writers on 40th Street. We
were on 40th Street & Broadway, right catty-corner across from the Met. And Artists and
Writers was on 40th Street. That was a pub. The editor drank, and I sometimes had to go to the
Artists and Writers and bring him back, or at least remind him that he ought to come back. In the
meanwhile, my boss was stealing the business from him. So the situation was not what I thought
it should be. The other thing that bothered me was that he wrote columns for the paper. He
would give me the Wall Street Journal and other magazines, and then I would write these articles
for him. So I decided to look for another job. I got a job in Associated Aviation Underwriters. I
was using an electric typewriter, and I typed policies. I was a policy writer and no typing mistake
on policies were permitted because they were legal documents. It was better paying, and it was
downtown on John Street. After a while, I did pretty well. Then there was another girl in the
department, and we went out a lot. My work suffered a little; one day the employment manager
said to me, “You know you're a bright girl, too many late evenings are not necessary.” I decided
to restrict my evenings out and, as a result, received commendations for my work. I went on
blind dates with her. It was a date to skate on a small pond, even when the ice was cracking. It
would be sort of wavy. Later Hillsdale built a big pond, and I would skate a lot. I also went
roller-skating in rinks. I loved to skate. I also liked to dance. To return to my date, we were
going to go skating, and this gal arrived with her date and my blind date. She had so many
clothes on that she could hardly stand up. She was a short girl. When we got to Lake Sebago,
my blind date was a good skater, so we went out and skated way across the lake. But this gal
stayed in the house there and kept warm. She couldn’t move because she had so many sweaters
and jackets on. Then there was the war.
I forgot to tell you that when I was a senior there was an essay contest sponsored by the
American Legion. I wrote about World War I and those who profited from the war--the arms
manufacturers, the armament companies. I concluded my paper with Robert W. Service’s poem,
“When our children’s children shall talk of war as a madness that cannot be; when we thank our
God for the grief that is past and blazon from sea to sea. In the name of the dead, the banner of
peace, that will be victory.” I won the medal for my essay. I’ve always been sort of anti-war
since and all the young men were being drafted including junior underwriters. I was twenty-one.
They decided that I could be a junior underwriter. That was quite an experience for me. I

5

studied insurance law and aircraft designs, so that I could perform my job effectively. I was
privileged to smoke at my desk. That was one the perks. [laughter] Now I don’t smoke, but
everyone smoked at that point. You know, we weren’t aware of the dangers of smoking. And
one of the things that the GIs gave to the French, as they helped to free them, and progress across
France, was cigarettes. So I had the job. Part of my job was to meet with the insurance brokers.
My boss, who was the senior underwriter, said, “Now you’re young, and you’re going to go to
cocktail parties which these brokers attend. Just remember you’re working for Associated. You
have to be on your toes. So take a drink and put it down. Look like you’re drinking, put it down,
and when they give you another one, take another one, smile. Just don’t drink them." [laughter]
That was good advice; I’ve followed it frequently. That’s where I was working when I met Wes.
I was the first woman underwriter on John Street, a street where numerous large insurance
companies had their headquarters. When I became an underwriter, it was decided I should sign
my name "M. E. Picker," instead of "Marie E. Picker." This worked okay until I began receiving
phone calls. Irate brokers had to be convinced that I was the underwriter and not Mr. M. E.
Picker's secretary. After several such episodes, it was decided I should sign my name, "Marie E.
Picker." When I got married in 1944, Associated decided I should continue to use my maiden
name so I would not have to explain another name change to the brokers we worked with. To do
so was unusual then, although it's fairly common now.
KP: Now being that your parents or grandparents are from Germany, had you heard of Hitler
through the ‘30s, and do you remember talking about events in Germany at the time?
MG: No, as I told you, my father said that conditions in Germany after World War I were
terrible. People didn't have enough to eat. When people are hungry, and they can't seem to get
out of their present condition, no matter how hard they work, they are more willing to listen to a
leader who blamed somebody else for their problems. Most of the Germans didn't know, I think,
at least in the beginning, of the horrors that were going on. Many of them had Jewish friends. …
We visited my grandfather’s sister’s children, who were the same age as my parents, more or
less, and their children in Hamburg after World War II.
KP: Really?
MG: We visited them. Annie, Heinz, Frieda and I often talked about the war. One, a cousin of
my mother's, Henry Brammann, was the captain of a Standard Oil ship. He was in America
during World War I because the government kept his ship here. We also visited his son, and
another cousin was also on the ship. Hamburg was a port city, as you know, and many people are
connected with the sea. … Heinz was a pilot on the Elbe River. Frieda's husband, Willy, was
also on a ship, so they all had sea experience. Henry Brammann was here during World War I.
Also my father’s mother was still in Hamburg in World War II. I remember she died, but I don't
remember exactly when. … My father wanted to learn English when he came here. We didn't
speak German at home. He wanted to be an American, and, particularly with a salesman’s job,
he wanted to speak English. So we spoke English at home, and I studied Latin and Spanish. I
took some German in school, too. The only thing I didn't take was chemistry because I went only

6

three-and-a-half years to high school, and I never could figure out enough time, since I was
taking six major subjects, to get chemistry in. There wasn't a great deal of talk about Hitler. I
mean, my parents were certainly not impressed with Hitler. The struggle was, in those years, to
make ends meet. Later my sister had a job and things were beginning to get better for us. My
father then got a job in the Hotel Taft in New York. He was in charge of the linens. Indeed, he
worked there until he was eighty. And he had people under him. It turned out to be all right. My
mother had a not very well paying job. As a junior underwriter, I was making seventy-five
dollars a week. … I even taught a young man, who had been medically discharged, who was
hired at Associated. That was Charles, and we were good friends. He married a girl who worked
at Associated. I still hear from her. He has died. …
KP: Do you remember where you were when you heard about Pearl Harbor?
MG: Yeah, that was my sister's twenty-first birthday. We were having a birthday dinner, when
the news came over the radio. I had a date with a boy I met at junior college. We went out, I
think to a bar to dance. Everybody was just talking about Pearl Harbor. And he signed up right
away.
KP: Did he?
MG: He went into the Air Force. He went to Rome. My goodness, I forget his name. It will
come to me. I haven't thought about him for a long time, more than fifty years. Morris was a
student at Junior College. Bergen Junior College is now Fairleigh Dickinson University. And
that’s how I knew him, and that’s when we dated. We had a date on New Year’s Eve. We went
into New York City. That was December 31, 1941, and it was such a wild night. I’d never been
to Times Square before, and there were so many people. We had reservations at some hotel. All
of a sudden, there were so many people, and the soldiers and sailors were lifting girls so they
could see. We had reservations, and I can’t believe we knew where we were going. Eventually,
we got there, but it was just unbelievable the number of people, and, of course, so many of them
were servicemen in that New Year’s crowd. It was just sort of unbelievable. And that was a
long, long night. I think it was about two o’clock when we got back to New Jersey. He joined
the Air Force and was sent to Rome, N.Y., for basic training. And then he went off shortly after
that. And as I said, I expected that I would marry him, but somehow. He was fun to date. So
that was that.
KP: So, dating basically, you went on blind dates? You went to dances and ice skating and
those things you talked about before. Was that pretty typical of what a lot of the girls were
doing?
MG: I think so. I didn't usually go on blind dates. The one I described was the only one I
remember. I had other dates. Let's see. After my first year of junior college, when I was
seventeen, Norene Meyer, who used to live at the end of our street, she and her parents had
moved to New York. So I often visited her, and that's when we went roller-skating. At her home

7

in Hillsdale, which was really her grandmother's house, she had a date. And he brought a friend,
and I was at the house. There was Jimmy Gogarty, and I really fell in love with him. He wanted
to get married, and I didn't, and wanted to have sex and I didn't. At the time, I didn't know that
my father didn't know who his father was. But my mother was very insistent that one waited
until marriage for sex. So we did a lot of parking and smooching and necking and petting, and
stuff like that. Anyway, finally, we broke up, and he did get married after a while. I sometimes
visited my best friend at junior college, Arlene Wilders. She went on to graduate, but I only went
one year at night. Also I had met Jimmy, and that was on my mind. Plus, it was pretty difficult
on fifteen dollars a week to go to school, eat your supper, and get home at night on public
transportation. I used to sell cigarettes for a scarf. So I didn’t continue my education, but I did
keep very friendly with this gal. I still am a friend with her, and she lives now in Florida. And
she was going on a date, and her brother was going to be my date. Then Jimmy called me, and so
they came to the house, and I decided to go with Jimmy. And I always felt terrible about Robert
Wilder, but I’m sure he recovered. [laughter] And I did too.
KP: When did you meet Carl?
MG: Carl lived around the corner, and we used to bicycle. My sister and I bicycled, and he
bicycled. Well, because of gas rationing, we couldn't use the car very often. We used to even go
down to the grocery store, and I think he worked down in that store for a while. There was a
small supermarket, instead of just a small grocery store. When we were little, real little, we used
to go to the grocery store and get five cents worth of soup greens. We’d get a bag so big, … it
was all you could do to carry it. Of course we were young then. Carl used to bicycle a lot. His
family lived around the corner, and so he asked me to go out. We did a lot of double dating and
triple dating. There were two or three other couples, his brother and a girl and his good friend
and a girl. Also we used to bicycle, go off and bicycle all day long and stop somewhere and have
lunch or sandwiches or something. Or, we would go up to a lake and swim. I loved to swim. …
We'd picnic. As I said before, his brother got married, this other couple got married. We went to
the wedding. And then, we still continued to bicycle. I don't think the other couples bicycled as
much as we did. We really liked to bike ride. And so one October day, we became engaged.
There was an engagement party. I got a brown velveteen suit in honor of the occasion. And I
was taking some kind of photography course. I was also in a local community drama group.
Anyway, we started to do other kinds of dating. For some reason it just didn't seem right. I just
didn't feel that I wanted to spend the rest of my life with him, so I gave him back the ring. And I
decided that I wouldn't get married during the war. Everybody was getting married, and I
thought I’d decided to marry him just because he was going away to war. It wasn't really the
thing to do to get married because somebody was going off to the war. At the time, I was a
volunteer as a Red Cross aide. I used to train after work. I think it was a six week course, two
evenings a week and all day on Saturdays. I worked in the Columbia Presbyterian Medical
Center hospital two nights and one weekend day, in addition to my job. So that was time
consuming. It was also interesting. I learned to do a lot of nursing routines. As Red Cross
Nurses’s Aides, we did all nursing chores, but were not permitted to dispense medicines. ...

8

-------------------------------------END OF SIDE ONE, TAPE ONE--------------------------------------MG: … Later I worked in psychiatrics.
KP: Were a lot of the patients people returning from the war, or was it mostly civilians at the
time?
MG: The patients were mostly civilians. I didn't work in obstetrics, but I worked in gynecology,
and on the medical and surgical wards. Sometimes there was only one registered nurse and me to
take care of a twenty bed ward. Later I worked in the psychiatric wing of the hospital for a while,
and that sort of got to me. I had not learned how not to take the patient’s problems home. I got
to worrying about the people who were patients. A young girl, who had multiple sclerosis, was
just about my age. Also [there was a] man who would try and take a knife to himself. You had
to be very careful not to leave any sharp instruments near him. There was a gal that was a
compulsive eater of parsley. She kept saying, "Could you bring me some parsley?" That was
strange. Anyway, I got a little upset, so then I was transferred. I worked in the Red Cross blood
bank. That was somewhat easier. We’d test people's blood to make sure that the hemoglobin
count was up. (The nurses did the actual taking of the blood.) Then you had to watch the donors
afterwards. Even big men sometimes need a little help, a little refreshments and occasionally
rest. At the time I was quite thin, and I never could manage to give blood. Either I was under
110 pounds or my blood count wasn't up, so I never gave blood after that blood transfusion that I
gave to my sister. [laughter]
KP: So then, the fateful weekend that you meet Wes?
MG: Right.
KP: So how long were you dating before you became engaged?
MG: Well, we met on June 6, 1943. I was working for Associated Aviation Underwriters on
John Street in downtown New York City. One lunchtime, as I was walking on the street, I met
Grace Hughes, whom I’d known in high school. We stopped to chat. She told me she was
married to Bud Westervelt and that he was in the Army. Because she was lonely without him,
she invited me to spend the weekend with her in Cresskill, New Jersey We settled on the first
weekend in June 1943. There was gas rationing during the war so I went to Cresskill, New
Jersey, from New York City by train. For the first and last time in my life, I didn’t pack any rain
gear for the weekend visit. Imagine our surprise when Bud came home unexpectedly on Sunday
morning. A third person in a one-bedroom apartment was hardly appropriate. To go home to
Hillsdale, I would have had to take a train back to New York City and another train or bus back
to Hillsdale, New Jersey So, Bud’s mother suggested that I spend Sunday night there. She
invited relatives who lived down the street. (Wes’ mother and Bud’s father were sister and
brother.) Wes came also and spent much of the evening talking to me. It was June 6, 1943. The
following morning, it was pouring. As I contemplated walking in the rain, Wes arrived in his

9

Model-T and drove me to the station. I was wearing a yellow dress made of synthetic fiber.
When I arrived at Penn Station in New York City, it was pouring and there were no taxis. So, I
walked across town in the rain, leaving my luggage in a locker. By the time I arrived at
Associated Aviation Underwriters, my short yellow dress had become a blouse. I had to send the
office boy back to the station to get my suitcase for a change of clothes. A year later Wes
recalled our first meeting. His letter from Camp Wheeler, Georgia, describes how we fell in
love. (See Letters 16 & 19)
KP: That was after you graduated then?
MG: Right, after Wes graduated. I didn’t graduate from Rutgers until 1967. I didn't know Wes
when he was at Rutgers. He dated other girls, some of whom I even met later. One thing he
always remembered was that at his junior prom at Rutgers, Sammy Kaye played. He liked to
dance. I often remember our first date. After that rainy day, when I went to work, he said he’d
call. He didn't know that my dress was shrinking, until much later. He said he'd call from
Cresskill and he did indeed. … He had a job as Assistant County Agent in Passaic County, as an
extension agent. He was a poultry major as an undergraduate. (See Letters 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
9, 10, 11, & 12) I think I met him in Paterson. And he took me to a restaurant where they made
wonderful pea soup. I don't remember what else we had, but we did have pea soup. Sometimes
we went to the movies. Wes came to our house, and I went to his house and met his folks. The
Westervelt family originally owned a tract from the Hudson to the Hackensack. When Wes was
born, they lived in the family house, a farm house on County Road. Through the years, a lot of
property had been sold, but it was still quite a big piece of property. Later, they moved to the
house on Hillside Avenue. I guess it was built in the 1920s. They had a grandfather's clock and
all sorts of other clocks. I remember the first time I spent the night; I slept in a bedroom, and all
night long these clocks were chiming. I couldn't believe so many clocks, all chiming the hours.
And they didn't all chime at once. At Christmas, Wes got his induction notice. We sort of
decided we would not get engaged. We would wait until after the war. That was part of my
decision; I was going to wait. I had a job, and I had my nurse’s aide commitment. He went off
to basic training at Camp Wheeler. I sent him things while he was down there. He loved lemon
meringue pie. I remember, I sent a lemon meringue pie, and he said it arrived in good condition.
I never heard him say that it didn't, even many years later, so I don't know. But everybody
thought it was absolutely unbelievable that a lemon pie could get all the way to Georgia in one
piece. … We wrote letters all the time, and then we decided that we would get married when he
had his leave. That was the end of my commitment. We talked about it, and decided we didn't
want to have a child until after the war. You never can be one hundred percent sure about
pregnancy, but we decided to get married. I think we had about six weeks to plan because we set
the date for when his leave would occur, when basic training was over. The wedding date was
set for June 17, 1944, because that was when he was going to be home. (See Letter 17) I think
we had a few days at home before that, during which we bought an engagement ring and a
wedding ring for him, which I now can't find. This is not the original wedding ring, I lost the
diamond in the swimming pool. Wes bought me another one, I lost that diamond in another
swimming pool. Now I don't wear it in the swimming pool. [laughter] Anyhow, he had

10

something like two weeks, so we didn't have a long time. For a honeymoon we went into New
York City, where my aunt worked at the Dorset Hotel. Wes’ cousin Bud came home on leave.
So Bud and Grace met us in New York City one afternoon. We saw the movie Going My Way,
which had just opened. We rode on a carriage in Central Park, walked and listened to a concert
in Central Park. I like New York. Of late years we went often to the opera and to jazz things. In
1944 we had three or four days in New York City. Then a day with his folks and a day with my
folks, before he went back. (See Letter 20) Presumably, he was going overseas. … About a
week later, I think it was the Fourth of July, Cresskill, New Jersey, where Wes and his family
lived, was having a celebration of the 300th anniversary of the town. Wes' mother had her
mother's wedding dress, and it was decided that since I was slim, I could wear this wedding dress
because it had an eighteen inch waist. Wes’ sister Margie, took the corset and pushed me into it.
I put my hair up, and I went into town for this celebration, and all of a sudden, who comes
walking down the street but Wes. I ran up the street in the corset thing with this long skirt.
[laughter] It probably was funny. It happened that he was put on a troop ship which, apparently,
the ship was rammed by something, and so they were sent back to Camp Kilmer, where
Livingston College is now. (See Letter 24) Because they were going to be there for, (they didn't
know how long,) until another ship could be readied or repairs were made. During the war, you
didn't ever know really what was happening ... because they were not to tell you. The soldiers all
went AWOL each evening as long as they got back by morning, which was all right because they
weren't really doing anything. They were just waiting. So he came up on the Fourth of July, and
I think he came up three or four times after that. … Then all of a sudden he didn't come;
obviously he was on his way to Europe on the boat. (See Letters 25 & 26) We corresponded.
He had an APO number. Wes was a reserve. In other words, ... their unit replaced some of those
that had gone to France on D-Day. June the 6th was D-Day. With the landing on the beaches of
Normandy, Patton's army was going across France. Wes went, as most of the reserves did, first
to England. (See Letters 27 & 28) We heard from him, and he got my letters. And then he went
across the Channel and joined Patton's army, the Third Army. … They weren't allowed (the
letters that were censored) to say exactly where they were. I know he had a leave in Paris. I don't
think he wrote about it. Anyway, he went out with some buddies, and they went into a bistro or
something, and he drank creme de mint. He got a little sick. [laughter] He also met a very nice
man, a Frenchman, and he had studied French, so he could communicate pretty well. Anyway,
the French soldier gave him the French Medal of Honor. He tried to tell me where he was. He
would write that was following the trail of The Three Musketeers and ask me to remember Giles
of the Star, giving me references so we could trace his progress with the news reports, which
were somewhat indicative of where Patton's army was. (See Letters 29, 30 & 31) In October I
didn't get any letters, and I got a telegram that Wes was “Missing In Action.” Then the letters
that I wrote started coming back with military stamps on them. Some of them said "Missing In
Action," some of them said, "Killed In Action." I don't think there was any intention to deceive; I
think the wrong stamp got on them. We didn't know where he was, and, obviously, I couldn't
write any more letters, since there was no place to write to and the letters that I had written were
coming back. So what had happened to Wes? … We didn't learn until later, that he was sent on
a scouting party on October 9, 1944, and they went out to the fortresses that were outside of
Nancy, France. They were in what they thought were evacuated fortresses. All of a sudden, they

11

were surrounded by the Germans. So they were captured. There was not much point in trying to
shoot all the Germans. They would have just been shot themselves. It was a platoon, a small
group of ten or less. They were taken by the Germans and put … in a temporary camp, which
was not pleasant, guarded by storm troopers. Then they went on a train up to Stettin to a prisoner
of war camp. While they were on the train, it was strafed by planes. This camp was on a farm, a
German farm, where they grew potatoes. … I guess they didn't grow much else at that time.
Anyway, they allowed enlisted men who were the prisoners to work, if they wanted to. Since
Wes was a private, not an officer, he worked, preferable to sitting back all day. The food wasn't
much. I guess they had mostly potato soup and brown bread. They had a guard who was
formerly in the army, but now at home. Maybe he had been injured. He and his wife were
managing the farm and the prisoner of war camp. They may have had other guards. Anyway, it
was Christmas there, and the guard had a son, who was a prisoner of war in the United States.
On Christmas, he came into the prisoners' barracks with a stollen, a German Christmas cake that
we always had at our home and that Wes, of course, had had the previous Christmas at our house.
My grandmother made it as long as she lived. It's a rich yeast dough. You roll it out and put all
the goodies like raisins, cinnamon and citron in the middle. Then you fold it up like swaddling
clothes, bake it, it’s called German stollen. That's the way our family makes it, and that's the way
this woman made the cake. So they had cake, and the guard played the harmonica, and they sang
the Star-Spangled Banner, and Christmas songs and the German anthem. So for a little while,
Christmas was celebrated. They all wished for the war to be over. … In the spring, the Russians
were moving from the East, and the Americans were moving from the West, and it became clear
to the Germans that they were not going to win the war. Basically, they didn't have any supplies.
They didn't have enough food, they didn't have gasoline and other supplies. So they evacuated
the camp, and the prisoners and the German people, started moving to the West, because the
Russians were coming from the East. The Germans felt they would rather surrender to the
Americans than to the Russians. The Germans lost a lot of men on the Russian front. This
cousin, whom I told you about, the granddaughter of my grandfather’s sister, lost her husband on
the Russian front, which I didn't know at that time. They walked across Germany, many
Germans and prisoners of war. They slept in barns when they could and ate what they could.
When they got to the Elbe River, they were repatriated by the American soldiers. (See Letter 35)
And all of a sudden, those prisoners were free, and most of the Germans were civilians at this
point. They were registered by Army personnel. The only time Wes was monitored by German
army personnel (storm troopers) was when he was first captured. As I said, that was a very
unpleasant situation, close to the front lines. The prisoners of war were repatriated. (See Letter
34) They were put on an Army jeep, taken to an American base camp. The Army wasn’t wise
about feeding ex-POWs. They, after all, had been without an adequate diet for at least six to
eight months, some of them for longer periods. And they gave them mashed potatoes and ice
cream, and all sorts of rich foods. … When Wes came back from the Army, he was the heaviest
he ever was, before or since. [laughter] But he could hardly walk up the street. And when we
went to the rehabilitation center in August, every one of those prisoners of war was ill. They had
stomach disorders.
So now I'll go back. We didn't hear anything from Wes after October. … At Christmas I
got a bonus from Associated, so I went up town, and I bought a St. Mary's blanket, a beautiful,

12

long, white, wool blanket, and I don't remember what else, presents from Wes to me. And
something from me to him. At home in Hillside, we decorated the tree and celebrated; I was sure
that he had to be alive. All of a sudden, early in February, the postman called my mother at work
and said, “There is a letter from Wes,” and you can't imagine what the letter said. (See Letter 33)
The letter said that the lady in this house brought us a Christmas stollen. [laughter] … It was
from a prisoner of war camp. It didn't say where, obviously, or anything. Later I learned that he
was receiving Red Cross packages. Among the things he received in the Red Cross packages
was a picture Home To Thanksgiving. When we were in Arkansas later, I ordered that picture.
But I'm getting ahead of the story. [laughter] … So then I knew he was alive, a prisoner of war.
I think I even notified the War Department. And then after a while, they sent me another
telegram notifying me that he was a prisoner of war. I got a few letters from him through the Red
Cross, including earlier postcards. (See Letter 32) [laughter] He was cutting wood in the forest
and working with the potato crop and things like that.
V-E Day in New York City was just unbelievable. Everybody went out on the street, and
we danced on the street. I remember being lifted up by the sailors and jumping around and
hugging everybody: everybody was happy. [laughter] It was just a really big celebration. And
then Wes came home a few days before our first wedding anniversary. We heard him first on the
radio. (See Letter 36) He was given leave for the summer and was told to report in late August
to Asheville, North Carolina, to a rehabilitation center to be reassigned. At Associated Aviation
Underwriters I had a job that I enjoyed and a salary that was pretty good. However I wanted to
have a leave of absence. So I went to my boss and he said, “Oh, yes,” but the higher up man in
the company said, “No.” They had too many people who took leaves of absences and didn't
come back. The secretary of the head of the department, who didn't take a leave, was divorced.
So I decided I would quit. And then I was told that if I wanted to, I should go and see them.
Maybe I could get my job back. They just wouldn't give me an indefinite leave. They would
have given me a one month, or a two month, but not indefinitely. Well, anyway, that was my
decision. So we were both home. We had the whole summer. And Wes improved, as I told you.
At first, he couldn't walk up the street. … And he had these nightmares. He would scream at
night. It was a mixed joy, but we worked together. Life was a little more normal. We had
friends and relatives to visit. Wes' brother didn't go to the war at all. He had small children, so
he was home. Bud got home, as well as other friends. We picnicked and swam and did all the
things you do in the summer. Wes improved. One day we were visiting a friend of mine, just a
few houses down, with several other couples. We were having some drinks and some food and
whatever. That was the day the US dropped the atom bomb on Hiroshima. That was very scary.
We all had really mixed emotions. Everybody wanted the war to be over, but to kill so many
people, innocent civilians. Actually at that time we didn't know much about the number killed.
It just seemed unbelievable. Later there was V-J Day. That was a big celebration. Then the
government lifted the restrictions on gasoline purchases, (gas was rationed during World War II),
so we decided we could drive to Asheville. If Wes was sent overseas, I would come home, or if
he was stationed in this country, I could go with him, and we'd have the car to go wherever he
was going. So we went to Asheville, North Carolina, a beautiful resort which the Army had
commandeered for rehabilitation with a whole lot of other prisoners of war, including a man with
whom I worked at Associated, who had gone off to war and had also been a prisoner. I met

13

Martin, who I had dallied with a little bit before I met Wes. He was married, and we used to
walk together from Associated, which is by the East River, to the Hudson, where we would take
either the ferry or the trains to New Jersey. Sometimes we'd stop for a drink. That was not so
good, particularly since he had a wife and children, which I pointed out to him, and we gave that
up. He was very nice, and we were very compatible. Fortunately, we stopped the relationship
before it got too far. He and his wife was there. She was very nice. I had met her at that point.
Every time we went to a meal, … we'd all come and sit down at the table, and you'd see the men
walking out. They'd all be getting sick to their stomach, so that by the end of the meal, there
were mostly women. It was a really big problem, probably caused by the fact that they were
given too much food at first, plus the physical, emotional and mental stress of being a POW. The
doctor that we saw, the specialist at Burlington, when Wes was diagnosed for Alzheimer’s, said
that it is possible that this kind of stress, (physical, emotional, and mental,) might contribute to
the onset of Alzheimer’s Disease. When Wes went to apply for the veterans benefits, the doctors
there said many, certainly not all, but particularly Vietnam War veterans suffered similar
dementia problems.
KP: Wow.
MG: … As a result of that kind of stress, they may be diagnosed with Alzheimer’s, later though.
There’s not enough data to prove it.
KP: There's a correlation?
MG: There seems to be some correlation. Anyway, Wes was quite sick at every meal, and so he
went to the doctor on the post in Asheville. I don't know what I was doing. The Army had
activities for the wives, so I was probably on one of those bus tours. I came back for lunch, and
he came in and he was high. I thought he had been drinking. I didn't know what to do. We went
to lunch, and this girl comes into the dining room with a bikini on, and in a loud voice Wes says,
“Don't let me ever see you walk into the dining room dressed in a bikini.” [laughter] I would
have cheerfully rolled right under the table. He was talking loudly, but he ate all his lunch. We
went back to the room, he laid down on the bed, and he was thrashing. Finally he went to sleep,
and he was still thrashing. I remembered my nursing training and tied him in the bed because I
was afraid he'd fall off. Then I went to see the doctor. So I went to the doctor. I said to the
doctor, “I don't know what is wrong with my husband. He went to see you this morning and now
he's acting as though he’d been drinking heavily.” … Well, it turned out they had given him
morphine, and he had had a very unusual reaction. Then the doctor said to me, “It's partly
physical that your husband is suffering all these upset stomachs. It's also partly mental and
emotional.” He said, “You could help him if you keep saying, ‘You’re all right, we're going to
eat breakfast and then we're going to do this,’ and don't watch him. If he starts to feel sick, say,
‘Why don't we go out and take a walk?’ Do something to help him, if you can, to get over this.”
So, I tried to take the doctor’s advice, and it worked with varying degrees of success; Wes
seemed to get better. Wes was re-classified. He was sent to Camp Joseph Robinson in Little
Rock, Arkansas. I think we had two weeks at Asheville. It was very nice. We had trips around

14

North Carolina and we went to the Vanderbilt mansion. There were parties and special programs
to make you feel better about life. Then we started off for Arkansas in our car, which we were
glad we had. Oh, and the other thing is, the Army didn't pay Wes. You know his name is
Westervelt, Griffin. Westervelt is his family name. Well, it seems in the accounting department,
the Army could never figure out which it was, Westervelt Griffin or Griffin Westervelt. As a
consequence, they would red line his name, so he was not getting paid. Wes had hoped to get
money when he came home from being a prisoner of war. We traveled West. I remember, we
got to Memphis, Tennessee, and then we crossed the Mississippi. It was a gorgeous evening.
And the cotton fields just stretched out flat, and it looked like the stars were right on the horizon.
If you walked far enough, you could pick one up in your hands. It was very beautiful. The
cotton looked so pretty. And we got to Little Rock, and Wes went to camp. We had to find a
place to live. I couldn't live in the barracks with Wes, so we went to the Army’s housing
assistance office. We were sent to a great family. They offered us a room plus breakfast and
dinner for fifteen dollars a week. So we had a bedroom. The Grant family included a mother
and father and their daughter had a baby, so the daughter was there with the baby. The baby’s
father had left. Mrs. Grant had a piano, and it was so dusty. It was just thick with dust, so I
asked her one day if I could play the piano. And she said, “Oh, sure, if you want to clean it off. I
don't clean it off because nobody plays it.” That was a very funny thing. Whenever I get behind
in dusting, I think of her. Why dust it if nobody is going to use it? [laughter] So I dusted it off.
She was quite an unusual housekeeper. When she cleared the table, she would take a dinner dish
right from the table and put it on the back stoop, so the cat could have the leftovers. At the next
meal, out would go another plate, until there were several, and then the dishes had to come in and
get washed. Also, she would open up things like the cornmeal and the flour and not put the
covers back on, so cockroaches often appeared. It's a warm climate. The meals were good, but
they were real Southern. Sometimes I didn't care for having mashed potatoes and pork and
beans, with sweet potatoes as a vegetable and corn bread on the side. One day I said, “I'd like
some spinach.” Mrs. Grant agreed, saying it would be great to have some greens. Our next
dinner included mustard greens, which I did not like at all. But I ate some. I appreciated her
cooking “greens” especially for me.
---------------------------------------END OF SIDE TWO, TAPE ONE------------------------------------KP: Let's continue the interview on March 16th with Mrs. Marie Griffin.
MG: At Camp Joseph Robinson in Little Rock, Wes was assigned to personnel work, to evaluate
the records of other soldiers to determine where they could best be assigned. He found this work
enjoyable. When we arrived, we paid the fifteen dollars rent, and we had very little money left.
Of course, things weren't quite as expensive as now, but nonetheless, you can't drive a car
without gas, you can't eat lunch without some money, and he wasn't getting paid. So I called my
mother, and she sent us fifty dollars. Then I decided that I should get a job to support this
project. I had worked in aviation insurance, so I thought I'd go downtown and visit the insurance
companies. I think I called a broker that I had had some contact with, and he said that the
insurance people in Little Rock were having a luncheon and why didn't I come and then I'd meet

15

lots of people and I thought that would be fine. So I went to the lunch. I think I was the only
woman. And this broker friend introduced me and said I had been working in aviation insurance
and asked me to talk about it. Aviation insurance was new when I was working in it. We
covered all small planes, private planes, and we covered trip tickets, which was what you
purchased when you traveled on an airline at this time. You could buy trip tickets in addition to
your regular insurance because most policies did not cover air travel. Associated reinsured with
Lloyds of London, with Chubb and Son, and numerous other companies, which I don't remember
all of them right now. In the war, the government took a lot of private planes to use for training
purposes, and we had a contract with the government that covered these planes. We also covered
the training flights. One of the bad things about this contract was that there were some planes
that we deemed unsafe. We wouldn't insure them under normal conditions, but under the
contract, we had to insure them. One day, we received a report showing that a high school friend
of mine was training in one of those planes and was killed. We didn’t cover the personnel, the
government covered the personnel. But that was very sad news for me. We also covered the
testing of models in, first, the wind tunnel and, then, the flight. The way we did it was, you'd
look at all the specs, and you'd look at the wind tunnel tests of the model, and then determined
the price at so much a minute for how long it would stay up in the air. The price would go down
after every minute; we had to figure by how much. As Mr. Raines, my boss used to say, it's kind
of like a gamble. When you bet that the plane is going to stay up for fifteen minutes, does that
mean it’s going to stay up longer? Or should you bet only ten minutes? It was an interesting job.
I was the first woman underwriter on John Street and I think the youngest. That was quite a few
years ago; I was twenty-two. Anyway, I went to this Little Rock luncheon and talked about
aviation insurance, and how it was going to now grow because after the war, people could have
their private planes again, and there would be gasoline. Afterwards, Mr. Raines came up to me
and asked if I would come to his office for an interview. He said they had a job if I would be
interested. I tried not to be too eager, but I said I was interested, and I'd come the next morning.
So I came the next morning, and they didn't really need somebody for aviation because they
didn't have that much aviation work. But they could use somebody for automobiles and other
property involving typing and some writing of insurance. So he said, “When would you like to
start? You have to have the time to look around Little Rock.” I think it was a Thursday or
Friday. And he said, “Would a couple of weeks be good?” And I said, “I think I could probably
manage to come by Monday,” thinking, “How are we going to eat?” [laughter] It was lucky that
our fifteen dollars a week got us a breakfast and a dinner. So I got the job, and I worked with
very nice people, especially Madge Twiss. Every morning we had a coffee break. We used to go
to a little diner. And it just amazed me that all those people, for their coffee break, would have
chili and Coke.
KP: Wow.
MG: I never got around to having chili and Coke for my coffee break. But, we did enjoy living
in Little Rock: we lived there from September to December. We met also another nice couple.
The daughter had a little girl. She took us to visit some friends, Helen and Dallas Dolan; Dallas
was part Cherokee. They were just wonderful people. They also had a daughter. … We used to

16

visit them, and I would play the piano, and we would sing for hours on end. They were very
compatible, lovely friends. We also had Army friends. ... Wes still didn't get paid.
KP: Still?
MG: But I was making a salary that kept us afloat. … We decided that living in one room with
the Grants and her peculiar housekeeping. ... (For example, she would get ready to go to church
on Sunday. We'd have breakfast, and if there was anything left, it would go in the china cabinet.)
It was kind of a peculiar life, and I always worried about the food going bad or bugs. In a warm
climate, there are more bugs. We decided to see if we could find an apartment and we did. This
small apartment had a gas stove. At that time, the houses weren't air conditioned, and they didn't
have central heating. I've never been so cold as it was when it snowed in Little Rock. Because
the house was cold, and you had only this little heater. The bedroom was freezing. Anyhow, we
decided that we'd invite a few couples, Army friends, for a Thanksgiving dinner. We didn't have
very much silver, I mean, you know, we had silver at home, wedding gifts, but in Little Rock, we
had a small apartment that was furnished, sparsely, to say the least. But when you’re young like
that, such things don't bother you, you go ahead and invite people anyway. [laughter] Madge,
and this woman that I worked with, loaned me some pots and things to help me out. She and her
husband also became good friends of ours, and they had a little boy. Upstairs in the apartment
house, there was a lady who lived alone. She came downstairs and said she didn't feel good. I
looked at her, and she had a terrible fever. So I went up and helped her. I called the doctor for
her and took her temperature and gave her aspirin and got her medication. She paid for it, but we
got it for her and took care of her. By the day before Thanksgiving, she was feeling better, so we
were talking. She said, “How about it? I'll let you have my dishes and silver so you can set the
table and have it nice.” So she loaned us her dishes and we set a table for Thanksgiving. We
didn't have too many pots. Wes made a dishpan full of dressing. I never saw so much dressing.
We cooked the turkey and the dinner, and it turned out well. We had a wonderful time. We
returned her dishes, and we didn't even break any. But we had so much dressing that when we
decided to go home, (all of a sudden in early December the government decided that all prisoners
of war could be discharged, so we were going to go home,) we still had dressing. [laughter]
KP: How many times did he cook Thanksgiving dinner after that?
MG: [laughter] Oh, he helped all the time. He used to offer to help make the dressing and stuff
the turkey, but we didn't usually make that much. We didn't have a recipe book in Little Rock, I
think I called my mother and got some pointers. … Wes was always talking about the Home To
Thanksgiving picture that was in the Red Cross package. So I had sent to New York to order this
picture, and of course, it arrived two days before we were set to go home. So it was shipped all
the way to Little Rock, and then we had to pack it back in its box to go back home. We had a
small car, and in addition to the two of us and all our baggage, we had acquired things. Even
though we didn't have much money, we seemed to acquire a lot of stuff. We were bringing
another fellow home to Baltimore on our way, so obviously there were three of us and three
people’s bags, but we managed. We rode all the way and over the Appalachian Mountains and

17

into Baltimore. We had a good time at his home, and then we came home to New Jersey. I think
we went to Wes' folks first, and it was shortly before Christmas, and for some reason, I got a
terrible cold. My grandmother was ill, but it didn't seem wise for me to go to see my
grandmother when I was so sick. So, I didn't. My grandmother died right before Christmas. I
didn’t get to see her before she died. It was very sad. But we went to the funeral. Wes was a
wonderful help. I have a picture of my grandmother upstairs. When we came back to Cresskill,
Wes had to think about a job. He was thinking about a job, rather than I; that was part of the
culture. He could have gone back to Paterson and continued being an assistant county agent.
They told him to call. However, he went down to see Professor Helyar. He told him about the
work he had been doing at Robinson with personnel. Professor Helyar offered him a job, as
assistant to the dean, to help him in his work as director of resident instructing. So Wes had two
possibilities. We decided to take the Rutgers offer. At the time, I think he was making 3,600
dollars, which is what I was making at Associated when I quit. Salaries for professors and
administrators were very low at that time at Rutgers. With the GI Bill, there were many more
students. The other problem was that during the war, there was no new construction so there was
not much housing available. Wes was slated to start in New Brunswick the 1st of January,
actually, started work on the 2nd. We had a room in a house on Townsend Street, near the
College of Agriculture, with no cooking privileges. I forget how much it cost; it was more than
the Arkansas house. But it was comparable, even though we had no meals at the house and no
cooking privileges. So we had to eat all our meals out, but we had a place to sleep. We went
down on the 1st of January, in the evening, and Wes started working the following day. We
would go in the morning, a place to have breakfast. Anyway, I decided I had to get a job because
there was nothing much you could do in one room that was very constructive. I mean, I could
read, and I could walk around town, and there were social events. But … it seemed wise to get a
job, so that we'd have a little more money. I went down to the employment agency, and they sent
me out to Squibb for a job as a secretary to all these chemists. (I told you, I didn't study
chemistry.) So I went to see this man, Mr. Lott. He dictated this section with chemical formulas
to me, I typed it up and I thought, “Well, that ends that.” Then he said to me, "I've never seen
anybody do it as well." I absolutely thought I would fall through the floor. [laughter] Then he
said to me, “Your husband and you are just out of the Army, right?” I said, “Yes.” He said, “Are
you pregnant?” I said, “Oh, no.” You can't be pregnant when you only have one room to live in.
I’m absolutely not pregnant. He very definitely didn't want to hire anybody who was pregnant.
Fortunately, you can't say that now. But, at that time, it was perfectly possible. I had replied in
all honesty. The job was secretary to all the chemists who were working on streptomycin, which
was discovered by Dr. Waksman at Rutgers. Squibb was trying to make it commercially
available. They had already done that with penicillin. The building where we worked was right
next to where they were making penicillin. We had one car. Wes would drop me off at Squibb
and go on to the college. Squibb was right there near Route 1. I'd walk in and the smell of
penicillin was pretty potent. I'd come in and every Bunsen burner had coffee. I always managed
to have a cup of coffee and a donut, or something with somebody or another. The chemists were
not used to having a secretary. So Wes got his chemistry books, and I did a cram course on
chemistry so I would be familiar with the terminology and when they started talking, I would not
be a complete nincompoop. It turned out that was wise because in the beginning, since they

18

weren't used to having a secretary, they would write their own memos. What they principally had
me do was, when they'd have a weekly seminar to discuss their various investigations, and how
their experiments turned out, I had to record their comments and write the minutes of this
meeting. As I got to know something of chemistry, I understood more about their theories, which
made it much easier to write up reasonable minutes. About a week later, I’d come in, and I’d be
sick to my stomach. So I didn't know whether it was the fact that we ate in that greasy spoon for
breakfast, because we were still in this room, or whether it was the penicillin cooking that
bothered me. Penicillin has a very potent smell. A little later in the day, I was fine. Everybody
was very sympathetic. They wouldn't even bother me until the afternoon, “because the poor girl,
she was sick to her stomach.” I didn't even think too much about it, but the next time when we
went home, I said, “Maybe we ought to check with the doctor.” So I went to the doctor, and he
said to me, “There's nothing wrong with you that nine months is not going to cure.”
KP: Your boss must have loved that.
MG: So there I was. That was January. The baby was due in September. Anyway, I went and
told my boss. We were really pleased, after all, except that we thought we had better find another
place to live. So, I told him, and he said, “Well, why don't you work as long as you can?” I
mean, what else could he do? The chemists were all really pleased; they didn't care. Also, they
were getting ready to write papers, and what they needed was somebody to type these papers, and
that was my job then. Basically, to find another person at that point wasn’t feasible. I had been
truthful with Mr. Lott. I really didn't think I was pregnant. We found another apartment where
we cooked on a toaster oven, and that wasn't too satisfactory. Then there was somebody who
worked with Wes, who knew this family on Baldwin Street, and they had an upstairs apartment.
So we moved there, and that's where we lived until after Joan was born. There was a bedroom
and a kitchen and a bath and a backyard, so that was kind of nice. I think I worked until May,
and the baby was due in September. Do you want to go on with my life?
KP: I just want to talk about the both of you going back to school, returning to school. So now
you started your family at this point. Right now, we're at 1946, and at that time Wes went back
to school. Now how did that work for the two of you, did he go to school at night?
MG: Yes. He didn't go right away. Let's see, we were in this apartment on Baldwin Street, and
wait a minute, it wasn't Baldwin, the name of the people were Baldwin. And Joan was born soon
after we moved there. I took Joan to the public health clinic. That's a funny story, but, anyway,
my mother had always said you should nurse your baby. At the time, nursing your baby was not
a popular thing to do. It wasn't like it is now. It was my first baby, and New Brunswick was full
of young couples just like myself. Most of them were having babies. It was the beginning of the
baby boom but nobody called it that then. Lots of young women were having babies, and there
weren't many obstetricians, so my doctor at home in Hillsdale recommended me to an
obstetrician, Dr. Walker. I guess every other doctor from every other place recommended him,
too. When you went for your pre-natal checkup, there would be ten, twelve women in the office
and he’d say, "Okay, ladies, pick up your charts, get weighed, write it down on the chart." He

19

would see you individually about five minutes at the most. Of course, the fee for a baby was
about 100 dollars then, not as much as it is now, but nonetheless it seemed too brief. I remember
one time I had some complaint, my legs had swollen or something. The doctor said, “Stay off
your feet and cut down on salt.” And I said, "Is this a serious problem?" “Oh, no. It's not
anything serious.” [And I said], “Well, you know, it's my first, even if you've delivered
thousands.” After Joan was born, while I was still in Middlesex Hospital, I wanted to nurse the
baby. But, Joan didn't nurse easily, and of course at that time, I didn't have any experience
nursing. So at night, they would not bring the baby in, but I had plenty of milk. All of a sudden,
I was having a fever and all these lumps in my breast because the milk was collecting in the
breast and not being expressed. Dr. Walker came into the hospital, and you could hear him from
one end of the hall to the other. “This woman wants to nurse her baby, it's the best thing, and you
don't give her any time. Now I want a nurse in there every time she nurses.” After that I had a
nurse with me, and I nursed the baby, and they brought her in during the night. From then on, I
nursed all my children. When I went for my postnatal checkup, I said, “What about a
pediatrician?” And he said, “No problem. If you’re nursing your baby, there's not a problem.”
So I didn't go to a pediatrician right off. Dr. Walker weighed the baby and checked her over.
Also I took her to the public health clinic, and that worked fine until Joan fell out of her high
chair. Then I had to call a pediatrician, and we had a pediatrician from then on. Dr. Walker was
quite a character. He delivered four of our children. We'll not go into all the pregnancies. What
I was leading up to was that as a baby starts to walk and creep around, you need more space. So
in November, Professor Helyar took us out to the Phelps House in which students had lived
before World War II, which was on the campus. Students could live there for free, like Wes
lived in the Poultry Building when he was an undergraduate. These students worked on the
campus to pay for the room. … They could work in the dairy barns or they could work in an
office. They worked somewhere to pay for their room, and they cooked together so they saved
money. Dr. Helyar said he was thinking of renovating the Phelps House to house needy students.
He suggested we could have the main floor, and Wes would then be responsible for all the
students on the campus who were in that category of living on the Agriculture campus and
working to pay for their rooms. The college renovated this house, not a major renovation, but
making it livable once more. … There was a furnace in the basement, coal fired. And a hot
water heater, also connected to this coal fired furnace, and no bathroom on the first floor. The
college built a bathroom out of the wood shed. It was impossible to get tubs or many plumbing
things, so our neighbor in Hillsdale had a bathtub out in the backyard that he was thinking of
sinking into the ground to make a fishpond. He gave that to us, and the college sent a truck up
and picked up this tub. It was an enormous tub. I could put the three children in it at once. So
we got a tub and a sink and a commode, and had a bathroom. For the students, the college built a
shower in the basement. There was a great big kitchen, and stairs came down the one side, and
the students had to walk around and go to the basement on the other side, so the students had to
walk through the kitchen to go to the shower. We couldn't get a refrigerator because they weren't
being made yet. So we found an ice box, and we used ice. It was quite an interesting place.
There were sixteen students upstairs, and two of them were GIs. There was a little question, at
first, whether I was too young to live in a house with all those boys. Anyway, that was ironed out
very quickly. It was decided that I was mature enough. We shared a common front hall. We had

20

one bedroom and a sitting room and a little tiny room next to the kitchen, which became a
nursery, and then a kitchen and a bathroom out in the back. We had some funny experiences
there. There was a phone in the front hall, and it was shared by the students and us. But mostly
in the daytime I was the one who was home. One time, for some reason, the Phelps House
number was the prime number for Rutgers for long distance. This was in the early '50s, when
Robert was an infant. I would answer the phone, and they'd want the president of Rutgers, or the
provost, or the treasurer, or some other official. They'd call and ask, “Is this Rutgers?” And I'd
say, “This is the Phelps House on the Rutgers campus.” [They would say], “Well, I'd like to
speak to the president.” And I couldn't switch them anywhere. And one time, I remember, the
phone rang and I ran to it while I had the baby in the bathtub. I said, “Please call back in fifteen
minutes.” That finally triggered a response. I called the campus; we figured out why I was
getting all these calls. Somehow the wrong number was listed in Rutgers’ long distance directory
in the long distance place. We had sixteen students upstairs. Every now and then, we'd invite
them down to have supper. I would cook dinner for them. And they could eat like nothing I had
ever seen before. I didn't have any brothers, although I have always had a good appetite. One
time, I made coleslaw in a great big pan. And it went all around the table, and the fellow that
was sitting next to me hastily put a little coleslaw back in the dish, so there would be some for
me. I couldn't believe it. And another time I had a centerpiece of fruit, and they all sat down, we
had tomato juice or some first course, and by the time I came in with the main meal, the
centerpiece had vanished. One of those students, George Wright, who came from South Jersey,
used to say, “I bet you I could eat five pounds of hamburger in one sitting,” and I said, "George, I
believe you. I'm not going to cook five pounds of hamburger to prove it.”
KP: He was probably doing that to trick you.
MG: Anyway, we had fun. What else happened there? … There were cornfields down from the
house to Route 1. And sometimes we had tramps. One time this fellow came, asked if I could
give him something to eat. I was smart enough to know I had to keep strangers outside. I said,
“Sit down on the porch, and I'll bring you a sandwich.” Later on, we heard on the radio there was
an escapee from the prison, matching his description.
KP: Oh, no. [laughter]
MG: But he was perfectly nice and thanked me for the lunch and went on his merry way. I don't
know where he went. I assume they found him after a while. … There was one room that wasn't
fixed up. It was filled with old furniture. By this time we had three children, and were pushing
out the walls there. Luckily in the Phelps House we didn't have to pay anything. The college
fixed up the front room, which was a very pretty room. Then we could make the children's room
out of what had been our living room and use this room as our living room. One evening I was
ironing in that room, (Wes had gone to the campus for a meeting), and the boys were coming in
and out the front door. All of a sudden, this man comes in, walks in and sits down in the living
room. I said, “What do you want?” He just looked around and talked and you know, I got a little
uneasy. I kept thinking, “I have this iron in my hand.” … He said something about “the girls,”

21

and I said, “No, all these students are Rutgers men,” because … we had Rutgers men. He looked
at me. I didn't know what he wanted, and I was wishing one of the students would come into our
living room, but those that came in went right up the stairs. … Anyway, finally, he said, “Well,
where are the women?” And then I figured it out. He thought the Phelps House was “a house of
ill-repute.”
KP: Oh. [laughter]
MG: He saw all the men walking in. [laughter] I was so relieved to have him get out, standing
there with the iron. You know, everything he said sounded so strange. I thought, “Is he going to
rob us? I'm not going to let him hurt the children.” That was funny. You asked about our
education, I haven't forgotten the question. Wes was a poultry major in the College of
Agriculture as an undergraduate. Since he was now doing personnel work, so he needed to
pursue an advanced degree. He enrolled at Rutgers to get his Master in Education degree,
majoring in guidance. Wes was teaching a course in career possibilities. He also organized short
courses together with Professor Helyar. Then Professor Helyar got sick and he had to take over a
lot of the director of resident instruction for Professor Helyar. We lived right on campus. Wes
could schedule his courses within his work day or in the early evening. … Wes was on call in
the sense that we lived on campus, and students lived in the same house. Wes was responsible
for the students. I think I have a picture here. Here’s a picture of the Helyar House.
-----------------------------------------END OF SIDE ONE, TAPE TWO----------------------------------KP: So this was the deck, right?
MG: No, the porch in front of the house. This was taken before we lived there, when it was just
students. And that's Professor Helyar in the picture. Anyway, it was an interesting book. Alpha
Phalpha was the home of the alumni association. Now there is the Helyar House on the Cook
campus which houses such students. … The Phelps House was a Revolutionary War house, an
Eighteenth Century house. It had Dutch tiles in the fireplace. The fireplace didn't work, but it
was very beautiful and the other fireplace had marble around it. They were back to back. There
was a big staircase going up to the second floor. There was a piano that the mice had taken
residence in, in the hall. When our oldest son was about two, he'd get up the stairs and climb
down the other side and get on the piano. He was always climbing like a monkey. Next-door
was a barn where steers were kept, from which we managed to get a lot of little kittens. One
time, Walter went out, he was just a little, tiny thing, he went through the fence among all these
great big animals and said, “Hi, cows.” [laughter] I went out and dragged him out of there. He
was perfectly happy. The cows didn't seem to bother him, but I was afraid he might be hurt.
Wes went back to school. And I thought about going back to school, but it was a little too much
with the children. First, there was Joan, and nineteen months later, there was Walter, and then
two-and-a-half years later was Robert, so then I had three small children. Lots of people had
more, but it was enough for me. And there were things for the faculty wives. There was this
newcomers group, and I remembered Wes came home and stayed with Joan so I could go to the

22

first tea and meet other newcomers. That was really an exciting thing for all of us, because we
were mostly all new faculty wives or faculty members. We made these friends; friendships that
have lasted all our lives. We enjoyed Rutgers, and we enjoyed our lives there. The Newcomers
was part of the Rutgers Women's League. (You probably have heard of that.) Our friends, Frank
and Pluma Becks lived in an old farm house. We met them and our friends Sam and Lucille Lear
there. We played bridge, went to dances on campus. We'd go out to dinner occasionally. It was
a time when with ten dollars you could get a night out, plus a sitter. We did have babysitters
right upstairs. Our babysitters were usually boys, and one evening, we went to the Rutgers
Christmas Musical, and we had friends for dinner before the performance. It got late, so we
decided to come back home for dessert later. A student, Max, came down. He was a pretty good
babysitter because he had younger brothers and sisters at home. And I said, “If you want a piece
of pie, the pie is there.” Later we came back to have pie ...
KP: Oh, no … [laughter]
MG: There was one piece left. Max's piece was pretty big. Then we had another fellow
babysitting, and he didn't have any other children in his family. We came home and I said, “How
was Joan?” He said, “Oh, she's fine. I just used three diapers.” I said, “Where are they? Did
you put them in the diaper pail?” “Oh, I put them on the baby; the bed's dry,” he replied.
[laughter] But she survived, and so did we. We had a lot of funny experiences.
KP: So what made you decide to go back, and when was right?
MG: After Wes got his Master's, he decided to get his Doctorate. First, he was promoted to
assistant dean, and then he got a raise. At that time, it was decided that Wes would no longer be
in charge of the Phelps House or the students who lived on campus; he had additional
responsibilities. So we went looking for a house. We bought a house in Piscataway. We saw
one house which we liked, and we had one built similar to that. But we did have our own plans.
We watched it go up. We owned a third of an acre, in Piscataway. At that time Joan was about
to be eight, and Susie was on the way. She was born in April 1954. We moved into the new
house in September, 1954. It was built on former farmland. The farmer had drains underneath
the ground to drain his field. Obviously, when they put the foundation in, they cut those drains.
Before we had closed, we had a veterans’ mortgage, a four percent GI mortgage. The Veteran’s
Administration inspector was due to inspect before we closed on the house. We moved in a few
days before we closed because we wanted Joan and Walter to start school in Piscataway and not
go back to school in New Brunswick for one week. We had a hurricane in New Jersey, and the
basement flooded. I had carefully collected all the children's puzzles and put them back in boxes
so that the right puzzle pieces were with the right puzzle. Also all the children’s books were
stacked down there. Everything got wet. The next day, in our brand new house, everybody is
walking in with wet, muddy shoes. The VA inspector arrives then, too, and he wouldn't permit
the closing until they put a sump pump in and drains around the house to take care of the water.
So we were really very fortunate because we hadn't closed, and the contractor was responsible.

23

KP: Yeah, you really lucked out.
MG: Except that we lost our children's books and puzzles. … Luckily the furnace was not
damaged, so it turned out all right. I was nursing Susie and all [the] plumbers, contractors, and
inspectors were running in and out of the house. But we survived that. The children went to
Piscataway schools. We were very active in the schools. Wes served on the Board of Education.
Piscataway was always building new schools, because developers kept turning farms into
houses. … Most of our children went to four or five different schools in Piscataway. The town
built a high school in Piscataway. We supported the building projects.
Wes decided that it would be advantageous to get his Doctorate outside of Rutgers. So he
went to NYU. He took the train to New York City, and he usually had night classes. He started
when we were in the Phelps House, and he got his degree in 1960. In his last year at NYU, Wes
was elected to the honorary educational society Phi Delta Kappa. Wes’ doctoral thesis was
entitled The Development of an Orientation Course Designed to Assist Agricultural College
Freshman in Achieving a Mature Mental Adjustment to the College Environment. The
inspiration for his dissertation dated from his own experience before coming to Rutgers as a
student, as well as his experience counseling veterans attending college under the GI Bill. Many
of these young men had insufficient preparation for college-level courses, so they needed
guidance and help beyond the usual freshman orientation. Wes’ doctorate thesis was much in
demand in the late '60s, when many young people were admitted to college, some with
insufficient academic backgrounds, in affirmative action programs. Our fifth child, Martha, was
born on October 7, 1961. When I went back to school, Susie was in kindergarten, and our next
door neighbor, with whom we are still friends, was working in microbiology on the agriculture
campus. Norm and Wilma Dondero were friends more than neighbors. Each had one car. There
was no public transportation in Piscataway, just the campus bus, which didn't come up to Lake
Nelson. So Wes and Norm would take the one car, and then Wilma and I would have the other
car, except when Wes or Norm had to go to some location other than the College of Agriculture
campus. So Wilma and I would go grocery shopping together, and if we had to do an errand, we
had one car between us. We weren't isolated. Other friends on Lake Park Drive were also
faculty in the Spanish Department. Helen Dauster got a job working in the library part time, and
told Wilma and me they needed more people to file catalogue cards in the card catalogue. This
job doesn't have to be done now, the catalogue is on the computer. Helen suggested that we
could work in the library mornings. … Her youngest son, Nicky, and Sue were in the same
kindergarten class, and they were very good friends. So when the children went off to
kindergarten, we'd go down to the Rutgers library and work a couple of hours in the morning.
We got seventy-five cents an hour, which wasn't much, was it? Wes and I were giving the
children piano lessons and trumpet lessons and dance lessons. We had a lot of expenses. Wes'
salary was going up; it was eight thousand dollars a year when we moved to Piscataway.
Everything else was going up also when we went out there. And it was going up, but so was
everything else going up then. So it was extra money. And then when Susie went to first grade, I
decided that I could go back to school. … I enrolled in University College. I didn't want to tell
them that Wes was on the faculty. I wanted to get admitted on my own credentials. I had to get
my transcript from junior college, where I had my freshman year and two courses at night school.

24

One of the subjects I had taken was Spanish I. Rutgers wouldn't give me credit for Spanish I
until I passed Spanish II. It had been a long time, more than twenty years. I could have taken
Spanish I over, but then I would lose those credits. So I decided to take Spanish II. I didn't take
it right away. I really struggled with Spanish II because I found I didn't remember as much as I
thought I did. It was quite a heavy course, a lot of reading. When I was in the Spanish II class,
Wes was running for the Board of Ed. The night before the election, I went to school. While I
was out, our youngest son came home. Robert was an avid reader. He had had rheumatic fever
when he was eight, and the doctor treated him with cortisone, which was new at the time. He
recovered, fully, but for a long while, his physical activities were limited. Also, the cortisone
made him moon-faced and heavier. … Walter was active in sports, but Robert was restricted. At
this time, Robert was in junior high, and just that day he had made the wrestling team. He was
going on his bike, riding to the library to get some books and he was hit by a car. I was at
Rutgers attending class. … The ambulance took him to the hospital. My neighbor, Wilma
Dondero, met me at school and said, “You better go right to the hospital.” Robert wavered
between life and death there.
KP: Oh, my God.
MG: But he recovered. … There was a spike on the car that had gone into his buttocks within a
half inch of the colon. And his leg was broken. Dr. Zawodsky, have you heard of him?
KP: I've heard of him.
MG: He's an orthopedic surgeon. He was new at the time, quite young. Rob was one of his
earlier patients. Dr. Zawodsky had him in traction for six months, so the growth of the bone
would equal the recovery of the bone. At home he was in a cast from his chest to his feet … and
I had to take care of him. We had teachers coming to the house so he didn't lose the year of
school, but he was out of school for about six months. Robert then went to rehabilitation. … He
recovered, 100 percent. His legs were even, so it was quite a miracle. Wes was elected to the
Board of Education that same evening, and about two days later, I went back to Spanish class.
… I went back to Spanish class, and I hadn't read the assignment. And we had a quiz, and I
never failed anything so miserably.
KP: Oh, no. [laughter]
MG: But I managed to pass the course with a B. All my other courses I did all right in.
KP: That was a close call. [laughter]
MG: I had to work on Spanish. Let's see, what else happened while I was in school? It was fun,
I enjoyed it. I took political science.

25

KP: So that was in the ‘60s, the 1960s, and what was the political climate, especially with the
teachers, on campus?
MG: I think it tended to be liberal. Well, it's probably biased, but I think anybody who really
thinks about things has to be more liberal than conservative. I don't see how an educated person
can conceive of a society that is supposed to be democratic if we don't really try to have
opportunities for every child, we don't want to insure healthcare for all our citizens. When you
think that we started out with such high ideals, that we would have education for every child. …
The immigrants that came here … managed to become what we call “Americans” because of
public education and the libraries. It seems that to deny education and health to anybody is the
opposite of our democratic ideals. I also took philosophy, logic, ethics, physics. I loved physics.
That was another subject I couldn't take in high school, and another subject I had a hard time
with, because I didn't have much background, although I had read quite a bit. We had an adjunct
professor, they had a lot of adjunct professors in University College, he got sick or something,
then and we had a physicist from Princeton teaching the course, and he was just fabulous. We
did these problems of putting a satellite up in the sky. I just thought it was great. My eldest
daughter, Joan, didn't take physics in high school, because she was in advanced math and
advanced English and languages, so she couldn’t fit physics in her schedule. And I was so
enthusiastic about it. She was in Oberlin College, at that time, and she took physics. She had a
tough time. I always felt sorry that I had urged her to take physics just because I enjoyed it so
much.
KP: Were students at Rutgers into the protesting?
MG: University College is different than Rutgers.
KP: Older students?
MG: Right, and most students were working or were, like myself, homemakers. I was working,
too, in the library, part-time then, and later on, when I did my Masters in Library Science. These
students came from work, and had little time for protests. Later, when I was working in the
library, there were protests. I started when Susie went to kindergarten in '59. … I also took
education courses because I thought I could teach and that would be something I could do while I
had children. In 1961, Martha was on the way, and I was still working part-time in the library.
There wasn't a lot of protests towards the end of the '50s. Martha was born October 7, 1961, and
I think, I told you that I was working part-time in the library. In May, before Martha was born, I
was offered a full-time job, not as a professional, but as a staff person. However I hadn't had a
menstrual period for quite a while, and I said I'd have to think it over. Dr. Walker, who delivered
my other children, had died. (He had resumed his obstetrics practice after the war because there
weren't any other obstetricians.) So I had to think about a doctor, and there was the son of a
chemistry professor, so I called him, but he was busy, and he had recommended this other doctor.
This doctor confirmed what I had sort of suspected, except that I hadn't been sick or gained
much weight. I was pregnant. So I didn't take the job. … I didn't go to school in the summer

26

either because the children were home. That year I was taking history and philosophy and
government. I went to class in October, and I had a paper due. The doctor had said since I had
had four children, the baby might come very quickly. So one evening I was having pains, and I
called him and he said, “Well, why don't you go to the hospital?” Wes and I got to the hospital,
and I had no more pains. So I called him up again, and he said, “Well, you're there and you're
registered, why don't you spend the night, and if nothing happens, I'll come to the hospital in the
morning and send you home.” So there I was, in the hospital, and Wes went home. Joan was in
the band; she had to be at the high school for a football game in the morning, and Walter was on
the JV football team, so he also had to be there. Wes had to do the driving chores that Saturday
morning or arrange for somebody else to transport them to the high school. The doctor would
come, and Wes would pick me up. Okay, that was all settled. And I slept, and when I woke up
in the morning and rang for the nurse and I said, “Can I have some breakfast?” “Oh, no,” she
said, “You can't have any breakfast because you are in the labor room. Why don't I get you a cup
of coffee?” I had a book to read and a cup of coffee. I was sitting there, drinking the coffee,
wondering whether I should call Wes, or the doctor. All of a sudden, I had this pain. I put the
coffee down, and then I called the nurse. I had the baby.
KP: Wow.
MG: So then I did call the doctor.
KP: Oh, wow. [laughter]
MG: And he had to go to a football game, too. “So,” I said, “There's not much you can do now.
You might as well go to the football game.” [laughter] That was really funny. The nurse and I
had to cut Martha’s fingernails. I've never seen a baby with such long nails. I was in the hospital
for a day or two, and so I missed some classes. I sent in a paper that was due, which I think I
completed in the hospital, with a little note that I had my baby and that I would be at class at the
next session. The professor read that note and asked the class, “Did any of you know she was
having a baby?” That was hearsay, I wasn't there. [laughter] … I graduated in ‘67, with highest
honors.
KP: Congratulations.
MG: In 1992, I went to my twenty-fifth reunion. After I graduated, I taught school. I did my
practice teaching when Martha was in nursery school. The next year she was in a private
kindergarten, because Piscataway changed the date to start school from November 1 to October
1. Martha was born on the 7th of October. So she couldn't go to kindergarten in Piscataway,
unless I made a big fuss. Wes was on the Board of Education at that point, and I didn't like to
make a big fuss to have her admitted, because people might say, “Yeah, she's admitted
because...” So we sent her to a private kindergarten, with another little boy went, whose mother
picked them up, and she stayed with Chris Montouri until I came home from practice teaching. I
was six weeks practice teaching, in Dunellen, New Jersey. It was fun. The supervising teacher

27

got sick, so I had full responsibility for the class, for the two weeks. The principal and the vice
principal from Plainfield came and watched me practice teach, and they offered me a job in
Plainfield, teaching English in the Junior High School. I taught seventh grade English at Maxson
Junior High from September 1967 until June 1969. It was a tumultuous time. There were riots
in Plainfield, and the New Jersey National Guard was called to Plainfield the summer of 1968.
We had riots in Plainfield High School. On one occasion, National Guardsmen were stationed
outside of Maxson Junior High School. Library instruction was part of the English curriculum.
When I planned these sessions, I realized that the library had virtually no books by Black authors
and very little on African people, although the school was racially mixed at that time. The school
was eligible for Title II funds to purchase library materials. The librarian and I worked together
to develop a list of books which we then ordered. My students were introduced to a broad range
of literature including African folk takes and the writers of the Harlem renaissance.
In the fall of 1968, New Jersey Guardsmen were stationed at checkpoints on the roads
leading into Plainfield. Every morning my car was stopped. I was asked if I had any weapons
and waved on. One morning I picked up Mary Brown, a colleague whose car was in the shop for
repairs. When we came to the checkpoint, the Guardsmen made us get out, inspected the car and
opened the trunk. Mary and I wondered why. It seemed to us that no white person would bring
weapons into Plainfield when they had a Black passenger in the car.
The tensions in the community were reflected in the compositions my students wrote.
Some reported that Guardsmen had searched their homes ostensibly looking for weapons or
suspects. A group of Black parents tried to set up an alternative school to ensure their children’s
safety. Some teachers, including me, sent books and assignments to those students while they
were absent from regular classes. At the initial meeting of the teachers willing to participate by
providing materials to the alternative school, I was the only white teacher. The experience taught
me something about how it feels to be a minority. One teacher, who was sensitive to my uneasy
feelings, reassured me by saying “It’s all right, Marie, you’re brown.”
In December of 1968, an epidemic of Hong Kong flu hit Plainfield. So many teachers
and students were absent that those of us who came to work had to supervise several classes in
the cafeteria. At the beginning of an extended Christmas break, I came down with the flu. My
recovery was exceedingly slow. Some days I could hardly climb the stairs to my third-floor
classroom. Because there was so much tension, the school nurse and doctor thought I suffered
from stress. I decided not to sign up for another year. When my family doctor returned from
Florida in early May, he diagnosed my condition as a kidney infection. With medication and rest
I finally recovered early in June 1969.
Martha was in the first grade at this time. She stayed after school with Joan and Sam.
Martha’s good friend, Jennifer Baily, was the same age, and in the same grade. Martha went into
the first grade at Piscataway with her friends. Martha had a lot of little friends that were the same
age. The Bailys went to South America the next year. I arranged for her to stay with a different
family, but it didn’t work out. In early September, I took Martha to visit the library. I wanted to
show her off. She was such a beautiful child. Indeed, they all were. Dr. Roy Kidman was the
University Librarian at the time, and Katherine Merritt was the head of the catalogue department
where I had worked part-time. When we were there, she said, “Could you come in and have an
interview? Maybe you could work full time cataloging.” I had already resigned from Plainfield

28

because of my health problems. I had thought it was just as good to stay home for a little while,
but it sounded interesting. I wasn't sure I'd get the job. Anyway, I did have an interview,
discovered that Roy Kidman liked Langston Hughes, and we had a wonderful conversation. I
was hired as a professional librarian, although I didn't have a library degree. Though the hours
were longer than teaching, it didn’t involve work at home. Teaching English is a very time
consuming job. If you teach English with any sense of responsibility, the job requires not only
preparation, but a lot of reading and grading of compositions, plus meetings and parent
conferences, etc. Another advantage was that since the children were all, except for Joan, still
home, in an emergency you can't leave a class full of children and say, “My daughter or son is
sick; bye-bye now, just take care.” Whereas the library was closer to Piscataway. Also, if there
was an emergency, the books would wait on the shelf in cataloguing. It is different if you're on
reference. You have to respond to the public. In cataloguing you could leave, make up the time
later. … I agreed to study Russian on my own, so it sounded okay. I worked for seventeen years,
the last eight as librarian in the Institute of Jazz Studies. Shortly after I started at the library, it
was unclear whether the University had a contract with the American Association of University
Professors, which included librarians. It was finally decided librarians were faculty. As a
faculty, we had a lot of administrative responsibilities including to set up tenure qualifications.
So I decided that I had better get my Masters degree, otherwise … I would not advance. I went
right to Rutgers Library School. That wasn't too bad because … it was close, and I could manage
the time to get to class. Because I worked in the library, I could use the library facilities and
sometimes maneuver my courses into my work, or at least supplement the course with what I was
actually doing. It was an exciting time to be in the library. Everybody was thinking about
computers, and with some co-workers, I took a course on library computing at City University
New York, in the graduate school. … We were using computers in the library, and I read and
studied a lot and went to American Library Association workshops. There were protests. We
had bomb threats in the library. They got to be quite disruptive. We’d have them fairly
frequently, and campus police would get everybody out of the library, and sometimes, they
closed the library for a few hours. When Nixon bombed Cambodia, we didn't all, but some of us
were protesting. We also had faculty sessions on the Vietnam War and questioned the bombing.
The ROTC building was right next to the library. It was a very turbulent time. There were also
the questions of gay bashing, blacks and whites, civil rights and affirmative action. In
Piscataway, my good friend, Wilma, and I, another faculty wife, and another woman from
Piscataway who later worked for Rutgers, Katherine McCormick, Richard McCormick, her
husband, is on the Oral History Advisory Board, we started a League of Women Voters (LWV)
in Piscataway. We were trying to get planned and controlled growth in Piscataway, instead of
haphazard growth. The state was planning to put a highway, Route 287, through Piscataway.
The town wanted to bring industry to the town. We LWVers would go to town meetings. I was
quite active in the league. We built up our membership; there were twenty-five of us. Those
women are still good friends of mine. It was an exciting time. There were also questions about
the Board of Education. I didn't teach in Piscataway, although I substituted in Piscataway for a
while. We didn't think it was right to have a board member’s wife working in the schools. Some
of us encouraged people to run for the Board of Education, including Wes and another friend of
mine, Peg Haskin. We met with teachers, and we tried to pass school budgets and all sorts of

29

things like that. So it was an exciting time; or at least it was busy. How did that impact on my
education? When I actually was going to school, I didn't do as much. You can't do everything.
We had an American Field Service (AFS) student. When Joan was in high school, Wes and I
helped to start an AFS chapter in Piscataway. I told you, we were also interested in the
International Club at Rutgers. We had students come to our house for holidays, and just ordinary
days, to get to know them and to give these foreign students a glimpse of American homes as
well as schools. We were very much involved in starting this AFS chapter. We had a student,
Liselotte Suter, from Switzerland in 1970; in fact, this student is coming in April to visit us.
Later on, when Martha was in high school, we had a … Swedish student, Marianne Hayer. In
between, … I was president of the AFS chapter for a while. The chapter had a student who didn't
work out; the family had problems that were unanticipated, and it wasn't working out. So we had
this boy from Brazil. This was when Martha was a sophomore. When you apply for AFS, you
indicate, for example, that you want a student who doesn't smoke, or at least at that time you did.
Now it's always no smoking. Unfortunately, people smoke much more in Europe, though I
guess young people smoke quite a lot here, too. So … when we applied, we would ask for
somebody with a similar background, you know, they would try to fit you with a student who's
had an academic background. He didn’t come from an academic background; his father was a
taxi driver.
---------------------------------------END OF SIDE TWO, TAPE TWO-----------------------------------MG: Fabio was a boy and Martha was a young girl. I was working, and Wes was working, and
the other children were not at home anymore. … So it was not the ideal situation. It turned out
that, except for the smoking, Fabio was very cooperative, but I worried that Fabio would smoke
before bed and burn the house down. … Fabio and Martha were like brother and sister; they had
such fun together. It really worked out well. We had other students for short terms. Most of
them were good visitors. … It is a wonderful program. You probably have more questions about
the war.
KP: Well, no. It’s definitely a life course interview, not only about the war. We want to know
about your life before the war and the effects of the war on your life after the war. I wanted to
ask, did Wes have, at this point, after you both went to school and your family was almost grown,
did Wes’ prisoner of war experiences still haunt him?
MG: When he first returned from overseas, Wes had nightmares; he would wake me up at night
screaming. But after so many years had passed, … I don’t know honestly. … We very much so
lived in the present, as happens when you’re active, going to school and studying. … Wes had to
finish his thesis; that was a big job. … He was writing his thesis when our third child, Robert,
was little. Robert was born in October, and shortly after that, Joan got sick, first from chicken
pox, then measles, and it wasn’t diagnosed right away. Robert was an infant, so the doctor had
me keep him separate from Joan. The doctor said that Joan would be okay because she had the
shots, but Robert hadn’t had the shots. … So we moved Robert into our bedroom, and I would
just nurse him in the day and take care of Joan. … So the baby would sleep in the day and be

30

awake at night. So for a long while, he had day and night reversed. Robert would be up and
wide awake in the evening; … Wes was trying to write. So if I went out someplace in the
evening, Wes would put Robert on a blanket and write. Did I tell you about Wes’ childhood?
KP: No, you didn’t.
MG: Do you think we should do that?
KP: Sure. You can tell me about anything you remember.
MG: Well, his family, (This is the coat of arms. (These were given to Kathy Plunkett) Here are
some family pictures.), came from Meppel, Holland, in 1662 on the ship (Hope?). They were
farmers over there in a place called Vest Walde (West Wood). The Westervelt name is derived
from this. When they came over here, they settled in downtown New York, which was then
Dutch. It was called New Amsterdam at the time. Lubbert Lubbertse van Westervelt settled in
Flatbush, Long Island, on the 15th of December, '62. Later they moved to Hackensack, New
Jersey. Many of the family are buried in the cemetery there in Bergenfield. We have seen the
graves of these people. Lubbert’s son, Roelof, is the branch of the family from which Wes is
descended. He sold his land in Long Island, and he purchased a tract of land in New Jersey. … I
think they were very prosperous. Roelof’s son, Johannes, fathered Petrus, whose son, Benjamin
P., whose son, Jan B., fathered Wes’ great-great grandfather, Benjamin J. In the Revolutionary
War, some of them fought for the colonists and some were Tories. Benjamin P. Westervelt was a
prisoner of war. We get down to 1851, and this is Wes' grandfather, Edwin B. Westervelt. And
this one daughter married William Griffin, and Edwin, this is his great grandfather, the one that's
in that picture. This is his grandfather. His grandfather had three children, including Wes'
mother, Aunt Molly and Uncle Ben, father of Bud. Wes’ grandfather’s sister married William
Griffin. They had children, including Wes’ father. His father and mother were cousins. The
family lived in a farm house on County Road in Cresskill. The house is still there. It's an old
farmhouse. Later on, Wes’ Uncle Ben and his wife lived in this house. (This is a picture of
Eleanor.) Eleanor is Bud's sister. Anyway, they moved from this farm house where Wes was
born. Actually, he was born in Englewood Hospital, but he lived in this farm house until he was
about four or five. Then the family moved to a house on Hillside Avenue. Wes' grandfather had
given the land for the Congregational Church. When he died, he gave his daughter, Ella, Wes'
mother, the mortgage on the church. Aunt Molly got the house on Hillside Avenue. During the
Depression, Wes' father was without a job. He worked for some time in the post office. Also,
they farmed. Among other chores, Wes delivered eggs. They had chickens. They kept some
chickens for eggs. Also they would have some young chickens, which they would kill off for
broilers. … The family was very active in the church. Wes sang in the choir and went to Sunday
School, and it was an important ingredient in his life. The family had a camp up in the Alpine
area, overlooking the Hudson. They would go there and cut wood and camp out. … Wes liked
to tinker with cars. He and Bud fixed up a Model T, and they drove down to Florida to visit a
cousin. They had a wonderful time from what I've heard, in that little, old car. He and his
brother also worked on cars. The family were really subsistence farmers there for a while. They

31

… grew vegetables and stored them for winter in a cold cellar. Aunt Molly worked in New York
for an advertising agency. It was a prominent advertising agency at that time. I really don't recall
the name, right now; I'm not into Madison Avenue. Wes' mother did not work. She was home
with her children. That’s always the wrong thing to say, because when you have children and
stay at home, you usually work pretty hard. But she didn't get outside pay for her work. Aunt
Molly loved to cook. And Wes' mother, who was called “Gigi” because when Betty Ann,, the
first grandchild, was born, she couldn't say “grandma,” and she called Grandma Griffin, “Gigi.”
So Wes’ grandmother was “Gigi” the rest of her life, and Wes' father was “Pop-Pop” for the rest
of his life. Wes went to Cresskill Elementary School, and then he went to Tenafly High School.
He was not an outstanding student there. He took French and failed it, but he graduated. Then
he went to work in New York. He worked for Dixon Pencils as an office boy. Later he worked
crating eggs and handling eggs in one of the markets in downtown New York. … Wes talked to
the man with whom he worked, who lived in Cresskill, who was also active in the church. I
think also in the DeMolay, which is the junior order of Masons, and Wes joined that for a while.
I don't know much about his activity there because he never spoke a lot of it.
KP: At the time, was he working with the idea that he would go to college, or was he strictly
working to help the family out through the Depression?
MG: He was working to help his family. They needed to have money. Anyway, this fellow
encouraged him to go to college, so he went down to Rutgers and talked with Professor Helyar.
Obviously, agriculture was the thing that he thought he wanted to do because his family had been
farmers for generations, dating from Holland. ... It was a family tradition. We had other pictures
that I have now taken up to Wes' room in the nursing home, of the farm and some of the
activities there. Professor Helyar encouraged him, but he needed to take a post-graduate course
to pull up his grades before he could be admitted to Rutgers and take college courses on a level
with other students. Wes went back to school, and he aced his French. He had the same teacher
he’d had in high school, and from the stories that Wes tells, she was really astounded. But it
shows, you can do, if you really want to. So many students in high school think they're pleasing
the teacher by studying, instead of realizing that they themselves are supposed to be pleased by
their studying. It wasn't a problem for me because I enjoyed learning things, but for lots of
students it’s a problem. Wes also took math and other things. Then the next year, 1939, he was
admitted to Rutgers. He lived in New Brunswick in a room; I don't know if there were sufficient
dorms. For the first year he lived in a room in New Brunswick, on Easton Avenue, or right off
Easton Avenue. The next year, he moved to the poultry building under the program that I
described to you, like the Phelps House. He did very well in college. He was elected into the
honorary agricultural society, Alpha Zeta, in his junior year and was elected chancellor of that
society in his senior year. But he did not get into ROTC, which he wanted.
KP: Oh, really?

32

MG: I don't know why. I don't think it was necessarily academic, but for whatever reason.
Perhaps the opportunities that were offered. Also Wes enjoyed Ag Field Day; you've heard of
that?
KP: Oh, we still have that.
MG: Well, Ag Field Day was very important to Wes. Wes received awards for chickens that he
raised. … He was a poultry major. He liked Professor Thompson. The poultry building on the
Ag campus is named for Professor Thompson. He used to send his laundry home because he was
really in a tough financial situation. Wes managed. He worked in the summers, and he
graduated in '43, shortly before he met me. He got a job in Passaic County as Assistant County
Agent. Also he was helping at home a little bit. Since he had not gotten in ROTC, he didn't
volunteer to go into the war. But when he was drafted, he went. There were conscientious
objectors in World War II. The girl who lived next door to us in Hillsdale dated a fellow who
was a conscientious objector. I sympathized to an extent, it wasn't that one didn't think that
Hitler was a dictator whose actions one loathed. … I just have felt, ever since I did research for
my high school essay, that somehow, really, was it worth it to kill so many young men? For
example, this came to my mind when this high school friend was killed in a training plane, we
wouldn't have insured if it hadn't been the government's, and other friends had been killed. I
never did find out what happened to Carl, and I hoped that he would come back in one piece. It
was probably heresy, but I even remember when Franklin Roosevelt died, thinking that, “Well,
he was just one more casualty in this war,” and combat had nothing to do with his death. Later I
was strongly opposed to the Vietnam War. I guess if there was ever a stormy period in our
marriage, it was then, since Wes was much more oriented to supporting the Army. … There was
a friend of a boy who graduated with Joan, my oldest daughter. He went over to Vietnam, and he
was killed. We had lots of discussions. Most of our friends, at first, at least, were in favor of the
war. The Rutgers community was divided. The Ag College tended to be conservative,
politically, and a lot of our friends were agricultural faculty and their wives. Also we had this
Iranian student. Our friends, the Becks, … went to Iran in a US AID program. They had four
children, about the same ages as ours. The oldest boy went to the library. He was studying Farsi,
and he met this young Iranian, Abolghassem Eskamani, who was a very bright boy. He was
studying English, so the two became friends. Abolghassem had won a scholarship to the U.S.,
and Frank Beck told him when he got to Rutgers, that he should look up Wes Griffin if he had
any problems, and Wes would take care of him. So Abolghassem came over here with what was
a lot of money in Iran, but the exchange rate was very bad for him. Admissions was going to
ship him back because he wouldn't have enough money for books and to live here. Abolghassem
said, “Well, I'm supposed to see Dr. Griffin.” So Wes said, “Well, he could live with us.” He
actually didn't live with us, because we thought it would be better if he lived in the dorm. It
turned out he got a job in the library, which Wes arranged. Wes also arranged for him to have his
exams orally until he could learn to write English. He wrote and spoke English, but not fluently.
It was difficult for him, and he was living with us in the sense that holidays, he'd be in our
house. Actually, whenever he felt like it, he would be at our house. And what was I talking
about when I brought him up?

33

KP: Vietnam.
MG: Yeah, well, he was supportive of my efforts. And he used to say, “I'm going to run you for
president.” Gradually Wes came around to that idea, too. As indeed did many people in this
country. But in the early stages, … there were lots of arguments.
KP: Wes didn't join any veterans groups. Was that a conscious decision or was he just busy?
MG: I don't think it was a conscious decision. We were having children; the job was time
consuming. Wes was taking courses. We developed a group of friends, who were faculty. There
was a feeling of getting the war behind you, not dwelling on the past. I told you, in the
beginning, he had these nightmares that lasted for quite a while; well, they started to go away. So
there was no urging on my part that he should go to the veterans. Would it trigger those thoughts
again? … Our lives were full. … I recall one time when Wes wasn't feeling good, (he had some
stomach problem), we applied to the Veterans Administration for medical benefits. Benefits
were denied, at that time, on the basis that there was no proof that his current problems were
related to his problems as a prisoner of war. When he was diagnosed with probable Alzheimer’s
Disease, I went to the support group for the first time, and I was rather upset that night. I was
learning about the disease, and Wes was often upset with himself because he couldn't remember
things. And, as I said, he couldn't always find things. It's easy to say, “It’s the disease and he
can't help it,” but nonetheless, you get upset sometimes. I would try not to say anything to Wes;
still, that builds up inside of you. I met this woman, who said that her husband had died, but that
he had gone for respite down to the Veterans Hospital in White River Junction. You can see the
hospital right from the highway, I-89. So I don't remember whether I wrote, I think I made a few
calls. They sent me endless forms, and I thought about filling them out, but I don't think I really
did. It didn't seem to me, at that point, that I wanted Wes to go down there. But then, about a
year or two later, it was clear that if I was going to keep Wes home, I had to have some time to
myself, because the demands of the disease were increasing. So I had Wes go to Project
Independence, which is an adult day care. When I filled out the forms, they said that he could get
veterans’ benefits. As I told you before, part of the rationale in the diagnosis was that quite a lot
of prisoners of war suffer from the problems of dementia, which are associated with Alzheimer's.
Again, there is no proof, but there is some correlation, they say. Anyway, the Veteran's
Administration accepted his application at that point, probably due to the fact that many Vietnam
veterans came home with stress related dementia problems. The thinking had changed in the
Veterans Administration, I think. Also I applied for respite, and indeed, if that had worked, I
might have him home. Not all Alzheimer's patients act the same, quite a lot of them wander, but
they don't all wander to the same extent. Almost all of them are eventually incontinent. The
disease is not exactly the same from case to case. Wes did go down to the Vet Hospital, and …
he just wandered all over the place and went into other people’s rooms. So we went down on
Monday, I took him down, and I guess Tuesday morning, they called up for me to take him
home. ... The hospital doesn't have the facilities for dementia patients who wander. To have
Wes in a situation where the only way they can manage the person is to drug them excessively or

34

use restraints was not acceptable. I don't know if he'll ever go to the Veterans Hospital again.
But he is eligible now. Had things been different, he may have been active in the veterans
associations, but he never was. He was active in Boy Scouts. When we moved to Piscataway, it
was a growing community because they were turning all the farms into housing developments. I
guess, we were hardly there a month when somebody called and said they wanted to start a
Brownie troop and would I help? I had Brownies and then Girl Scouts. The next year, they were
going to start a Cub Scout pack. (Walter was eight years old.) First, Wes was the pack leader
and a neighbor was the den mother. Then Wes went on with the Cubs and he was the scout
leader for many years, until Robert was well into high school. They hiked, and they camped. ... I
was in the Girl Scouts; he was in the Boy Scouts. The Girl Scout camp used to have family day,
when we'd go up and fix the Girl Scout camp up and help with setting up things. The whole
family would go. We camped; we also took a trip out West for six weeks. Wes had a conference
at Fort Collins, Colorado, where my daughter, Joan, lives now, at Colorado State University, on
the importance of college professors being able to teach as opposed to just being able to do
research and how that could be encouraged. That was the focus of the workshop. We camped on
the Poudre River, while Wes went to the meetings. The conference had a party the last night, and
we all got dressed up and came into town and went to the barbecue. When we lived in the Phelps
House, Wes would sometimes have to be away at a meeting. Wes normally took care of the
furnace, and the pot stove, for the heat and hot water. When Wes went away, the students
upstairs were supposed to do this. They were pretty responsible, except they weren't always there
and they sometimes forget. So all of a sudden, there wouldn't be hot water and the house would
be getting cold. And then they would go down with their books and sit by the fire. Finally all the
radiators were going “pssst, ... pssst.” Oh, it was cute. We had all sorts of experiences there.
[laughter] So any other questions?
KP: I can't think of any. Can you think of any that I might have forgotten? I think we covered a
lot of topics.
MG: Right, I mean, we could go on about all the children.
KP: What about the dances? Did you ever go to USO dances during the war? What were they
like?
MG: Well, they were different than other dances. I went in New York City; when you went, you
had to agree that you weren't going to date anybody that you met there and that you were not
looking for a night out. You had to be compatible with the servicemen's wishes. The servicemen
would come; you would either dance, or you could sit and talk, or you could look at pictures of
their family, or their wives and children, or mothers and fathers and write letters with them. I
didn't do it too much because … I worked in the hospital at nights, and so I didn't have too many
free evenings. But I had one unique experience. You weren't supposed to date these servicemen,
and the servicemen knew it, and we dancers knew it. I was talking to this young man. He told
me his wife, she was expecting a baby. I don't know how we got to the subject, but he said what
he'd like to do in New York was to go to Schrafts and have hot chocolate. Schrafts was a

35

chocolate confectionery; they had many restaurants in New York City. I don't know whether they
have them any more. There are coffee and chocolate shops in Vienna, but I don't know whether
they have many in New York anymore. I don't think Schrafts is in New York anymore. Anyway,
he said, “Could you go with me?” I said, “I can't go with you because of the rules.” I said, “Why
don't you go to the Schrafts?” … “And I'll go there, too, and we'll have a hot chocolate.” So we
did that, and we figured that wasn't exactly breaking the rules. Then I went home, and he went
back to wherever he was stationed. At the USO, there was music, and in New York, particularly,
almost everybody that came there was going overseas any day, so frequently they wanted to talk
about their families to somebody else. You weren't usually pressured for dates. It was a little
sad, because you knew you'd never see those people again, and you sort of hoped there would be
somebody to talk with your husband or father in the same way. Sometimes there was somebody
who loved to dance and that was fun. So I did some of that. I had a different kind of experience.
I used to roller skate before I met Wes. I met a sailor at the rink, and it got very late, and that
one evening he said he had some friends, and they had an extra room in a hotel, why didn't I
spend the night instead of going home to New Jersey? I said, “Oh, well, I guess I could." I was
really naïve. I went in the room and locked the door and said, “Good night.” Then they banged
on the door. And I said, “For goodness sakes, I'm going to sleep. I have to go to work in the
morning,” and that was the end of that. I spent the night, I didn't pay for the room, and I never
knew where they slept. I think it wasn't exactly what they had planned. [laughter] I didn't really
think of what they had planned on until much later.
