
Shaun Illingworth: This begins an interview with Dean Nan Hunter at Georgetown Law School
in Washington D.C. on March 20, 2015 with Shaun Illingworth for the ACLU Oral History
Project. Thank you very much for having me here today.
Nan Hunter: My pleasure.
SI: To begin, can you tell me where and when you were born?
NH: I was born in Wilmington, North Carolina, which is also where I grew up. I was born in
1949.
SI: Can you tell me a little bit about growing up in Wilmington, what your neighborhood was
like?
NH: Well, it was a small town at that point, actually. So I’m laughing a little bit at the term
neighborhood because from the perspective of a metropolitan area, the whole town was like a
neighborhood. It was a population of about fifty thousand. I guess a small city, large town.
Conservative part of a conservative state. I was born in 1949, so I grew up in the 1950s, 1960s.
The dominant issue was race and the battle over integration. That’s what I remember from my
childhood.
SI: Well, how did that play out in your area? You would have been going to school after Brown
v. Board of Education? [Editor’s Note: Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas was a
1954 Supreme Court ruling that ordered schools to be desegregated.] I understand that was not
always enforced in some of these states.
NH: Yes. No, I never went to a racially integrated school until I was in high school. So, more
than ten years after Brown v. Board was decided. It was the dominant political, social issue in
that place. Now, as a small child, I wasn’t very much aware of it. I was aware of racial
distinctions being drawn though. I was troubled by them from a very young age and had many,
many arguments with my mother about race as I became an older child and then went into the
teenage years. So it was a tremendously important set of issues for me, personally.
SI: Tell me a little bit about your education in that area where you went to school. What
interested you the most in school?
NH: Well, I went to public schools in Wilmington from first grade through graduating from high
school. As I said, it was not until high school that I went to a racially integrated school. The
things that interested me the most--I loved school. School was just a treat for me, I think for as
long as I can remember. The things that interested me the most at the time, in terms of school,
were writing, journalism. When I was in high school I wanted to be a journalist. And history
has always been an interest. So I was a fairly athletic kid, but growing up--the benefits and
pleasures of growing up in a small town were also part of the picture, as well as the fact that this
particular town is located on the Atlantic coast. So, for me a huge part of my childhood revolves
around going to the beach, swimming and that sort of thing.
SI: Well, I know now it is quite--I wouldn’t say touristy, but a lot of people retire down there.
Was it that way when you were growing up?

2

NH: No, the town has just exploded and become so much more cosmopolitan than it was when I
was a kid. When I visit there now, it’s much larger. What is now a branch of the State
University at Wilmington, the UNCW campus has grown--I wouldn’t even know--exponentially,
I guess, since I was a child. So, of course, that has brought in students [and] faculty. There’s a
film and TV studio located there. The tourist industry, because of the beaches, it was always a
haven for tourists, but that’s become much larger and more sophisticated. So, the irony for me, it
was not--my experience of it growing up was probably more negative than positive. Now people
come up to me and say what a great place it is. It’s still pretty conservative, but it’s a very
different place now than what it was then.
SI: Growing up, were you part of a large family? Did you have a lot of siblings?
NH: One sibling. One younger brother.
SI: Outside of the classroom, what did you do for entertainment or did you work, or anything
like that in high school?
NH: In high school, I had part-time jobs, plus standard activities, reading, going to the beach,
movies. When I was a younger child, it was girl scouts, playing softball, pretty basic stuff.
SI: So moving forward through the 1960s, you said that your high school was the first integrated
school you went to. Were there any issues there? Were there any difficulties?
NH: Not when I was there. It was a very small number of African Americans students who had
the guts to integrate the high school. In the late ‘60s and early ‘70s, there were significant racial
tensions that hit the surface in Wilmington, but by that point I was in college.
SI: How did your family feel about education? Were they pushing you towards college or was
that something that was more self-motivated?
NH: No. It was really, pretty much self-motivated. My father was a college graduate. My
mother had never gone to college. I don’t think my mother ever regretted not having gone to
college. It was assumed that my younger brother would go to college. It was certainly, perfectly
okay if I went to college, but there was absolutely no--certainly, no academic pressure.
Obviously, my parents wanted both of us to do well in school, but the pressure to excel in school
just wasn’t there, probably to my benefit.
SI: So you would have been in high school from 1967 to 1970?
NH: No, it was more like ‘65 to ‘67.
SI: Mostly interview people who are in the northeast growing up. You look at yearbooks from
everyone’s high school and they start out looking like it is the 1950s and the end it looks like
Woodstock. Was the counterculture or the overall trends like that showing up in Wilmington?
NH: Not at the point that I was in high school. I graduated in 1967. Those friends showed up
very quickly afterwards. That was a period of a lot of flipping, of the sort, I think, that’s
reflected in the yearbooks that you just described. I was in high school at what was really the
very end of the 1950s. That’s how I would characterize how it was in Wilmington. I’m sure it
was somewhat different in other places, but yes, it was the very end of the 1950s, I would say. In
3

the four years that I was in college--I graduated from college in 1971, [it was] just
transformational.
SI: In your high school, when things would happen such as the March on Washington and North
Carolina was a big state for sit-ins and that sort of thing, were those discussed among your
classmates and how were they viewed? [Editor’s Note: The March on Washington for Jobs and
Freedom was a civil rights march that occurred in Washington D.C. on August 28, 1963. Martin
Luther King gave his “I Have a Dream” speech at the march on the steps of the Lincoln
Memorial.]
NH: No, they were not much discussed. I have to say, certainly the majority of students were
not terribly engaged with those issues. I would say that in my friendship group it was different.
There was more discussion. Even with that, it was nothing like the intensity of discussion that I
experienced and I’m sure they experienced as well in college, just literally a year or two later.
So it was the very, very beginning of anti-war marches and they barely penetrated the
consciousness, I would say, down there. I remember doing a high school project on Vietnam--it
was putting pins in a map I guess where American soldiers had died or something like that-something very basic. But the conceptualization of it was at least agnostic about supporting the
war. It stood out for that, for that perspective. I was not the only kid from that high school who
developed a much more radical perspective on things.
SI: You decided to go to Northwestern. How did you choose Northwestern?
NH: Well, as I said, in high school I thought I wanted to be a journalist and Northwestern has an
excellent school of journalism. After my junior year, when I was editor of the newspaper--I was
editor of the newspaper my senior year, but they have a summer program for high school
students in selected areas. One is journalism, one is theater, I guess one is probably engineering.
There might be one or two others and it’s quite competitive to get into it. So I was selected to go
to the program in journalism and it was really my first time away from home on my own. The
whole experience was like going to college for four or five weeks in the summer, however long it
lasted. I just loved it. I just ate it up. So that was a complete snowjob on me in terms of
wanting to go to Northwestern for undergraduate school.
SI: Was it much of a shock going from Wilmington to the Chicago area?
NH: Quite a bit of a shock, yes. I was very oriented to wanting to leave Wilmington and
wanting to leave the South. So there wasn’t any sort of second-guessing along those lines, but
yes, the students were heavily from, I would say, the Northeast and the Midwest. It was just a
very different setting, in a way that I really enjoyed for the most part.
SI: Well, what interested you the most on campus? What did you get involved in outside of the
classroom?
NH: I got involved in the anti-war politics pretty quickly. I participated in some sit-ins. I
remember spending a very, very nervous weekend wondering if I was going to be expelled
because some students were expelled from a sit-in of the ROTC building, and I had been part of
that as well. It hit me at that point, that actually, I was there heavily, heavily on scholarships,
and I really didn’t have a plan B if I had been expelled. Luckily, I wasn’t. So I would say that
4

the anti-war activities were the main things that I was involved with on campus during those
years.
SI: So the sit-ins, they would be taking over campus buildings?
NH: Yes, yes. There was an ROTC unit, a Navy ROTC unit on campus and we occupied the
Navy ROTC office.
SI: You got there in the fall of ’67.
NH: Right.
SI: Then the following summer is ‘68.
NH: Right.
SI: Were you active around that time?
NH: Yes, but I was not in Chicago for the summer of ‘68. I was back in Wilmington, so I
missed the great drama on the streets of Chicago.
SI: Now, did you continue after that freshman year to be involved in the anti-war movement on
campus?
NH: Oh, yes. Yes. I’m not sure exactly which year I did what. I don’t think the ROTC
occupation was my freshman year. It was various things in various years. I was there in the
spring of 1970, which was when the Kent State tragedy occurred and that was obviously an
intense period. [Editor's Note: On May 4, 1970, Ohio National Guardsmen fired on students at
Kent State University, killing four and wounding nine others. Some of the students had been
protesting the United States entry into Cambodia, while others had been passing nearby or
observing the demonstration. On May 14 and 15, 1970, students at Jackson State College
protesting against racial harassment were fired upon by state and city police, resulting in two
deaths and a dozen injuries.] Students went on strike, the school closed down, as occurred at
campuses across the country. It was really quite a remarkable moment. So, only by
remembering sort of when a particular march on Washington happened or something, would I be
able to place it in which year I was in college.
SI: As a journalism major, were you involved in like the school paper?
NH: No, I didn’t get involved in the campus newspaper. That actually just didn’t interest me
that much. Then, my last year--I actually graduated with a degree in political science because
during my junior year. I decided that journalism was not what I wanted to be my major.
Northwestern has an excellent journalism school, but I began to doubts. I don’t want to say it
was vocational, but it was so oriented toward a certain profession and toward a certain style of
writing and I had second thoughts about putting all my eggs into that basket.
SI: You graduated with a degree in political science in 1970?
NH: ‘71.
SI: ‘71, okay. Then did you go directly to Georgetown Law?
5

NH: No, I didn’t. I spent a year in Chicago. I was working as essentially a paralegal in the
Northwestern Law School Legal Aid Clinic. That was a hotbed of young radicals at the time. It
was during that year that I decided that I wanted to go to law school. I didn’t apply to law school
when I was a senior in college. I found that I really loved the work and loved the skill sets that
were part of lawyering and there was a good match between my skills and those that law drew
upon. So, that’s when I applied to law school.
SI: Was it just sort of the general atmosphere of the Legal Aid office or were there particular
interactions that led you towards that?
NH: I certainly formed friendships there and connected with people on a personal level and that
was very important. It wasn’t so much the particular areas of law as the engagement with law as
a mechanism for social change.
SI: What led you to pick Georgetown? Can you kind of describe the atmosphere here in ’72
when you came?
NH: I picked Georgetown--it was appealing to me to come to Washington. Georgetown had a
reputation then as now as a very public interest law oriented school. The location in Washington
fed that, I think, and still does. It was, even then, a leader in clinical education, which in part,
because I had been part of a clinic at Northwestern Law School, I understood that the sort of
progressive political edge of legal education at that point, especially in terms of the institutional
location would most likely be in the clinics. Georgetown was already the national leader in that.
So I think all those things together were what convinced me to come to Georgetown.
SI: Again, the atmosphere question. I am basing this on a number of interviews I have done
with people who went completed their undergraduate education here in the ‘60s and they talk
about how it was more conservative then, and then it became, in their opinion at least, more
radical. I was wondering how would you peg the faculty and the students at Georgetown?
NH: At the law school? Well, the students struck me--of course, you always form your own
friendship groups. So, I very quickly fell in with people who were as interested in various social
justice issues as I was. It was not difficult to find those people, let’s put it that way. It seemed to
me more conservative than college, but I think that’s because my friendship group in
undergraduate school was also politically compatible. So, you sort of first arrive at law school
and you look around and there are all these people who want to be business lawyers and you
think, “Where did they come from? Were they in undergraduate school, too?” So, partly it was
adjusting to that. The faculty was mixed. I would say that it was pretty generationally aligned in
terms of--I’m sure there were people in the faculty who were quite conservative, but for the most
part, the faculty here was not unlike what it is now. I’d say the center of gravity is what I would
call a kind of civil rights liberalism. So probably, by that point, by 1972, my guess is that the
law school was considerably more politically progressive than the main campus. I never did
anything--I never engaged with the main campus, which is easy to do because of the physical
separation, but that would be my hunch.
SI: Were there any professors or courses that were particularly influential for you in that time
period?

6

NH: In different ways, yes. I had a couple of the first woman law professors here at
Georgetown. Judy Areen joined the faculty when I was here and so she taught me family law. A
woman who was a visitor--she was a Department of Justice lawyer and I think she was
considering an academic career and I guess decided against it, or maybe she was just here as a
visitor from practice--I don’t know--but a woman named Monica Gallagher, who was a Justice
Department lawyer, taught civil procedure. She was dynamic because she was activity engaged
in lawyering, in the civil rights division of the Department of Justice. Then there were any
number of folks who were important. Wally Mlyniec, who’s still here, was just starting the
juvenile justice clinic at that time. He became a leader in clinical education. A woman named
Sandy Rothenberg, who’s now a judge in Colorado, ran a criminal defense clinic program that I
participated in. Then some of the folks here were just really excellent teachers.
SI: Do any of the cases that you had contact with in the clinics stand out?
NH: Not really. They were small individual cases and so I can’t really say that any of them
stand out, no.
SI: Did you continue to be involved in things outside of the classroom or does law school take
up all your time?
NH: No, I was involved. At that point, I’d become very interested in women’s legal issues and I
was also in the process of coming out as lesbian. So I got involved during law school as a
student member, I guess, of the Women’s Legal Defense Fund. I worked in a pro se divorce
clinic, not a clinic run by the school, but a community clinic run by the Women’s Legal Defense
Fund. There was also a local feminist activist organization called the D.C. Area Feminist
Alliance. That might have started after I graduated from law school. It was all part of that 1970s
period.
SI: What kind of cases would your work on in the clinic? You said that it dealt with issues of
divorce, generally.
NH: Pro se divorce meaning that the woman, or the plaintiff--but it was oriented toward women-who wanted to get a divorce [and] couldn’t afford a lawyer--pro se means representing yourself.
So they were, by definition, simple matters, generally uncontested divorces, but at that time it
was--I don’t actually know exactly how it operates now, but let’s say if husband and wife had no
children or maybe had one child, but not a lot in property and it wasn’t contested, both of them
wanted to get the divorce, it can cost a lot in legal fees. For low-income families that was very
tough. So, it was not oriented to dealing with difficult or tricky, or precedent setting cases. It
was oriented to providing a service to people who needed, a very simple legal matter taken care
of, but they didn’t have the resources to pay for lawyers.
SI: So at this point, I do not want to say early in the LGBT rights movement-NH: No, it is.
SI: It is a breakwater point.
NH: Yes.

7

SI: Was there, for example, a student organization here at Georgetown Law? Was there an
interest group around the legal issues?
NH: Not at the time that I graduated. Shortly thereafter one formed. That led to a significant
case in which the gay student group here at the law school and the gay student group at main
campus sued Georgetown and won in the D.C. Court of Appeals, an order saying that
Georgetown University had to grant them the benefits of student recognition. When I graduated,
the year that I graduated, to my knowledge, there were three gay people in the class. I’m sure
there were more, but the only other two that I knew were two friends.
SI: So you graduate in ’75.
NH: ‘75.
SI: Did you go right to work for the American Civil Liberties Union?
NH: No, I practiced here. So, I practiced here for a year, apprenticing actually, with a woman
named Ann Garfinkle, who was a small private practice, National Lawyers Guild, left-associated
lawyer. At that point, I was becoming more active in the National Lawyers Guild and that
became an important organization for me during this period of the late ‘70s into roughly the early
‘80s. I was pretty active in the National Lawyers Guild, which was and is an organization of
left-identified lawyers. I worked with Ann for a year right after I graduated and then five of us
formed a women’s law collective and we practiced law. I practiced law there--what are we at
now, ’76--for five years. Then, in 1981 I moved to New York and joined the ACLU.
SI: What kind of cases would you take on in that period in between law school and the ACLU?
NH: Different ones of us in the office did different types of things. I tended to do employment
discrimination and family law. One of my partners did a lot of landlord-tenant law, representing
a lot of tenant unions. Employment, family law, and criminal defense were the sort of bread and
butter sources of income.
SI: When you say it was a collective, did you operate on the economic model of a collective?
NH: Yes, we did. Lawyers were not paid more than the legal worker.
SI: Looking back, did that work out well, that model?
NH: The pay part worked well. We were all paid--I don’t remember how much, but it seems
that was the last moment in which you could live in a city comfortably with a modest income. I
don’t remember exactly how much. The thing that--we finally had to readjust was the division
of labor. I guess there were three parts of the collective enterprise. One was how we were paid.
One was decision making within the group. It was a small group. One was the division of labor.
The shared decision making and the shared income distribution were no problem, but those of us
who were lawyers just could not take the time to do some of the work that didn’t require lawyers.
So we ended up needing to hire--we started with one person who was not a lawyer and we ended
up needing to hire another person who was not a lawyer because the attempt to divide support
activities did not work.
SI: In ‘81 you moved to New York. Was that to go to the ACLU job?
8

NH: Yes.
SI: Tell me about the process of getting that job and applying.
NH: I’m pretty sure that I found out about the job through someone whom I knew from the
National Lawyers Guild, a woman named Rhonda Copeland, who is now deceased. She did not
work in the ACLU. She worked at the Center for Constitutional Rights, but I’m pretty sure it
was Rhonda who told me about the job because I did not know the people who were in that
office where I went to work. I think that’s how I found out about it. So I applied. I went to New
York to the interview, got the job and then moved up there.
SI: Now was that the Reproductive Rights Project?
NH: The Reproductive Freedom Project.
SI: Tell me a little bit about that project and what its status was when you got there in size and
what you were put to work on.
NH: Janet Benshoof was the director of the project. Suzanne Lynn was, I guess, the only other
staff lawyer. She was there before I was. I think it was a woman named Judy Levin who had
left and that created the opening that I filled. So there were just the three of us there and
secretaries. The work basically consisted of constitutional litigation around the country. I
moved there in 1981. I have this vague memory of it being warm, so maybe it was the spring or
summer when I moved up there. This was a point when the backlash against Roe v. Wade had
built up and was continuing to build up. [Editor’s Note: Roe v. Wade is a 1973 Supreme Court
case where the Supreme Court ruled that states cannot ban abortions that occur within the first
trimester. It was a 7-2 decision.] One of the first cases that I worked on there was--and the point
that I worked on it, it was already in the appellate courts was--the Akron case. [Editor’s Note:
City of Akron v. Akron Center for Reproductive Health was a 1983 Supreme Court Case where
the ACLU of Ohio challenged the regulations for abortion setup by the city of Akron, Ohio. The
court ruled in the ACLU’s favor stating that many regulations were unconstitutional.] That was
one of the early efforts by the anti-choice folks to try and reverse Roe v. Wade. We were totally
successful in that case. I think the Supreme Court decided it in 1983 and at that point, the sevenjustice majority that had decided Roe v. Wade was mostly still there. As that majority
diminished over time, abortion rights grew weaker and weaker. While I was with the
Reproductive Freedom Project, I wrote parts of appellate briefs when cases were in the appeal
stage and I litigated cases at the trial stage.
When I began the nature of the abortion rights or reproductive rights practice actually was very
much like what it is now in one sense, which is that we were concentrated almost entirely on
challenging restrictive state laws. One of the things that changed in the early ‘80s when I was
there happened because President Reagan was elected. Then the anti-abortion agenda was
incorporated at the federal level.
By the time I left that project in 1986--so I was there for five years--several of our biggest, most
important cases were challenging federal statutes and federal policies. When I arrived there in
1981, I don’t think we had a single case challenging a federal policy. It wasn’t because there
were no anti-choice federal policies before then, but the challenge to the worst federal policy
Hyde Amendment, had been already lost, shortly before I arrived. [Editor’s Note: The Hyde
9

Amendment was passed in 1976. It bans the use of federal money for abortion. This applies to
women who are on Medicaid, which is the federal health care program for low-income people.]
So I did trials and pre-trials in Louisiana, Kentucky, Utah, Florida, Nevada, Minnesota, and
various other places around the country, Florida.
SI: Can you tell me a little bit about what went into preparing for those cases? Was there an
overall strategy or was each state so different?
NH: The states were different to some extent, but we always litigated in federal court.
Essentially, the question was whether various restrictions that were designed to chip away at a
woman’s ability to get an abortion, whether they violated the principles then of Roe v. Wade. So,
a lot of what the litigation consisted of was summary judgment motions plus some trials. I spent
a significant amount of time preparing our expert witnesses to demonstrate the factual impact of
these restrictions and deposing witnesses on the other side. So that was the bulk of the practice.
Interestingly, right now, that’s the bulk of the practice again. The law has shifted in a way that I
think is quite unfortunate. Given the last eight years of the Obama administration, there aren’t
that many cases or issues involving federal policy for the most part, but you’ve got all these
restrictive state laws. During periods when the country has had conservative presidential
administrations, there have been a lot more federal law issues.
SI: From what I understand, the Hyde Amendment was about restricting access by cutting
funding to Medicare?
NH: Medicaid.
SI: Medicaid for poor women.
NH: Right.
SI: So these would be on the state level, similar methods that you were trying to challenge?
NH: Right.
SI: Was that also financially based?
NH: No, it wasn’t mostly financially based. There were some versions of that same issue of
cutting public funding that were litigated under state constitutional provisions that came out
better than the federal challenge did. Mostly, the laws we challenged involved issues like
parental consent for teenagers or forced waiting periods, so that women had to make two trips
and so forth. It was the beginning of what is now the intense attack on abortion-providing
facilities by requiring that they have expensive equipment and facilities essentially like a surgical
center, which is just completely unnecessary. There were requirements that the counseling had
to be done by a physician and couldn’t be done by a nurse. I can’t even remember what all of the
restrictions were. There have been dozens over the history of this period. So, that was the nature
of the practice, and in each state there was a slightly different political constellation or set of
issues.
SI: I understand the Reproductive Rights program split off from the ACLU?
NH: Right.
10

SI: Was it the end of that period?
NH: Well, it was definitely after I had left the Reproductive Freedom Project. I think it was the
early ‘90s when they left the ACLU. I’m not sure.
SI: While you were there did you feel the project got its due from the larger organization? Was
there any indication something like that was forthcoming?
NH: I was surprised when the project left. At that point, I had been out of daily abortion rights
work for several years but I think the issue, as far as I understand it, revolved around funding.
The Reproductive Freedom Project and the abortion rights issue at that time got a tremendous
amount of funding and it did allow the project to grow. During the time I was there we expanded
to at least four lawyers, plus we would hire a fellow who was right out of a clerkship or out of
law school to be there for a year. So it was expanding. The litigation expenses were growing
and those had to be funded as well. My impression, and this is completely second, third hand-but my impression is that the Reproductive Freedom folks, especially Janet, felt that the potential
existed for a level of funding that would carry an entire organization as it is now…that she had
the ability to raise that funding and that, to some extent, the central organization stood in the way
or there would have to be some sharing of the funding. Those are details that I really don’t
know, but my impression is that that was the sort of fundamental dynamic that led to the split.
SI: On the five-year period when you were working on these cases, you were focused on the
cases themselves, but were you part of the effort to fight the battle in the public realm?
NH: Oh, sure. I wrote op-eds and we did press and spoke at national events. We did speeches
in local areas also, in Salt Lake City or New Orleans or Louisville, Kentucky or wherever the
cases were going on. We didn’t just litigate. We also participated in doing outreach to other
community organizations, partly as a way of coalition building to increase public support for the
litigation and for the issue in those places. So, I was part of that. I think we were all part of that.
We also testified in Congress and in state and local legislatures. We were primarily engaged in
litigation, but we were also very much engaged in public education and in trying to assist the
state affiliates of the ACLU and our clients in their state and local advocacy.
SI: What would you say were your most vivid memories of that time, either in the courtroom or
outside?
NH: That would be a mixture of personal and professional memories. Certainly, in the day-today piece of it, for me it was the first time I had ever done any substantial amount of work travel.
I found that in my first few years there I was spending twenty five percent of my time travelling
and going into these various places to do pre-trial motions or to do trials. So, I suppose one of
the most vivid lessons that I feel like I learned that I very much used when I was doing the
LGBT and AIDS work was the extraordinary power and value of the ACLU state affiliate
network, especially at that time. The ACLU was the only organization that had state affiliates in
every state. We had our national office in New York and there was a legislative office here in
D.C. that dealt with Congress. There are tons of progressive organizations that had a national
office in one of those two places or maybe both. There was no other entity that had an effective
affiliate network the way that we did. That was extremely valuable because it meant that there
was an ACLU person who was known to and active in the state legislature in Nebraska, or
11

Colorado, or whatever. That gave us--especially with the abortion rights debates, so much was
involved at the state level in terms of where the legislation was coming from. So that was
something that I hadn’t realized before taking the job. I hadn’t realized that this distinction
between the ACLU and all the other groups existed and how important it was. I have to think a
bit about other specific vivid moments.
SI: We can always come back to it. So in 1986, that was when you made the transition from the
Reproductive Freedom Project to the newly created--what was it called?
NH: It was called the Lesbian and Gay Rights Project at that point.
SI: So how did that come about?
NH: Tom Stoddard and I had been pressing the national ACLU to start a lesbian and gay rights
project for several years. [Editor’s Note: Tom Stoddard was an adjunct professor at the NYU
School of Law and lawyer for the New York Civil Liberties Union. He became the executive
director of the Lambda Legal Defense and Educational Fund. He died in 1997.] Tom was a very
important gay rights leader at that point. He died in, I guess, the 1990s, but in the 1980's he was
on the staff of the New York Civil Liberties Union, which was housed in the same building as
the national staff. So he and I became friends. He was a wonderful, wonderful guy, very smart,
very impressive. He was on the New York staff, and I was on the national staff. He was doing
gay rights issues as part of his job in the New York staff. I didn’t have any portfolio for gay
rights issues, but I was a volunteer lawyer with the Lambda Legal Defense Fund, which at that
point, rented space in the ACLU building.
We were both pressing the ACLU to begin its own project. At that point in time--so this is
1984, 1985 roughly, there was no national organization that did any gay rights work except for
the gay organizations. If you did gay rights work you were, by definition, a gay organization
because nobody else would do it. So we both thought it was really important for the ACLU to
become more visible in this area. The ACLU had done gay rights cases for years and years. In
southern California and various places, the state affiliates did it, but there was no defined
national office project in that area. So we both pressed Ira Glasser, who was then the Executive
Director of the ACLU. The issue was that the ACLU financial model was that all of the national
office projects were supported by foundation grants. A Ford Foundation grant created the
Women’s Rights Project and various other projects. It might have been a Rockefeller grant that
created the Reproductive Freedom Project. But all of the projects were, within the institution,
defined as being "extra" and supported by these money grants. There was no foundation that
funded gay rights at that point. Maybe a tiny family foundation from a wealthy gay or lesbian
donor or something, but Ford wouldn’t touch the issue, [nor] Rockefeller. None of the major
foundations would touch the issue at that point. What happened is that James Hormel, a longtime
ACLU member and leader from San Francisco, a wonderful man, basically wrote a check for
fifty thousand dollars, when Ira said, “If we can find fifty thousand dollars, we’ll start this
project.” I can’t imagine starting anything on fifty thousand dollars, but that was the magic
number. So it went forward from there. It was really Jim’s generosity that forced the issue
within the organization. So, the project started in 1986.
SI: Was he approached by you?

12

NH: No, he was approached by Ira. Ira went to the very few individuals he thought would be
willing to do this. So, no, we didn’t have to literally raise the money ourselves in that way.
Actually, the other person who was key to that was Dorothy Ehrlich, who was then the Executive
Director at the Northern California affiliate, which was Jim’s home base. It was to Dorothy's
credit also because he was her donor. I’m sure he donated to the national organization, but he
was a big northern California suppoter. Dorothy was extremely supportive of starting a lesbian
and gay rights project. I’m sure that if she had not been, it would have been much more difficult
to do so.
SI: How did you go about setting up the project once you had the money?
NH: Well, it was me basically. It was me and a secretary. Because it was so small, one of the
first things I decided to do was to leverage the affiliate network. So I prioritized that, especially
regarding AIDS, which much a significant and urgent issue. In 1986 even though the
mechanisms for transmission of HIV were known there was a lot of fear. Over time, the fear
became less and less rational, but that was still a moment when the fear of contagion was intense,
even with school children and certainly with a stigmatized group, like gay men. So, I set up a
distribution system for emerging AIDS-related information because it was so important to be
able to counter those fears with documentation, and new documentation was coming out literally
every week. It was an extremely dynamic time and field. That was one of the big challenges of
starting a gay rights project in 1986.
SI: I read in a piece you wrote about the atmosphere that Congress was considering mandatory
testing and really extreme measures. Tell me a little bit about trying to combat some of those
more extreme issues.
NH: My AIDS walk involved a great deal of public education, as well as collaboration with
public health authorities. It was in their interest, to have the public not panic and to have the
public understand the best scientific information about mechanisms of transmission. Frankly, it
was also very much in their interest to ally with the gay community because they understood, as
public health people generally do, that in order to bring about sustainable behavior change, you
can’t do it by coercion. So there was this massive enterprise involving gay community
organizations and the new AIDS service groups like GMHC (Gay Men's Health Collective) and
others, together with public health officials--in an effort to contain the spread of the virus. What
we did at the ACLU was also try to and contain the spread of the stigma and to counter the
voices that were trying to piggyback on this horrible disease to feed their political agenda. In part
because it was only me, national office litigation was limited. The most important works was
centered in public policy and legislative debates. There were only a few genuinely important
cases that emerged during this period.
By far the most important case at the time involved interpretation over a statue called the
Rehabilitation ACT. Under the Rehabilitation Act, entities that received federal funds (including
public school systems) were barred from discriminating against otherwise qualified persons who
had disability. The first summer after I founded the project, the summer of 1986, my big project
was writing an amicus brief for the Supreme Court on behalf of the American Public Health
Association, in a case called Arline. This was a tuberculosis case, but it became the vehicle for
taking the question of AIDS transmission to the Supreme Court, specifically whether people
could be fired from jobs where there was no risk of transmission, but there was this fear of
13

transmission. [Editor’s Note: School Board of Nassau County v. Arline was a 1987 Supreme
Court case, which ruled that a contagious disease can qualify as a disability and protects a person
from employment discrimination.] So we were very lucky that a teacher in Florida had brought a
federal court case after she was fired because she tested positive for TB, because it would have
taken years to get an AIDS case before the Supreme Court and the TB case was already there in
1986. Tuberculosis is much easier to transmit than HIV, but the issue became the transmission of
all communicable diseases. So I wrote an amicus brief in that case. The Reagan Justice
Department took the position that people should be fired or fire-able even if the fear of contagion
was irrational. This was just an outrageous cave-in to the far right, and that Supreme Court
rejected that argument.
We won the Arline case, which was a huge, huge turning point for AIDS issues. That was the
watershed for the analysis of employment protection. Employment protection for people with
HIV/AIDS was based on disability law. Tuberculosis is a disability. HIV/AIDS is a disability.
Arline's claim was based on a law that prohibited discrimination based on disability. So
disability then became the frame that we used in a significant part of the work of representing
people with HIV/AIDS.
SI: Now, in reading different accounts the name of the project goes from gay and lesbian to also
AIDS. Is that a separate project or was it all under the same office?
NH: We structured it as two projects. We added the AIDS project, in part, because of funding
issues, because at that point there were a couple of funders like amfAR, who were willing to
fund an AIDS project, but even they did not want dollars going to a lesbian and gay rights
project. [Editor’s Note: The American Foundation for AIDS Research was founded in 1985 and
conducts AIDS research.] As far as staff, it was essentially the same people, although some
people worked more on one issue than the other. At that point, we had expanded. Bill
Rubenstein was there. Judy Levin was there for a while.
I hired Chai Feldblum who worked in Washington because the other gay and legal organizations,
had no presence in Washington. [Editor’s Note: Chai Feldblum a commissioner in the U.S. Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission. She was legislative counsel at the ACLU from 1988 to
1991 and later a professor at Georgetown Law] There were the gay lobbying organizations like
HRC [Human Rights Campaign] and the National Lesbian and Gay Task Force in Washington,
but their role, which was certainly important, was heavily oriented toward lobbying for money
for gay services. They didn’t have legal expertise. Their staff members, even if they were
lawyers were basically lobbying over dollars. So, what was needed in Washington was an
organization that it lobbied over issues and the substance of the law, and that was the ACLU.
That is why, even though I was based in the New York office, I hired someone to work in the
D.C. office. She became one of the primary drafters of the Americans with Disabilities Act,
which extended the prohibition against discrimination based on disability to the private sector.
The statue issue in the Arline case applied only to public entities and federal grantees. The
enactment of the Americans with Disabilities Act in 1990, basically settled the issue in terms of
employment discrimination against people with HIV. It did not magically eliminate all the
problems, but it settled what the rule would be for the vast majority of situations.

14

So to sum up my work on AIDS--first I concentrated on the Arline amicus and then the work on
the Americans with Disabilities Act--those were incredibly important things to do at that point in
time.
SI: I saw some areas where you were working, like the rights of gay and lesbian service people.
Can you tell me a little bit about that, the Watkins case? [Editor’s Note: Watkins v. United States
Army was a 1989 Ninth Circuit Appeals Court case which allowed Sergeant Perry Watkins, an
openly gay soldier, to reenlist in the army.]
NH: Yes back to the lesbian and gay rights issues. One of the ironies of the beginning of this
project was that it opened doors in June of 1986 and then almost immediately the Supreme Court
decided Bowers v. Hardwick. [Editor’s Note: Bowers v. Hardwick was a 1986 Supreme Court
case that ruled that consensual sodomy is protected by the Constitution.] Needless to say, that
was a disaster. All of the lawyers thought we were going to win Hardwick, albeit narrowly.
Instead, we lost narrowly.
There were many challenging issues on the lesbian and gay rights side of things. The military
issues were essentially a dead end, given the tradition of judicial deference to the military.
Mostly the Project steered clear of the litigation of any of those cases of that time. The Watkins
case was one where we did get involved. It was litigated out of the ACLU of Washington.
Watkins was a terrific case. It led to an important ruling on equal protection grounds in favor of
Perry Watkins. We all understood that the panel decision was not going to survive because it
found that sexual orientation classification should be subject to strict scrutiny but it turned out
well nevertheless. The great appeal of the case was that it also had an equitable estoppel issue,
because the Army had let him reenlist knowing that he was gay and then tried to strip him of
benefits. So the ACLU did win the Watkins case. It was the only military case that was won for
years and years, although it was ultimately won the estoppel question. It was a great case for
public education purposes as well. When the panel of the Ninth Circuit ruled for Perry Watkins
in that case, it got a huge amount of attention, as it should have.
I argued a case myself in the Eighth Circuit that involved funding for a gay student organization
at a public university. There had been a series of cases holding that public universities had to
recognize gay student groups. The case that I won in the Eighth Circuit took the law further and
held that the groups also had a right to funding on the same terms as other student groups. Also,
in the wake of Bowers v. Hardwick, with the Supreme Court having found that criminal laws
against sodomy were constitutional, what the movement then did was to go into state courts. We
challenged sodomy laws on state constitutional grounds where we thought state appellate courts
might be receptive. That was quite successful. That was also another example of how the state
affiliate network of the ACLU was invaluable, because it was our state affiliates who litigated a
lot of those cases. The Project assisted on the state sodomy challenges to various degrees. By the
time Lawrence [v. Texas] got to the Supreme Court seventeen years later, there were half a
dozen states, including ironically Georgia, where the state supreme court had found a sodomy
law unconstitutional under the state constitution, even though the US Supreme Court had said
that there was no federal constitutional right.
SI: Lawrence was the one that struck down the Texas law?
NH: Yes.
15

SI: Hand in hand with the AIDS-related efforts, that brought up a lot of other rights issues
regarding right to visit partners, inheritance, and issues like that. How did your project deal with
those issues?
NH: We did some model laws, including doing a model confidentiality law. For me personally,
it was fascinating because abortion obviously is a medical issue as well. So I had some personal
history in terms of litigating the constitutional dimensions of health related issues and some
experience in just working with medical experts. With AIDS, it cut across so many areas of
health related law. It was confidentiality. It was medical records, privacy. It was hospital
visitation. It was Medicaid coverage. It was private health insurance issues, employment issues,
school issues. It really ran the gamut. Almost every issue in American public law popped up
someplace in that context. The Project also did the Braschi case, which was a lesbian and gay
rights case, but came about because of AIDS when the so-called “roommate” of a man who lived
in a rent-controlled apartment died of AIDS. The legal question was whether the survivor would
be treated as a spouse under rent control regulations. We won that case in the New York Court
of Appeals. You never know why you win a case, but there are a lot of examples of that. So
who knows what was essential in winning or losing, but the fact that the man who died had died
of AIDS and there was growing public sympathy and understanding about the impact of that
disease on this community, I feel sure that helped us in reaching the judges in that case. Also, it
made it into something more significant than this one personal story because it was easy to
imagine that it applied to a lot more gay male couples than just this one couple. So the Braschi
case was an important victory for the ACLU in that time.
As with reproductive rights issues, we took our advocacy to many venues. We did congressional
testimony. We testified before state legislative committees. We wrote a book as well as writing
papers and op-eds. We did a lot of public speaking. This was all in addition to litigation. So we
had a very multi-dimensional focus to our advocacy.
SI: One of the questions I always ask about is the relationship between the legislative office and
the national office, where your main role is litigation and theirs is more addressing potential
laws. It sound like you found this, method by hiring Chai Feldblum. What other ways did you
work with the legislative office?
NH: Our primary goal for the legislative office was the enactment of the Americans with
Disabilities Act. That bill was at least as important to people with HIV and AIDS as it was to any
other disability group. There was an attempt at the very end by social conservatives to amend
the ADA to drop coverage of HIV. The disability groups held firm and refused to go there.
Unfortunately, conservatives did enact an amendment that excludes transgender from the
definition of disability, but that was just not a winnable issue at the time. So we all drew the line
was on HIV and AIDS. That was the main issue for us in Congress.
SI: In 1990, you left the project to go to Brooklyn Law?
NH: Right.
SI: What motivated you to do that?
NH: Well, it was a tough decision because my ACLU position was a great job. I was having a
great time doing it. I was very aware that it was an absolute plum job for anybody interested in
16

doing social change or public interest law. The truth was that I wanted to be able to speak in my
own voice and to be able to analyze and critique some of the framings that lawyers invariably
develop and have to develop in order to represent their clients and their issues. I felt like I could
have continued to do it for many years and it would have been very important work as we see,
but for me, it became less satisfying over time. I wanted to have an independent voice, and you
can’t engage in that sort of analysis and critique if you’re a spokesperson for an advocacy
organization. That’s just not appropriate. Plus, if you’re a lawyer you have clients. So, it was a
question of moving into a different role and being able to write and to write without worrying
that something I said might be used against my clients or somehow conflict with positions that
the ACLU was taking.
SI: In your career post going into academia, did you continue to work with the ACLU in later
cases like Windsor and others?
NH: Yes, I’ve continued to--for a while, I think I was counsel to the Project. I had to give that
up when I went into the Clinton Administration. I still participate in some strategy discussions.
I’m now also distinguished scholar with the Williams Institute, which is a research institute on
sexual orientation and gender identity at UCLA. So yes, I have remained very active. I’ve
written a number of amicus briefs. When I started teaching, I was still co-counsel--actually with
one of my Georgetown colleagues now, David Cole, in the National Endowment for the Arts
litigation that came out of a funding issue at the very beginning of the 1990s. Karen Finley was
the lead plaintiff in that case and I represented Holly Hughes. [Editor’s Note: National
Endowment for the Arts v. Finley was a 1998 United States Supreme Court case. The case
involved Karen Finley, a performance artist, who filed a suit against the National Endowment for
the arts.] David and I were the lead lawyers. That case was still going on when I went to work
for the Clinton Administration, so obviously I had to withdraw from that and from any ACLUrelated activities. Then after I left the Clinton job and went back into teaching, I started again
writing amicus briefs and consulting with people.
SI: Can we pause for a second?
NH: Sure.
[Tape Paused]
SI: I could probably be here all day asking about your time in the Clinton Administration, but
could you tell me how your work with the ACLU influenced your role in that administration, in
terms of policy related to AIDS and so forth? Obviously, you have no direct ties as you said. It
seems like it was a continuation of what you were trying to do there.
NH: Right. Yes. Well, it’s interesting. One of the cases that I did when I was at the ACLU was
a challenge to the CDC guidelines on the content of AIDS educational materials. That’s another
case on which David Cole and I were co-counsel. In fact, those were the two cases that I stayed
involved in as an attorney after I went into teaching: the NEA case and the CDC guidelines case.
So, as it turned out, when I went into the administration, those were still live matters. The NEA
had not yet gone to the Supreme Court. The CDC case, if I remember correctly, was mostly
resolved. I think we had settled it on very favorable grounds, but maybe there was some kind of
continuing supervision by the court. I’m not sure, but I do remember that the CDC guidelines
17

issue was one that I specifically recused myself from when I became deputy general counsel at
HHS because I had been involved in challenging the constitutionality of a previous version of it.
So there was a firewall and I had no role in advising the agency on that.
I was involved in other AIDS issues. For example, I represented the United States at two
international AIDS conferences. So I was able to have some influence in terms of HIV related
policy so long as it did not overlap with anything that I had been involved in before joining the
Administration. Of course, it was the Clinton Administration and not the Bush Administration,
so the policy became much better. The main thing that I worked on in the first year and a half
was legal work related to health reform. That’s the reason I wanted to go into the administration.
It was the great hope of 1993 and ‘94 was that there would be health reform. So, I did a lot of
work on a variety of issues related to health reform that built on my HIV work. One example was
privacy of medical records, which was something that I knew a great deal about because of the
work I had done regarding AIDS. Another issue was consumer rights, what I mean by that is
rights vis-à-vis health insurance companies. Again, that was something that had come up quite
frequently in the context of AIDS, so that was the context in which I learned that body of law;
then I took that knowledge with me to HHS. After health reform failed in 1994, I wrote this
memo saying that where the administration should go after that should be a health care bill of
rights, a patient bill of rights idea that was reframed in terms of insurance. Shortly after I’d left
the administration in1996, Congress created a presidential advisory commission on health care.
President Clinton appointed me as a member, although it was Secretary [of Health and Human
Services Donna] Shalala who put forward my name. It was in that context that I moved forward
on this effort to develop a health care bill of rights focused on access to health insurance
coverage. And it did emerge from the commission in, of course, compromise form. So, that was
another example the trajectory from working on HIV/AIDS issues to broader health law issues.
SI: You said things were a lot better under the Clinton Administration, but working within it, did
you find that they were receptive and really wanted to work on resolving these issues or was it
just playing to a constituency?
NH: In the previous twelve years there had been a major right wing effort to go after
progressives on these issues, and there certainly wasn’t that in the Clinton Administration. But
like any administration, the political leadership was constantly judging popular support for any
given issue. I didn’t expect it to be as if the ACLU had taken over the government or a gay
rights group had taken over the government. Life as a progressive public official is genuinely
complex and challenging. The greatest education for me was that it was the first time that I had
ever been in a position with a great deal of responsibility with multiple constituencies to be
accountable to. You’re not just accountable to an identity group or a community or even a set of
issues. For example, we had to deal with governors. Governors as a group were very important
in the administration of Medicaid, because it’s a joint federal/state project. Of course [there are
a] whole range of constituency groups and some dominate in Democratic administrations and
others dominate in Republican administrations, but they’re all always out there. You have to
navigate appropriately depending on what your policy goals are. That was a great learning
experience for me.
SI: Why did you leave the administration?

18

NH: At the time, there were quite a few law professors in the Clinton Administration and the
rule for all of us was--I think all of us got leaves of absence for two years and then an extension
to the third year. I think law school deans must have agreed on this timeline. After the third year,
you either went back or you lost your position--you lost tenure or you lost your tenure track
status or whatever. I was clear that I wanted to be in academia at that point for the same reasons
that led me there in the first place. Seeing from the inside was enormously valuable, but I never
intended to stay in that kind of position. So I was there for three years and then went back to
teaching. The woman I worked with, Harriet Rabb, was from Columbia Law School. [Editor’s
Note: Harriet Rabb was a Columbia Law professor and dean and then served as General Counsel
in the Department of Health and Human Services during the Clinton Administration. She has
been the general counsel of Rockefeller University since 2001.] She elected to stay. She’s a bit
older than I am and so, for her, I think losing tenure was not such a big deal, and she did lose her
position at Columbia
SI: Was that at the time that the Defense of Marriage Act was being pushed through? [Editor’s
Note: The Defense of Marriage Act, or DOMA, was passed in 1996. It originally stated that the
federal government did not have to recognize gay marriage. However, the Supreme Court
declared this section of the law unconstitutional. It is known as Section Three.]
NH: Yes, the Defense of Marriage Act was enacted in 1996. I arrived on June 1 of ‘93 and I left
on June 1 of ‘96. So, the Defense of Marriage Act, most of that activity was after I left, although
I was involved in some of the discussions because I knew the people who were involved at that
point.
SI: Was it shocking to you the way it turned out?
NH: Not really. It was so obviously a Republican gambit to force Clinton to either alienate the
gay community or alienate more conservative Democrats, whose votes were essential to his reelection. The bill passed Congress about three or four months before the election. It wasn’t any
surprise to me what he did. Of course, I wish he had acted differently, but I wished even more
that Republicans would not take over the Executive Branch in 1996. The Republicans did exactly
the same thing with welfare reform that they did with DOMA. That same summer of ‘96. If my
recollection is correct, they passed a punitive version of welfare reform. The administration had
proposed a very different approach to welfare reform. They passed that and the Defense of
Marriage Act and Clinton signed both. In doing so he alienated folks who were active in antipoverty efforts and he alienated gay rights people. But, the people in both of those groups had to
ask, compared to what? Are you going to vote for Clinton or are you going to vote for--the
Republican nominee, Bob Dole. So, to me, the outcome of that process--there’s nothing noble
on either side of that game, but I wasn’t surprised by the outcome.
SI: We are getting close to four. I wonder if we can jump ahead and you can tell me a little bit
about your involvement with the Windsor case. [Editor’s Note: United States v. Windsor is a
2013 Supreme Court case which declared Section 3 of the Defense of Marriage Act
unconstitutional.]
NH: For the Windsor case, my only significant involvement was my writing an amicus brief.
Since I left the government and came back to teach, I have been involved, I’ve helped people
moot arguments and I continue to participate in a group called “the roundtable.” It’s a meeting
19

every year or twice a year of the lawyers from all of the LGBT legal organizations, plus a few of
us who are grandfathered or grandmothered into it because we once worked for those
organizations and now we’re academics. There are three of us who are in that category. A lot of
strategy discussions happen at those meetings. That’s been my involvement in it.
SI: Is there anything else you would like to add about your time at the ACLU?
NH: Not that I can think of at the moment.
SI: Well, you can always add stuff to the transcript. I really appreciate all your time today. If I
have some follow-ups can I give you a call?
NH: Of course. Sure.
SI: Thank you very much
NH: Sure.
