FARRELL: This is Shanna Farrell with Phyllis Massino on September 20, 2015 in
Huntington, New York. We are doing an interview for the Rosie the Riveter
project. Phyllis, can you start by telling me where and when you were born, and
a little bit about your early life?

MASSINO: I was born October 4, 1925, which makes me ninety this year. I was born
in The Bronx, New York.

FARRELL: Can you tell me a little bit about your parents, what their names were?

MASSINO: Oh, sure. To Lena and Tom Cicarelli. They were young; my mother was
about, I think she was just barely twenty when she had me, and my father was
twenty-three. They were young. We lived in The Bronx almost all of my life till
I was twelve years old. Then my father had a house built in Throgs Neck, and we
went to live there. This was the country. There were five houses on the block.
And we just loved it, because we had come from apartment houses, always lived on
the fifth floor. My father said the air was cleaner there; it was also cheaper,
so that’s why we lived up there. I think my life really began probably in
Throgs Neck. I was twelve when we moved there. When I was thirteen, the boy
around the corner came into my life, and he started coming to my house every
day. I was thirteen and he was sixteen, and we became friends. My mother said,
“You’re too young to leave the house.” Very strict Italian family. So my
mother said, “He can come here every day, but you don’t go anyplace.”
Okay, so that was part of the rules. And he did, and we had a very nice
relationship. The only thing was, we knew that he had rheumatic fever, he had a
hole in his heart, and he was supposed to die when he was eighteen. So being
very romantic and believing that love conquers all at that age, we said, “Nah,
that’ll never happen. We’ll make it not happen, of course.” So when he was
eighteen, he said, “Well, I think I have to get a job. I have to start
working,” because he was being homeschooled, but not by his parents. The board
of education sent a teacher to his house, and that’s how he got his education.
He was a Boy Scout, made a lot of little things, and we did a lot of projects
together. He was a sweet boy. Very respectful. Then he went to work. When he
went to work, he went to G &amp; G Precision Company -- remember that. He went there
to work, but within a year he passed away, as the doctors knew he would. So I
was sixteen, he was nineteen, when he passed away. Love does not conquer all. I
was heartbroken! By the time I was eighteen, I graduated school, and his friend
came over and said to me, “How would you like to work where John worked? Now
they’re taking in women for defense, and do you think you’d like to take his
job? They’re doing that now.” So I said, “Sure, I’ll try.” I said,
“But I’m making twelve dollars a week, don’t take me anyplace I’m not
going to make more than twelve dollars a week.” So he said, “How about forty
dollars a week?” That was the first time that they gave one dollar an hour to
anybody, that’s when it started. I went there, and I worked there for three
years. In the three years, I met my husband, who was a foreman, he was the
foreman of the girls. There were ten girls and about thirty men. I was nineteen
years old, so I went out with two other young men, but after three months I said
no, I don’t see anything worthwhile here. Then he was the third one I went out
with, and he turned out to be the one. We got engaged I think a year later, we
were married two years later. That’s about it as far as the life story goes.

FARRELL: Before we get to your work at G &amp; G, I want to back up a little bit. So
your parents had immigrated here from Italy.

MASSINO: No. They were born here. My grandparents all came from Italy. But my
parents were born here in the Belmont section of The Bronx. I was born on
Washington Ave. My parents had a basement apartment in my aunt’s house. My
grandmother lived with my aunt and uncle and cousin Mary. It was a two family house.

FARRELL: Okay, so your parents were born here. Were you living in -- can you
tell me a little bit about the neighborhood in The Bronx that you lived in? Was
there a big Italian community?

MASSINO: Yes. Very poor and very big community of Italian people, and there’s
still -- probably a lot of people might know Arthur Avenue, and that’s where I
used to go shopping with my mother and my aunts and my grandmother, and of
course that place is still there. Where I was born is not there, it burned to
the ground at one time, so that’s over with. But it was a wonderful
neighborhood. We moved out of the basement when I was three years old. There, my
aunt had a two-story house and it was only about a block away from where we
lived, on the fifth floor. So we used to come down every day to be with Grandma
and my aunt. We used to sit on the porch, you said hi to the people going by. We
were a very friendly neighborhood with our neighbors. I went to public school
around the corner. In school we had something I have never seen before in a
school -- a dentist’s office. On certain days my teacher would get a call on
the intercom and told which child had to be sent down for dental work. We had to
have permission slips signed from parents as to if they wanted work done on
their child. On my days, my mother would come and see what the dentist was
doing. There was no charge at all. He was very good with children. I think he
was probably the first dentist I ever went to. My best friend was next door. My
best friend’s mother came in and witnessed and helped with my birth, which was
at home. And then, when she was born, my mother helped and was there at her
birth. We were friends all of our lives. She died about ten years ago. But
friends all our lives. In fact, I have quite a few friends that I’ve been like
friends for forty, fifty years, but now they’re all about gone. It’s lonely
to be ninety, it is, because half the people -- most of the people,
three-quarters -- are gone. I am also the last person in my family left. Now
starts my children, but the older folks are all gone.

FARRELL: Can you tell me a little bit about what your parents did as far as jobs?

MASSINO: My father was a plasterer, which all the houses at one time were not
made of this paper, cardboard, or anything, it was all plaster, as this house
is, too. During the Depression, nobody was building houses, couldn’t afford
to. So he was gone -- once he went to Florida to try to get work there, he heard
that there’s work there. He tried a lot of things. He even had a cab, a
taxicab. They allow you to work in a taxicab a certain amount of time, but then
you have to buy, what was it again, a label. Not a label. Medallion, right. You
had to buy that, and that cost hundreds, so he didn’t want to do that.
Couldn’t afford to. So then heard of a job helping a man who had a publishing
business, and he heard that he needed truck helpers, truck driver helper, and he
went to do that, which he did for quite a while. In fact, he did it for so many
years that finally, the man he helped offered the business to him, and he’s
such a great guy, this boss, that he let him pay him off as the money came to
him, as he worked for the money. That’s what he did -- he bought the business.
And finally, he ended up having his own trucking business, and that was for a
long time after. But that was the time that we finally, we were able to have our
house built in Throgs Neck. My mother was a stay-at-home mom. The last time she
worked before she got married, she was a dress operator. They used to have
dresses with beading on them, a lot of beading, and that was the flapper era.
She used to go to a factory and put the beading on the dresses. Then once she
had me, and then I had two brothers; one of them died very young and one of them
I still have, he’s eighty-two years old, and that was it, she really never
worked in a factory or anyplace. Just took each of us. But she had me go every
summer to work. I went to an all-girls high school, Jane Adams High School,
which was for all girls and it was all girls’ services, like a beautician -- I
took dressmaking. But it seemed like the only thing I was fit for was to go into
these factories, which were sweatshops. At these places, the women were really,
oh, they used to get hysterical if they didn’t get the work. So I went in as a
finisher, because I was new. I did that every summer. Not good enough as a dress
operator yet. Once a relative said, “Oh, come with me, it’ll be a great job
for you.” She was making taffeta bedspreads. I was new to the machine. That
taffeta kept slipping away, gave me a really hard time. The more I had jobs like
that, the more I said, “I don’t like this kind of work, you know?” I
didn’t want to do it. But anyway, finally, at the defense plant, we were
working on Navy orders. We were making metal bushings. We had to wear heavy
gloves, and the coils that came off the bushings, you had to pull them with your
hands. I had to learn how to read a micrometer. [Section added by narrator
during editing process: It’s a very precise instrument and it measures mostly
metal that I know of. For fun we used to measure a lock of hair -- it can do
that too. The reason it took me about a month to get the hang of it was, yes you
want the numbers on the dial, but if you squeeze it too tight it will be wrong,
or too loose it would be wrong too. It’s all in the feel of the way you
control the shaft. Very important to hold it softly to get the right readings.
Each bushing had to be measured to certain specifications. It became easier as I
got used to it.] Then I had to measure them as they cooled off, make sure I got
the right reading on them. It was hard work, didn’t like it, happy to give it
up. [Laughs]

FARRELL: Before you started working for G &amp; G, was that when you were working on
the taffeta quilts?

MASSINO: Yes, before that. Oh, no, no, that was before. The job I had before I
was working for G &amp; G at twelve dollars a week was, I was working for Van Dutch
Chocolate Company -- Dessert Company. Van Dutch Dessert Company, and we used to
make Jell-O and it was funny, in the winter we used to make the Jell-O in
glasses and put it out the window sill. It was all business neighborhood. The
soot was crazy, all over the place, but we put the glasses outside, because
that’s where it was cold. Within an hour, you had Jell-O all ready. And we
only used tap water. It was fun. That was the twelve-dollar-a-week job. I had my
own machine, and I used to make the boxes with a little copper-colored clip came
out of the machine to hold the boxes together, because all of these boxes were
going to go overseas, and they were all desserts. But all the girls used to take
little pieces of paper and put it in with the boxes, we put our names and
addresses, you know? A couple of times the cooks wrote back to us. Then another
thing we did was, we belonged to the USO as well. We used to go dancing at
different places and have hot chocolate and something, we’d sit down and talk
with the boys. Maybe at least once a week we used to do that for quite a bit of
the war.

FARRELL: So you were about, when the war started, you were about eighteen years old?

MASSINO: Yeah, just graduated high school.

FARRELL: Can you tell me a little bit about the start of the war, your memories.
Did you know that it was coming?

MASSINO: Well, the newspapers were frightening. That’s all they wrote about,
but they scared us the way they put it. It sounded like the enemy would be up
the block soon.

FARRELL: Can you tell me a little bit more about that?

MASSINO: That was, the whole thing was those newspapers when they said that
Japan was considering coming into the United States, I think we all got
hysterical. We were scared stiff of the Japanese people. We didn’t know too
much about them anyway, but just the thought of them. And then we got -- always
the papers, had no TV at the time. TV didn’t come till 1950; I had my first
child then. It was just such a frightening time. The rationing, well, you know,
we managed somehow. I used to get bags, plastic bags of white stuff and you got
a little yellow thing with it, a little package of yellow stuff, and then you
had to mix that together, and that was your butter. It was horrible. I mean,
people didn’t go for much bread and butter in those days, believe me. Because
it was a mess. But we did that.

FARRELL: Do you remember when you heard the news that the war had actually
started, or that Pearl Harbor had been attacked?

MASSINO: Oh, we were so scared. I don’t remember too much about that because
it was so far away. My Dad and I both worked at G&amp;G for about six months. He
worked there at night. At times we would work on the same machine. When we did
that, he would make a little extra and put it aside and say to me, “Use this
for tomorrow.” That was nice. He didn’t work there too long. I think for
about six months he worked there, at night. And he tried to work in the day,
too. It was hard. [Section added by narrator during editing process: My dad and
I had a Victory Garden, mostly vegetables, but we threw in a few flowers to make
it pretty. My mom cooked up great dishes with the string beans, spinach, and
tomatoes. She did not like weeding. I did some on Sunday and Dad did the rest.
We were very proud of ourselves, Dad and I.]

FARRELL: Do you remember why he couldn’t work during the day?

MASSINO: When he couldn’t?

FARRELL: You said that he wanted to work during the day. Do you know why he
wasn’t able to?

MASSINO: He wanted to do his trucking business. There’s something about that.
And we were in a flood when we moved to that house, the flood of ’38, and the
water was seven feet into our basement. But we didn’t have a downstairs
basement, it was a walk-in basement. Seven feet of water. A little dog jumped up
the steps. We were taking care of my cousin’s -- my mother’s cousin’s
little dog. She was going to Europe, so she left her dog with us. So this little
dog used to stay downstairs, because my mother didn’t like animals. So I hear
him barking, which he didn’t do. We had all gone to bed, really. I said,
“Whitey, what’s the matter?” When I went to say that, I saw the water
right up behind him. Oh my god. I started screaming for my parents. Well, the
firemen came and they took us out in the boats. Terrible night! While we were in
the boats, we could see rats running across the top of the water. That was the
worst part, just seeing that. But that was when we first moved in to that house.
I think we were into that house maybe not even a month. It was some welcome, I
tell you. It was a nightmare.

FARRELL: What was the recovery like for that? What did you have to do to recover
from that?

MASSINO: Believe it or not, the next day we went back and it was dry. What had
happened was, we had a wall that was built up around Throgs Neck, the wall had
broken because the storm was so fierce and it had broken down that wall. We
lived actually about two blocks from the water, but it came in all that way.
When we were in the boat with the firemen, I hear my uncle calling -- we’re on
the boat, and he’s calling our names, “Where are you?” Because we were in
like a depression of the lay of the land, and my uncle was on the highest part,
and all he did was yell, Uncle John kept calling us and calling us, and finally
I said, “That sounds like Uncle John.” Finally, when they took us up on dry
land, it was him we went home with. He was there with his car. Our cars,
everything was covered with water. It was really something. We didn’t know how
we would get out of there. The next day, as the tide went back, it was dry. But
you know what it was? All that mud, horrible, smelly mud that whatever was in
it, covered with it, you had to throw out, you just couldn’t clean it, you
couldn’t wash it enough. It was really a lot of experiences, I’ll tell you.

FARRELL: You were also eighteen when you started working at G &amp; G? You told me a
little bit about how you had gotten the job. Can you tell me about what the
training was like, or maybe even the interview process when you applied for the job?

MASSINO: Actually, no training. On the job, it really was. But they were very
careful with us, especially the ladies, make sure you got this and that, your
gloves. Especially the gloves, because we were always working with hot steel.
One day the owner of the business, he was a doctor of metals? Metallurgics or
something like that. So he came around, and I was kind of a glamour girl, and he
came around, he said to me, “Why did you come here to work?” I was taken
back, you know? I said to him, “Aren’t we all working here for our
country?” I was shocked. And he says, “You gave the right answer.” Testing
me. But most of us were young. I would say at least half of us were eighteen to
twenty to start. The others, well, they came from all around. They came from --
one came from -- there’s that Polish town, oh, I forget what you call it. It
must have been over by Brooklyn. [Section added by narrator during editing
process: The girl from Greenpoint and I became friends. Her name was Sarah but
they called her Sacha and that’s what she wanted us to call her. She was
polite and she invited me to her sister’s wedding. It was interesting and of
course her family had a young man they wanted me to meet. That didn’t work out
at all. He was so shy, he hardly talked. We always laughed about that and
referred to him as “Silent Sam.” Another lady, Mary, was from Manhattan and
she liked that I always wore earrings to match every outfit or top that you
could see under the jumper top. So one day she asked how many earrings I had and
I told her about one hundred and she asked if I had a lot of good ones. I told
her no, mine were all about fifty cents to one dollar. She decided she wanted to
get me a good pair. She took me to dinner one night at Schraffts and then she
took me to “Repacqe.” It was an upscale jewelry store. The interior was all
leopard skin and lights. She wanted to get me a fifty dollar pair but I refused
it. I did not want the responsibility of expensive earrings. So she got me a ten
dollar pair because I would not let her spend more. Word got out in the shop
that she took me to dinner and gave me earrings. I told them we were only
friends and she wasn’t special to me. But one of the young men asked if I
really did have one hundred earrings. I say yes and that I would bring them in
sometime. Well one day he asked me when I was going to bring them in and I said
next week, which I did and counted them in front of everyone. He said, “If you
do all of this just to confirm my curiosity, I will bring you in a pair next
week to add to the collection.” He did. He made his sister buy them and they
were so awful. I only work them for work. He was one of the boys who were
drafted and he never came back.]

FARRELL: Greenpoint?

MASSINO: Yes, she came from there, and some came from New Jersey. I don’t know
how they got the jobs, but I know how I got it.

FARRELL: What was it like to learn on the job?

MASSINO: It was hard, very hard. Because I had to know how to read the
micrometer, and that wasn’t too easy, because you had to handle this hot
metal, which we used to try to wait. They’d say to us, Wait till it cools off
and then take it, then do it. We wore jumpsuits, that’s what they wanted us to
wear, to be covered, jumpsuits. Had the hair back, because when you were looking
over to measure the metal, they didn’t want your hair falling in or anything,
so we had to keep it back. I didn’t like that work, it was terrible. And
smoke, smoke all the time. Plus you had to put some kind of liquid on it, so
that it cuts better. You had to learn how to sharpen those bits that go on --
that do the cutting. That was hard. It was on a wheel, you had to do that. That
wasn’t easy to do, really, especially I always had long nails, you know? So I
said I gotta do it with my gloves on. That’s where my husband came in.
[Laughs] I used to say to him, “Please, could you do this for me?” And
he’d go, “Sure, no problem.” Then started to go out with him, and he was
the sweetest guy. [To daughter, who is in room:] Show the picture of Dad. You
don’t have any pictures of him, I thought you might want some.

FARRELL: Sure, yeah.

MASSINO: This is him, in the middle.

FARRELL: How long was he a foreman at the factory before you were there?

MASSINO: Oh, quite a while. Maybe a year. He wore thick glasses, that’s why he
was not in the service. Well, he was there as long as the girls were there. I
think that’s when he started to be a foreman. He was in charge of the girls.
And this -- this was our first date here. Right from the factory we went out.

FARRELL: Just zooming in on that a little bit.

MASSINO: Oh yeah, I used to give him my lunches, yeah. Because he liked the
homemade food, and my mother always gave me omelets and -- and I gave it to him.

FARRELL: Can you tell me a little bit more about your -- so you had to wear
gloves, and you had to wear jumpsuits. And you said there was a lot of smoke.
Did you have to wear masks at all?

MASSINO: Sometimes when the smoke got too much, we had to wear the masks, yeah.

FARRELL: Do you remember any accidents or any workplace safety issues that came
up that you had to have addressed? Or that he would’ve had to deal with as the foreman?

MASSINO: Oh, I know one, yes. Well, he was out with a virus or something for a
couple of days, so another fellow took over. He sent me to work on a drill
press. I was, at the time, about 120 pounds, so went on this drill press, and as
I pulled down the handle, it lifted me right up. I was just too light for it,
you know? I’m yelling, “What happened? What happened?” And they all come
running and they help me down. They said, What are you doing on this machine? I
said, So-and-so sent me. He told me to do this. So then they had to talk to him
and say, The girls do not do this machine, they’re too light for it. That’s
about the only thing I remember. Mostly it was very safe, and they were always
checking for different things, make sure the machines were timed right. It
didn’t seem hazardous at the time, except for what you breathed in, it was
awful. In three years I don’t think it did any harm, [Section added by
narrator during editing process: but I’m sure it affected my husband to breath
in all that smoke. He was also a smoker of one pack a day. When he was in his
sixties he had emphysema and I’m sure that smoke from the work did not help
him with the cigarettes as well. He died at seventy-one.]

FARRELL: Do you remember some of the other jobs that people were working on in
the same factory, or was everybody working on the bushings?

MASSINO: Yes, we were all working on all different sized bushings. These were
for the Navy ships. I once worked on one that was an inch, just an inch long,
but all I had to do on that was to de-burr it. But on a wheel, one of those
wheels that was for -- how do you call them? They were sandpaper wheels? And I
was just de-burring them. But mostly we had nice-sized bushings, I would say
about two to seven inches. I think seven was about the longest.[ Section added
by narrator during editing process: I don’t know if anyone knows what
deburring is, but sometimes after the autsede is done, it might come out with a
small overhang. On the big ones we’d use a planer and took it off quickly by
hand. On the small ones it always had burrs on them. So they had another step to
them and you did them all on the sand paper wheel stones. [Section deleted by
narrator during editing process.]

FARRELL: Once you pulled the metal off, what would happen to it?

MASSINO: Well, then it was a new measurement. Then we had to measure it. We had
to wait till it cooled off, and then measure it. And if it wasn’t the right
measurement, either you cut more or -- [Laughs] or then it was no good. Then you
got into trouble. Too many of those they didn’t like. Believe me, we were very careful.

FARRELL: So some of it got used, and some of it didn’t.

MASSINO: Mostly all got used. Because then the men knew how to fix it up,
that’s what they’d do. But with us ladies, we really didn’t know what we
were doing, we just did what we were told. We just didn’t have the feeling for
it like the men did. And you know what? When the men were in the service -- they
used to tell us, let’s say, Oh, we can’t wait to get back, I want to get
back to my farm, I want to get back to this, back to that. So when us girls were
together, we’d say, “I want to go and be a salesgirl someplace, be dressed
up, look nice.” So those were our dreams. I had my dream, though. I went to
work for Bloomingdale’s, and I loved it. It’s funny, how everybody’s got
their own dream of what they want to do. That’s how we looked at it. I was
just a salesgirl and hat model in the millinery department. Just loved it.

FARRELL: Can you tell me a little bit more about some of the women that you
worked with and maybe some friendships that you formed while you worked there?

MASSINO: [Section added by narrator during editing process: On Saturdays we
worked half days. All of us girls would go into New York City which was only a
train ride away. We’d have lunch and sometimes go to a play. We loved to go to
McGinni’s and have clams and clam chowder on to Morning to You, who had ham
and eggs all day and served it in a small frying pan. We kind of became a small
family, but not overly so.] One girl was heavy, and we became friends. She and I
used to go to the gym. We went to a gym that was outdoors. First time I had ever
seen an outdoor gym. Up on a rooftop, yeah, on the West Side. She lived not too
far from there. But I still had to go, oh, to The Bronx, you know? That was all
right. I was becoming a veteran traveler of trains. One girl used to get letters
from her husband in the service. One time, when we walked into the break room,
she was sitting there crying because he had been injured. A lot of unhappiness
around at that time. Once when I came home and my mother said she hadn’t heard
from an aunt of mine -- not a real aunt. In the Italian people, when you have
good friends, you call them aunt, you know, and she was called my aunt. But it
was her nephew, and he was killed in battle. So there was a lot of heartaches
around at the time, really. We just couldn’t wait for it to be over. But
I’ll tell you, what happened when it was over? We were all in the -- all
working, and somebody, one of the higher-ups in the office, came on and said,
“Well, girls, the war is over, so you don’t have to come in Monday.”

FARRELL: That’s how you found out the war was over?

MASSINO: That’s how we found out.

FARRELL: What was the reaction in the factory after that?

MASSINO: We were mad. What a way to tell us, as far as that goes. But we were
happy the war was over. But they said -- I guess they were happy to get rid of
us, that’s how we felt about it.

FARRELL: Did you know that that was coming?

MASSINO: No. Couldn’t imagine how it was going to be. But they didn’t, like,
say, “Okay, in a week, in a day.” No, that’s how they said it.

FARRELL: Did they lay off everybody at that time, women and men?

MASSINO: No, not the men. Only the girls. They didn’t need us anymore. But I
don’t know why, because they had -- they still had our places empty. It
isn’t that those people were coming back. And a couple, at least three that I
know right away didn’t come back. But that’s how they did it.

FARRELL: And when you were working there, can you tell me a little bit about the
commute that you had to make to get there?

MASSINO: I had to take a bus to the train, and then I had to take two trains to
reach Long Island City. Then I’d get off at Long Island City, I think it was
Jackson Place. I worried so much about the war and how things were going. I had
two cousins in it. One was in Iraq at the time, they called it Persia, and my
other cousin was in Italy. We worried about them, and I used to stop in at the
church and just go in and light a candle every so often for them. Then I’d go
to work. Altogether different feeling in those days, as there was later on, once
it was all over. I mean, such nice boys, all of them. Young boys worked there,
but they were all going to be drafted.

FARRELL: Did most people that you encountered or that you knew feel a sense of
patriotism and like you were helping the war effort? Sort of the climate, the
tone of the time.

MASSINO: More or less, I would say, but never talking about it, really. Just you
knew. There were signs all over about slip of the lip -- we didn’t talk about
what we did or who we were working for, because we weren’t supposed to let
anybody know that we were working on Navy -- had a Navy contract. So there were
signs all over, Don’t say anything. And we didn’t. I mean, I’ll talk about
it now, but in those days you didn’t, you just didn’t.

FARRELL: Can you tell me a little bit more about -- was there a union at all?

MASSINO: Yeah.

FARRELL: There was a union there. My husband belonged to it for years. It was
the machinists and long shoremens’ union.

MASSINO: There was a union.

FARRELL: Were you a member of the union?

MASSINO: Yes, and in fact I was -- at one point I was the secretary and I took
notes for them. Let me think. What was the name of the union? It’s funny, I
belonged to a union but I don’t think it had to do with this one, where they
were the confectioner -- oh, that was the dessert company. Confectionary Workers
and Pickle Workers Union, together. [Laughs] No, that wasn’t for this one,
though. This one was just a regular -- I can’t remember. I don’t think it
was funny, so I don’t remember it as well.

FARRELL: How did you get involved as the secretary?

MASSINO: They needed one. We all went to the meetings, paid our dues, and they
said, We need a secretary. Okay. That was it.

FARRELL: What kind of things would you talk about at the union meetings?

MASSINO: About what’s going on in the shop, how the bosses treated you,
whether you needed anything. I think that’s about it.

FARRELL: You leisure time, you had mentioned that you were involved with the
USO. Can you tell me a little bit more about that?

MASSINO: We used to go, mostly at night, and they used to have the meetings at
different places. Apartment houses had basements, and they used to sometimes
have the meetings there. Then there was one in New York that we used to go to,
but not so much -- it was too far away. If we had to go there, we wouldn’t go.
It was just too far. Because I had friends who lived in Long Island City, and
they wanted to go from there, so I was kind of the outsider who lived in the
boondocks, you know? So this was where we mostly had the meetings, in the
different apartment houses that had community rooms or big basements. And there
was always somebody there who came with the doughnuts and with the official
labels on themselves. Yeah, we did that all the time. Then we used to write to
them, to the soldiers. And officials used to say to us, If you know who you’re
taking home, you can take them home, but know what you’re doing. They used to
give us a lot of talks about that before, because they didn’t want just
anybody coming home. So my mother always used to welcome them with open arms,
and she said, “We’re going to put the sign here, USO,” she said. She’d
always say, “I got leftover macaroni, who wants it?” And we’d always find
somebody to have it. There were some good times, too. It seems so long ago, like
a dream.

FARRELL: Can you tell me a little bit about what happened when the war ended,
where you ended up? So they told you at work that the war had ended and then you
weren’t supposed to come back. What did you do from there?

MASSINO: I went to Bloomingdale’s.

FARRELL: So you went right from there to Bloomingdale’s, okay.

MASSINO: Yeah, because that was our dream, a couple of us went there.

FARRELL: Was it hard to find a job there then?

MASSINO: No, because they more or less took us with open arms, because of where
we had worked, you know. No, maybe it was the right time, I don’t know.
Probably the right time, the right place. We were about, I think we were three
that stuck together, and all about the same age, so I think they were happy to
get us.

FARRELL: How did you see things change in New York after the war ended?

MASSINO: In New York. Well, you didn’t see all those soldiers and sailors
around like most of the time there were. That’s it. I used to go -- we girls
used to go from Long Island City, we used to go into New York to see a play at
least once a month, play and dinner out. Well, after that, we weren’t going
there anymore, because we had different jobs, and by then I was about to get
married. I got married from Bloomingdale’s, I was working there. The girls
there were so cute. They took me to Central Park for my shower. They gave me
little kitchen things, you know? The food was pies. [Laughs] Never forget that.
We had a lot of fun, though. And Bloomingdale’s, we had a lot of fun. It
wasn’t as easy to have fun in the defense plant. But I gotta say, the men were
very courteous, very nice to us all the time, very helpful -- oh, except for one
thing I forgot to tell you. One day they sent me to, what did they call it now,
they called the tool crib, for a left-handed micrometer. They looked at me,
really? No such thing. They were teasing me. [Laughs] That was it as far as fun
went. Once we got back in a normal routine, then things got a lot better. Once
the boys started coming home, oh, thank god. It was something. Then I got
married. Oh, so while I was in Bloomingdale’s, the buyer said to me, “You
know, you’re really an up person. I’d like you for my assistant.” I said,
“Really?” And she said, “Yeah.” Because I worked there about two years.
So I said, “Oh, that’s great. I’d love to be your assistant.” Doesn’t
happen that way, you know, but I believed her. Whether she knew that it
wouldn’t happen, I don’t know. But all I know is that one day this young
woman comes in, and they said, “Oh, she’s from Canada, but she’s going to
be your new buyer.” I couldn’t work there anymore. Could not work there
anymore. So my girlfriend called me and she said, “You know, they need an
assistant manager in a hosiery shop. Will you try it?” And it was on Wall
Street. Oh, more of a ride down, you know? But that’s okay. So I said yeah, I
can’t work with her anymore, because I feel she didn’t tell me the right thing.

FARRELL: How long were you at Bloomingdale’s for, total?

MASSINO: About two years.

FARRELL: And at that time you had started seeing people come home from the war.
How did you see the workforce change? Were there less women working then, and
were the men getting their old jobs back? Or there wasn’t very much of a
difference that you experienced?

MASSINO: Well, in Bloomingdale’s, the men didn’t have too many jobs. It was
mostly the women. So actually I didn’t see that.

FARRELL: And did your husband stay on as the foreman after the war was over? Did
he stay with G &amp; G?

MASSINO: Yeah, he stayed with them, I think, another year or so. But then we got
married, and he said, “You know, this is the only work I’ve ever known.
I’d like to see if I can do anything else.” He had visions of being a
salesperson too, but he was not that type. He was good with people, but he was
not aggressive, you know, like when you had to make a sale, he didn’t have
what it took, really, to do that. So I said to him, “Look, we’re getting
married, okay. So for a couple of years I’ll keep working.” I have a good
job as an assistant manager in a hosiery shop. You ever hear of Albert’s
Hosiery? One of their shops. For three years he tried different things. He tried
being a salesman of jewelry, of car parts, of manufacturing screws and things
like that. It didn’t work out. So he says, “Well, I tried. I’m ready to go
back to my work.” And he did. So he went back, and we had our first child. We
were living in my parents’ house, we had an apartment in their house. You know
how life is? It ended up that my parents’ last home was in my house, my
basement. We made an apartment for them. Would you believe that? Isn’t it
funny how life works out? [Section added by narrator during editing process: My
parents lived in my finished basement, Dad for five years and then passed on,
and Mom for fifteen years. They lived in half of our basement. We made three
rooms for them.]

FARRELL: It is, yeah.

MASSINO: Then he started working in, what was it, Reeves Instrument, and it was
over in Long Island, but over here. So he says, “I can’t take that commute.
We’re going to have to do something.” So I said, “Okay, what do you want
to do?” He says, “My brother and my cousin and me want to build a house.
That’s what I want to do.” [Section added by narrator during editing
process: In 1955 I was expecting my third child and we knew we were ready for
our own home. My husband is a precision machinist. He brother is a draftsman and
he helped build the first MR1 machine. His cousin was in heating and
refrigeration at Montefiore Hospital in The Bronx. This was the work backgrounds
of the three men who built my house in one and a half years. My third child has
his first birthday here and I have lived here for sixty years. We had two more
children after we moved here.] This is the house. I lived in it for sixty years,
never fell apart. Got a basement downstairs, made an apartment for my parents.
Now my grandson and his wife live there. We raised five children in this house.
What else can I tell you?

FARRELL: Can you tell me a little bit about some of the biggest lessons or some
of the biggest things that you took with you from your time working at G &amp; G or
working during World War II?

MASSINO: [Section added by narrator during editing process: The experiences I
had at G7G never left me and came in handy when I needed them. In 1975 Bill felt
he didn’t want to work for anyone else. He wanted his own shop. He decided he
would try to set up a shop in half of our basement and see if he could do it.
Turns out it worked out well. He worked from blueprints and he did first samples
for big companies on Long Island. They had all been in the war effort and were
now turning to peace time work. Bill made the samples and designing the work
effort and he did very well for fifteen years. Because I knew the work and he
did have a small lathe like I used to work on, I was able to help him with
different things. Also I helped him when he had a deadline to meet and took care
of inspection and again my handy micrometer came in. Sometimes I delivered
worked for him too if it wasn’t too far. I didn’t like to go to areas I
didn’t know. After fifteen years his lungs began to give out. I’m sure the
solvent he used for cutting the metal did not help. Again my experience during
the war came in handy. In his last year as he felt life slipping from him, I
worked right next to him and he’s talk me through some jobs so we could
finished them and meet his deadlines. We worked together right to his end.]

FARRELL: What you learned about yourself?

MASSINO: Well, I learned that I could do things if I have to, that’s for sure.
Because the whole three years, I mean, I hate to say it, but did not like it. It
was not a woman’s job, really. But the money was there, the patriotism was
there, we felt good about working there. So any time we’d say, “Ugh, I hate
that job,” but it’s for a good cause, that’s what you’ve got to think
of. We used to comfort each other. Because I was not the only one. Almost all of
us didn’t like the work. I think maybe two girls really liked the work and
wanted to stick with it. Go ahead. But you can do a lot when you have to. And
weren’t these poor fellows going out to a war, did they want to? They didn’t
want to. So that’s what we always -- we told each other that. It’s for them
that we’re doing it, and we just gotta do it. And we did. So really, you
learned a lot of stick-to-it-iveness, really.

FARRELL: And what are some of the things that you’d like future generations to
know about your experiences or World War II in general?

MASSINO: Well, I think I’ve just about said it, that if there’s a job to be
done, you have to do it. But you have to also look at yourself and say, Can I do
this for the reason that I’m supposed to? We just did it, you know? As I keep
saying, most of us did not like the work, it was not nice work, it’s not what
a woman would want to do. But we did it when we had to. And that’s what young
people have to realize, that there are some times you do things in life that you
don’t want to do, but you do it for a reason, you do it because it has to be
done, and that’s all there is to it. And then, you know, my husband, have to
admire that these three men made this house, a year and a half of weekends. As
the money came in, we gave it out, but this was our dream house. This is what we
wanted, and we were always happy here. They used to come to my house in The
Bronx, my parents’ house, every Friday night and look at a book, how to build
a house. Would you believe anybody would do it? But they did it. And then his
cousin built the house next door, but that is a house that’s on a mountain
kind of thing, it goes down -- the back is all open, so they couldn’t do it,
there’s too much to it, and they were not experienced enough. But they were
willing to try. So I used to babysit -- they lived here for quite a while, they
had two children. Me, with my -- I always had a baby, it seemed, I babysat their
children in with my children whenever they needed it, and that’s how I paid
them back a little bit.

FARRELL: Is there anything else that you want to add?

MASSINO: No, just that I’m proud of what we did. I think we accomplished all
the things that mattered to us in this life. Now I’m always sad, because every
time I turn around, another friend dies. But that’s life, I guess. So I’ve
been living in this house sixty years. Wonderful years, raised five wonderful
people and would not change a thing.

FARRELL: Well, thank you so much.

MASSINO: Oh, my pleasure.

