REDMAN: My name is Sam Redman, and today is May 11, 2012, and I’m sitting
down today with Mary Hall Prout, in Greenbrae, California. Mary eventually
became a teacher, then head teacher, then director of the early childhood
development programs in Richmond, California. So today, that’ll be most of
what we talk about. But I’d like to first begin by asking you if you could
tell me your full name and where you were born.

PROUT: Before I was married?

REDMAN: Sure, that’s fine. We can start with that.

PROUT: It was Mary Agnes Hall.

REDMAN: And Mary just spelled M-A-R-Y.

PROUT: Yes. Agnes, A-G-N-E-S.

REDMAN: And your maiden name, last name, was spelled?

PROUT: My last name was Hall, H-A-L-L.

REDMAN: And that became your middle name when you were married, and you took the
last name Prout. Could you spell that?

PROUT: Yeah, P-R-O-U-T.

REDMAN: And you were born in San Francisco, is that right?

PROUT: Right, at Mary’s Help Hospital.

REDMAN: And what date was that? When were you born? What was your birthday?

PROUT: What was my birthday? It was August 7, 1921.

REDMAN: Can you tell me just briefly, just for a moment, about your father?

PROUT: My father was a very interesting man. He was a newspaper man. He bought
the Gilroy Dispatch. And he was very clever; he could do the front office and
the back office. And he bought that newspaper -- it was in Gilroy -- and he had
it for probably about six years. Then he got bored and wanted to go on someplace
else. So my mother said, “Okay, John, we’ll go where you want to go.” So
then he started a paper in Santa Cruz, and it was a weekly paper. He would go up
and down the main street of Santa Cruz, and he would interview people. He just
had a lot of fun doing it. Then he went to Watsonville. And the Watsonville
people were very mean to him; they didn’t want him in the act. It was a
syndicated group. They didn’t want him there. So whenever his boys would
deliver the papers in the morning, they would go around and pick them up and
throw them away. So that got to him a little bit. Let’s see, then he went to
Petaluma and had a nice little newspaper there. What was so good, what we
admired, my sister and I -- I have one sister -- we admired so much, the fact
that he could do it all by himself. He did the artwork, he did the mechanical
work -- he just loved it. It was really astounding to see the talent that he
had. Then my mother was a housewife, but she became a nurse before my mom and
dad got married. She was born at Mary’s Help Hospital. An excellent nurse,
loved it. But her father didn’t want her to become a nurse because he felt
that it was too hard on girls. They had to do all the custodial work and
everything. So she said, “Okay, Father, I’ll graduate from high school, and
then in three years I’m going to go to become a nurse.” And he said,
“That’s fair enough.” So she had a young sister, so in three years, they
both went to Mary’s Help, both became RNs. Then after -- well, it was after
the war, I guess, my aunt was just a little gal, and she was getting that
virulent flu that they had then, that terrible flu. It was just awful. So my
mother knew that she wouldn’t live through it. So Mom tried to get an
ambulance, but she couldn’t find one, so she got a hearse, and she went down
to the veteran’s hospital in Palo Alto, picked up my aunt and saved her life, really.

REDMAN: This was in 1918, the influenza?

PROUT: Yes, exactly, that virulent, terrible --

REDMAN: I’d like to get back to that in just a moment. [audiofile stops,
restarts] Thank you for letting me fix the audio there. When we left off, we
were talking about your parents and your mother’s recollections from the 1918
influenza outbreak of the flu, the Spanish flu.

PROUT: Oh, yes, that was terrible. People were dying by the inches.

REDMAN: What did your parents tell you about how they met? Do you remember about
their early courtship and how they got together?

PROUT: Yes, I do. We’re Roman Catholics. My grandmother, my maternal
grandmother, always had the priest to dinner or to breakfast. She was very proud
of that, because he could only come every other week, I think it was. Her name
was Flanagan, a good Irish name. So anyway, my father was starting in the
newspaper business. He had a little newspaper up in Colusa. And my mother had
beautiful red hair and he saw her at the holy communion rail and just thought,
boy, that lady’s for me. There was a twelve-year age difference. So anyway, he
popped the question, and my mother said, “Well, John, I can’t go right away,
because I’ve promised another nurse that I would take her and a patient by
train, to Chicago, and I can’t let them down.” She did that. Then when she
came back -- she was cute -- she said she saw the bridges and everything and
thought, oh, this is where I want to be. So anyway, my mom and dad got married
and then they had just two of us.

REDMAN: So you came along in the early twenties and your sister is a little younger?

PROUT: She’s seventeen months younger.

REDMAN: Seventeen months younger, okay. And what’s her name?

PROUT: Her name is Gabriella. Gabriella Thomas.

REDMAN: In San Francisco?

PROUT: Yes, she’s now in the Sequoias. She broke her shoulder and she’s a
very brave girl. She’s going to be in the hospital, I think she said, for
three months. So it was a bad break.

REDMAN: Can you tell me a little bit about where you attended elementary school?

PROUT: Yes. We went to Catholic schools. We started out in Gilroy, and we went
to the Presbyterian Sisters there. We were there for maybe about three years,
and then we went to the Daughters of Charity, in Santa Cruz, up until about -- I
was a sophomore in high school and my sister was a junior. Or no, she was --
what do you call it? I can’t think of the right word. Well, she was a junior
in high school, and I was a senior. Then my dad moved us to Watsonville, and we
went to the Notre Dame Sisters. They were good teachers. Oh, boy, they were wonderful!

REDMAN: What was it like to be a young girl in a Catholic school in those days?

PROUT: It was just fine. We loved the nuns. They were so nice, and they were all
overly qualified. They had PhDs and everything. And they did a lot of music, and
they did a lot in the arts. At our school, let’s see, we had fifty girls, period.

REDMAN: So it was an all-girls school?

PROUT: All-girls school.

REDMAN: And it was a good environment for you.

PROUT: Oh, it was wonderful! We had this one nun that would write poetry, and
she was just great. Then we had this other sister, so funny. She wrote books and
everything, and she was very learned, but she was funny, too. She would take all
the peanuts away from all the girls. And we had desks that lift up like this.
You probably never saw a desk like that.

REDMAN: I haven’t used a desk like that, but go ahead, yes.

PROUT: But anyway, so the part that was open would be standing here, and then
she would eat the nuts herself. [laughs] She was so funny.

REDMAN: Some of the things you hear about Catholic schools in that era are about
punishment. One of the things you hear is that it was a stricter system than
later educational styles. Can you speak to that? Is that characterization
overblown, do you think, or is that something that happened?

PROUT: Once in a while. See, a lot of the sisters came from Ireland, and they
disciplined children. They just did. They were kind of mean. But I never saw any
of that, because the nuns that we had were all very reasonable. They were
wonderful. If they called your mother, you’d have a chance to tell her what
was wrong. Nothing that was quiet or anything.

REDMAN: Was there an aspect of being in California, do you think, that --

PROUT: It might.

REDMAN: -- had a little bit of a laid-back attitude towards those sorts of
issues, maybe?

PROUT: Yes. Well, I never thought about that, but they were just very fair with
us and very -- I know they wanted my sister to take music lessons. She had a
beautiful voice. But she said, “No, I’m just going to waste Dad and Mom’s
money, because I’m lazy.” Yes, I always remember. But this nun was saying,
“Go ahead.” Then they wanted me to become a nun, and I didn’t want to
become a nun. I always remember, there were twin girls. Well, one of the twins
became a nun. She was so devout and great, but she would go behind the altar and
drink some of the wine. She was a character. So we said, “You’re going to
get caught.”

REDMAN: Now, how about you? With some of the encouragement to become a nun, why
did you choose not to?

PROUT: Well, I just didn’t want to be a nun. It’s too cloistered. In those
days, they got around a lot, but it was just -- you couldn’t get married, life
was limited, and it just didn’t appeal. We couldn’t go out with boys. Oh, we
could go out if we wanted to, but we never had any chances to.

REDMAN: Now, you would’ve been about, I understand, in second grade -- or
first or second or third grade, thereabouts -- when the great stock market crash
happened --

PROUT: ’29, yes.

REDMAN: -- in ’29, in the autumn of ’29.

PROUT: See, I was about eight years old.

REDMAN: But I understand that things got a lot worse then, after the end of the
year; that in ’30, when --

PROUT: Oh, it was bad.

REDMAN: Things just got worse and worse. Could you talk about that?

PROUT: Yes, I can. But my mother and dad protected us. They never told us much
about it. I had friends that oh, were bemoaning the fact all the time. My dad
lost our home. The Bank of America took it, and he was just as scalded as
anybody else, but they never mentioned it in a negative way.

REDMAN: So they shielded the kids from some of that stress.

PROUT: They shielded us, yes.

REDMAN: Do you think it had a toll on them, those things?

PROUT: Well, I know this one friend of mine that the parents were very open with
it all. She remembers changing majors in college because she just couldn’t
finish. She was going to be an artist and she wanted to be, but her folks
thought it was very impractical and that there was no point in her going through
with it, where my family would’ve encouraged me to do it. They were always so
placid. We had a grandfather that lived with us, my mother’s father. He was
wonderful. Tall, good looking Irishman. My mother would scold us and then he’d
say, “Anna, you can’t scold them, because they’re good girls.” Well, he
had thirteen children. Thirteen children. She’d say, “Father, I remember you
disciplining us.” But they had a nice rapport. It was happy time.

REDMAN: So for you, I imagine that your father’s newspaper businesses
would’ve come up against tough times, certainly, in those days.

PROUT: Oh, yes. But you know what he did? He was a young man. The first
newspaper was in Gilroy. Gilroy was a pretty small town then. But anyway, one of
the men got measles. He was the man that sold hay. So these fellows were all
still so young, they -- let’s see, how’d that go? Well, they had a dummy
horse up on top of the feed store, so they put red dots all over. So they had a
wonderful time. Then my dad joined all these clubs, the Kiwanis, the Rotary. He
was just a doer.

REDMAN: So he was active in joining clubs and associations?

PROUT: Elks. Yes.

REDMAN: For someone that, let’s say, is unfamiliar with the Elks Club or the
Kiwanis Club, what types of things did that mean?

PROUT: They were service clubs. The Elks Club did a lot for charity. Then they
had the Kiwanis Club, too. You had to be in business to join the Rotary and the
Kiwanis. Well, you had to be a businessman.

REDMAN: So certain men in the community would get together and do charitable
activities or service activities?

PROUT: Yes. Then they always had lunch on Tuesday. That got a little boring for
my father, I think. But he loved it, because he knew that these men were all his
friends, and they were good and they were working hard. But it was a lovely time
for a young couple, I think. So there was a lot of happiness. Then we would want
to go to Sacramento for the state fair. My father’d say, “No, no, we can’t
go, girls. I’m getting this wonderful offer to print something.” I can’t
remember now what it was, but we just can’t go. Well, then my mother came
home, and she was packing to go to Sacramento, and we said to my father, “We
knew you’d let us go.” He always wanted to widen our horizons, which was a
lovely way. So I have nothing negative to say about either of them.

REDMAN: Were there any struggles that you would point to in the Depression?

PROUT: Oh, yes. My dad and mother lost their home, a beautiful home on King
Street in Santa Cruz. That, oh, my father was just -- he was ready to kill
[Amadeo] Giannini. Really. Because Giannini was the big banker, Bank of America,
and he was doing terrible things. Some of these poor little farmers, he was
telling them that they had to close their doors. That was an awful time.

REDMAN: Do you think that California suffered the full brunt of the Depression?

PROUT: I think so. Yes, I think they did.

REDMAN: So people could really feel it. But it sounds like, though, in the home,
there could be a sort of situation where your parents might be able to protect
you from --

PROUT: Oh, yes, they did. In fact, I don’t think my sister or I even knew
about it, because we were so protected. Then we moved to another house, which
was very nice, so it wasn’t so traumatic. And the other house had ducks, so we
were all crazy about the darn ducks.

REDMAN: [audiofile stops] When we left off, we were talking a bit about what
life was like before the war, during the Great Depression, growing up with your
sister and your mother and your father. Then for a while, your grandfather was
also in the house.

PROUT: Yes, he stayed with us.

REDMAN: He was from Ireland, you said.

PROUT: He was from -- oh, he was a handsome man. Great big, tall man. Had a
beard and everything. My mother -- see, she had a lot of brothers and sisters,
and they would always come down and see him. And my Aunt Virginia wrote him a
letter every day, from San Francisco. They just adored him. And he had been a
tough parent and not an easy one. He had five sons, and they didn’t all want
to be Catholics. They would say, “Dad, you’re taking our little sisters,
when it’s pouring rain, and you’re not covering them up enough.” So
anyway, they really got after him. Then finally, he lessened a little bit and he
wasn’t so strict. But he loved the kids; you knew that.

REDMAN: How about then, as you get a little older, as you’re starting to get
into high school age, were there subjects that you and your sister both enjoyed
particularly much, or subjects that you disliked?

PROUT: The only thing I disliked was geometry.

REDMAN: Geometry.

PROUT: Geometry. But I loved algebra. And we had good teachers. They were
wonderful; they inspired you. But geometry was very hard for me. I hated it. And
I made it harder. We had this nun, she was a great big nun, and she taught us
typing, too. She had this long, long room and she had typewriters and here and
here, and then she could barely go in the middle, with the typewriters. Anyway,
but she was great. She taught us how to type.

REDMAN: So that skill typing sounds like that would come in handy.

PROUT: Came in handy. Very, very much so.

REDMAN: That was something that young women of your generation, many of them
didn’t get skills in typing, it seems like, and that they would have to pick
it up later on or they would struggle.

PROUT: Well, I think most good high schools had it, because they knew that it
was the only communication we had, really. It worked out well and everybody --
then we’d do the hunt and poke, where we look over here. But Sister Eleanor
was cute. Then if she saw us not doing that, she would tap us on the shoulder.
Then once in a while, boom! But she meant so well and was a good instructor. So
they weren’t angry with us. And my mother and dad were so fair. One time I had
a report card that my mother knew did not belong to me, because it was terrible.
So anyway, we went up to the school. My mother would never criticize one of the
sisters. She was very, very diplomatic. So she said, “I know this report card
doesn’t belong to my daughter, because she has much better grades.” Well,
they had copied the wrong report card. But Mom never, never said bad words about
the teacher. She just kept her level, and we knew it was going to turn out all
right because I was a good student.

REDMAN: That seems like something, a character trait that you would want to see
in a head teacher.

PROUT: Yes, exactly.

REDMAN: Someone who doesn’t blow up or respond to things, someone who keeps
their cool.

PROUT: Oh, yes. I was a head teacher for a while, and we had some interesting
times. I always remember this one black man. He didn’t want his child
disciplined. I said, “I don’t think you know what the term discipline
means.” I said, “We don’t put our hands on the children. If we did,
Protective Service would be called in right away, and we would be in trouble.”
And we would’ve, so we never did it. But this man was threatening me. We were
in the hall of that Maritime center, and all these other parents were coming by
me and trying to see if I needed help. I said, “No, I’m fine.” So he
backed me up against the wall, but didn’t touch me. I said, “Sir, now I’m
going to say good evening and I’m just not going to think about what we’ve
been talking about, because I know now you understand where we stand.” You had
to be very diplomatic. And then, you learned to be diplomatic. Then he never
said a word after that. But the word discipline was, ugh; he didn’t like that.

REDMAN: We’ll get back into those stories in just a moment, but that was a
really fascinating example.

PROUT: It was good.

REDMAN: San Jose State comes next for you. You started in 1939, is that right?

PROUT: Yes, I graduated in -- well, just during the war.

REDMAN: So ’43, you graduated?

PROUT: I graduated in ’43. Now we have about three or four people here who
graduated about the same time.

REDMAN: Is that right?

PROUT: Because we’ve had a lot of Cal people and a few Stanford, but we’d
never had anybody from San Jose, so it was fun. Now this lady is leaving because
-- she didn’t stay very long. Her husband died. She had a home someplace and
they were going to paint it, and she decided she would leave.

REDMAN: What was San Jose State like when you arrived there? What was the school
like when you got there?

PROUT: Well, it’s always been kind of a mess, because they would have to take
-- architects would bid on the schools. So those campuses just had a little
school here, a little school there; it was just a mess. We hated that, but we
loved the common area, which was so -- I loved that school. I just loved it. It
was fun. We did well in school and we just had -- I joined a sorority.

REDMAN: Did your sister join you, as well, the next year?

PROUT: No, she went to Dominican [University].

REDMAN: Oh, is that right?

PROUT: Yes, she went to Dominican and she wanted to. We had an aunt who was a
Dominican nun, and she wanted us all to go to Dominican. But I didn’t want to
go, and my father didn’t make me. So I went to community college for two
years, and then went to San Jose and graduated from there.

REDMAN: What were you studying at -- ?

PROUT: Teaching.

REDMAN: You were studying be a teacher all along?

PROUT: Yes.

REDMAN: Did you know when you arrived that that’s what you wanted to do?

PROUT: Yes, because it was basically a teacher’s school for so long, and now
it’s broadened; it’s everybody.

REDMAN: What were the options for a young woman like you in those days? You’d
mentioned nursing was clearly an option that was in your family, becoming a nun,
or becoming a teacher. Were there sort of career opportunities that might’ve
presented themselves?

PROUT: Yes, like librarian. They had a wonderful library school there, just
wonderful. I always remember when Eisenhower first went in as President, we had
a place where it was kind of a common area, and he spoke and it was the first
time anybody spoke on television. It was really very awe-inspiring. It was
marvelous. Then during the war, it dropped so much because the men weren’t
there, and it was a small school.

REDMAN: What was December 7, 1941 like for a student? The day Pearl Harbor was
attacked, what was that like, to be a student?

PROUT: I’ll tell you. My friend and I went down to Watsonville; we were going
for the weekend. We went to her home and her grandfather was there, and of
course, Pearl Harbor came on. He looked at us, and he said, “My dear girls, we
must pray.” I’ll never forget that old man. So everybody had a distinctive
meaning to what happened. Really, we just cried, because we knew that all the
men were going to go and some of them weren’t going to come back. It was a
terrible thing.

REDMAN: So part of the sadness of that moment and the emotions that came up were
about the implications for the young men around you. It wasn’t just about what
had happened on that particular day, which was, of course, very sad.

PROUT: Yes, yes. But you know what? I heard an interesting thing. I’d never
heard this before. We were in the [Hawaiian] islands later. They said that some
of those fellows that had been on those ships that were bombed, that they --
let’s see, how did that go? They had a musical contest. They won, I guess, and
the head general said, “I want you fellows to sleep overtime, because you won
the contest.” And they were some of the ones that were killed. That was so
sad, when you think back on that. But I’d never heard that until the last time
we were in the islands. Interesting.

REDMAN: Let me ask about after the war starts. So you were in your second or
third year of school by that time.

PROUT: Right.

REDMAN: Had you transferred to San Jose State by that point, do you remember? Or
was that still in the community college days?

PROUT: No, I just had two years in the community college, and then I went to State.

REDMAN: War is declared not that long after, and early in 1942 President
Roosevelt issues an executive order that sends the Japanese on the West Coast to
internment camps.

PROUT: Yes, right. I had a couple of friends that were in an internment camp and
they --

REDMAN: Can you talk about that?

PROUT: Yes. And they loved it. They go back every year, because they were little
kids and they had fun. And they all lived so close together in those internment
camps --

REDMAN: And they could play, as kids.

PROUT: They could play. The only thing that was so sad, I had a friend who --
[mic noise; audiofile stops, re-starts]

REDMAN: When we left off, we were talking about what school was like, what
college was like for you and the start of the war, because those things
would’ve coincided in your life.

PROUT: Right.

REDMAN: And we were talk</transcript><transcript_alt></transcript_alt><rights></rights><fmt></fmt><usage></usage><userestrict>0</userestrict><xmllocation></xmllocation><xmlfilename></xmlfilename><collection_link></collection_link><series_link></series_link></record></ROOT>
