EHRLICH: Are you set?

LOVERDE: I&#039;ll never be set.

EHRLICH: Okay, so this in an interview with Margaret Gerrity Loverde, on
February 7, 2003, at her home in Berkeley. So, let&#039;s start at the beginning.
Where and when were you born?

LOVERDE: I was born actually in Oakland, while my family lived in Berkeley. 11/16/26.

EHRLICH: Who was in your family?

LOVERDE: At that time, my father and my mother and an older brother.

EHRLICH: Then who were your siblings, in your nuclear family as a child?

LOVERDE: My older brother was Joseph, and I had a brother after me named John
and two more sisters. There were five of us.

EHRLICH: What were their names?

LOVERDE: Kate and Mary.

EHRLICH: What about grandparents? Did you know your grandparents?

LOVERDE: I knew my maternal grandparents. They lived in Berkeley, and they were
here for quite a few years. I did not know my father&#039;s parents at all.

EHRLICH: Do you know where your grandparents were from on your mother&#039;s side?

LOVERDE: The ancestors came from Halifax, Nova Scotia.

EHRLICH: What about on your father&#039;s side?

LOVERDE: Ireland.

EHRLICH: Did you grow up with a connection to either of those places?

LOVERDE: Well, just in my imagination. I&#039;ve never been to either place.

EHRLICH: You grew up in Berkeley. Did you live in the same home?

LOVERDE: Not the same home all my childhood. I was in a rental place the first
years, downtown Berkeley, Durant Avenue. I don&#039;t remember it. Then we lived
right above the campus, on--oh, I don&#039;t remember the name of the street, but it
was right near the stadium, actually. It was up some side streets above it.

EHRLICH: Do you have good memories? What kinds of memories do you have of that home?

LOVERDE: Very little. We were just there for a short time, too. That was just
another rental. Then we moved to the house that I actually grew up in most of my childhood.

EHRLICH: Where was that?

LOVERDE: 1184 Sterling, in the Berkeley hills, right below Grizzly Peak.

EHRLICH: What was that neighborhood like?

LOVERDE: Well, it was up at the top of the hills, and when our house was first
built, at that time, there were very few other houses around there, and it&#039;s
very built up right now, of course. It stayed in the family all these years,
until my two sisters, who had owned it, sold it.

EHRLICH: What kinds of memories do you have of childhood?

LOVERDE: Happy ones, but we were very much close to home, and we did not have a
lot of money. But we were a happy group.

EHRLICH: What kind of work did your parents do?

LOVERDE: My father was an artist and my mother had been an actress, but when the
war problems arose, she wasn&#039;t able to continue on that because there wasn&#039;t
enough work, and that&#039;s when she started working for the children&#039;s centers--

EHRLICH: Which we&#039;ll talk about more later. Did you have a religious upbringing?

LOVERDE: Oh, yes. Roman Catholic.

EHRLICH: Can you tell me more about that?

LOVERDE: Most of my early years in school were in the Catholic school. I started
in St. Augustine&#039;s, from first grade on. I guess kindergarten was in a public
school, in Hillside School in Berkeley, and then I went to St. Augustine&#039;s,
which is on the border between Berkeley and Oakland. The present bishop was in
the class below me.

EHRLICH: Really, what&#039;s the present bishop&#039;s name?

LOVERDE: John S. Cummins.

EHRLICH: Did you know him?

LOVERDE: Oh yeah. He&#039;s about to retire. Then, when my actual parish in Berkeley
built a school, we moved--my family went into that school, at St. Mary Magdalen&#039;s.

EHRLICH: Say that again. When your parish--your family moved in order to--?

LOVERDE: No, when my parish, St. Mary Magdalen, built their school, we moved our
schooling from St. Augustine&#039;s to St. Mary Magdalen&#039;s.

EHRLICH: So that you could go to the parish school?

LOVERDE: Yeah.

EHRLICH: Did you attend church regularly?

LOVERDE: Oh yeah, that&#039;s one of the things of the Catholic Church.

EHRLICH: What was that experience like for you?

LOVERDE: That was the way we did it. I&#039;m thinking as a child at this point. It&#039;s
very meaningful for me.

EHRLICH: Did you have any connection or affiliation or experience with churches
in Richmond?

LOVERDE: I knew of them--the Catholic churches; St. Cornelius, St. David [of
Wales]--but I never went there.

EHRLICH: So, you just knew them by name?

LOVERDE: Yeah.

EHRLICH: How did you even know them by name? Did other people you know go there?

LOVERDE: Yes, later years, though. It wasn&#039;t during the war. I don&#039;t even know
if they existed during the war.

EHRLICH: So, did you always go to private parochial school?

LOVERDE: After I graduated from St. Mary Magdalen&#039;s, eighth grade, I did
summer--my older brother had gone to St. Joseph [Notre Dame High School] in
Alameda, but he also did some schooling at Berkeley High. I did also in summer
school, but I actually went to Holy Names High School in Oakland, which was a
girls school.

EHRLICH: Was there ever any talk of you going to public high school?

LOVERDE: Not that I remember, except summer school. My younger brother went to
Berkeley High. It was a matter of funds.

EHRLICH: Do you remember anything about hearing about the public schools
becoming crowded during the wartime? Any stories from your brother, or concern
on your parents&#039; part?

LOVERDE: No. I really don&#039;t. Possibly in Richmond, but I didn&#039;t know about that,
and I don&#039;t think they did at that point.

EHRLICH: So, your brother went to public school partly due to funding?

LOVERDE: My older brother went to St. Joseph, in Alameda, as I mentioned. My
younger brother only went to Berkeley High, and my two sisters also.

EHRLICH: So, in terms of the beginnings of the war, I&#039;m wondering if you have
any memories of hearing that Richmond was going to be a major center for
war-related work. Tell me what you remember.

LOVERDE: I remember talk about the shipyards getting very busy, and I understand
that they were working to build some--I don&#039;t remember what kind of ships, but
to help the English, before we even got into the war. I remember that there was
an influx of people from the middle part of our country: Oklahoma, Arkansas and
some of those areas. I know that Richmond built up with a lot more people than
they had ever had in the downtown part.

EHRLICH: What do you remember of people&#039;s attitude towards the outsiders coming
in? Do you remember what the talk was?

LOVERDE: I think it wasn&#039;t very nice. I remember the terms Okies and Arkies, and
at that point I was in high school and I didn&#039;t even know what it meant at
first, and then I realized, but I didn&#039;t have a sense of it being a negative thing.

EHRLICH: But it was?

LOVERDE: Yes, looking back on it, in later years, I realized that it was,
because a lot of them hadn&#039;t been educated. They were very poor, and that&#039;s why
they came out to where the work was.

EHRLICH: What kinds of stereotypes can you remember people associating with
Okies and Arkies?

LOVERDE: Probably the lack of education and the poverty, and how that is obvious
in the way they dress or act or whatever.

EHRLICH: Do you remember any jokes? Were there jokes told about them that you
can remember?

LOVERDE: No, my family really worked against that sort of thing anyway. I don&#039;t
really remember much about that.

EHRLICH: Do you remember kids at school talking about them, or in your neighborhood?

LOVERDE: There weren&#039;t a lot of children in my neighborhood when I was little
because the houses were pretty sparse up there in the hills at that time. So,
no, I don&#039;t remember that.

EHRLICH: Do you remember any talk of African Americans coming from the South?

LOVERDE: No. There again, racial considerations were dealt with in our family in
a way that--we were taught not to be prejudiced, not to have different ways of
looking at people. People were people. That&#039;s the way I remember from early days
in my family.

EHRLICH: Did you know people who worked in the shipyards?

LOVERDE: No, except my father as an artist was asked to come and do drafting, as
were other artists that he knew. My sister told me that--and I wasn&#039;t aware of
this--my youngest sister mentioned that the artists in this area were all asked
to be drafters, and they used to go together in the same car.

EHRLICH: Do you know who asked them, how that connection was made?

LOVERDE: I asked my sister that, and she didn&#039;t know.

EHRLICH: Any memories of how your father felt about working in the shipyards?

LOVERDE: He enjoyed it. I think my sister&#039;s comment was that he made a salary
there, and it was the first one in a while, because he was an artist who was
working as an artist and struggling as an artist, which is not very conducive to
having a high income, as you can guess.

EHRLICH: Do you have any memories of him talking about his job at the shipyards?

LOVERDE: Well, I remember him working on drawings at home.

EHRLICH: What can you remember?

LOVERDE: Just material being laid out, and trying to return on the spot what
they wanted him to do.

EHRLICH: Do you know what it was he was helping design?

LOVERDE: They were parts of the ships, as I recall, but I was more interested in
his artwork than I was in the drawings. At that point I was in high school, so I
was busy studying myself.

EHRLICH: Did you study hard in high school?

LOVERDE: Yeah.

EHRLICH: Before you started working at the child care centers, were you familiar
with Richmond? Can you talk a little bit about your experiences there, or lack
of experience there?

LOVERDE: Yeah. In talking to my cousin yesterday, she reminded me that
Richmond--first of all, between Berkeley and Richmond was this vast area, which
is now the El Cerrito Plaza, that was a dog racing place. Also, I recall that
from the center of the university outward in a radius of three miles in all
directions, no liquor could be sold. So, right at that El Cerrito or Albany
line, there were a lot of bars. Richmond was pretty sparsely populated at that
time, when the shipyards were going on. Then they quickly built a lot of
temporary housing, I think. Some of them were made more permanent, but having
driven through Richmond recently, in the downtown area, I realize that all of
those places that I remember that were just temporary buildings are gone and
there are much more substantial homes now.

EHRLICH: What do you remember those temporary buildings looking like?

LOVERDE: [laughs] Very blank. Not cracker boxes, because they were maybe the
length of the block, and just little apartments right along. I haven&#039;t thought
about that much, but that&#039;s basically all I remember. I was always driving
through when I was going out there. It was quite a ways from my home in
Berkeley, so I had to go by car most of the time. I don&#039;t think that there was
transportation from Berkeley into Richmond except by car.

EHRLICH: Once the war started, do you remember gas rationing?

LOVERDE: I sure do.

EHRLICH: Can you tell us a little bit about that for people who don&#039;t know
anything about it?

LOVERDE: I don&#039;t remember how they did it. I just know that there was not enough
gasoline to just take rides as you wish. It was a matter of having to ration it
yourself within the family.

EHRLICH: Could you buy as much gasoline as you wanted?

LOVERDE: No, you want a definition of rationing?

EHRLICH: Yes, how it all worked.

LOVERDE: I really don&#039;t know how it all worked. We&#039;ve had rationing since then,
so I tend to think about that more. It probably was done very differently.
Rationing means that there isn&#039;t very much and that everybody has to be allotted
a certain amount and no more. So you had to figure it out.

EHRLICH: So, within your own family, how was it figured out?

LOVERDE: My parents took care of that. I was not allowed to even learn how to
drive until I was twenty-one.

EHRLICH: That&#039;s one way to save gas.

LOVERDE: It sure was.

EHRLICH: So, when you went to the child care centers, your mother would drive.
Is that right?

LOVERDE: Yeah, basically either I would drive out with her or else someone that
she knew that was going in that direction, I would go with them.

EHRLICH: So, aside from seeing the not most attractive housing, what other
memories do you have of what Richmond looked like?

LOVERDE: I remember the Kaiser Permanente being started and then the building of
certain buildings for the children&#039;s centers, like Maritime and Pullman. That
was the first ones that I believe they built in &#039;43. Kaiser Permanente Hospital
was something that we got into right away because of my mother&#039;s work there. So,
we started with Kaiser in the very beginning, and I&#039;m still with it, but having
been away for many years in the east.

EHRLICH: Part of that health plan?

LOVERDE: Yeah.

EHRLICH: I was thinking maybe we could talk a little bit about attitudes towards
women and work at that time. Maybe we can start out by hearing a little bit
about what your mother&#039;s involvement with the child care centers was.

LOVERDE: Well, my mother&#039;s involvement doesn&#039;t directly connect with attitudes
about women working, I don&#039;t believe. I&#039;m not sure what you mean by that term.

EHRLICH: Well, why don&#039;t we start off with you saying a little bit about what
your mother&#039;s role with the child care centers was.

LOVERDE: Okay, she started working with some child care programs in Berkeley
that were set up that had nothing to do, I believe, with the war at that time,
but just sort of a neighborhood thing. The person who became director of the
child care centers in Richmond was an acquaintance of hers. She called her and
told her since she&#039;s working with preschool at this point that it would be great
if she could join the program in Richmond, so she moved out to Richmond.

EHRLICH: What was this woman&#039;s name?

LOVERDE: Her name was Erla Boucher. She was director all those years during the
war and past that. I forget when she retired. It was quite a few years later.
She was a very good director.

EHRLICH: Do you know why your mother was drawn to choosing to work at the child
care centers in Richmond rather than staying put in Berkeley?

LOVERDE: Because it was a much bigger program, I&#039;m sure. You&#039;re asking me a lot
of things that I&#039;m just conjecturing on here. It was something that Erla Boucher
had, I guess, talked enough about that she needed her, and she was talked into
it. It was a good thing, because she was very important in the beginnings of the
child care centers in Richmond.

EHRLICH: Your mother was or Erla Boucher was?

LOVERDE: Well, Erla Boucher, of course, but my mother became so also.

EHRLICH: What was your mother&#039;s full name?

LOVERDE: Dorothy Wetmore Gerrity.

EHRLICH: Do you remember how people felt--the attitudes--about women with
children going to work?

LOVERDE: Well, I think at that time there weren&#039;t that many women working, and
women were basically in the home taking care of the children. The whole concept
of child care wasn&#039;t really functioning fully at that time. Having listened
recently to a tape of my mother&#039;s, the question was asked her about the program
and how it was arranged, how the day went, and she said, &quot;We had to work that
out, because there was no model for it.&quot; Which I thought was interesting because
I hadn&#039;t realized that until I heard that statement, actually.

EHRLICH: So was your mother somewhat unusual in having worked outside of the
home early on?

LOVERDE: Probably, because she had an artist as a husband. She did a lot of
radio work as an actress prior to that, and had been on stage. That paid, and it
didn&#039;t when the war got going. A lot of the theaters were not functioning as
they had been. The Works Progress Administration [WPA] was going full force then
for artists as well as actors, and that figured in a lot with what my father was
doing, too, I believe. The WPA program was, I think, what--now, thinking about
it--brought him into the drafting experience. But also, I think my mother&#039;s work
in radio in San Francisco was also probably a WPA project, but I&#039;m not sure. A
lot of these things I&#039;m just sort of--

EHRLICH: That&#039;s fine.

LOVERDE: --filling in as you&#039;re asking me.

EHRLICH: Do you remember other people&#039;s attitudes about mothers going to work or
women joining the workforce, either negative or positive?

LOVERDE: Well, I think within the Catholic church and in my high school there
was a feeling that it was not a good thing. The consideration wasn&#039;t made so
much then about &quot;how much money is your family having as an income?&quot; as it is
today. So it was a matter more of making the right choices, and being a mother
in the home or wanting a little more money. It was looked at in a different way;
the values were different then, I believe.

EHRLICH: Can you say a little bit more about that?

LOVERDE: Not a lot, but when I was a senior in high school, I was asked to take
the side of it being a good thing for women to work during the war. I was very
reticent about taking that side. It was a debate with another school, as I
recall, but I was talked into it by a very convincing nun. So, I drew very
heavily at that point on what I knew about the children&#039;s centers, because I
realized that all these women had to work that had come from the poorer states.
So, I was able to use that idea to back my stance in the debate. So, I felt good
about it after it was over.

EHRLICH: Did you win?

LOVERDE: I don&#039;t think there was a winner or a loser at that point. I felt that
I had done fine.

EHRLICH: Can you remember any of the specific points that you made? Could you
reconstruct any of your argument?

LOVERDE: Goodness, I haven&#039;t really thought much about that, but, as I was
saying, it was a good thing for women to work when so many of the
soldiers--husbands--had gone off to war. There just wasn&#039;t that much money
coming in, so a lot of women didn&#039;t have a choice. I think that was the point I
made, too.

EHRLICH: Where did patriotism fit into either side of the argument?

LOVERDE: Maybe not so much. Maybe it was economic mostly, but I&#039;m pulling at
straws now. I really don&#039;t remember, except I think I was pointing out that they
now have good child care programs for children with working parents or working
mothers when there is maybe no one else in the home.

EHRLICH: And the argument against women going to work, what was that argument?

LOVERDE: I think it was a, probably, largely--I was going to say religious
argument, but this was within the Catholic schools, this debate, and I think it
was the idea that the woman should be with the children in the home. But when
there is no money supporting that home, as I said, a lot of women didn&#039;t have
much choice.

EHRLICH: I know that Eleanor Roosevelt was a strong proponent of women working
during the war. Do you remember how people felt about her views, either people
in your family or yourself or anyone you knew?

LOVERDE: You know, I didn&#039;t follow a lot of what she did until later. Many years
later I studied more of her ideas. My family were very supportive of the
Roosevelts and everything that Franklin Roosevelt had done. I remember the day
he died. I was in the library of UC Berkeley, not the Bancroft, but the main
one. I remember when he came to San Francisco, I went over with my brother and I
was very young and we stood and waited for two hours for him to come by. He just
went right on by, but I was so excited. It was the first important person that I
had ever seen in person. Anyway, that&#039;s silly, but--

EHRLICH: No, actually, that isn&#039;t; it&#039;s interesting. So, no specific memories of
feelings about Eleanor Roosevelt?

LOVERDE: Not at that age. No, not until many years later.

EHRLICH: Maybe now we could talk a little bit about your involvement in the
child care centers? So, what was your involvement with the child care centers?

LOVERDE: I&#039;m forgetting the dates that I started high school. It was, I think,
the first year of high school that my mother started working out there. I was
very interested in what was going on, because she liked to talk about it at
night. I often would drive out with her if she was ever called in for a problem
and had to go out--because she was responsible for many of the schools that she
was working with at the time.

EHRLICH: What year do you think that was?

LOVERDE: That was before Maritime [Child Development Center] and Pullman were built.

EHRLICH: In the early forties?

LOVERDE: This is where I was trying to find out exactly when the children&#039;s
centers started. The term &quot;children&#039;s center&quot; was used by the state after &#039;45,
but I keep saying that because that was used most often, but &quot;child care
program&quot; was the same thing. I just wanted to put that in. Looking back on it, I
think it was &#039;41, &#039;42--probably &#039;42--after the bombing of Pearl Harbor. That was
a date that we couldn&#039;t come up with: when my mother actually started out there
and when Erla Boucher did.

They started with a few small schools, from what I understand, and then they
realized that so many of the children had no one to care for them when their
mothers were working, especially where the husband and father was off to the
war. So, they would find children in cars. That was very early on, that children
would be left in car while the mothers were working. The police would find them,
and then bring them--try to find a place for them to be taken care of, and it
was happening more and more often. That&#039;s when they came up with the idea of
taking this Washington, old school--it was evidently a grammar school--and
turning it into a twenty-four-hour program. I believe it was the only
twenty-four-hour program. My mother was the head of that. We often went out like
at night, when there was a problem. I would drive out with her for fun or to
find out what was happening. That was the very beginning for me.

EHRLICH: It was your experience at Washington when you were still in high school?

LOVERDE: Yeah.

EHRLICH: So, can you share memories of that time with us?

LOVERDE: I don&#039;t know how deeply you want me to go into this, but I can tell you--

EHRLICH: Any stories you have.

LOVERDE: Well, I can sort of make descriptions rather than stories. When I say
that, I&#039;m talking about how the program was arranged. The shipyards had three
shifts: the day shift, the swing shift, and the graveyard shift. It went from, I
believe eight to four, and then four to midnight, and midnight to eight. So,
this program was set up to accommodate the people who would work either the
swing shift, basically, or the--I mean to also accommodate them--and the
graveyard shift; the swing shift and the graveyard shift. They would have the
children there--I think my mother was explaining on this tape that I remember,
that if the parents were working either of the two night shifts, they could
leave their child there for the double shift at night because the child would be
sleepy. But, then when the police would bring children in from cars that had
been locked into, it became a big problem, because what I understand is that
they didn&#039;t have the facilities to take care of extra children, a lot of babies,
so there was a lot of shuffling, difficulty at that time. A lot of the children
were drugged to keep them asleep.

EHRLICH: Did you actually see that yourself, or how do you know that the
children were drugged?

LOVERDE: Probably one of the summers that I worked during that period when I was
in high school, I remember a child very definitely, very clearly, that I saw
very shortly after she had been found. She evidently was drugged and left at
home, and it was over a long period of time. She was rather tall, and I think
she was about four, and she could hardly walk. She was sort of stumbling around.

EHRLICH: Who brought her into the center?

LOVERDE: The police. She stayed with the centers and I saw her, I believe, many
months later, and she had improved dramatically. It was wonderful to see her.
She wasn&#039;t able to talk very much either at that point. So, when I did see her
later, she was able to converse much better and function physically. It was
good. I understood that a lot of them who had been drugged did have problems
later. Anyway, that was my main experience in that particular case.

EHRLICH: Do you remember how other people responded to the fact that--or the
assertion that--these children were drugged?

LOVERDE: I don&#039;t know that it was widely known. I&#039;m not sure. In high school I
wasn&#039;t a newspaper reader. We had a radio, but I didn&#039;t listen to radio news at
that point in my life. A lot of these things I realized about many years later.
Actually, when I wrote a paper on it for a UC Extension course, where I
explained a lot of what I&#039;m telling you--I don&#039;t have a copy of that now, but I
remember having done a lot of research for that to get this information down.

EHRLICH: Do you know whether charges were pressed against the parents when they
drugged their children?

LOVERDE: I don&#039;t know. I wondered about that recently, but I think, considering
the situation at the time, that they didn&#039;t concern themselves with that as
much. It was just taking care of the moment, making it understood that this
mustn&#039;t happen anymore. Perhaps they would be given a second chance. If the
child turned up in this situation again, then there probably was trouble.

EHRLICH: It sounds like providing the resource of having a twenty-four-hour
center was offering the parents something that was a real alternative. What
other memories of Washington school do you have?

LOVERDE: I remember the old building, and I remember there was a play area
outside, and the building was torn down as soon as they finished with this
program--probably in, like, &#039;46 or so--so it was not something that I saw past
that. That was many years ago. But, I know that my mother&#039;s information said
that there were three floors and that the children played in the main floor, and
didn&#039;t use the second floor. No, the third floor and the first floor were used,
I believe is what it was. I don&#039;t know what the second floor was, but I think
they slept on the third floor.

EHRLICH: So how much time did you actually spend at Washington school?

LOVERDE: Not a lot of time, but I heard a lot about it from my mother. I would
ask her questions, and most of my time was at one of the more modern schools
that were built after that.

EHRLICH: Do you know anything about who the children were who went to Washington?

LOVERDE: No, they were all children of the people who were working in the
shipyards. I think a lot of them came from other places because they--I was just
going to say that they probably wouldn&#039;t be working there, unless they came from
outside the area to work there. But that&#039;s neither here nor there--I&#039;m not sure.

EHRLICH: I heard that there were problems at Washington School and it ended up
closing. Do you have any sense what those problems were?

LOVERDE: No, I never heard that, but I would think that there would be, or could
be. They had to have a staff there at night, and it&#039;s possible that the night
staff wasn&#039;t functioning fully and keeping track of everyone. I wouldn&#039;t know. I
hesitate to make any comment about that.

EHRLICH: You said that you would ask your mother questions and she would tell
you. Are there any other issues that you remember her speaking about?

LOVERDE: No frankly, I don&#039;t. They were just anecdotal at that point.

EHRLICH: Do you remember any of those anecdotes?

LOVERDE: I think I&#039;ve told you most of the ones that I remember.

EHRLICH: The drug-related issues?

LOVERDE: Yeah.

EHRLICH: So, before we explore your experiences at Maritime, which is where I
think you spent the most time, do you have any distinct memories of any of the
other centers?

LOVERDE: No, not that were different from anything that I remember from Maritime.

EHRLICH: So, you don&#039;t remember the other centers being distinctly different
from Maritime?

LOVERDE: No, they all functioned with the same rules. I can almost go through
the day in my mind, as how it would go, depending on the age of the child.

EHRLICH: Let&#039;s start out by getting a sense of when it was you worked at
Maritime, and then that would be great to hear about the specifics of the day.
Do you know when it was that you worked there?

LOVERDE: Yeah, I believe it was &#039;45.

EHRLICH: You were no longer in high school. Is that right?

LOVERDE: That&#039;s correct. I was just out of high school, and had started college
at that time. I&#039;m not sure exactly.

EHRLICH: How long were you there at Maritime?

LOVERDE: For a year.

EHRLICH: What kind of training did you get? Do you remember?

LOVERDE: Erla Boucher, from what I recall, had brought people in to train us
during the sleep times of the children. We would take turns. Of course, one
person would be in the room--and this is only my trying to figure it
out--because there had to be someone with the children at all times, of course,
even when they&#039;re sleeping. She would have instructors come, sometimes from the
universities, and come right to the centers and give training for the programs.
My mother mentioned that she got thirty units credit during that period of time
in the very beginning, just from having taken courses in that period of time.

EHRLICH: So, what do you remember from your own training?

LOVERDE: A lot of my training came from UC Berkeley, from Extension courses that
were set up for that.

EHRLICH: So the courses were at UC Extension, but were specifically set up for
people working in the child development centers?

LOVERDE: They were specifically set up for the people who were working, but this
was not connected with the director in Richmond. There were other centers that
were being set up in other places in the Bay Area too, at that time, because
they could see how handy and helpful it was for families.

EHRLICH: So, when you said that Erla Boucher had people come actually to the
center, do you remember that, while the children were napping? What kinds of
things they talked about?

LOVERDE: I do vaguely remember it, but not a lot of it, because I preferred to
take the courses at UC Berkeley myself. But we are talking about different
courses, of course. Anyway, no, I think you are counting on my memory in a way
that I don&#039;t--this is not information that I retained particularly. There are
some things that come back very clearly in my mind; not that particular thing.

EHRLICH: I&#039;m wondering how it was different working at the centers as a high
school girl and then coming as a college student for a full year?

LOVERDE: Well, by that time, I had taken some courses, so I knew a lot more
about it. I read some books on my own. I mean, I was interested in it.

EHRLICH: When you were in high school, were you paid or was it volunteer?

LOVERDE: When I just went with my mother it was not paid, no. But when I
functioned maybe for a full day to fill in, or something, I believe I was.

EHRLICH: Do you remember what your pay was?

LOVERDE: No.

EHRLICH: Could you guess?

LOVERDE: No, I really don&#039;t even want to try to guess, because I&#039;m not really
sure about that. Pay at that time did not mean a lot to me. I think the pay was
good when I worked there for full time.

EHRLICH: I remember also hearing that groups like the Girl Scouts and the Red
Cross helped train high school girls to work in the centers. Do you have any
memory of Girl Scouts or Red Cross or high school Victory Corps?

LOVERDE: That must have been later. I don&#039;t know. I was not aware of that. I did
not ever hear of that. That might have been within the Richmond schools.
Richmond is another county, and a lot of things are designated to counties. I&#039;ve
always been in Alameda County myself, so it&#039;s a different thing.

EHRLICH: So, for someone who has never been to Maritime, can you give us a
sense--an impression--of what it felt like to be there?

LOVERDE: I think it was very well built. I remember going in the front--the main
desk right there, and then the hallway off to the right, which was parallel with
the sidewalk. It was at a corner, and both Maritime and Pullman were at corners.
The other hallway went down parallel to the other street--the cross street--so
that the play yard would be in this area in the center. It was a very ample play
area. Well, first of all, to stay in the building, there was an upstairs. Down
the hall on the right were four different classrooms, but right at the bottom of
the stairs was the director&#039;s office. No, it&#039;s changed. It&#039;s a director&#039;s office
now, but it was a nurse&#039;s station and doctor&#039;s station: a place where, if
children got sick during the day, they would be isolated. Then the director&#039;s
office, I think, in one of the buildings was behind the main desk, down this
other corridor. In each room was usually a different age group. In the yard that
came out from those rooms--there were fences in between; you&#039;d keep the age
groups somewhat separate.

EHRLICH: Do you remember what the age groups were, roughly?

LOVERDE: Yeah, I remember, I haven&#039;t finished describing the building, so I will
get to that in a minute. I think that Maritime only went up to six-year-olds and
maybe stopped at the end of kindergarten, and sometimes six-year-olds are in
kindergarten, depending on what their training had been. So, for instance, they
would have maybe five-and-a-half-year-olds, six-year-olds, in far room and in
the next room it would be four-and-a-half to five-and-a-half. In the yard, those
two rooms would play together. They didn&#039;t have to separate the yards quite as
much as the actual rooms. Then, go four to three--some schools would--you know,
each age level. A lot had to do with each child himself, too. Some were more
mature than others. Upstairs used to be, at one time, a sleep area. I remember
that distinctly, because for a very short period of time, they had babies up
there. I think that the main rule was that a child had to be potty-trained or
get out of diapers before they could come to the nursery school. Down the other
corridor there were two rooms for children.

Each school was different and, I think, in those two rooms maybe the older--in
Maritime, they were the older ones, I think, because the Nystrom School is
beyond it. They had a play yard together, and that was the last play yard, so
all this area outside was set very well. Right near the actual rooms were an
area of sandboxes and gravel area, and a place where they could ride tricycles
or whatever. Beyond that was a grassy area. So, it was a really nicely
constructed and thought-out plan for the outdoor play area. Now, I&#039;m trying to
think now. You asked the question about the age group. I took care of them. I
think I&#039;ve got the building worked out pretty well, with the big area outside.
It was bigger than the area inside. I think they stopped using the upstairs for
sleeping. I think that was in the beginning when they had so many extra children
that they found, that had no care. I&#039;m not sure about that. I wasn&#039;t in Maritime
during the war when--it was just at the end of the war.

EHRLICH: In &#039;45?

LOVERDE: Yeah. So I&#039;m not clear about all that. I wish my mother was around. She
could take care of all these questions very quickly.

EHRLICH: No, we&#039;re interested in what you remember too, which is fine. Should we
take a little break now?

EHRLICH: So this is tape two of our interview with Margaret Loverde. You gave us
a very nice description of the structure of the building and of the outside of
Maritime. Can you describe what a classroom that you worked in looked like?

LOVERDE: Okay, as you walk into the rooms, there were the cubbyholes right to
the left, I think, in each room. There was a bathroom area on the right and washbasins.

EHRLICH: What did that bathroom look like?

LOVERDE: Well, little toilets along the wall, and a group of six also. That was
it. It was very clean, cleaned regularly and supervised, and the cubbyhole area
was around three sides of a square, and then the children each had their own
cubby, so to speak. They put their coats in there and whatever they had in their
hands. Then they&#039;d come in. Then, into the room, there would be little tables in
different places depending on how big the children were, how small. Everything
was graded to size. Small chairs, of course. I&#039;m trying to think. I think most
everything that they ate--I&#039;ll get into that in a minute--was brought from the
kitchen prepared, so there didn&#039;t have to be work done with preparing anything.
There didn&#039;t have to be a kitchen area in the classrooms. Describing a room.
They used areas that blocked off, so there would be a play corner. There might
be a corner with music, a phonograph player. They have so many new things now
available, so it&#039;s hard to think of whether they are still using that or not.
That would be a listening corner or a singing area--a music corner. They would
have cots put away in a corner if the children were small enough. It was older
children, I think. Once they were five or six, then they&#039;d be going to school
and coming back to play. Like morning kindergarten, they&#039;d maybe have a little
rest area in the afternoon, but possibly not. I don&#039;t know what it is now.

EHRLICH: Can I ask a question? I&#039;m wondering what was on the walls. Do you remember?

LOVERDE: Oh, yeah, a lot of drawings and paintings of those children. Easels
would stand in a corner where the art area was. The pictures would be
everywhere. They&#039;d be on windows, they&#039;d be on cubbies, they&#039;d be above the
cubbies. It was always very decorated. Even on the windows that were leading to
the outside, there would be paintings up on the windows. But, right at this
point, I&#039;m sort of describing what my classroom was, too, which was first grade
for many years. We always put up the artwork of the children. Well, that&#039;s sort
of a description of the room. There would be areas where there would be nothing
so there could be dancing in a circle or story time. Library corner. That sort
of thing.

EHRLICH: Was there one age group that you worked with for the whole year that
you were at Maritime?

LOVERDE: Most of the time it was four--maybe three- and four-year-olds, but
mostly four-year-olds, I think.

EHRLICH: So, could you describe a typical day?

LOVERDE: Sure. First of all, the schools in those days--and I don&#039;t know what it
is now--but they were open from six a.m. to six p.m., and some children would be
there as early as six.

EHRLICH: What time did you arrive at work?

LOVERDE: Changing shifts, but usually it was like nine to five, sometimes eight
to four. The children that came early would have breakfast. During the war--we
didn&#039;t talk about what they would pay, but the federal government was paying for
a lot of it. The families paid on a sliding scale, depending on what their
income was and how many were in the family. So, everyone was different.

EHRLICH: Do you know roughly what people paid, or can give us some sense of what
it was--any idea?

LOVERDE: Well, I have a lot of ideas; the thing is that it was very varied. So
much of my experience was after that period, so I keep thinking of that as an
answer. It was much more expensive later, of course. I really wasn&#039;t concerned
with the money in the beginning, so I really don&#039;t know that. But I think what
my mother said was that some children didn&#039;t pay anything--literally--until
maybe they got a job. I mean during the war, because they needed people to work there.

Now, you asked for a typical day, I think most children would come between seven
and nine. They&#039;d all be there by nine usually. Breakfast would be over by eight,
probably, or around eight. Of course, if the child was scheduled for breakfast,
they&#039;d pay a little more. There might be a story time after that or free play or
art work, until it was warm enough or, depending on weather, time to go outside.
I think most of the day of the four-year-old was an outside thing. An easel
could be brought out right near the building so they were painting outside. The
easels were very well constructed with two children working at the same time
back to back, front to front, with the easel in between with the paints maybe in
milk cartons right in front, and big brushes. They worked that way.

Maybe midmorning, depending on whether there was breakfast or not, there would
be a juice time and maybe a cracker. At that point, they&#039;d all be brought
together. Maybe if they&#039;re outside and it&#039;s a great day to play outside, they
could come up when they are ready for their juice. Then toward noon, they would
have lunch, and the lunch would be a full meal. They were usually encouraged to,
at least, take a bite of everything, but I think the rules in that regard were
very different, depending on what school or what supervisor, whatever. But, I
think a lot of children learned to eat well in the children&#039;s centers. I always
felt that.

Then there was always a nap time, even for the four-year-olds, until they got
into kindergarten, then it became a differing thing depending on what the day
was for them. The cots would come out and tables pushed aside. Usually that
would go for about two hours for rest, if not sleep. If they played well in the
morning, they usually did fall asleep, even the four-year-olds. The rest of the
afternoon, for a while anyway, would be outside play as soon as they woke up,
unless it was raining. There would be story periods and there would be music
periods and art periods and free play in the room even, if it was a cold day.
They&#039;d be brought in as the sun came down, as the weather got colder or
whatever. It was all variable in terms of the way the day was going. If it was a
classroom that was filled with children whose parents would come around the same
time--like probably existed when the day shift would get off at four--then they
would be brought in and be pretty much ready to go home quickly at that time.
And usually it works best with a story time, and maybe everything else ready to go.

One thing I think that would be important to mention, and I think it was a very
good thing: the children when they came in in the morning, they went right into
the nursing area to be checked out for any rash or sore throat or anything at
all, and they were not accepted until they were checked out.

EHRLICH: That was every day?

LOVERDE: Oh yeah, absolutely. It had to be, because certain illnesses would
transfer so fast from one to another. And to teachers, too. So, I think that
pretty much covers the day, except the children whose parents were working maybe
another kind of job. They did take children, I think, that did not necessarily
work in the shipyards, so that some parents would come at the last minute. Maybe
they would do their shopping and come at the last minute. I think maybe around
five, depending on how many were left after five, they [the children] often
would come to a central spot near the front office. Maybe they would all be in
one room, so that most of the teachers could move on. Of course, the Washington
School--the twenty-four-hour situation--was very different. I might remark that
in that twenty-four-hour school, no children were allowed to stay
twenty-four-hours. They were not just allowed to leave them there. They didn&#039;t
have facilities for bathing children or keeping clothes, that sort of thing.

EHRLICH: Was there a limit to how long? Could they stay for two shifts?

LOVERDE: If it was a day shift that the parent worked, they could stay one
shift; if it was the swing shift or the graveyard, they could stay two--is my
understanding. I think it was very well worked out. It probably didn&#039;t all
happen the first day or month even, but I think it was well worked out finally.

EHRLICH: So, in terms of the activities, I&#039;ve heard there was a rotating staff
that went from center to center. Do you remember an art specialist, a music
specialist? Do you remember what kinds of programs they did with the children?

LOVERDE: I don&#039;t know where you heard that, because let me just tell you that my
mother, when the Washington School closed--and I think that was when the war
stopped, I mean when the war was over--she became a field supervisor and she
worked out what--she went from school to school, but I don&#039;t think in the
beginning, during the war, that they had specialists. Maybe once in a while, but
I never saw that. I know my mother did, but she was the person that saw that
each classroom had an equal amount of playthings, toys, equipment, and that was
her place. She would bring in new things for everyone, but it was always equal
within the district.

EHRLICH: So you don&#039;t remember an art teacher coming to do a special activity at
that school and then moving on to the other schools.

LOVERDE: No. I remember that in public schools, and later in the children&#039;s
centers, but not in the beginning.

EHRLICH: Not when you were at Maritime?

LOVERDE: No. It could be that they had volunteers or parents, but I don&#039;t think
people were hired to do that. But I may be wrong.

EHRLICH: You described the children being well-fed. Do you remember what a
typical breakfast was?

LOVERDE: There was always some fruit, and there was always some cereal and maybe
toast. I wasn&#039;t there usually for breakfast, but I remember seeing what was left
on the plates, like some orange pieces or that sort of thing. There&#039;s a break in
the afternoon too, by the way. After they wake up from nap they have another
time to have a bite to eat, and sometimes it would be graham crackers with some
orange slices or something. But it was always healthy food.

EHRLICH: Do you remember what lunches typically were like?

LOVERDE: Yeah, there was usually, I would say the kind of meal that maybe most
parents would give their children at night. It was a full meal. Very good food,
actually, as I recall. They had good cooks and they well seasoned everything so
that children would like it. There would always be vegetables. There would
always be some starch--what I used to call with my own children &quot;filler
food&quot;--and maybe meat or fish. The reason I liked it and thought it was so good
was that they did try everything that was healthy. They encouraged all the
children to eat up, but at least take a bite or two. They always had dessert.
Sometimes, if they wouldn&#039;t cooperate with the beginning, they wouldn&#039;t get the
dessert. There was a lot of talk about whether that&#039;s a good thing or not but,
anyway, it was good. And always milk, of course.

EHRLICH: Speaking of talking about what was and wasn&#039;t good, do you remember
there being sort of a philosophy towards child rearing and what that was, or
towards education? Do you remember talk of that?

LOVERDE: You mean in--

EHRLICH: Say, Maritime where you worked the most.

LOVERDE: Well, I think in most classrooms that I went into, there was always a
little prayer before a meal, &quot;God is great, God is good, let us thank him for
this food.&quot; There didn&#039;t seem to be people saying, &quot;I don&#039;t want my children
saying that,&quot; in those days. They just went along with it. I think they were
glad to have someone take care of them. It&#039;s a little different now, I think.
Anyway, there were a lot of rules that had to be followed in terms of what
parents had to cooperate with in regard to their children. I remember there were
a lot of controversies like dealing with behavior, and how to deal with it.
There were situations where the parents would start slapping their children
around in the classroom, and that was a no-no, of course. There were a lot of
problems like that had to be dealt with. Basically that&#039;s all I can say unless
you have any particular thing that you want to--

EHRLICH: No, I was curious too whether there was a philosophy among the teachers
towards the best way to raise children, if you remember that.

LOVERDE: I remember at that time, during the war, that there wasn&#039;t a lot of
time to talk among teachers of how to do that.

EHRLICH: You had your hands full?

LOVERDE: Well, I think everything came down from the top. There were rules. I
think now, even people having children come into their homes, like friends of
mine that have had children come into their homes, they have to have a certain
amount of experience in rules, and things have to be taken care of before they
are allowed to do that. But in those, days there wasn&#039;t a lot of that. The
classes were all very large during the war, and I know that at the end of a day
you were exhausted if you weren&#039;t sitting around all day--and you could hardly
do that with that particular job.

EHRLICH: Do you remember any more of the rules?

LOVERDE: Now, rules for teachers, parents, or--?

EHRLICH: Any.

LOVERDE: Gosh, I haven&#039;t thought in this regard, because it is kind of
universal. Let me think for a minute. Well, there are so many automatic, I mean,
things that you would expect. Well, I mentioned--excuse me. I&#039;m going to have a
little water here.

LOVERDE: I&#039;m trying to think of some rules that might be interesting.

EHRLICH: Just because it gives us some sense of if child rearing has or hasn&#039;t changed.

LOVERDE: No, I think most of the rules at that time would be the ones that are
going now.

EHRLICH: Even the thing you said I thought was really interesting, which I know
is important, that everything--the truth is it was, to us, it all seems
ordinary, but it was very revolutionary at the time to have all the chairs
small, to have it focused on the child. That was new. That was a new philosophy
in child rearing, having it child-focused in that way. So that is what I was
thinking about; whether you remember other things like that that reflected
attitudes toward children. Some of it you already said, just by saying that you
had small chairs and small tables.

LOVERDE: You know, when I said that, I thought, why am I saying this, it&#039;s so obvious.

EHRLICH: That was one of the most important things you said, because before
that, that wasn&#039;t the philosophy. The philosophy wasn&#039;t to scale things, have it
focused on the children. It was to have children accommodate themselves to the
bigger world. So, the fact that you said that was really important, because it
is true that everything was made little so that the children would feel
comfortable and safe.

LOVERDE: Whenever we&#039;d talk to the children, we&#039;d always get down on our knees
or a small chair.

EHRLICH: Can you say that on camera? That would be good thing to say, that you
were encouraged to--

LOVERDE: Aren&#039;t those things that go without saying?

EHRLICH: No, it reflects an attitude towards relating with children. There have
been times where children were expected to keep quiet. Rules towards how to
interact with children change all the time.

Stine:

Okay, can I start? [Referring to turning the video camera on]

LOVERDE: We stopped it at you asking me if there were other rules--

EHRLICH: That you remember in the classroom. I can ask it again if you want.

LOVERDE: No, because I don&#039;t know where to go with that, unless you have an idea.

EHRLICH: Okay, you had said something about--I mean, the original question had
been about asking about the philosophy in the classroom. You had said that you
always got down low to talk to the children. Maybe you could say that so we get
that on camera. I&#039;ll just ask you about that.

LOVERDE: That may not have been a rule.

EHRLICH: It doesn&#039;t matter if it was a rule or not. I won&#039;t frame it as a rule.
I&#039;ll just say that--

LOVERDE: Okay, but I was thinking to bring that in, if I could find just one
more rule, I could put that in.

EHRLICH: It&#039;s okay, you don&#039;t have to. It all just flows. It will flow
naturally. You don&#039;t need to practice it. If you don&#039;t think of another, that&#039;s fine.

LOVERDE: Well, as I say, I will think of a hundred of them tonight probably.

Stine:

That always happens.

EHRLICH: Yeah, that&#039;s the way it works.

LOVERDE: But, as I said, I don&#039;t think of them as rules. I was thinking of rules
the parents--like in this school you have to have them in by this time, you
know, that kind of thing, when I mentioned that.

EHRLICH: We&#039;re on now. So, I&#039;m wondering if you could talk a little bit about
any interactions you remember having with parents, or your sense of who the
parents were.

LOVERDE: I didn&#039;t have a lot of interactions with parents myself personally,
because the head teacher was always there, and I was just helping, or one of the
other teachers in the room. A lot of the parents didn&#039;t seem to have an
understanding of the reaction within their own children, depending on their
attitude. If they came in belligerent or hard on their child in front of other
children in that setting, you could see that their son or daughter was very
disturbed by that, very humiliated possibly. A lot of the parents didn&#039;t really
have the capacity to understand the effect on the child and how that could be
carried on in their life, especially if it was repeated. So, I think a lot of
effort was spent to try and get them to behave with their own children at least
in our school, when they came there.

EHRLICH: When you say the parents, were these parents mostly people who had come
from other parts of the country?

LOVERDE: I think so, most of them, yeah.

EHRLICH: Where do you think they were from?

LOVERDE: Well, as I mentioned earlier, a lot of them were from the middle part
of the country where they were having--I guess it was a Dust Bowl sort of
situation, and a lot of them were very poor.

EHRLICH: Do you think that some of them then maybe had some different attitudes
towards child rearing than some of the teachers?

LOVERDE: Oh, absolutely. Any family that was having trouble with poverty
probably didn&#039;t focus on the effect that they would have on their children. It
just is a given, I think, that they just tried to survive. Let&#039;s put it that way.

EHRLICH: Do you have any memories of distinct conflicts that happened in the
classroom between parents and teachers or times that teachers would need to
resolve issues with parents?

LOVERDE: Yes, I&#039;ve seen problems, but I wasn&#039;t always involved within it, the
problems themselves.

EHRLICH: Could you give us a sense of the types of problems you might see?

LOVERDE: Well, I think a lot of them was their manner with their own children,
as I mentioned, or demanding things of their children that were really far out.
We were there as an audience to see the way they were talking to their children
and what they wanted from them. A lot of times that would cause a rift between a
teacher, or the head teacher, and the parent. I think, basically, the school was
very good for the parents in terms of what they learned in regard to children.

EHRLICH: I&#039;m wondering whether there are particular staff people from Maritime
that you remember?

LOVERDE: Yeah.

EHRLICH: Who do you remember?

LOVERDE: Are you speaking of names or descriptions?

EHRLICH: Sure, names if you remember names.

LOVERDE: Mary Hall is one. She was a teacher and became a director later or a
supervisor or whatever they want to call it. I&#039;ve been trying to find her,
actually. I understand she lives in San Francisco, but I haven&#039;t been able to
locate her. She was very gentle. In my early memory, I enjoyed working with her.
There were a lot of different teachers that I thought were really great. I try
to forget ones that I maybe don&#039;t like as well.

EHRLICH: Do you think the teachers, by and large, were happy working at Maritime?

LOVERDE: Oh yeah, I think so. I think when a job is that involved and physically
active, that they wouldn&#039;t stay if they didn&#039;t like it. I don&#039;t think I remember
anyone ever there, that worked there, that didn&#039;t want to be there. I just don&#039;t
have the memory of that sort of thing.

EHRLICH: What about the racial background of the staff?

LOVERDE: I think it was very mixed.

EHRLICH: Mixed, meaning?

LOVERDE: Mixed, different races. Diversity. Good diversity. Balanced.

EHRLICH: What races do you remember being there?

LOVERDE: Well, in those days it was mostly black and white. I remember we had a
lot of African American women working.

EHRLICH: Teachers?

LOVERDE: Yeah.

EHRLICH: So the teachers were African American and white?

LOVERDE: Yeah.

EHRLICH: Do you remember in terms of proportions of numbers? Was it mostly white
and some African American or was it balanced? Do you have a memory of that?

LOVERDE: I think it was very balanced, but that&#039;s just my way of thinking. I
actually worked later in San Francisco in a school that was all black. I was the
only white person. I think it was one of the original--I think after the
shipyards were built in Richmond that they built some in San Francisco too, and
it was one of them.

EHRLICH: Do you remember at Maritime if there were any Asian teachers?

LOVERDE: You know, I didn&#039;t think of them separately at that time. I don&#039;t
remember that.

EHRLICH: Or Hispanic?

LOVERDE: I don&#039;t think at that time Hispanic were mentioned or suggested that
they were Hispanic. I think the only way--I mean, I&#039;m always kind of amused by
that, because you don&#039;t know a Hispanic person by looking at them. Maybe you
have a name, and the name might be the husband&#039;s name. Who knows? I didn&#039;t ever
think about that.

EHRLICH: When you think back on the children, what racial backgrounds were the children?

LOVERDE: They were very diverse, too. I think when there was a big influx from
Oklahoma and Arkansas, I think those were actually mostly white in the
beginning. Within the schools, they were very mixed.

EHRLICH: In your experience in the classroom at Maritime, the year that you were
there, what do you remember of who the children were in terms of race?

LOVERDE: Yeah, I think they were definitely mixed at that time.

EHRLICH: Mixed means?

LOVERDE: White and black. As I said, they didn&#039;t have differentiations beyond
that, at that time. Maybe the staff did, the office help or something, but not
within the classroom, not within the groups.

EHRLICH: Do you remember any Japanese children?

LOVERDE: I remember there being children of all kinds, but--when I was teaching
in Albany as a school teacher, I had to work it all out, exactly what their
background was. I was always surprised to find, when I went through the list. I
know that the little girl that I spoke of being drugged, I think she might have
been Asian. I think of her, because she was very strong on my mind at a time. I
was thinking that she might be Asian.

EHRLICH: I was wondering if there were any other individual children that you
still remember.

LOVERDE: Again, I say actually my time in Richmond was much shorter than my time
in San Francisco and my time in Berkeley--

EHRLICH: I was thinking of that year at Maritime.

LOVERDE: --and then my teaching years in Albany, which are twenty. So, I don&#039;t
really remember.

EHRLICH: I&#039;m going back to a question about staff. I&#039;m wondering if you could
talk a little bit about Erla Boucher. What do you remember of her?

LOVERDE: I remember in the beginning she was kind of up on a pedestal because
she was the director. She was always very efficient and very friendly to me. I
saw her shortly before she died, actually. I went with my mother, who was good
friends with her, to her home. She was always a fine person. My mother spoke of
her too, on the tape, and she said that--she was talking about the fact that
Erla Boucher had brought all the teachers to the schools to train the teachers,
and my mother was commenting on what a wonderful thing that was, because I think
the payment for the teacher was taken care of by the school, the program. It was
kind of a gift to all the teachers to make things work better. I thought that
was a brilliant thought. I just never heard of that. I hadn&#039;t remembered it,
actually, except it began to work in my mind as something I remember hearing
about when I was there maybe for a summer and maybe got into a little bit, or
something. But I hadn&#039;t heard the whole story about how this was a regular thing
and she kept bringing people in. I think she was a very good person to have
started it all. I think she stayed with that program long into the
state-controlled years.

EHRLICH: Did you remember a woman named Catherine Landreth?

LOVERDE: Yes.

EHRLICH: And who was she?

LOVERDE: I don&#039;t remember who she was, but my mother spoke of her all the time.
It&#039;s a very common name, Catherine Landreth. I just can&#039;t figure who she was, I
mean, what position she had.

EHRLICH: I know that she did various things, but one thing I know is that she
was a supervisor of student interns. I was wondering whether maybe you had any
training with her.

LOVERDE: I don&#039;t think so, I think she must have come later, or maybe earlier. I
don&#039;t think I ran into her in her position. I think I ran into her only
socially. I don&#039;t know.

EHRLICH: I was also wondering whether if you had any contact with the
superintendent of the schools, Walter Helms. Do you remember his name or him
being talked about or attitudes towards him?

LOVERDE: I remember his name; I never had contact. We were connected to the
schools insofar that some of our children in the kindergarten group and the
extended day care--which I haven&#039;t even mentioned here; that&#039;s kind of a program
for older children that took place alongside this other. I think probably Walter
Helms had to deal with the connection between the children in the school that
went to the grade schools, like at Maritime and Nystrom, which is right next door.

EHRLICH: Did you have experience with the extended day care?

LOVERDE: I did later; not during the war, but I did later.

EHRLICH: Is there anything else about Maritime that we haven&#039;t talked about that
you think is important to record?

LOVERDE: Well, my talk about Maritime I think is universal with all the schools,
first of all, I&#039;ll say. I know that the basic way of dealing with children was
sent out to all the schools. I think anything I said about Maritime in terms of
working with the children or even the schedule--the schedule was the same in all
of the schools, I believe. I don&#039;t have anything more to say on that, I don&#039;t believe.

EHRLICH: Maybe we could talk a little bit about Richmond after the war.

LOVERDE: Okay.

EHRLICH: Do you remember when the war ended?

LOVERDE: Forty-five?

EHRLICH: No, what I meant was, do you have memories of hearing that the war was ending?

LOVERDE: Yeah. That meant a lot to all of us, of course, but you are talking
about Richmond. When I was out there in &#039;45, we were dealing with the same
program that we had been dealing with, and I don&#039;t think all the shipyards
suddenly stopped, but I don&#039;t really remember that exactly. When the federal
funding stopped and the state took over the payments, I don&#039;t think anything
changed there either, right away. I know that my mother got involved in better
pay for teachers and would go up to Sacramento on a regular basis, lobbying for
the schools.

EHRLICH: Do you remember anything about protests due to a plan to cut federal
funding for child care?

LOVERDE: At what point?

EHRLICH: Once the war ended. Was your mother involved in--the lobbying that she
did was specifically for better pay? Do you remember her being involved in a
movement to continue federal funding so that the centers wouldn&#039;t close?

LOVERDE: Probably, I really don&#039;t know the transition there. I just know that
she had said that when the federal program stopped that the state took over, but
maybe they had to fight for it. I really don&#039;t know. I was back in college,
living a different sort of life. I just know that I was aware of her lobbying
efforts after that, a couple of years later. It could well be that they had to
fight for keeping the schools open and turning it over to the state, and maybe
the state was saying no at first, and maybe the federal funds were needed to
carry through for the transition. I&#039;m not sure.

EHRLICH: Any other memories specific to after the war?

LOVERDE: No, many years later in the seventies, I came back to California after
being in the east, in Chicago, with a family. I put my oldest son in the
Maritime nursery at that time. It seemed to be functioning in the same good way
that it had before.

EHRLICH: Did you remember any differences?

LOVERDE: No, I don&#039;t, because I don&#039;t think I had them there very long. I think
it was just to fill in for the summer or something before school started. I
don&#039;t really remember the situation around that.

EHRLICH: Another question that I&#039;m wondering about is: I&#039;ve heard that fathers
on the G.I. Bill after the war became involved in the centers. Do you have any
memory of men being involved in the centers, fathers?

LOVERDE: I don&#039;t have a memory of it, but I would imagine--when you say
involved, you mean more than a parent group or something? Volunteering?

EHRLICH: I&#039;m not exactly sure actually what the involvement was, and I wondered
if you knew anything about it.

LOVERDE: No, but a lot of fathers would come in and pick up their children. I
know that would happen. It wasn&#039;t just mothers, even in the beginning. I never
differentiated between mothers or fathers before. Are you?

EHRLICH: No, that&#039;s a good answer. Aside from putting your son in the center for
a little while in the seventies, have you or anyone in your family been involved
in Richmond in any way, since your experience in the centers?

LOVERDE: No, not since then, because at that point, I started working for the
Albany schools and working on my teaching credentials so I could teach first grade.

EHRLICH: What kind of credential, or did you need a credential for the year you
taught when you were in college?

LOVERDE: I had a child care permit. I think I mentioned to you that I had thrown
that away because I got another one later to supercede it. I don&#039;t know the date
I got that, but I know that I got it because of the courses I took whenever they
were available. It was during the forties, maybe it was after the war, but it
allowed me to teach in the San Francisco schools as well as the Berkeley and, I
think, Oakland too, actually. Different times, maybe short periods of time.

EHRLICH: I know that other high school girls also volunteered at the child
development centers. Do you have any memories of any high school boys
volunteering or being involved teaching?

LOVERDE: No, and I don&#039;t have any memory of any high school girls either. They
probably would come after school and play with the children in the yard or
something like that. That&#039;s good. That gives them a good background.

EHRLICH: So, anything else that we&#039;ve not discussed about anything during the
war years--anything we&#039;ve left out; your experiences at the centers--that you
want to add in now?

LOVERDE: No, but I&#039;ll mention some that I remember. There was a center named
Canal, and I believe it was near Point Richmond, which is where the Washington
School was. There was a Peres, which may have been towards San Pablo. I&#039;m not
sure. This is just off the top of my head. There was Stege and Fairmount, which
actually was in El Cerrito, so that may have been after the war, I&#039;m not sure. I
know my mother said that when the war ended there were fourteen centers. I can&#039;t
pull up more than seven names, so I&#039;m a little confused what those other seven
were. That&#039;s all I can say about that.

EHRLICH: Okay. I&#039;m done, I think. Let me just make sure there&#039;s nothing I&#039;ve
forgotten to ask. It would be nice to have your mom included. What were you
going to say?

LOVERDE: I was just going to mention that if you wanted to remember that.

EHRLICH: Yeah, I do.









PAGE  44

</transcript><transcript_alt></transcript_alt><rights></rights><fmt>video</fmt><usage></usage><userestrict>0</userestrict><xmllocation></xmllocation><xmlfilename></xmlfilename><collection_link></collection_link><series_link></series_link></record></ROOT>
