WASHBURN: Now we’re on tape three.

PROBERT: I hope this isn’t going to go on a tape, is it?

WASHBURN: Well, it could, but we can erase it.

PROBERT: Some of it. I don’t care, but I don’t think anybody wants to listen
to it anyway.

WASHBURN: You seem very frank and people want to know women’s opinions at the
time. So, you went back to work after your son was old enough. What did you do?
Did you put your son into daycare?

PROBERT: No, no, no. I had a lady come to the house, Italian lady down the
street. She came to the house, took care of him. Otherwise, I couldn’t work. I
took care of a child in my home for about a year, and then I thought, well,
Western Electric, I had a friend, she said, “Mary Ann, you want to work? You
can get on right away.” I said, “Sure, if I can find somebody to take care
of my child.” The lady used to come and take my son, bring him to her house. I
always had a lady taking care of mine.

WASHBURN: Did she take care of other kids at the time?

PROBERT: No, just him. I took care of a little girl.

WASHBURN: How did you know her?

PROBERT: Oh, through a friend, an Italian lady. My son only has one child, a
girl, and he married a girl next door. That’s okay, but he didn’t want his
wife to work at all because I think they miss not having me home.

WASHBURN: Why did you go back to work? What were you thinking?

PROBERT: Oh, I’m always a worker, and my husband’s not a high-salary man. He
worked at Oakland Naval Supply Depot, and if you wanted a home, even at that
time, you buy a house, you have to have two salaries coming in. It’s not that
easy. I always worked, and I liked to work, and once you start working, you get
two salaries. We were on a real strict budget. We had the budget books, and you
put so much money in each envelope, you start saving. We paid cash most of the
time -- none of this other stuff -- and it just goes on and on and on. That’s
why I always worked. Well, his wife works now, has worked, they don’t say
nothing about it. He only had one child, and it’s different. My son, it’s a
lot different than it was. I worked because I wanted to send my daughter to
college and my son to college, and they disappointed me because they didn’t
go. They didn’t go to college, see?

WASHBURN: I’m sure they know that. So, at that time, you could not afford not
to work?

PROBERT: That’s right. Once you’re working, during the war and everything, I
took care of a little girl across the street while her mother and father worked.
They pay you about $5 a week or $10 a week, just babysitting. My son, he was a
little older, and you’re responsible for the child from morning till night.
It’s a job all right, but you don’t get paid that much for babysitting.

WASHBURN: What’s this about all the Rosies, they were housewives, and then
they put on their heavy clothes and went to weld, and then they went back to
being housewives after the war? What’s with all that? That doesn’t seem like
that’s you.

PROBERT: No, no. Before I went in to be a Rosie and after I come out a Rosie,
I’ve worked all the time. I think it’s because if you want to look back, it
starts way back when my mother didn’t work. Back in Illinois, I was working in
Illinois already. Some people and some husbands, they don’t want their wives
to work. They don’t have to work. But to me, I just grew up that I had to
work, that’s all. I liked to work. I get tired just being in here. I go next
door and help her -- she doesn’t feel good -- I’m still going to work. I
have to keep busy.

WASHBURN: Who are these Rosies that after they worked, just went back to being a
housewife? Who are these people?

PROBERT: I know some of them, but they’re working. Even this Japanese gal, she
has three boys. One of them’s a schoolteacher, another one’s something else,
and she’s working. She worked for Emporium Capwell. Most of them have
continued to work, and that’s a lot of baloney that they didn’t work. If you
want anything, you have to work for it or save it, unless you inherit money from
somewhere or you have a skill of some kind where you’re rolling in money. If
you were educated, if I had to have a degree -- and my husband, he worked in a
bakery at night, and if he could have learned to be a baker or had a skill of
some kind that he could demand higher wages, then you don’t have to work. Who
is it that got all the money now? It’s all these rich people that have money;
they make more money and more money. They don’t even work for it. They invest
it, they know people that know how to buy stock or bonds or whatever, and
they’re making the money. They don’t have to work, but people like us that
don’t have the education or the money to start with, how are you going to make
it unless you work?

WASHBURN: Say that again: so, most of the women you knew who were working in the
shipyard, afterwards, what do they do? Where do they get jobs?

PROBERT: They’re working. They got jobs; most of them had to go to work like
AC Capital’s. I have a lot of friends, they’re all in sales. This one here,
furniture, that type of work, when they can afford a babysitter and work. Or
they went to school, or they had a school. That’s this lady here, too; she
worked at AC Capital. And the hospital, I liked the hospital. To me, what is
there? You have a family, you want to raise your family, you want to give your
kids some education. What I don’t understand is these two ladies that are
getting married, they’re both working, they’re not going to sit at home.

WASHBURN: At Beckman’s, that was a factory job, also.

PROBERT: I was in the wire department.

WASHBURN: Were you part of a union? Can you describe your work there?

PROBERT: No, no, no, we didn’t have no union. It’s very easy to do: you
learn to solder with the iron, and you learn all the codes of the wire. The wire
has a code, the color. If you want to make a cable, this one wire goes here;
it’s a board and it has nails on it, and you write the wires go certain
places. You just have to lay them in, then you have a lacing cord, then you tie
it up like that. Then, you just pull it off, and it goes in behind a machine,
all those machines. Then, they have a printed circuit board that you can solder.
Well, I didn’t do that -- I could solder, but I liked wire department. We made
switches and all that kind of stuff. Right now, I can’t get a job. Say I
worked in the wire department -- I have no idea if I went in electronics, but
they move it to cheap labor. They moved the plant, and most of it is done, I
don’t know who, the Japanese do it.

WASHBURN: Probably in Mexico or China or something.

PROBERT: Mexico. We lost our jobs.

WASHBURN: What were you doing for benefits during the war and after the war,
health benefits? Can you describe that?

PROBERT: I belonged to Kaiser. I had an own doctor, and I think it was Blue
Cross. We belonged to Kaiser. My husband and I belonged to Kaiser.

WASHBURN: You belonged to Kaiser during the war because you worked in the shipyards?

PROBERT: Yeah, and after the war, I still belonged to Kaiser.

WASHBURN: You still belong to Kaiser?

PROBERT: I sure do. My husband had Oakland Naval Supply, where he worked.

WASHBURN: So, when you were at Beckman, did Beckman pay for your benefits to Kaiser?

PROBERT: No, no, no. They didn’t have Kaiser, then. No, we didn’t have no
health plan there at Beckman. They didn’t have a health plan.

WASHBURN: So, what did you do for health insurance?

PROBERT: I just paid my bills at the ordinary doctor.

WASHBURN: You paid each time you went. So when did you first sign up with Kaiser
HMO? Do you remember what years?

PROBERT: No, but we’ve been members for a long, long time. Since, well, after
we dropped Blue Cross we went to Kaiser. You have to have a plan.

WASHBURN: Isn’t that amazing, what Kaiser did? He started there. The first
Kaiser hospital was there in Richmond.

PROBERT: I got all the articles here.

WASHBURN: What do you remember about that hospital? Did you ever go there? What
do you remember about that hospital?

PROBERT: Oh, yeah. They’re very good. They were always good, even with the
kids, when I had to take them to the one on Cutting. Even after the war, they
were very good. I think he’s a wonderful man. He was for the working people
that even today, I never find Kaiser down. They’re not the best, but they’re
a lot better. I’m a volunteer in Doctors Hospital right here in Pinole, and I
could see a lot of things. It’s up to your doctor who you have that counts.

WASHBURN: What can you describe about the building there at Kaiser? Now, it’s
not owned by Kaiser anymore; it’s owned by some other group. Can you describe
what the building looks like, the one on Cutting?

PROBERT: Oh, they’re going to make something else out of it.

WASHBURN: Then, what was the building like?

PROBERT: Oh, it was the same as it is now. They haven’t did too much to it,
and I didn’t have no trouble with them, never. I never had any trouble with
them. Even today a lot of it is the individual themselves. And some of them,
they give them a bad name, and it’s not even true. That’s how I feel. What
you see, “Oh, the Kaiser, they’re all dying over there,” I didn’t see
whether the hospital was dirty or anything like that. I’ve worked in a
hospital. I worked where the nuns are in St. Louis, all nuns there. It’s St.
Anthony. They train them, and when I went to work there, you had to stay there,
in the place. They give you room and board, and I can’t see where they were
that different.

WASHBURN: Let me ask you, briefly, during the war, were you going to church at
St. Mark’s?

PROBERT: Yeah, I did go to church.

WASHBURN: Did you go regularly?

PROBERT: No. Well, sometimes I did. On Sundays, I went, and then I went to the
Lutheran church in Richmond. My husband didn’t go, and my son didn’t want to
sit still. I went to St. Mark’s, and he didn’t like the nuns with all the
garbs that they wear. They didn’t have a nursery school. I’d take him up and
down and moving around, and one time -- things have changed now, the mass,
everything, they face the people -- when I went to the Catholic church, they had
their backs to the people, and the server boys. It was a whole different type of sermon.

WASHBURN: Mass was in Latin.

PROBERT: Yes. My son, Rick, said, “When is Jesus coming out?” [laughter] He
hollered this out at St. Mark’s, and he says, “When is Jesus coming out?”
You can’t go to church with kids; they’re jumping up and down and trying to
kneel and all that, no. My husband wouldn’t go.

WASHBURN: Did the religious community support you at all during the war?

PROBERT: I wasn’t involved in it. I went because I felt like going. I didn’t
even go to church during shipyard days. After I’m out, I had Ricky. This was
another thing; I lived in Oakland and at St. Francis de Sales, he said I had to
be remarried before he would baptize him, baptize Rick, so my husband did agree.
We got married in the priest’s home.

WASHBURN: Well, explain that, because your husband is not Catholic.

PROBERT: No, that’s right, he wasn’t Catholic. We had to get remarried in
his house, and then I could baptize my son. I did believe in the baptism.
There’s a lot of things in the Catholic religion since I’ve been brought up
that’s still with me. I still say the rosary. I still like to pray to God.
There’s only one God for me. He’s up there, and to me God’s over
everybody, and he’s the one that whatever your life is like -- I don’t want
to sound like a preacher -- you have to have some type of a religion or believe
in something. To me, I think God is the only one that will answer these
questions and prayers. Whatever’s going to happen, I don’t think we have
control over him.

WASHBURN: Mary Ann, it sounds like you weren’t so religious, then. Now,
you’re more religious.

PROBERT: Yeah, that’s true. I didn’t have the time that I have now, either.
My husband’s been dead for eight years now, and I find, to me, religion, the
Methodist religion, they kind of build your own self up. It’s not you have to
have to go to confession, you have to have all kinds of other things. To me,
that’s why I have more time to devote to going. I only go once a week. I go
for Bible study, I’m more into the Bible. Before, I never even looked at the
Bible through the Catholic school. They have catechism. They have a different
way of praying. To me, I feel he’s the one that’s going to judge me when I
die. I don’t know where we’re going to go or what, and that’s how I live.
Now, everybody doesn’t have to live that way. I’m not an angel, and I make
mistakes. I’m just like anybody else; you’re human. We all make mistakes,
and all I think you have to do is ask for forgiveness.

WASHBURN: Why don’t you think you were more religious during the war years,
early on in your life? When you had your first kid, during the Depression, why
don’t you think you were more religious during that time?

PROBERT: I didn’t bother me. My mother prayed all the time. She sat in her
corner and prayed all the time. I went to the church in Illinois, the Catholic
church, and I went to Catholic church. I had first communion and solemn
communion and confirmation. Then, you marry a man that’s not Catholic, you
can’t be a Catholic if you’re going to go to confession all the time and
say, “Well, I did this and I did that. I used the name of the Lord in vain.”
You can make a whole bunch of stuff up and lie about it. You can lie right in
the confessional. You hear that priest listening to you. To me, I told the
truth, how I feel. As long as I’m not stealing, lying, or hurting another
person, or doing harm to them, to me, I don’t see where you have to be
confessing all the time. My folks never went to church after they left Italy.
Sometimes, they have too much church. I think church is the type of people that
are in it. That’s what makes the church. I’m a Catholic, I’m a Protestant,
I’m Jehovah Witness, I’m this and that -- it’s how you feel, what you
believe in. I don’t want to sound like a preacher.

WASHBURN: I think that’s a good way to end. Do you have any questions at all,
which she hasn’t answered?

PROBERT: I just rattled on and rattled on. She’s a little sweet girl, and you
have your own ideas about how you want to be and what you want to do, and what
you do. I think within your own mind, you know that it’s right. [break in
audio] They thought the women were laying down like that all the time. That’s
a lot of baloney.

WASHBURN: Let’s see that picture. What’s this picture describe, there?

PROBERT: “Once they tasted the economic independence after the war, a lot of
people didn’t go home. They went back to the -- .” No, that’s on there.

WASHBURN: Say that again, what’s this describing?

PROBERT: Well, I thought that they have this showing how the women had to work
in here, and they said that that’s all they did, was lay down in a
double-bottoms, have sex, but that’s not true. This says, “Once they tasted
independence, after the war, a lot of the people didn’t go home. They went
back to what was called ‘women’s work.’” See, they went back to
women’s work -- this is a man’s job, here. This is a good picture of the
ship right here, a shipyard, one of the ships.

WASHBURN: Do you have any personal photos we can take a look at?

PROBERT: Of me? Yeah, I have that. This is me, and these two ladies, they took
care of the restrooms. When the women went in there, they looked after the
women, and then, this girl lost her husband during the war, was working in a
shipyard, and was very sad. These are like the burners, or welders, and each one
of these had a different job. I worked in the steel order department, and I
think maybe one of these worked in there. These are women from, this is yard
one, and this is the crew for our yard one shipyard. I wish I looked like that
now. [laughter]

WASHBURN: Her name is Mary Ann Probert, on the left, there. So, we can conclude
this, if we want. Yeah, so why don’t you turn to the wall and describe a
little bit of what’s on the wall, there?

PROBERT: At the dedication, they passed these out and they gave me that honoree.
You want me to put this one, here? This is my picture, here. They had a
wonderful celebration. They had the planes flying over the place we were in and
had a band. We had three planes flew over and George Miller from Washington, DC
was there. We had a band and marched down to the place where they launched the
ships, and we had a wonderful time.

WASHBURN: Fantastic. That’s such a great wall, you have there. Look it up --
that’s very, very patriotic.

PROBERT: Thank you. You mean that flag up there?

WASHBURN: Yeah, the whole thing.

PROBERT: I like the heart. I just made it up myself, the Rosie. This is the
towel, and there’s the tags that we drew for. Thank you.

