SELVIDGE: This is Sarah Selvidge interviewing Agnes Moore on July 12, 2010, and
we&#039;re in Walnut Creek, California. Could I just ask you to say your name?

SELVIDGE: So just to start off can I ask you to tell me a little bit about where
you were born, your childhood, and that sort of thing?

MOORE: I was born in Searcy County, Arkansas.

SELVIDGE: Okay.

MOORE: It wasn&#039;t in a town. It was just in a township, and I was born on
February 24, 1920. Shortly after I was born my father was elected sheriff, and
we moved into town, right at the edge of town. He bought forty acres there and
built a house on it. It was also, there were two reasons for moving there. One
was because it was near his office. His office was headquartered in that town,
and also there was a high school in that town. When they lived down in the
country, the schools only went to the eighth grade. They had seven children, so
the older ones were old enough to go to high school. So that was another reason
because he wanted the children to have an education.

So two years after he was in office as sheriff they found him shot dead in the
courthouse. So my mother had seven children to raise.

SELVIDGE: My goodness.

MOORE: So the property that they had homesteaded when they first got married was
160 acres, and it was on the Buffalo River.

SELVIDGE: And this was the property where you were born in the township?

MOORE: Yes, in Arkansas.

SELVIDGE: In Arkansas.

MOORE: So, of course, they still had that 160 acres and then they had the forty
acres they had purchased from my grandfather when they moved closer to where
they&#039;d be near a doctor and near my grandparents, my mother&#039;s parents. So there
was farmland, and we just scratched a living out of those little truck patches.
It was in the Ozark Mountains so there wasn&#039;t much flat land, it was just
patches here and there.

We had everything, you know, that a farm has. We had pigs and chickens and cows
and horses, and we grew just about everything we ate. We canned everything. We
even took our corn to the grist mill to have it ground into cornmeal, so
everything was organic. We had good food, so that&#039;s where I grew up, and that&#039;s
the way my mother raised us.

SELVIDGE: So just, can you tell me a little bit more about that? So you have
seven siblings all together?

MOORE: Yes.

SELVIDGE: And where are you in the lineup, so to speak.

MOORE: I&#039;m the sixth child, next to the last.

SELVIDGE: And I imagine you all would have helped a great deal on the farm.

MOORE: Oh, we worked. We worked. We worked always. We&#039;d get up in the morning
and milk the cows and do everything, all the chores, and then we would run all
the way to school so we wouldn&#039;t be late. Everybody had a job. I had four
brothers and two sisters. My brothers knew how to cook and iron and do all the
chores just like the girls did. When a job had to be done, whichever child had
finished his or her job, they got that job no matter if it was in the house or
outside. So the girls did farm work and the boys did housework. We did everything.

SELVIDGE: Wow. That&#039;s great. So did you sell any of the things you produced on
the farm in addition to living--

MOORE: Yes, we did. My father had planted a big orchard of plums, great big
purple plums. We sold those and shipped them; there was a train that went
through that town. We would ship them on the train to buyers, and then, I guess
they were distributed from there into stores or whatever.

And we would sell cattle because our cows were always having young ones. So that
was, you know, money. And we sold chickens and eggs. We sold cream from the
milk. We had a cream separator, and so we would put the cream into great big
containers and take it into town to a produce store that bought the cream, also.

SELVIDGE: So you sold both locally and at a farther distance.

MOORE: Yes.

SELVIDGE: That sounds like a lot of work.

MOORE: It was. It was hard work, and we learned to work. I think that was one of
the best things our mother ever taught us was how to work.

SELVIDGE: How old were you when your father was killed?

MOORE: I was four years old.

SELVIDGE: You were four. So I was going to ask you what changed, but maybe you
were pretty young--

MOORE: I was young, but I still realized that there was change.

SELVIDGE: Yeah. What were some of the things that changed for you even as a
four-year-old after that?

MOORE: Well, I didn&#039;t have a father to pick me up and throw me up in the air and
let me ride on his big feet, and my little brother also.

SELVIDGE: Sounds like your father was very playful.

MOORE: He was. Then one thing that changed, my father had a Model T Ford sedan.
I guess they would have called it a touring car. He had taught my mother how to
drive it, but she was driving it one day and my oldest brother, he was fourteen.
He decided she should go faster, so he, there was a lever up on the steering
wheel where they could feed the gas, or there was also one down on the floor
board where they could use their foot. Anyhow, he stepped on the gas and made it
go faster. So it startled her, and she drove it off into a ditch.

SELVIDGE: Oh, no.

So after that, she said she was going to sell the car because somebody would get
killed. So we had horses and a wagon with mules to pull it when we went places.
Or walk, we did a lot of walking.

SELVIDGE: Oh, okay. So she got rid of the car.

MOORE: Yeah. Yeah. She sold it.

SELVIDGE: She sold it. Did you learn to drive? This would be jumping ahead. Did
you learn to drive at all while you lived in Arkansas, or your siblings?

MOORE: No.

SELVIDGE: No.

MOORE: Well, I did, I had a high school boyfriend for a while, and his father
had I think it was a Model B Ford. So I drove it once in a while when we would
be out.

SELVIDGE: Well, I&#039;d like to ask you some questions about high school, but maybe
in the middle if there&#039;s anything you remember even before high school about
your elementary school experience.

MOORE: I remember when I was in, I guess, about the sixth grade, I had polio.

SELVIDGE: Oh, wow.

MOORE: And I missed practically the whole year of school. That was pretty bad. I
couldn&#039;t walk for most of that time, and my mother, there wasn&#039;t any treatment
for it then, just massage and hot compresses. My mother exercised my legs. She
kept moving them like I was walking, you know?

SELVIDGE: That&#039;s good.

MOORE: And eventually I got to where I could walk. I could stand my weight on my
right foot first before the left foot. The left side was more affected. But she
got me over it.

SELVIDGE: So you made quite a good recovery, then. That&#039;s good.

MOORE: Yeah, and then I remember, I can remember the first day I went to school.
I was so excited because being next to the youngest, all these older brothers
and sisters would go off to school in the morning, and I had watched them go and
wished that I could go, too. So I was quite excited about the first day at school.

Then I remember we had a Maypole dance, and the little girls all wore crepe
paper dresses with ruffles all over them and their dress had to be the same
color of the long ribbon that they carried. Then they would weave in and out and
weave it around the Maypole. So I remember that.

Then I was always looking forward to graduating from the eighth grade so I could
be in high school. The grammar school and the high school were all in the same
building, but the high school was upstairs. So I was looking forward to get to
go upstairs.

SELVIDGE: Going upstairs, so tell me about what high school was like for you. I
know you mentioned that part of the reason your family moved closer to town was
to give all the kids an opportunity to go to high school.

MOORE: Yeah. It was a small high school, and in order to prepare people for any
college career, any career that they might go into, for instance, medical or any
of the other occupations, everybody in school had to take a college prep course.
So to provide at that time medical students with, they had to have Latin because
all of the prescriptions were written in Latin, so everybody had to take Latin
because we could only have one language teacher. Then we had a science class, I
remember performing a lot of experiments with science. One time we made some
kind of acid, and it bubbled up and spilled all over the floor, and it ate the
soles off of my sandals.

SELVIDGE: Oh, wow.

MOORE: They were just shreds when I went home. So it was pretty strong acid, I
don&#039;t recall what it was, but I remember that. We had a glee club in high
school, so I was in that. We had tennis, and I was on the tennis team. We had
lots of contests, and we raised money to buy typewriters.

SELVIDGE: For the school?

MOORE: Yeah. So we bought five typewriters, and they didn&#039;t have a classroom for
it, so they put these in the bell tower.

SELVIDGE: Interesting.

MOORE: There was a little room down below the bell tower, and the principal,
while he was working at his desk, he would conduct the typing class. So that
was, you know, one way they had of training the girls for more office practice
and things.

SELVIDGE: That actually brings up one of my follow up questions: were there
different classes for boys and for girls? You mentioned the typing class.

MOORE: There were agricultural classes for the boys, and they learned all about
livestock and how to care for them. Most of the farmers back then, if one of
their animals got sick, they took care of it themselves, and they knew how to do
it. Then, the girls had like sewing and things like that that the boys didn&#039;t
have, but that was about all.

I can remember we raised money to buy library books.

SELVIDGE: Oh, yeah?

MOORE: We had a small library. There was a big, long room where all of the four
high school classes, it was what I guess you&#039;d call a home room. We called it
study hall, because when you didn&#039;t have a class, you had a desk in there and
that&#039;s where you went and stayed until your next class was due.

Anyhow, we bought these library books. We raised money for that, too. So I
worked in the library. And when the books came in they were just in these great
big boxes, you know. I got to take them out of the box, and oh, I just was so
excited about all these beautiful covers on the books, and they were brand new.
We never had new books. There was always, before school started, there was a
place in town where everybody turned in their old books and they could trade
them for their new books.

SELVIDGE: Oh, like the school textbooks and things like that?

MOORE: Yeah. So to get to handle these new books in the library was just a big
thrill for me. Then I had to number them and all of that and then put them on
the shelves. So I remember that was very pleasant.

SELVIDGE: Yeah. So you mentioned that there was this college preparatory course.
Was it expected that many students would go onto college after high school?

MOORE: I&#039;d say maybe ten or fifteen out of each graduating class, which there
would only be about twenty-five or thirty who graduated.

SELVIDGE: Oh, so that&#039;s a good number then? Close to half, maybe, or nearing that.

MOORE: Well, sort of.

SELVIDGE: Yeah. But at the same time there must have also been a lot of people
who went into farming.

MOORE: Oh, yes. Yes, there was.

SELVIDGE: Continuing the work on the family farms.

MOORE: Oh, yeah.

SELVIDGE: What about with your own siblings? Were there brothers and sisters who
stayed and worked on the farm?

MOORE: No. They left.

SELVIDGE: Everyone left.

MOORE: My oldest brother when he graduated from high school, you could take a
state examination for teaching and get a credential to teach in a school that
had eight grades in it. My oldest brother did that, and he taught for a while,
but he didn&#039;t really like it. The part he didn&#039;t like was the unruly boys, and
he didn&#039;t want to have to correct them because they were almost as old he was
and he had known them, you know.

SELVIDGE: Oh, sure.

MOORE: So it was, he didn&#039;t like that, so he went into, well, I guess it was
sort of like clerk work, bookkeeping type work. But he also was a good athlete
in school, and he won all of the awards. He was left handed, and he was a real
good baseball pitcher. He had friends whose families had moved to California,
and they lived in Salinas Valley. Back then that was like the early thirties,
all of the valleys in California had baseball teams. They had a league, and they
would compete against each other. So they needed a pitcher, and his friends told
him about my brother. So they sent him a train ticket and money to come to
Salinas and pitch baseball. They also had a job for him in this company, and he
worked for that company for thirty-five years. In another month he was going to
be retiring, and he was at work with the company car and he was in an accident
and killed.

SELVIDGE: Oh, wow.

MOORE: So he didn&#039;t get to retire like he thought he was going to. So then the
younger ones, we sort of followed him to California. I always wanted to either
come to California or Florida because when I was, I guess, in about the seventh
grade in my geography book they had a picture of a woman picking an orange off
of a tree and eating it, and I just thought that would be wonderful to live in a
place like that. So I always wanted to come to either California or go to
Florida, so I wound up in California.

SELVIDGE: Just before we got to the California part, I wonder if you can just
talk a little bit about whether the Depression changed things on the farm and
with your family before you left.

MOORE: Oh, yes. The Depression itself wouldn&#039;t have changed our lives a whole
lot. However, we had droughts. It didn&#039;t rain, and we depended on the rain for irrigation.

SELVIDGE: Yeah. What kind of irrigation systems did you have on the farm?

MOORE: We didn&#039;t have any.

SELVIDGE: You didn&#039;t have any. Okay.

MOORE: We totally depended on the rains.

SELVIDGE: So you absolutely depended--

MOORE: Because it rained all summer back there.

SELVIDGE: Right. Usually.

MOORE: Yeah. But we had, oh, quite a number of years in a row where there was
very little rain, and even in the winter time there wasn&#039;t much. So I remember
the last time we planted a big crop our corn got about eight inches tall, and
the sun was so hot that it just, it turned brown and was just like dry straw. It
killed it. So we had no corn crop that year. That meant we didn&#039;t have feed for
the animals, and hay didn&#039;t grow either. So it was really, really bad. We didn&#039;t
have, we only had a couple of cows that they could eat the dry stuff, and they
could eat the leaves off of the trees, too. They had about twenty acres of
pasture to run in, and it was really, really hard.

SELVIDGE: Yeah. What kinds of things did your family do to cope with the
worsening situation?

MOORE: Well, my mother could always sell some of the timber because a lot of the
land was just mountains with trees on it. She never sold a whole lot. She only
sold enough to have the money that she needed. It was really rough. My mother
was a real good seamstress, and she made all of our clothes. She&#039;d buy the cloth
and make our dresses. Then, of course, I being the youngest girl, I got a lot of hand-me-downs.

SELVIDGE: Yeah, I guess so.

MOORE: So those were the only things. I remember one year we also grew tomatoes,
and we would sell them to the local cannery. We had, this is just an instance of
what women had to endure. We had beautiful tomatoes that year, and we had just
hand picked them, you know, and put them in crates and filled the wagon full. So
my mother drove the mules with the wagon, and she took my little brother and I
with her. She took us with her a lot when she had to take care of business
because then the older children could do their chores.

SELVIDGE: Instead of having to watch you.

MOORE: Yeah. So we were sitting up on the seat on the wagon with her, so when
she drove to go down onto the scales to weigh the tomatoes, she told my little
brother and I to be quiet because she wanted to hear the grade that the man gave
who graded the tomatoes. She wanted to hear what grade he gave the man in front
of her. He had driven his wagon down onto the scales, and so the inspector, or
whatever you called him, he came and he looked at the tomatoes and he told him
the grade, and then, of course, he got paid according to the grade.

SELVIDGE: Right.

MOORE: You know, the best--

SELVIDGE: A different rate, depending--

MOORE: Yeah, like A grade was the best and B, C and on down like that. So that
man left, and my mother drove the team with the wagon down onto the scale. So
the inspector looked them over, and told her the grade she was going to get. And
she said, &quot;No, my tomatoes are better than that. The man in front of me, his
tomatoes weren&#039;t as good as mine, and you gave him a better grade. I should at
least have the grade he got.&quot; He said, &quot;That&#039;s the grade I gave you, and that&#039;s
the grade you&#039;re going to get.&quot; She says, &quot;And you won&#039;t get my tomatoes. I&#039;ll
take them home and feed them to the hogs.&quot; She just flipped those reins, and
away we went. I started crying. I said, &quot;Momma, what are we going to do now?
That was the money for our books for school.&quot; She said, &quot;There&#039;ll be a way.&quot;
That was always her answer when things had got real tough. There will be a way.
So we went home, and we dumped the tomatoes into the hog pen. They were
beautiful, too, just really-- But being a woman, he thought he could get away
with that and that she would have to take the lesser grade. Then, of course,
other things she had to endure was when it came time to breed the cow, she
couldn&#039;t go to the neighbor who owned a good bull, you know, and everybody took
their cows to him. She couldn&#039;t go because she was a woman. She couldn&#039;t go talk
to that man.

SELVIDGE: They couldn&#039;t do business together?

MOORE: No. She had to send my oldest brother. So if there hadn&#039;t have been an
older brother, I don&#039;t know what she would have done, but that was just another
thing. There was always something coming up that she had to endure things that,
because that was in the late twenties.

SELVIDGE: Right.

MOORE: And the thirties, and women&#039;s rights weren&#039;t thought about back then.

SELVIDGE: Right. And the expectation was that men would do business transactions?

MOORE: Yeah. So she had to be the best manager in the world. She didn&#039;t let us
get away with anything. I mean, you know, she had ways that she thought we
should, things that we should do and we should always be decent. I can remember
she would always say, &quot;Don&#039;t do anything to disgrace the family name.&quot; So we
were supposed to walk the straight and narrow.

SELVIDGE: It sounds like she taught you a lot.

MOORE: She did. Yes, she did.

SELVIDGE: So your oldest brother then went to Salinas, and then, I guess,
probably some other family members must have moved on before you finished high
school even, some other siblings.

MOORE: Oh, yeah. Sure.

SELVIDGE: And did a lot of them come to California then?

MOORE: Yes. My oldest sister, she was married and had a little girl. She and her
husband came, and her husband went to work. They had more children, and then the
next oldest one; he went to Arizona with an uncle. Some of my great great uncles
had gone to Arizona and taken up land when the government was letting them
homestead land. So one of them went back to Arkansas for a visit, one of the
uncles, and so my second oldest brother, he went to Arizona. Eventually, he
owned a business that was land leveling and tillage. He did real well, and he
lived in Chandler, Arizona. It was all desert, and he cleared the desert for
citrus. His son came along and took over the business, and he took out the
citrus for homes.

SELVIDGE: Oh, I see.

MOORE: And graded the land for streets, so they saw a big change in that country
over there. Then, the next oldest was another boy, and he came to California. He
eventually went to work for the P.G.&amp;E. He went to work digging post holes, and
when he retired he was supervisor over all of the high line development.

SELVIDGE: Wow. He worked his way up, then.

MOORE: Yeah, and then the next one was a girl. She always wanted to be a
beautician, even in high school. She ordered a little hand dryer from the
Montgomery Ward catalog. And after school she would set and style and cut her
girlfriends&#039; hair, and they would pay her, so she earned some money that way. So
she eventually came to California, and she had a beautician degree back there,
but when she came to California, she had to meet California standards.

SELVIDGE: Sure.

MOORE: So she went to school in San Francisco at a beauty school. And she had a
beauty shop is Albany for about sixty years.

So then there was me, and I came to California, and I went to college, and I
married. Then I had two daughters, and one daughter was a homemaker, and she
passed away with lung cancer two years ago.

SELVIDGE: Sorry.

MOORE: So then the other daughter lives in Orinda, and she has a consignment
store, ladies&#039; clothing. Before that she worked for a company and was supervisor
over I think about three counties for that company. Then she married somebody
who lived in Orinda and eventually opened a store there.

So then I went to college here in California. My sister, both sisters were
beauticians and they wanted me to go into that. And I said, &quot;No, I&#039;m not going
to school to learn to do something that I have to stand on my feet all day.&quot; So
I took up accounting.

SELVIDGE: Oh, okay. You wanted to be sitting down.

MOORE: Yes.

SELVIDGE: Before we talk about that, I think we&#039;ll probably have a lot to talk
about with you coming to California and the college experience. Then we&#039;ll get
into the World War II stuff, too, but before we do, I just wanted to ask a
little bit more about the general feelings about leaving where you had grown up
and coming to California. I know you definitely had a line of siblings before
you who had done that, but was it sort of unexpected that a family should have,
you know, all the kids leave the area, is that something that happened with a
lot of families, I&#039;m just curious about that aspect.

MOORE: It happened with a lot of families. There wasn&#039;t any work there for
anybody unless your family had a business or, you know, things like that you
could go into. If you didn&#039;t want to go into farming, you just left and went to
where there was work.

SELVIDGE: Yeah. Was there a sense do you remember at the time, I&#039;m sure you were
looking forward to picking oranges off the trees in California, but was there a
sense that this sort of way of life was coming to an end, that there wasn&#039;t any
more opportunities in farming in having your own land and that kind of thing?

MOORE: Well, I think for us it was something we looked forward to. Because of my
father&#039;s death, it was never proven how he died. I mean he was shot to death, but--

SELVIDGE: Sure, but the larger circumstances.

MOORE: Yeah. It was generally thought that the Ku Klux Klan had something to do
with it.

SELVIDGE: Really?

MOORE: Because they were real strong back in 1924.

SELVIDGE: Sure.

MOORE: They also were doing lots of things that were unlawful, and it didn&#039;t
have to be racial. If someone didn&#039;t go along with what they wanted to do, the
Klan wanted to do, and were in opposition to it, then they were on their enemy
list. Because of things that they were doing, the Klan was doing, the local
newspaper wouldn&#039;t defy them, they wouldn&#039;t publish anything in their paper that
was unfavorable to the Ku Klux Klan. So my father and both of my grandparents
and a number of other influential people in town and businessmen, they started
another newspaper. It was called The Mountain Eagle, and they said they
published the truth. Of course, the men who started that newspaper, their names
were all listed on the heading of the newspaper and, of course, the Klan knew
who they were. My father was one of them, and so it was generally thought that
the Klan had something to do with it. But they never, I don&#039;t think they even
bothered to investigate it. I think they should have had the state to come in
and investigate it, but nobody did. Of course, you didn&#039;t know who the Klan
members were unless you were a member yourself. So we grew up under what you
might call that cloud. An incident happened when I had only been in school two
or three days and we were out on the playground and it had been raining. A
little boy ran up to me and said something, and I didn&#039;t understand what it was.
So I looked at him and I said, &quot;What?&quot; He said, &quot;Oh, you&#039;re so and so,&quot; and he
pushed me down and I fell into the mud hole with my new dress. I was just
heartbroken because I&#039;d looked forward to going to school and then to have that
happen, so some little girls took me into the teacher. Then when I went home,
next day I wasn&#039;t going back to school. My mother wanted to know why, and I
finally told her. I said, &quot;The boys are mean at that school, and I don&#039;t want to
go.&quot; She said, &quot;Well, I&#039;ll take you back to school,&quot; so she left all of her
chores, separating the milk and the cream, and all of that, and it was a mile to
school. So she took me to school, and she talked to the teacher. So that
afternoon the principal of the school came into the room, and he said, &quot;That
game that you&#039;ve been playing and pushing people into the mud, it&#039;s not allowed.
It&#039;s not a good game, and people will be punished if they play that game any
more.&quot; Well, I thought then, &quot;That&#039;s a game?&quot; I suppose the principal, that&#039;s
the only words he could put it into.

Now getting back to what the little boy said, he said, &quot;KK or anti,&quot; and then
when he said, &quot;Oh, you&#039;re anti,&quot; he pushed me down into the mud. I happened to
be standing by a little puddle. So I suppose his family were KK&#039;s, you know?

SELVIDGE: Yeah.

MOORE: Because he knew that I wasn&#039;t.

SELVIDGE: Yeah, and you didn&#039;t at that time realize that you were or weren&#039;t.

MOORE: I didn&#039;t know what he said, even. Yeah, I mean, we had never talked about
this. After my father&#039;s death, my two grandfathers came and had all of us
children, the seven of us and my mother, and my uncle was there. He sat us down,
they did, and they said that we were never ever to talk about an incident that
happened the night after my father died.

A big, long line of cars drove by our house and shot guns over our house. We
could see the red bullets flying through the air, and drove past our house and
up the end of the mountain and came back down the top of the mountain even with
our house, and burned a big cross up there and milled around up there most all night.

SELVIDGE: Wow.

MOORE: We were terrified, of course. So my mother said when they started
shooting over the house, see the road was, it would be about a half a block from
the house because, you know, we lived on a farm. The houses were all set back,
way back. So when they started shooting, and my mother said, &quot;Oh, you little
kids run around behind the house and hide. You older ones go in the house and
put out all the lights and then come to the back yard. We hid back there for a
long time, and we watched that big cross burn. Then, oh, I don&#039;t know, it was
very late in the morning we saw the headlights of the cars drive back down the
mountain, and some of the cars went on out past our house, but some of them came
back by our house driving into town past our house. So, you know, some lived in
one direction, and some another.

SELVIDGE: Right.

MOORE: So we never talked about that, even to our cousins, even amongst
ourselves. We never mentioned it. We, you know, were always looking over our
shoulder. And very careful who we chose for friends, and we didn&#039;t, as I say, we
never ever mentioned that. So because of that, you know, there was always that
feeling of damage that had been done to us, and we didn&#039;t like it there. None of
us stayed there.

SELVIDGE: So that was a big part, that feeling of being harmed by the people in
the area.

MOORE: Yeah. And who could you trust? Because, now some of those people knew who
killed my father.

SELVIDGE: Sure.

MOORE: It was hinted that it was suicide, and that was just to cover up. So,
anyhow, I just looked forward to the day when I could leave.

SELVIDGE: Yeah.

MOORE: I had girlfriends. I went to church all the time and the Sunday school
class, and, you know, we&#039;d go on in the summertime we&#039;d go to the river and swim
and have picnics. You know, we had fun, but as far as I was concerned, there was
always that feeling of not really belonging, and discrimination. I think that&#039;s
one reason my mother had a tougher time than just being a woman.

SELVIDGE: Right. She had both of those-- Wow.

MOORE: Yeah. So that&#039;s the reason I wanted to leave. And, of course, I wanted to
find that place where those oranges grew.

SELVIDGE: Yeah. Absolutely.

MOORE: But, you know I never did.

SELVIDGE: Never picked an orange from a tree?

MOORE: Never did.

SELVIDGE: Well, you still can.

MOORE: Yeah, I still can. Well, I have too. People have orange trees in their
yard and stuff like that, but I never, I lived in Salinas for a while, and, of
course, you know that&#039;s right after World War II started.

SELVIDGE: Right. Well, I&#039;m going to probably switch the tape before we get into
the World War II bit. I&#039;m just curious, I&#039;m so fascinated by these incidents
that were so important in your life but also had to be kept so secret. Did you
ever get the sense where was a specific incident with the newspaper story that
was published that these people didn&#039;t like or--

MOORE: There was a number of them. Almost every paper, it was a weekly, and
almost every paper there was something, an incident that they had done. For
instance, they horsewhipped a man, it was a white man, and actually my father,
most everybody was a member of the Klan. It was supposed to be a social thing,
and he witnessed this incident where they horsewhipped a man, and he was--

SELVIDGE: He was a member, and that was why he was there.

MOORE: Yeah. You couldn&#039;t go if you weren&#039;t a member. I don&#039;t know how they knew
who was a member, they all wore sheets.

SELVIDGE: Right.

MOORE: But anyhow, he said, he told my mother, and my mother told me this story
as I was growing up that he said he would never go again. It wasn&#039;t a good
organization, and that no matter what the man had done, there were laws to take
care of it, and that they should not have taken the law into their own hands. So
that was the reason he left, and then I suppose there must have been other
incidents, too.

SELVIDGE: Especially violent incidents.

MOORE: Yeah, and he just said it&#039;s not a good organization, and he didn&#039;t want
to belong to it any more. So that was that. So that could have been another
reason, you know, but that newspaper, I mean, it was just obvious, and their
names, the publishers&#039; names were all listed.

SELVIDGE: Right. So the newspaper would have been publishing stories about the
Ku Klux Klan sort of acts of violence against black people and white people, I
guess, in the town mostly or--

MOORE: The Ku Klux Klan, the truth, yes, acts of violence, yeah. Well, it had to
be white people in that town in that county because there weren&#039;t any blacks.

SELVIDGE: Oh, okay.

MOORE: For one thing, it was just small family farming, and there wasn&#039;t any
work for them, so they lived in the southern part of the state, this was in the
northern part of the state.

SELVIDGE: Okay.

MOORE: Actually, those people were anti-slavery anyhow, of that mind, because
when the North and the South had gone to war and the states were seceding, I
think that&#039;s what it was called, from the union and joining the southern states.
There were five counties in northern Arkansas that voted not to go with the
South, but the state legislature voted to go with the South. So they were, all
the men, you know, were expected to go fight for the South, and the men from
these five northern counties didn&#039;t go. So they sent a colonel, this is
published in one of the county history books, a colonel, his name was Cypert the
Southern army sent this colonel and his regiment or whatever he needed, they
arrived on horseback, you know, all these military people, and they gathered up
all the men that they could find. They put them on a long chain and marched them
down to Little Rock and charged them with, I don&#039;t know if it was treason, or
whatever the charge was, and they tried two of the men, and they shot them. So
these other men, they decided they would go fight, but then when they would get
into a battle they would disappear, and they&#039;d go back north to their homes and
then the families would hide them out in the hills, you know, and they wouldn&#039;t
fight for the South.

SELVIDGE: I think I&#039;m going to have to change the tape here.

MOORE: Okay.

Begin Audio File 2

MOORE: But then I married a California man.

SELVIDGE: Your husband is from California. Okay, so this is our Tape 2 Sarah
Selvidge with Agnes Moore, July 12, 2010 in Walnut Creek. So you were talking
about coming to California.

MOORE: Yes.

SELVIDGE: You were just sort of starting what happened before you came.

MOORE: Yeah.

SELVIDGE: Part of that story.

MOORE: Well, I came to California to my brothers home in Salinas, and I went to
work in the vegetable packing industry. Then I came to San Francisco to visit my
sister, and I bought a little &#039;35 Plymouth. It would have been five years old, I
guess, because that was about 1940 I think.

SELVIDGE: And this was right after you graduated from high school when you left.

MOORE: Yeah. So I was visiting my sister in San Francisco. Well, the Japanese
had bombed Pearl Harbor, though, in December of &#039;41. This was about January
some, you know, not long after that that I--

SELVIDGE: So this was about January 1942.

MOORE: Yeah.

SELVIDGE: Okay.

MOORE: That I came to San Francisco visiting my sister, and I heard on my car
radio the announcer, &quot;Women, do something for your country. Go to the Richmond
shipyard and be a welder.&quot;

SELVIDGE: Oh, wow.

MOORE: So I told my sister, &quot;Gee, that must really be an important job,&quot; because
they&#039;re asking for us to do it on the radio, you know, for us to go there and do
this job. So I said, &quot;That&#039;s what I&#039;m going to do.&quot; So I drove over to Richmond.
Of course, I got dressed up in the best I had, you know.

SELVIDGE: Yeah.

MOORE: Black suit was very popular back then, and white blouse. Oh, and you had
to have a hat with a veil, and I had that, with my high heeled black patent
leather pumps. Of course, I had to have a black purse to match that and gloves.
So I walked into the Department of, it was the California Office of Employment
in Richmond, that&#039;s where they told us to go. So I walked in, and the
receptionist wanted to know if, you know, she could help me. I said, &quot;Yes, I
want to be a welder.&quot; She kind of looked at me, and she said, &quot;We have a lot of
jobs in the offices.&quot; I said, &quot;No, I want to be a welder. They were asking for
us to come and do that, and it&#039;s an important job, so that&#039;s what I want to do.&quot;

SELVIDGE: It&#039;s so funny. It&#039;s especially funny I have to say looking at what you
traded your white gloves and your hat with the veil for the welding mask--

MOORE: Oh, yeah, for all of this.

SELVIDGE: Had you heard before the advertisement or call on the radio, had you
heard before talk of women working in the war industries, or was this kind of
the first--

MOORE: No.

SELVIDGE: You didn&#039;t really know about that.

MOORE: No, I didn&#039;t know anything about any of it. I&#039;d never been on a ship in
my life. I&#039;d never seen the ocean until I came to California. It was all a new
life, totally new, you know. Living in a city was totally new, you know, growing
up on the farm in a small town. It was all very exciting.

SELVIDGE: Yeah, I bet.

MOORE: You want me to tell about getting hired?

SELVIDGE: Yeah. That&#039;d be great.

MOORE: Okay. They hired me, and they instructed me to go out to the Richmond
Shipyard #3, Kaiser Permanente.

SELVIDGE: So you go to the employment office and they try to dissuade you a
little bit.

MOORE: Yeah.

SELVIDGE: But you&#039;re determined to work as a welder, and then they send you out
to the shipyards for training?

MOORE: Yeah. Yes, they told me where to report to, and I had to, you know, sign
all the papers for hiring and show my citizenship and all that. Then they
instructed me to go to this certain building at the shipyard to the welding
school, but before they sent me over there, they sent me to the store, the
company store to buy all of the clothing that I would need. So it was quite
different than anything I had ever seen, and I have it here if you want me to
show you--

SELVIDGE: Yeah, let me pull back a little bit on the video here, okay, you can
go ahead and show--

MOORE: So they sent us to the store and said that, then they gave me a paper
with the clothing I would need. The first thing they did was take us to the shoe
department, and I don&#039;t have those shoes, but they were high-top laced up, and
they were very heavy and they had steel toes so if anything fell on your foot,
it wouldn&#039;t smash your foot. So then they sold us, this type of a leather
jacket, and they&#039;re really heavy, and it&#039;s just real rough cowhide and very
thick. They also sold us leather overalls. I don&#039;t have the overalls, but I do
have the jacket.

SELVIDGE: Were they denim overalls or leather overalls?

MOORE: They were leather.

SELVIDGE: They were leather also.

MOORE: Just like this, and so they sold us that. Then they sold us these gloves,
and these went all the way up to your elbow, and they&#039;re lined with asbestos. I
still at that point didn&#039;t know I was going to be handling fire.

SELVIDGE: What are these for?

MOORE: Then this helmet, and oh yeah, we had to have a bandana and tie our hair
up. Of course, we all had down below the shoulder length hair at that time, and
so anyhow, this thing goes on like this. Of course, you have this bandana tied
around your head first.

MOORE: And then on the hood, when you&#039;re welding, this comes down and there&#039;s
this window. This is clear glass that we can see through. But when it&#039;s down
like this, it&#039;s dark colored because when we&#039;re welding it has to be real dark
colored to protect our eyes from the fire.

SELVIDGE: Right. But you can still see, but you can only see where there&#039;s
light, right? Where there&#039;s fire.

MOORE: Yes, you can&#039;t see through it when that dark window is down closed.

SELVIDGE: Right, except for what you&#039;re welding.

MOORE: Yes. When you strike an arc and you start welding, then you can see where
you&#039;re welding. And you have to be able to see because you have to see where
you&#039;re supposed to weld. Oh, this is the book that we bought to-- It told us all
about welding machines and the settings on the welding machine. There was
amperes and voltage, and the amperes heated the metal and the voltage pushed it
off onto what you wanted to weld onto. Of course, that was all a new language to
us. We didn&#039;t have any idea what that was all about.

SELVIDGE: Yeah. How long was the training?

MOORE: Two weeks.

SELVIDGE: Two weeks? Wow.

MOORE: Yes.

SELVIDGE: That&#039;s not very long.

MOORE: No. We had to have a rod pot. This is another thing that you had to carry
the welding rod in, but we had to have a rod pot because we had to have a steel
brush and a hammer, they called it a chipping hammer where we chipped everything
off of this weld after we made it. Then we took the brush and brushed it, and if
it had any pin holes or undercutting, it would have to be chipped out and
redone. So there was that. Then we were issued, we didn&#039;t have to buy this, they
issued it to us. It was called a stinger.

SELVIDGE: So you did have your own personal one of these?

MOORE: Yes, you had this, you took it with you when you, well, they gave us
lockers, assigned us lockers so we could store all of this equipment in the
locker. We didn&#039;t have to carry it home with us every night.

SELVIDGE: Okay, so the locker was at the shipyard.

MOORE: Yeah, and you didn&#039;t have to pay for it. But we carried this around our
neck like that. This end of it was plugged into another line this same size, and
this is all full of copper wires, just little tiny copper wires. It&#039;s very
heavy, and you would have a line, they were twenty-five foot lengths of line.
You had to have enough of those twenty-five foot lines to reach to where your
welding machine was because one end of it was plugged into the welding machine.
Sometimes you would be welding down in the bottom of the ship, and the welding
machines were always up on top deck. So it took a lot of line to get down to
where your job was. So then in order to weld, you had to have the welding rod,
which you clamped in here, into the stinger and then you would strike an arc
like say you wanted to weld that onto the deck or whatever, you&#039;d strike an arc,
and you had to just hit it real quick because if you did it slow, the rod would
weld itself onto the metal and then you&#039;d have an awful time breaking it loose.
So you learned just to hit it real fast and not pull it too far away. See the
ship, the whole ship was grounded. It had to be grounded in order for this
process to work. So you would just start welding, and you had to oscillate it
all the way and do it just very smooth. If you didn&#039;t do it smoothly, you
wouldn&#039;t have a good weld. So that was what we learned at welding school.

SELVIDGE: Yeah.

MOORE: Two weeks.

SELVIDGE: In two weeks, that&#039;s so quick.

MOORE: But the first night at welding school, I worked nights, and everything
during World War II, everything was open twenty-four hours a day.

SELVIDGE: Really?

MOORE: All the stores, the movie theaters--

SELVIDGE: Around Richmond?

MOORE: San Francisco, all around the Bay Area because you had three shifts, they
worked around the clock.

SELVIDGE: They had three shifts?

MOORE: Three shifts. So the first night that I was in the welding school, and
there was another young girl, eighteen years old, she had just graduated from
high school in San Francisco. She and I kind of buddied together. So we went in
after the shift was over, we went into the locker room to change clothes. I
looked in the mirror, and our faces were all black from the smoke and the
welding. They had booths built with pieces of metal clamped onto a frame thing
with all positions of welding. We had to learn flat, vertical and overhead. Flat
was the easiest. Vertical was a little harder because you were going up the
wall, and overhead was really hard because if you didn&#039;t get it up in there just
right, the whole hot metal would just fall out on you, you know. So it was hard.

So well anyhow, we had been in this booth trying to learn to weld all night and
went into the locker room and saw this smoke on my face. I looked at her, she
had smoke on her face, too. So I said, &quot;Well, I suppose when we learned how to
do this, that we won&#039;t get our faces dirty like this.&quot;[laughter] Anyhow, after
two weeks they sent us out into the yard, and they sent us to the outfitting
dock. That is where when a ship is launched; it is not a ship that can sail
under its own power. It&#039;s pulled out into the water by a tugboat, and it&#039;s
pulled around to the outfitting dock. It&#039;s tied up there, and then that&#039;s where
it&#039;s finished. So it used to take months and months and months to build a ship,
but Kaiser developed a method of, prefabrication. They built a ship in just a
little over five days, put it together. It was because of all the prefabrication
they had learned. They had areas in the yard where they could build all the
parts of a ship, and this, I don&#039;t know if you can put it on the camera--

SELVIDGE: Yes.

MOORE: This is what&#039;s called the superstructure of the ship. It&#039;s everything
that&#039;s above the top deck. It&#039;s the captain&#039;s quarters and all of that, and they
fabricated this on a place they called the prefab area. It was so heavy you can
see there were four of those large whirly cranes that&#039;s hooked on to it. These
cranes run on a track alongside of where the ship is being built. Those four
cranes hooked on to this superstructure, carried it down, and there were white
chalk lines drawn on the top deck of the ship. That&#039;s where they had to set it down.

SELVIDGE: Oh, so the cranes would position it according to that?

MOORE: Yeah. They didn&#039;t have the electronic controls back then. They had
riggers, men who gave instructions, hand instructions to the crane operator.
Four of these had to be coordinated with hand signals.

SELVIDGE: Wow. That sounds like a very difficult job.

MOORE: They set it right down where it belonged, and then the ship fitters would
come in, and they would have a welder who was called a tacker. They would tack
little four-inch pieces, four-inch square pieces of steel plate, they would tack
it on to the deck close to the bulkhead of this superstructure that was touching
the top deck of the ship. They would tack those pieces all along, weld tack.
Then the ship fitter had a hammer and steel wedges, and there would be one on
each side of that bulkhead because they couldn&#039;t see each other. They had to
draw that steel down to where it fit the straight white chalk line, and so they
would drive these wedges in between the bulkhead and the piece of metal that was
tacked. They called it a flange, and they would do that all along, all around
the bulkhead until they got it all straight on this chalk line. Then the tackers
would tack it in place, just say maybe every two feet they would tack it on both
sides. There would be somebody on the inside of that bulkhead that was doing the
same thing. And get it tightened down in position, then the welders would come
along and they would weld the bulkhead onto the deck. This was going on, you
know, all around that. Well, inside that superstructure there were rooms, you
know, facilities for the men to sleep and eat and whatever, the captain and--

SELVIDGE: Right.

MOORE: So those bulkheads and all had to be welded to the deck on the inside of
that. It was quite a chore. This picture was taken at Yard 3, and the only
buildings standing in Yard 3 now is this big cement building right here.

It&#039;s a permanent building, and during the shipyard days it was the supply house.
All of the equipment, anything that anybody needed like say this stinger, this
is called a stinger, these would get burned because this is just like some kind
of plastic or some material, and eventually they&#039;d just get so hot that it would
break. So you&#039;d have to take these back to that, they called it the tool shed,
but there was a window there on the outside where you went and you would turn
this in, and they&#039;d give you a new one. The same thing for any other supplies
you needed. You could have five pounds of welding rod, that&#039;s all that would
hold, your rod pot would hold with all these other tools you had to have. Oh, we
had to have a flashlight, too because many times we were welding in small,
cramped spaces, and we had an extension light, it was called. It was an electric
bulb on the end of the long electric wire, and you plugged that in somewhere way
out there. It had a protective frame around it so the bulb wouldn&#039;t get broken,
and you could use that. But you couldn&#039;t always get that into the small
quarters, so you had a flashlight, and then you&#039;d use the flashlight to inspect
your weld after you did it and see that it was okay. So those things were all
reissued as they became worn out. So you would take them to that same equipment
place, and they would give you new ones.

Well, when we were sent out to the yard after the two weeks at welding school
and they took us to this outfitting dock where the ship was, I got onto the
ship. They did have a gangplank to walk up to the ship, it was up high. But then
when you got inside the ship, there weren&#039;t any stairways. It was all ladders
because they had not been installed yet. There were cables and lines, there were
electric lines and welding lines, there were acetylene gas welding lines, and
there was water all over the decks. I thought, you know, I guess they&#039;ve just
really broke something up here and the water is leaking, and they have all these
things to work with strewn around here, and I thought after they got it fixed,
you know, that it would be a nice place to walk where you wouldn&#039;t have to
stumble over all those things. But they never did get it fixed. I found out
that&#039;s just the way it was. When they got it fixed, then you were no longer
needed on that ship.

SELVIDGE: Then the ship was off.

MOORE: That ship was gone. You were on another one.

SELVIDGE: So they were just working so fast that there was just stuff everywhere.

MOORE: Yeah. Everything. There would be welders, say if you were welding on flat
weld. About every six feet there would be a welder, and you had to protect your
eyes from the welding.

SELVIDGE: Not just your own, right.

MOORE: Yeah. You didn&#039;t look directly at it because if you did, you would get a,
what&#039;d they call it, a flash. Then your eyes would be sore for days and you--

SELVIDGE: Oh, right. Did that ever happen to you?

MOORE: Just once. There was a welder over to my right and kind of behind me, and
you have to raise your hood up when you burn your rod. It&#039;s all burned up so you
have to get a new one and you have to raise your hood up so you can see to get
the new rod. When I did, this fire, that&#039;s not what they called it. Anyhow, from
her welding I didn&#039;t protect my eyes fast enough, and so they were really sore,
and they get red and they&#039;re teary.

SELVIDGE: Did you have to stop working or--

MOORE: Oh, yeah. You can&#039;t work. You miss a few days&#039; work. But you go to the
First Aid, and they give you drops to put in your eyes. Also, there was, they
deducted, I believe it was 75 cents out of each paycheck for medical insurance,
and Kaiser had their own medical insurance. I think that was the first HMO. Then
they built a big hospital in Oakland, and they had a small hospital in Richmond
at, I believe, it&#039;s 23rd and Cutting, I know it&#039;s on Cutting, and so if you had
anything further wrong with you that they couldn&#039;t handle at First Aid, then
they would send you over to that local hospital.

SELVIDGE: Did you ever use the medical services while you were there?

MOORE: I did one time. It was another disorder. It wasn&#039;t from welding, but they
had nurses and doctors there and everything was really, really nice. I was
dating the man who became my husband before I went to San Francisco, and
eventually we decided to get married. His company was headquartered in Berkeley.

SELVIDGE: So you met him when you were living with your brother in Salinas?

MOORE: Yeah. Because his company was headquartered in Berkeley, you know, it was
nearby, and he would be there occasionally. Then in 1943 we got married, but we
just drove to Nevada over Labor Day weekend and got married because during the
war, nobody had a wedding.

SELVIDGE: Right.

MOORE: It was just you just went and got married, didn&#039;t have time for all of that.

SELVIDGE: Yeah. So can you tell me a little bit about before you got married
where you were living, so you had come from Salinas, your sister was in San
Francisco, but you were working in Richmond?

MOORE: Yes. I lived with my sister in San Francisco, and we would take the
street car down to the Embarcadero to the Ferry Building, and then we would ride
a ferry over to Richmond.

SELVIDGE: You and your sister or you and other people?

MOORE: Well, my brother-in-law worked there.

SELVIDGE: Oh, okay.

MOORE: And then for a short time my youngest brother worked there for a short
time. Then my brother-in-law&#039;s sister, she eventually went to work there. But
then on the ferry I got acquainted with a lot of the girls who did work in the offices.

SELVIDGE: Oh, okay.

MOORE: Welding is not an occupation where you can make friends on the job.

SELVIDGE: Yeah, I was going to ask about that. It seems especially compared to
working in the cannery where you&#039;re next to people.

MOORE: Yeah, where you can talk to somebody.

SELVIDGE: Yeah.

MOORE: You couldn&#039;t, it just was not conducive to making friends.

SELVIDGE: Because you&#039;re closed off, and it&#039;s an individual job.

MOORE: Yeah, and then as soon as the shift is over, you go to your locker as
fast as you can, and everybody&#039;s going in different directions because the
lockers weren&#039;t all in the same place.

SELVIDGE: So there wasn&#039;t a lot of camaraderie among the welders.

MOORE: No. Some of these girls, one of them in particular, her husband was, he
had been a merchant seaman, but then when they got married, he went to work in
the shipyard because he was familiar with the merchant seamen, and he, I guess
he was still a member of that union. But anyhow, he had a lot of friends and
they always wanted girls and so they were always fixing the rest of the single
girls up with a date, you know. We had a lot of fun.

SELVIDGE: So a lot of your social ties were with fellow commuters, people who
you knew on the ferry.

MOORE: Yeah, because you know, you could have breakfast on the way home on the
ferry, and they had all kinds of food on--

SELVIDGE: So the people in the clerical areas also worked the night shift?

MOORE: Yeah. So we would go, we could go to a movie right then.

SELVIDGE: Yeah. Did you see a lot of movies?

MOORE: Yeah, and also we could, oh golly, there were so many things to do in San
Francisco if you&#039;re young and single.

SELVIDGE: Yeah, but tell me what kinds of things. Also, when I ask this question
about what kinds of things you did, I just want to see if I&#039;m understanding this
right, that mostly you would go out and socialize in San Francisco, not so much
in Richmond.

MOORE: Yeah, in San Francisco.

SELVIDGE: Richmond, was that mostly just a place where you worked?

MOORE: Yeah. We did play tennis in Richmond. We found out they had tennis
courts, and so after work if we wanted to play tennis, we would make a date. I
would drive my car, and then I would drive it from the shipyard up to the tennis
courts. Then we would go to Golden Gate Park, and, oh, the museums, and then, of
course, they had Playland at the Beach, and they had all kinds of rides and
everything there, and our favorite was the bumper cars.

SELVIDGE: Oh, yeah.

MOORE: We liked that because there was always a lot of sailors in these bumper
cars, and they were always trying to get a girl cornered. So it was always just
a lot of fun.

SELVIDGE: Right.

MOORE: And then sometimes we would get together with them after and go to some
of the other games or whatever they had there. Then we&#039;d go to the zoo, which
was out in that area, and the aquarium, just lots and lots of things to do.

MOORE: I never got tired of going to Golden Gate Park. It was so big, and there
were so many areas of it.

MOORE: Then the big museum was there, and that was always interesting. Then the
flower house, and they had banana plants in there. They grew bananas, and that
was really interesting, and all of these tropical plants. Coming from a farm I
was interested in all those different plants, so--

SELVIDGE: With the people that you met on the ferry and then all your, you know,
socializing out and about, was it mostly people who had also come from other places?

MOORE: Yes. There was one lady from Oklahoma, and there was another one was from
Sacramento. She&#039;s the one that had married the merchant seaman, and he was from
Michigan. So it just, you know, people were from everywhere.

SELVIDGE: Yeah.

MOORE: Everywhere except San Francisco. I only met that one girl in welding
school that was from San Francisco, and I don&#039;t think she stayed in it because I
never did see her after we went out into the yard. There were people who had
never worked in their lives. There was two women, the story was that they had
been social women in San Francisco and had never worked and were these very
dainty women, and they were welders. But people they were just, everybody was so
incensed over the bombing of Pearl Harbor that we would do anything to avenge
ourselves from this horrible thing that had happened.

SELVIDGE: Yeah. So you certainly, people felt like they were really a part of
the effort.

MOORE: Oh, yeah. Yes. We were building things that were needed for the war. Of
course, you know, things were rationed. When I got married we bought a house,
and we didn&#039;t have anything to keep house with. So you had to have permission
from the War Department to buy things for the house, like a stove. Most houses
didn&#039;t have built in stoves back then. To buy a kitchen stove we had to hunt and
hunt and hunt, and we couldn&#039;t find one even though we had the permit slip to
buy one.

SELVIDGE: It was just locating it--

MOORE: Yeah. So we were driving out, the highway used to go down East 14th
Street in Oakland. There was a huge, looked like a warehouse there, and we saw
this kitchen stove sitting in a window. So we went in and yes, it was for sale,
and we had our permit, so we bought it. But they didn&#039;t deliver. So I don&#039;t
know, we finally got a trailer, I guess we rented it, and then we went and got
the stove. But you couldn&#039;t buy a refrigerator at all. They were for the war
effort, you know, the military. And hospitals and things of that sort.

SELVIDGE: So did you just use an ice box for a while?

MOORE: Fortunately, it was cool enough and the store was nearby. We could just
buy things that we would have had to refrigerate, like meat, we only bought meat
for one meal. Eggs would stay fresh. It was cool enough, you know, you had that
cool breeze coming through the Golden Gate in Richmond. The wind always blows there.

SELVIDGE: So, once you got married you lived, you bought a house in Berkeley, is
that right?

MOORE: In Richmond.

SELVIDGE: Oh, in Richmond.

MOORE: And being new to buying property, we never thought about location, you
know. I was just thinking about the floor plan, and that the house was built the
way I wanted it. Well, we bought right beside a railroad track.

SELVIDGE: You built the house or--

MOORE: No, no. We bought it.

SELVIDGE: You bought it, okay.

MOORE: There were a few homes that were started at the beginning, before the war.

SELVIDGE: Right.

MOORE: And they were finished up, you know, along-- I guess not too many were
buying a house at that time because there were several of these houses that
still were for sale, so we bought this one. Now it&#039;s in the area they call the
Iron Triangle in Richmond. Had we been more intelligent about location, we would
have thought several times before we bought that house.

SELVIDGE: A house next to the railroad tracks.

MOORE: Yeah, so the realtors also, those houses probably weren&#039;t first choice,
and they showed houses in the area that was hardest to sell to these novices. So
they didn&#039;t show us any of the houses up on the hill, but we lived there for
eighteen years.

SELVIDGE: Oh, yeah? Was it very different moving to Richmond after having lived
in San Francisco?

MOORE: Of course, it was a lot different, but it was more rural because there
were big yards and the streets weren&#039;t real busy and houses weren&#039;t real, real
close together. So you couldn&#039;t hear your neighbors. And I had a garden and
planted flowers and all that, you know. So then I worked there until after the
Japanese surrendered and my husband&#039;s company had a job in Oregon. They had
notified all of the women that worked in the shipyard that the ships that were
contracted for had to be finished, and that if any of the women wanted to leave,
they could feel free to do so because that would leave more work for the women
that had to work. So because my husband&#039;s company had this job in Oregon, I quit
and went with him. So, I worked in the shipyards four years. I was pregnant at
that time. I didn&#039;t know it when I quit, but I knew it shortly afterwards, and
our daughter was born in Oregon and my husband was not happy about that because
he was a Californian.

SELVIDGE: Were there many women who got pregnant while they were working?

MOORE: I didn&#039;t know of any who did. Could have been, but I didn&#039;t know about
it, because I wasn&#039;t that closely associated with them. Then another reason,
even at lunch time I didn&#039;t socialize with them. Probably if I hadn&#039;t had family
who worked in the shipyard and we had our lockers all together.

SELVIDGE: You and your family?

MOORE: Yes, in the same area.

SELVIDGE: Was that just a coincidence or--

MOORE: No, it was--

SELVIDGE: You planned, you were able to request that.

MOORE: Yeah. I think my brother-in-law had the first one, and then the rest of
us as we came along we just got a locker in that area. That also didn&#039;t lend
itself to getting acquainted with the people you worked with.

SELVIDGE: Right, so you would have lunch with your family.

MOORE: Yeah, because we would put our lunch pails in the locker. On graveyard
there wasn&#039;t any facility for food.

SELVIDGE: Oh, okay, no cafeteria. You would bring your own.

MOORE: Yeah, you had to bring your own lunch. So then there were benches in that
area so we would sit there and eat our lunch. So I wasn&#039;t even eating lunch with
the people I worked with.

SELVIDGE: Right, and did you work the night shift the whole time?

MOORE: Yes, yes I did.

SELVIDGE: Was that hard? It sounds like there were a lot of people doing it, so
maybe not.

MOORE: Oh, heavens yes. At shift change there would be people coming in for the
day shift, but we were leaving from the night shift, too. It was just shoulder
to shoulder people walking out of the shipyard, and there was a huge parking lot
because a lot of people drove. Some people drove from San Jose and way over at
Stockton. They could get gas stamps to go to work.

SELVIDGE: Because they were working on the war effort.

MOORE: Yeah, yeah. I forgot how many gallons you were allowed just for private
use, you know. It wasn&#039;t very many. Then you also had stamps to buy tires and
shoes. You got two pair of shoes a year, and that was pretty hard with kids
because their feet grow so much, but they only got two pairs of shoes a year.

MOORE: Sugar was rationed. I think flour was. Shortening, most everybody used
like Crisco back then. You only used oil to make salad dressing. Now I cook with
oil all the time. It was a totally different time, but you didn&#039;t hear anybody
complaining. They just whatever the job was they had to do, they would just go
do it because it was a part of avenging the death of our men in Pearl Harbor.
That was just so awful, I mean, and sneaky, you know. They had envoys in
Washington, D.C. discussing a new peace treaty because the old one was about to
run out. They were shocked when they went in for their meeting the next day, and
here they were at war with us.

SELVIDGE: Yeah.

MOORE: So they didn&#039;t even know it. It just, I don&#039;t know if you&#039;ve ever seen
any pictures of the bombing of Pearl Harbor. They have a lot of them on TV--
During the war you didn&#039;t have television, so the only thing you had was
newspapers for any news from the war, except the movies always had before the
main movie, main pictures, they would show current events, that would be
pictures of what was happening, but even there you didn&#039;t get a lot of pictures
from the war front because they had no way of sending them except by mail.
Flight time, that took too long, and so you&#039;d see a little bit of news about the
war at the movie theater just before the main picture was shown.

SELVIDGE: Yeah. Then did people follow pretty closely in the newspapers and talk
about specific events?

MOORE: Yeah, they wanted to know what was going on, and there were shipyards all
around the Bay Area. Gosh, I think I have maybe here written down how many they
had. Get my glasses on so I can see. Oh, this is what we looked like. Is that
going to be shiny?

SELVIDGE: Actually, it looks pretty good. Going to zoom in a little bit, here.

MOORE: When we were dressed for welding, that&#039;s what we looked like.

SELVIDGE: Yeah, wow. So she&#039;s wearing leather overalls--

MOORE: Yeah, everything, the hard-toed shoes. I think she even has a bandana on
her hair, doesn&#039;t she?

SELVIDGE: It looks to me like her hair is loose. I can&#039;t tell, but she could be
wearing a hat.

MOORE: Oh, probably is, yeah.

SELVIDGE: Okay.

MOORE: Then this picture here, I&#039;m in it. That was all the welders in what was
called the plate shop. That&#039;s where they had a pattern room, and these patterns
were made out of plywood. They would lay that down on a big sheet of steel, and
then they would draw a chalk line around it and a cutter would come along with a
torch and burn on that chalk line and then they would weld all these parts
together. That was prefab. I&#039;m this one right up here on the top row the second
one from the left.

SELVIDGE: Oh, I see.

MOORE: Then I made another picture there where you can see me a little better.

SELVIDGE: Yeah, that&#039;s great. Now I see all the bandanas in that picture.

MOORE: Yeah, we just stopped work to go, they told us, you know, everybody stop
work and go over and get in this certain area that they wanted to take our picture.

SELVIDGE: And what&#039;s the picture for?

MOORE: I suppose for their records, you know. Then you could buy a copy of it.

SELVIDGE: Oh, okay.

MOORE: This picture was a lot bigger than this, and I didn&#039;t think that I would
ever want all of it, but I had to cut it smaller because it wouldn&#039;t fit in my
picture album.

SELVIDGE: Actually, it looks like we&#039;re just getting towards the end of the next tape.

MOORE: Okay.

Begin Audio File 3

SELVIDGE: Okay, so this is Tape three. Sarah Selvidge interviewing Agnes Moore,
July 12, 2010.

MOORE: Well, there were ships not only being built at Kaiser in Richmond. Kaiser
had four shipyards in Richmond.

SELVIDGE: Right.

MOORE: All around the Bay Area there was over thirty shipyards. And they were
all over. They were Alameda, Oakland, San Francisco, Vallejo, Stockton, and just
all over, and they were building all types of ships. Some of them were landing
craft, and Kaiser at Richmond built liberty ships and victory ships. Then in
Yard 4 Kaiser built barges and, I think they built some LSTs there and a lot of
small ships. But Kaiser had contracts with Britain before we got into the war to
build ships for them.

SELVIDGE: Okay, so they started even before US involvement in the war.

MOORE: Yeah, and so they did it. The ships were, they were the liberties and the
victories were just over 500 feet long. The liberty ships were built first, and
then Britain needed a faster ship and a lighter ship so that they could maneuver
and get away from the German submarines that were sinking all of them. So they
made a contract for the victory ships. They were the same length as the liberty
ships and just about the same size all over. However, the liberty ships had a
lot of heavier equipment and parts built into the ship that made them heavier.

One of the big things was the escape hatches. They were built out of  inch
steel, and they went from the top deck down to the bottom of the ship. It was
about three feet inside. The part inside was about three feet square. They had
an oval-shaped door that you had to step real high into, and they had one of
those doors on each side of the two sides of the escape hatches. They could be
closed, when they were closed, they were water tight. There was a ladder, a
steel ladder, built onto the inside of this escape hatch. It went from the top
deck all the way down to the bottom, so if the ship was hit and water was coming
in down below, the men could go into those escape hatches and climb up to top
deck. Then hopefully they could get on a lifeboat or whatever, and then they
could get out.

The victory ships didn&#039;t have that. They had ladders they could climb and get
out, but there wasn&#039;t a water tight space. But that left a lot more room for the
hold of the ship, where they could have more cargo, and it got rid of a lot of
weight for these victory ships. There is a victory ship in Richmond at the old
Yard 3 on the outfitting dock where I first went to work. It&#039;s called the Red
Oak Victory, and it was given to the City of Richmond to restore, and people can
go there and see it. Volunteers are restoring it, so it&#039;s a slow process. But
it&#039;s looking better all the time. Every time I go over there I can see a lot of
improvements on it. So it&#039;s interesting to go there and see it.

I have young boys in my family and grandchildren and such, and they love to have
me take them over there. They can run around over that ship, and the first thing
they head for is the gun up on the end, the gun mount up there. How they just
love to go up and see that gun.

SELVIDGE: Yeah. Tell me what it was like when you saw the first ship completed.
Do you remember that?

MOORE: You know, I never saw a ship launched because they never launched them on
graveyard shift.

SELVIDGE: Oh, of course. You were on the wrong shift to do that.

MOORE: I remember seeing one that was ready to launch, and they had removed all
the scaffolding. The Richmond Shipyard 3 is  built, and the ships are built in
what they called basins. The keel is laid, well, at first they closed the end of
the basin that&#039;s next to the bay, San Francisco Bay. It&#039;s waterproof then, so
it&#039;s all dry down in there, and they lay the keel on the cement bottom of the
basin, and they just build it right on up. Well, they have to have lots of
scaffolding all around the sides when they&#039;re working and building it, and they
used to have just thick boards laid, to walk onto the ship from the ways, they
called it. Then it was just, you know, like a little bridge. I don&#039;t recall if
it even had a rail to hold onto. It may have, I just don&#039;t remember that. Then
like I said, all along the sides of the ship is all that scaffolding where the
workers have to be able to stand on it and build the ship right up, you know.

I do remember when a ship was ready to launch and all the scaffolding was gone
and the ship was just standing there by itself. Then you could see what it
looked like. But then when they got ready to launch it, they opened up those
gates on the end and the water all came in and floated the ship. Then a tugboat
pulled it on over to the outfitting dock.

SELVIDGE: Yeah.

MOORE: Because I worked nights, I couldn&#039;t, it was always dark. It was dark when
I went to work, and it was dark when I got off work most of the time. So I
didn&#039;t see the ships launched. But, of course, later in going home a lot of
parts of the time of the year it was daylight, and there was just ships all over
the bay, you know, coming and going, carrying troops. Every railroad track had
troop trains, just boys hanging out all the windows. They were taking them to
the ports so they could get on the ship and be taken to the war front. All
around the ferry building on the wharfs there, was just all kinds of military
men that were being held there until they got on the ship to be taken away.

There wasn&#039;t any troops carried by plane during World War II. I know when the
Viet Nam War came along, Jeez, those boys could be right on the front being
fired at and seeing everybody get killed and in two days they were home walking
on the streets and everybody was unconcerned, you know. Nobody was talking about
the war. That must have been a real shock to those young men that, you know,
they were over there dodging bullets a day or two ago. Because, see, they were
brought home on the planes. I think that the young men being brought home by
ship during World War II, it was slower. It was weeks before they got home. So
they were, they had time to kind of forget about the front, where these kids
coming from Viet Nam didn&#039;t.

SELVIDGE: Yeah, they didn&#039;t. Did people talk much about the warfront, people you
knew, told stories and told you thing about it when they came back or--

MOORE: Well, the only ones that came home from the warfront were the dead ones,
so they didn&#039;t do any talking, but most men that came back from World War II
didn&#039;t talk about it. I&#039;ve done interviews for the Library of Congress with
veterans, and there are so many that have great stories to tell, but they won&#039;t.
There&#039;s some that do, but even they don&#039;t go into the details about battles and
things, they just kind of generalize everything.

I know here at Rossmoor because it&#039;s a retirement community, there&#039;s a lot of
World War II veterans. They&#039;re dying off real fast. The ones that had been
interviewed, it&#039;s just not even a smattering of the others that were here. I was
interviewed by the Rossmoor newspaper about war work, and the next morning, I
don&#039;t think I told you this before, if I did, you can tell me. The next morning
after that picture and the news report came out, a man called me, and he told me
his name. He said, &quot;I&#039;m a veteran of World War II.&quot; He said, &quot;I just want to
thank you.&quot; He said, &quot;I&#039;ve always wanted to thank some of the women for what
they did.&quot; He said, &quot;You&#039;re the only chance I&#039;ve had to know who one is.&quot; He
said, &quot;I want to thank you for what you did during World War II.&quot; He said, &quot;You
saved my life.&quot; I really got speechless.

SELVIDGE: Yeah.

MOORE: That he would be thanking me? He was over there spilling his blood, and a
lot of them getting killed, and he&#039;s thanking me? He&#039;s the one that deserved the
thanks. But then he told me why. He said that, I did mention this to you, but
that was before I started recording.

They were on this island, and they had grouped, been brought there by ship on
one side of the island, and the Japanese army was over the mountain on the other
side of the island. They were getting ready for a big battle. He said they
didn&#039;t have any supplies. He said, &quot;We were running out of everything.&quot; He said,
&quot;We didn&#039;t even have weapons to fight with, and ammunition, and even their food
supplies were getting low.&quot; He said, &quot;We didn&#039;t have any word when anything
would be arriving for us.&quot; So they were really worried. They just knew they were
going to all get wiped out. He said they got up one morning and they looked out
on the water, and he said in every direction as far as you could see there was
every kind of American ship that had ever been built. He said they knew then
they were going to win. So, he said &quot;You women saved our lives.&quot;

SELVIDGE: Wow.

MOORE: He said, &quot;You built those ships, and you packed that food,&quot; because there
were no men at home to do it. There were a few that were 4F or that were just
over the age limit. I think 38, they wouldn&#039;t take them after they were 38 years
old. So the majority of the workers were women. It wasn&#039;t only just here. They
were building ships on the East Coast, too. They built a lot of submarines, and
then up around the Great Lakes they were building submarines, which surprised
me. I just recently found out that, I just assumed that when they took the
submarines out to sea, they went up through, I guess, like Quebec, and then out
to the Atlantic. They brought those ships down the rivers.

SELVIDGE: Oh, no kidding?

MOORE: Yeah. That really surprised me, all the way to Louisiana to New Orleans.
I didn&#039;t even know that there was that much water in those rivers that could
float a submarine.

SELVIDGE: Yeah. That is surprising.

MOORE: I don&#039;t think they built any large ships in the Great Lakes. So they were
like submarines, and I guess they&#039;re just not that big. Once they got into the
Mississippi River, it&#039;s pretty big, but there&#039;s places where it&#039;s not real deep.

SELVIDGE: Yeah. Well, so after being involved in something like this that was so
important and where you had such dedication to a single purpose, was it sort of
disappointing. Of course, it was great that the war was over, but was there sort
of a sense of what do I do now afterwards or--

MOORE: No, not for me, and I think most women were the same way, they just
wanted to get back home. Of course, there were some that still needed to work
because they were supporting families. Some of those women did stay in welding
that had families to support.

SELVIDGE: They did.

MOORE: Must have been pretty tough for them, though, the competition. I&#039;m sure
that if there&#039;s two people standing there for a job to be hired and one was a
woman, the man would have got the job.

SELVIDGE: Yeah.

MOORE: But it didn&#039;t bother me at all. One reason being I had a baby right away,
and, of course, I was all wrapped up in this new baby.

SELVIDGE: Yeah.

MOORE: I think a lot of other women were the same because it was, I have a
recorder. Is that going to bother this?

SELVIDGE: Well, we can maybe just wait.

MOORE: That&#039;s my baby that was born in Oregon.

SELVIDGE: Okay, so we were just talking about your daughter.

MOORE: Yeah. Like I said, and then a lot of the women, too, had husbands that
were coming home from the military. Of course, they were thrilled to be home
with him.

SELVIDGE: Right.

MOORE: And some of them had children. That was another thing, during the war
Kaiser started the child care. They had places where, they had women hired, and
these were usually older women that couldn&#039;t work in the shipyards and places.
They would take care of the children, and they had them for all three shifts.

SELVIDGE: Yeah, wow. So some of the kids were on graveyard shift, too.

MOORE: Yeah. Everything was made convenient for the women to work.

SELVIDGE: Right, but not all of these things lasted like you were saying. Can
you tell me some about, I know you had a really big life transition around the
same time.

MOORE: Yeah.

SELVIDGE: But just about some of the transitions that people experienced, sort
of after the war and going back to what was maybe normal, but so many things had
been different for so long.

MOORE: Well, this is not exactly what you&#039;re asking about, but, my husband had a
friend whose wife was a schoolteacher, and I was making about twice her salary.

SELVIDGE: Oh, wow.

MOORE: She asked me what my salary was, and I told her. By the way, it was the
best I can remember, it was about $85 a week take-home pay. So anyhow, I told
her, and she said, &quot;Oh, heavens, and you had two weeks training for that job?&quot;
She says, &quot;I had five years of college, and I&#039;m not making as much as you?&quot; I
said &quot;Yes, but after the war you&#039;ll still have a job, and I won&#039;t.&quot; She says,
&quot;Well, I never thought about that.&quot; But, see, we were paid exactly what the men received.&quot;

SELVIDGE: Oh, you had the same salary as the men did.

MOORE: Yes, because they were, they didn&#039;t discriminate on the wages. We were
doing the same work they did, and so--

SELVIDGE: So since you didn&#039;t have a family yet, and when you did get married,
your husband was working, what did you do with all of your salary? It seems like
a good, a pretty good income.

MOORE: Well, we bought the house.

SELVIDGE: You bought the house.

MOORE: We had to have furniture. We also had a little savings account.

SELVIDGE: Were there women, though, who were just making money for the first
time and it was really a lot. I mean, did people talk about that or--

MOORE: Well, occasionally it would be mentioned, but when I was in a position to
talk to people who worked in the industry, we weren&#039;t thinking about work and
salary, we were just thinking about having a good time.

SELVIDGE: Yeah.

MOORE: We also would go to dances, I didn&#039;t mention that, and night clubs, and
they had lots of popular entertainers that came to San Francisco. I remember
Frank Sinatra was there.

SELVIDGE: Oh, yeah?

MOORE: I saw Jane Wyman, and just a lot of the night clubs, you know, the movie
stars would come and entertain. Then in the shipyards in the daytime they always
had entertainment. Popular entertainers would come and on their lunch hour they
always had these big entertainments, and, but on graveyard we didn&#039;t have
anything like that.

SELVIDGE: Not on graveyard, yeah.

MOORE: So I&#039;m sure there probably was people that did discuss their salary
amongst their friends. I have gotten acquainted with some through the national
park, the Rosie the Riveter National Park, which is over in Richmond where the
Kaiser shipyards were. I work there as a docent. I hear their talks-- A lot of
times we go, and they have us speak to groups and all that, and so I have heard
a lot of those discussions, those speeches. It&#039;s real interesting to meet those
people, too.

SELVIDGE: Yeah.

MOORE: Because they worked in totally different parts of the industry than I
did. There&#039;s one African American woman who I hear quite often, and her stories
are quite different from mine, the discrimination and all that. But I didn&#039;t run
into any discrimination in my line of work because everybody was in a crew, each
crew had a lead man, it was always a man, and you reported to that person, and
then he assigned you where your job would be and told you the location of it. So
you were just interested in getting your lead lines, and you had to find a
machine that wasn&#039;t being used and, you know, we were busy, so we didn&#039;t have a
chance to talk. But as far as any discrimination racially, I didn&#039;t see it. As
far as I was concerned, you know, we were all there to work, and everybody
worked. Now maybe on day shift or something there might have been more of that,
but the way I always looked at that was they had as much right to the job as I
did, everybody had the same opportunity, I hope. So everybody had a right to be
there if they wanted to be.

SELVIDGE: Yeah.

MOORE: So it didn&#039;t ever bother me. That never has bothered me. Being from
Arkansas and the South you might think it would, but I had a mother that
believed in democracy. She never taught us racism. The only time I ever heard
her say anything is one farmer one year had five black people working for him,
and my mother said he shouldn&#039;t have those people-- I said, &quot;Well, why not?&quot; She
said &quot;Because they just make slaves out of them.&quot; I suppose that meant they
weren&#039;t paying them what they would pay somebody else. I didn&#039;t know, I was too
young to ask any more questions. Then I kind of had to think about, I know that
we referred to work a lot of times on the farm as working like a slave, but I
was not really too much aware of what a real slave was. But I know that she
didn&#039;t believe in slavery, and she didn&#039;t believe in a lot of the things that
the South is noted for. And of course, we were considered South.

But I think that she was a very religious woman, and Christianity doesn&#039;t teach
you to be slaves or make a slave of anyone. So I just never was taught that. I
never had it talked around where I was. So I suppose that&#039;s why maybe I was more
open minded. However, if I ever feel pushed, I don&#039;t allow it. I don&#039;t allow
anybody to push me around. I feel, you know, we are all created equal. Maybe
your circumstances might be different, but, so discrimination at work was never
a problem with me.

SELVIDGE: You didn&#039;t experience that.

MOORE: But I know I have heard remarks made from some of the people from the
South, workers, women, too, and they didn&#039;t like to sit in a restaurant and eat
where they ate. You know, they just had problems with a lot of--

SELVIDGE: Other people from the South that you knew.

MOORE: Yeah. It was a little hard for me to understand how they could feel so
bigoted when I didn&#039;t feel that way. Maybe they had had different experiences in
life than I had had.

SELVIDGE: So let&#039;s get back, I guess, to where we were in the chronology a
little bit at the end of the war so we can have the sort of the timeline of you
moved to Oregon, and one thing I&#039;m not sure about how this fits in, you
mentioned before, going to college, and I&#039;m realizing that I didn&#039;t understand
if that was before or after when--

MOORE: It was after the war really.

SELVIDGE: After the war, okay.

MOORE: Yeah.

SELVIDGE: Okay. So why don&#039;t you tell me just a little bit about that, about
moving to Oregon, how was that different?

MOORE: Oh, the job in Oregon was a short job actually. I think my daughter was
two months old when we moved back to California. It was an irrigation project.
The federal government was putting in this irrigation to central Oregon where, I
called it the desert because they just had, it was like the Arizona desert, you
know, the kind of shrubs they had growing there and the shrubbery and there
weren&#039;t any big trees in that area.

One thing that I really enjoyed, they had a huge celebration when they turned
the water into the irrigation ditches. There&#039;s a huge Indian reservation just
outside this little town, the town was Madras, Oregon. When they had the
celebration they had it on what had been an airport during World War II, and
that was right at the end of the war, so this airport wasn&#039;t being used and
everything was removed from it. So they had the parade and everything on that
airport on the runways. The Indians all participated, and they had the Indian
princess with this beautiful white doeskin costume, and she was on a beautiful
white horse. It was just really a beautiful, beautiful thing, and the Chief had
his big headdress. All of the other Indians were riding beautiful horses, and I
just thought it was just the grandest thing, you know. I was so excited about
it, you know, and I had gotten acquainted with people who lived in town. They
didn&#039;t, you know, they didn&#039;t have anything to say about all this display. Well,
come to find out they were very hostile toward these Indians from the
reservation because a lot of them would come to town and get drunk and, you
know, they drank too much. They didn&#039;t even, they weren&#039;t impressed with the
Indian princess and any of it. I think they just wanted it to all go away. They
didn&#039;t want the reservation there. They didn&#039;t know that they had intruded onto
their land, you know. They never thought about that. So that was interesting. We
were there such a short time that I don&#039;t recall much about it. However, one
time they needed something welded, and they had me come out and weld it. They
had the machine and everything, but something happened to their welder. So that
was fun.

SELVIDGE: Yeah.

MOORE: Then we came back to California.

SELVIDGE: And you settled back in the same house?

MOORE: Yeah.

SELVIDGE: Because you had mentioned eighteen years. So how was Richmond
different then after the war was over once you came back?

MOORE: Well, there was still a lot of work, and, of course, a lot of the people
had left and gone to wherever they came from. The apartments were all torn down.
The buildings, there were many, many, many apartment buildings to house all
these people. Richmond just kind of settled down, you know, into an ordinary
life. There wasn&#039;t any problems like there is now in Richmond. I think because
there was work, and now with the economy the way it is, people are out of work,
the young people are rebellious, they don&#039;t have funds, and they find problems
to get into. So that part of it has really changed. It was just a nice town when
I lived there.

SELVIDGE: So your second daughter was born in Richmond then.

MOORE: Yeah.

SELVIDGE: And when was it that you went to college, after your daughters were born?

MOORE: When my daughter was in the second grade she brought home a brochure.
They had established the junior college, Contra Costa Community College, the
first site was Richmond, and it was at the Shipyard 3 in some of those old buildings.

SELVIDGE: Oh, wow.

MOORE: They were encouraging mothers to go to college, and I said, &quot;Oh, wow. I
can do that.&quot; And so I did. I took all courses that could be transferred to Cal
Berkeley, so there were really more black young people enrolled there than there
were any other nationality. I would go into the study room a lot of times
between classes and do homework. I was taking a history class, and I was in this
room studying. A lot of young people from my history class were in there so we
all got to discussing the lesson and then other things. One day I looked around
and I was the only white person in there. It didn&#039;t bother me at all except I
didn&#039;t see any faces like mine. I thought, &quot;Gosh, I never thought about that
before.&quot; I had been in the same room with these same people, you know, quite often.

Something this one woman said really opened up my thinking. They were talking
about housing and different places to live. So, of course, their best thoughts
of a place to live would be up in Mira Vista section of Richmond. Well, it was
all whites up there, and I said, &quot;Why would you want to live there? It seems
like you would want to live with your own kind of people so you could be more
comfortable, or something. I said, &quot;I wouldn&#039;t want to move where there wasn&#039;t
any of my kind of people.&quot; She said, &quot;I want the same thing for my children you
want for yours. I want the best education; I want them to live around the best
kind of people.&quot; She says, &quot;In north Richmond you don&#039;t always live around the
best kind of people.&quot;

I thought, &quot;Wow.&quot; That really, really made me stop and think because she was
just a mother, and she wanted for her children what I wanted for mine.

SELVIDGE: Yeah.

MOORE: I also was a Girl Scout leader, and I had all races in my troop because
in the area where I lived there was all races lived there. There was a Filipino
girl and a Chinese girl and a Japanese girl, and, of course, black girls and
white girls, but I didn&#039;t think about them being different. They were just all
kids, and everybody got along and worked together and there was no problem.

But then one other thing that same woman said that was talking about a better
life for her children, she said, I was working very hard because I knew
competing against all these young brains that I thought it was going to be
really tough. She said, &quot;Why do you work so hard? You know, you learn more than
you have to.&quot; I said, &quot;Well, I want to make a good grade.&quot; She says, &quot;I don&#039;t
care. I just want to get that piece of paper.&quot; She says, &quot;It doesn&#039;t say on that
piece of paper whether I made A&#039;s or C&#039;s.&quot; She said, &quot;Why I should I labor my
brain if I don&#039;t have to?&quot; Well I didn&#039;t think that was a real good idea because
when I went to school it was pounded in you, you had to get good grades.

You had to, you know, you couldn&#039;t flunk out. It was just a different way of
thinking. It&#039;s just a whole different world now than it was when I was young. I
think it&#039;s a harder world to live in. For one thing, you didn&#039;t have all these
electronic devices. I&#039;m still, I finally was encouraged to learn e-mail. I had a
computer, but I got it mostly for the printer because I was writing a lot then.
I didn&#039;t care whether I had anything else or not.

Well, then I joined clubs here at Rossmoor, and people would say, &quot;What&#039;s your
e-mail?&quot; &quot;I don&#039;t have one.&quot; So they said, &quot;Well, it&#039;s so easy to communicate
with e-mail.&quot; I said, &quot;I have a telephone, just call me up and I have a recorder
if I&#039;m not there.&quot;

MOORE: So finally I did break down get an e-mail and learned how, but I still
have problems with the computer. It does things that I don&#039;t ask it to do
sometimes, and I don&#039;t know how it happens. I suppose maybe, I have a laptop
now, and I don&#039;t think it&#039;s as good as my IBM was because I could do things with
the IBM that it seemed to me it was a lot easier. And this one is Jujitsu made
in Japan, and I know the controls and all are supposed to be the same, but it&#039;s
very difficult for me.

SELVIDGE: Yeah. It&#039;s hard.

MOORE: But back to our subject, I don&#039;t know if I showed you, I didn&#039;t show you
this picture. When I was in the welding school and they sent me out to the
welding yard, they told us that we were just beginners and welders and that
there was a test that we could take after we were more experienced. It was
called the ABS test, the American Bureau of Shipping. This test you welded on
pieces of metal that they had set up, and you had to do vertical, flat and
overhead because they could turn this around in a jig they had set up, and then
when you finished, they sent that piece to the Navy. It was a Navy test, and
they bent it in a vise, and if the weld cracked, you didn&#039;t pass.

SELVIDGE: Oh, wow.

MOORE: So this is my ABS certificate.

SELVIDGE: You passed.

MOORE: I passed. Then on the other side it tells all about it. So they took your
picture, and you went over, they excused you from work to go into the area of
the shipyard where they gave this test. So, I don&#039;t know, it probably took me
forty-five minutes, maybe an hour, to get over there and back. It was just in
another section of the shipyard. Oh, and this is a picture of me, and that&#039;s my
cousin I&#039;m with, and we were in a night club in San Francisco. So that&#039;s what I
looked like then.

SELVIDGE: During the war years. Great. Well, we&#039;re actually getting to the end
of the third tape, so if you want, we can, there&#039;s a couple minutes left to wrap
up if there&#039;s anything else. But if there&#039;s more that you wanted to talk about,
we could go to another one.

MOORE: Well, I think we&#039;ve covered just about everything.

SELVIDGE: Yeah, I think we&#039;ve covered a lot of your experience. I know there&#039;s
more we could ask. Is there anything else you wanted to touch on?

MOORE: It&#039;s just that I don&#039;t think I mentioned that the feeling of the country
and all the people, everybody, you didn&#039;t hear any complaints. It was everybody
was of the same mind, they were doing whatever they could to get supplies to our
men and get them to have what they needed to fight with, fight the war and to
get them home as soon as we could. Everybody was united. It was the only time
since then, I&#039;ve never felt that our country was that way. We have so many
different divisions. So it was just a great feeling, and you were so proud of
your country and proud to be an American.

SELVIDGE: That&#039;s a good place to end I think.

