WILMOT: And we’re recording. Okay. This is Interview #2 with Ivy Reid
Lewis. It is September 14, 2006, and good afternoon.

LEWIS: Good afternoon.

WILMOT: I’m glad we found the time today.

LEWIS: Yeah, I am, too.

WILMOT: Just to start -- there was a story I had heard secondhand from someone
else and I wanted to ask you about it. This was the story about World War II and
how your neighbors responded and talked to you about the influx of African
Americans from the south during World War II.

LEWIS: You know, my family moved to Richmond in 1935. And we lived in North
Richmond, which was primarily Italian, Portuguese -- it was European mostly -- a
few black families and a few Mexican-American families, but predominantly
Italian. And we bought a house and our neighbors were the Costas -- Mary Costa.
One day she came over to my mother’s. Our property adjoined each other. They
had a great big garden -- North Richmond was rural. Everybody had a garden. And
she said, &quot;Ms. Reid, have you heard that you have to move because all of these
black people are coming from the south? Aren’t you going to move?&quot; [laughs]
And my mother said, &quot;I don’t know where I’m going to move to. No,&quot; she said,
&quot;we don’t plan to move.&quot; And unfortunately Mary Costa was one of the first
victims. Somebody beat her up at the bus stop and her family did move, but her
husband didn’t move. He stayed in the house there until he died. But that was
a transition that took place in North Richmond. North Richmond was primarily not
a black community. I am not sure how many black families there were, but there
were not very many in North Richmond, and so the transition took place and most
of the white people moved out and black people moved in. People wanted to rent
our garage, chicken houses, any place that they could live. There really
wasn’t any place for people to live. So, the county part of North Richmond
didn’t have paved roads. It had all dirt roads. And there was a lot of truck
farms. And so these people just moved in with tents and whatever they could put
together and overnight it grew up like a little shantytown. And that’s when
the population in North Richmond grew. Most of the people that I’ve been
noticing now that used to live in North Richmond lived -- the white people --
live in Lafayette because I’ve been seeing obituaries, a couple, like Mary
[Politich?], whose family really got rich off of black people, but they never
mention that. She came from North Richmond. She lived in Lafayette when she died.

WILMOT: What do you mean her family got rich off of black people?

LEWIS: Well, they had the only grocery store. It was Pete [Politich?] Market,
North Richmond Grocery. Their family -- that was the only grocery store when you
came into North Richmond, so actually it grew -- they became quite wealthy from
that store. And then I don’t remember when they moved away, but when the kids
got bigger, everybody moved out. Like, Nello [Bianco?] just recently died; he
was on the BART board. But his family also had a grocery store in North
Richmond. The Corteses, Banduccis -- all of those people lived in North
Richmond, but now that they’re prominent people, they live in Lafayette and
other areas. But they never mention that they lived in North Richmond.

WILMOT: And were these like -- did you play with the children of all these
families? Were you close with -- ?

LEWIS: I went to school with them. Yeah.

WILMOT: You went to school with them. And you went over to each other’s houses?

LEWIS: I went over a few people’s houses. Banduccis lived over on the other
side of town. There used to be water that came into North Richmond but then
people used to come out there and fish and go swimming, but then Chevron cut
them off with their settling pond. On the way to school, I’d stop by some
kids’ houses and wait for them to go to school. And sometimes I’d go down on
10th Street to play with some white kids down there. But mostly, they never came
to North Richmond until after we got a park out there and then a lot of people
came out to North Richmond. My best friends when I was growing up in North
Richmond were white. They moved away when World War II started, and the area changed.

WILMOT: And you mentioned that one person, Mary Costa, was the first person --
you said she was the first victim?

LEWIS: Well, the only victim -- I guess that she might have not been the first
one, but that I knew about, because she was our neighbor. Somebody beat her up
at the bus stop and robbed her.

WILMOT: During that transition time, was violence and crime very common?

LEWIS: Yes. Because, before that, you never saw anything -- once in a while,
there were some Mexican people and across from our house on the corner, it used
to be a beer garden, but people would just go in there after work and have beer
and things like that. And there was never any violence. On the weekend, kids
would go in there and I remember they used to play the beer barrel polka and all
of the kids would dance and stuff. I’m talking about small children. I’m not
talking about teenagers.

WILMOT: Beer barrel what?

LEWIS: Beer barrel polka.

WILMOT: What’s that?

LEWIS: There was a song that was called the beer barrel polka. And that was
really popular in those days. And because the people were mostly European
people, that’s what they played, a lot of polkas and stuff like that. And
sometimes these Mexican guys -- Nacho and his brother, Lalo -- they’d
sometimes get into fights with people, but very seldom we saw any fights until
World War II, when all of the black people came. They were always fighting and
cutting up people and beating up people. A lot of violence.

WILMOT: Amongst themselves? Was this inter- or intra-racial violence?

LEWIS: Among themselves. A lot of violence. And before, we never locked our
front door. Sometimes, we’d go to my aunt’s house and spend the week. We
never locked the front door. Nobody ever came in our house, but after they came,
you had to lock your doors.

WILMOT: Where did your aunt live again?

LEWIS: Oakland.

WILMOT: Did she live over in West Oakland? So, what do you think was going on?
Why was there so much violence? What was happening? Do you have any thoughts on
why that was?

LEWIS: Well, if you go to the South, in some parts it’s still that way.
[chuckles] When I was living in Louisiana, the black people couldn’t have a
dance or party unless they were shooting and fighting. Not all black people from
the South are violent. However, someone once told me that the majority of blacks
who came to work in the shipyards were saw mill people, whatever that meant.

WILMOT: You had mentioned that the real estate agents also had a role in kind of
deciding during World War II, kind of talking to people and talking about how
the neighborhoods were going to look. You had mentioned there was some red-lining.

LEWIS: There was red-lining -- I took that tour with the state park in Richmond
and they went through Atchison Village. Well, Atchison Village didn’t allow
black people to live there when they first opened it. And during the war years,
it was all white. And they were segregated. That’s how the neighborhood
councils got started with Lucretia because there was a lot of people who -- I
could tell you a whole story about that. [chuckling]

WILMOT: Please do.

LEWIS: The people between the whites and the blacks couldn’t get along because
they were not used to living together or going to school together. We had a lot
of fights in school. Between whites and blacks.

WILMOT: This was in 1940s or 1950s?

LEWIS: 1940s. And over in San Pablo, there was a lot of trailers. We called it
Okie Village. A lot of people, white, poor white people lived, they migrated to
San Pablo and actually, later, I guess, in the ‘50s, they moved out here to
Concord and you go further back out Concord, the farther you go, people are all
way back there and had migrated out from World War II out of the shipyards. When
they closed the shipyards, they all moved out there. And it wasn’t very many
blacks at all that moved out here. Some of my neighbors here don’t speak to
me. I think they’re Mexican, next door. And one man across the street. But
most of the other people are really friendly. But, Richmond became really --
North Richmond and parts of South Richmond -- before the war, there was just
maybe three black families -- the Petgraves and the Ellisons and the Graves --
the only black people that I knew lived on the South Side.

WILMOT: Of Richmond?

LEWIS: Of Richmond. All the rest of the black people lived in North Richmond.
The Malbroughs, Turners, Spencers, Morgans, Robinsons, Freemans, Chase,
Bonaparts, Reids, Gordans, and the Blackmans to name a few are the families who
lived in North Richmond. Blacks did not live in the Iron Triangle.

WILMOT: And I understand the Petgraves, they were also -- they were Jamaican.

LEWIS: I don’t know. I didn’t know them. I just knew where they lived -- I
knew them if I saw them, but I didn’t have any contact with them at all. My
father used to work with Ollie Freeman in downtown Richmond. They had a
shoeshine parlor, and when my father would come off work, some evenings he’d
work there. .And on the weekends he’d work there -- and I never saw a lot of
discrimination in Richmond until after World War II started. Because there were
a lot of places where people said, “Well, you can’t go in that store,” but
I never had any of that. I never had a problem. I always was able to go wherever
I wanted to go. But I see signs -- some lady once had a sign -- it said,
“Whites only” and that was the Jack Newell’s store over on Cutting
Boulevard -- she showed this picture. We had some things on the south side of
Richmond, but I never went over there so I never actually saw that sign.
Downtown Richmond, I never had any problems. I always went every place I wanted
to go.

WILMOT: And you mentioned that the neighborhood councils grew out of the kind of
hostility or the ways that blacks and whites couldn’t live together? And I
wonder --

LEWIS: That was in the war housing, Harborgate, Seaside, and those areas. It
seems like -- I was too young to know about them but since then I have read some
of the material -- that’s when they started to try to get people together, to
work together, but it didn’t work out. I know that when I went to Junior High
School -- I think I told you this -- about how they were asking to make the
school segregated and then Earl Warren was the governor, and he said that he
went to school with blacks and his kids did and if they didn’t like it, they
could go back where they came from. They were not going to have segregated
schools in California. So, there was a lot of that. People didn’t want to sit
next to you on the buses. It was a lot of hostility, but we lived through it all
I guess. [laughs] If you have lived out of California, you know that California
is probably more liberal than a lot of states. If you go other places, you’ll
see it still. It hasn’t changed that much. People still have their old
hostilities. In wartime, Richmond’s downtown really grew. There were only two
theaters in Richmond, but after World War II, we had about five theaters in
downtown Richmond, a lot of stores, a lot of people, it was really strange.

WILMOT: So, did the real estate agents actually try and scare people out of the area?

LEWIS: Well, they really did redline. If you were black, you could not buy
anything out of North Richmond. You couldn’t move anyplace. And I think that
later, about in the 50s, it changed, and people started moving. And I remember
this -- maybe I shouldn’t call by name -- but this guy used to go to school
with me and they lived over at Iron Triangle, and they lived in a little shack
of a house. Their house was -- they were poor, white people. They were not rich
working-class white people, but they all had little houses. But after the blacks
moved in there, the neighborhoods all start running down, and he was saying,
what a shame, but their house wasn’t any good anyway to begin with. [laughs]
So I mean, it didn’t take much for it to run down. After that, the Iron
Triangle started to become all black. And you know, Tom [Butt?] recently had an
article in his newsletter, which is not true. He said that the Hilltop Mall
Shopping Center closed up Downtown Richmond and that’s not true at all. The
Redevelopment Agency and Napoleon Britt closed up downtown Richmond. The
Redevelopment Agency essentially moved whites from downtown Richmond.

WILMOT: Tell me about that.

LEWIS: All of the neighborhoods surrounding downtown Richmond in the Iron
Triangle were white. There were really nice homes. From Lucas Avenue and from
5th Street over to 14th Street, north of MacDonald Avenue, Richmond’s
Redevelopment Project. I don’t remember the boundaries of the project, but it
was white removal. They bought all of these homes and businesses, and tore them
down. The redevelopment agency and Napoleon Britt closed up downtown Richmond.
Hilltop Mall might nailed the lid on the coffin, but it was already dead. On
10th and Barrett, there was a big Episcopal Church. There were apartment
buildings, nice homes. All those things were torn down. And so downtown
Richmond, people started moving out. Businesses started just leaving. They moved
the population that supported downtown Richmond away. But Tom Butt hasn’t been
here that long, so he doesn’t know that. I don’t know where he got that
information, but it’s wrong. And sometimes I read stuff where people say they
were historians for Richmond, and they don’t have it right at all.

WILMOT: I wonder who you’re thinking of --

LEWIS: I don’t know. I don’t know their names. I know I read a book once, or
I read an excerpt from a book, about North Richmond, talked about the cabbage
patches. I never saw any cabbage in North Richmond, so I don’t know what they
were talking about. But people get it all wrong. But North Richmond, you’d
have to live there and see how it evolved after it became an all-black ghetto.
There were some Spanish-speaking people. A few white people lived in North
Richmond. Not very many. But then, during World War II, they started to have
nightclubs and everything going on and I can remember, down at the Dew Drop Inn,
and the Savoy Club, and I can’t think of the other names. Jimmy
McCracklin’s. All people would always come to Richmond, to North Richmond, to
go to all these nightclubs and I guess it was an era of the blues that really
evolved in North Richmond.

WILMOT: Was it blues?

LEWIS: It was blues and -- I don’t think it was rhythm and blues, but just
maybe blues. And down at Tapper’s Inn, everybody, I mean, people would come
from all over to go down there, and they’d have Hedda Brooks and Louis Jordan
and all those people that got to be important in those days. Of course, you
don’t know anything about them. [laughs]

WILMOT: Well, you know, actually there was a project that came out of where I
work at ROHO which is focused on the blues and the musicians in West Oakland and
Richmond, so Jimmy McCracklin was interviewed as part of that.

LEWIS: He had a club in Richmond.

WILMOT: Yeah, so he was interviewed. I mean, it was -- so I have heard some of
these names, but of course there are a lot of people I don’t know of. And
it’s not my specialty, my area either, so --

LEWIS: I have a newspaper someplace if I find it, and it talks about all the
different blues, you know, the different nightspots and different things in
Richmond. Like, on Sunday afternoon, they would have like blues festivals and
people would just jam out to North Richmond, and go to all those things. It was
really kind of exciting.

WILMOT: Did you used to go out and dance?

LEWIS: No. I wasn’t old enough, really, but I used to go sometimes and watch.

WILMOT: And what do you remember seeing?

LEWIS: [chuckles] People dancing and drinking -- but it was really -- the
atmosphere. You know, North Richmond before, it was like nothing. There was
never anything there. Not even streetlights. It was just an old country place.
People had chickens and cows. So to see all these things, it was cool for a kid.
It was really quite interesting.

WILMOT: Were people beautifully dressed? Did they wear gorgeous clothing?

LEWIS: My father worked at Mare Island and he would invite people over on Sunday
for dinner and they came dressed up. Yeah. But a lot of people were really poor,
you know. I can tell you one thing I remember about World War II. Most of the
people who came here, they had rotten teeth. Their teeth were really in bad
shape. I mean, not taken care of at all. And you could see how poor some people
were. I’m talking from a child’s perspective, there were just a lot of poor
people. Both white and black poor people and some people used to sleep in
theaters. And my father always had a ball team. My father had two or three ball
teams and on Sundays he used to play games out in North Richmond Ballpark, and
people would come from all over to see the games. We had the Spiders and the
Spiderettes, the girl’s team, and they had a lot of stuff. I mean, you just
would have had to have been there. Richmond changed completely overnight.

WILMOT: Where did you go to get your hair done when you were little?

LEWIS: I never.

WILMOT: You never did?

LEWIS: I did it myself.

WILMOT: You did it yourself. Like your mom did it or -- ?

LEWIS: We all had long hair and we had to wear braids. We didn’t go to the
beauty parlor. But they had them. I remember when Miss Norveline [Harris] came
to North Richmond.

WILMOT: Tell me about her.

LEWIS: Miss Norvaline and her family, they moved to North Richmond, and then she
opened up a beauty shop and people used to go over there all of the time. Once
in a while, I would get to go to Norveline but they never did my hair right
because I have natural, curly hair, and they’d always wanted to straighten my
hair out. My mother didn’t let us go. We could do our own hair. But once in a
while, like if I was in somebody’s wedding or something, I would get to go to
Miss Norveline.

WILMOT: What was it like going to Miss Norveline’s house? Was it her house or
was it a shop or --

LEWIS: She had her shop in her house. It was on 4th Street across from Davis
Chapel, and then she moved down on 7th Street, which became a redevelopment
area, and then she relocated to the south side. In fact, Davis Chapel, that’s
an interesting story because my best friend was Gloria -- her name was Gloria
Harris, but her name is Gloria Spearman now -- and my other friend, Jeannie
Surlock, we all used to go down and play with Reverend Davis’ daughters, he
had two daughters and they came to Richmond. At the time, I didn’t know that
they were planning to build a church or anything -- but I was at the first
meeting they had to plan to build Davis Chapel Church. But Gloria and her mother
were Methodist -- I was Episcopalian at that time, and I didn’t go to the
Methodist Church, but later I joined the Methodist Church and I still belong.
But I was there when they planned at the first meeting to build Davis Chapel,
and I remember Reverend Davis -- there’s a film -- I don’t know who has the
film, but I saw it once, and he was on the corner of 10th and McDonald when all
the shipyard workers were getting off. You have no idea how downtown Richmond
looked. I mean, people were walking all over. It was always jam-packed full of
people. And he would be asking people to help him build the church, and he was
passing his hat. I don’t remember if he had something that he put the money
in, but he was always asking people to help him build a church. And I remember
Richard Granzella. And Richard Granzella and Nelson Carter used to walk -- I
think I told you this before -- and he became the owner of Richmond’s Sanitary District.

WILMOT: Is he Alfred Granzella’s--?

LEWIS: Yeah. He’s Alfred Granzella’s brother, but I went to school with
Alfred. Alfred Granzella’s -- Richard Granzella is older than I, but I used to
watch him -- that’s what a lot of people used to do. They’d dump trash and
garbage, and just go out there and just dump stuff and then a lot of people
would go out and -- I don’t know what they’d collect, but a whole bunch of
junk from out of there and sell it. But then Richie used to go out there all the
time, him and Nelson, and then he became the owner of it. I don’t know how it
went, but anyway, I know that he became rich. I brought this book to show you.
This is a book of Jocelyn Elders, and here on this page, if you’ll read it, I
don’t have my glasses --

WILMOT: Hold on one second. Would you say that one more time? This is the book
of Joycelyn Elders?

LEWIS: “When we moved to California,” read that part right there.

WILMOT: Okay. I’m going to move this. Hold on. Just read the first part?

LEWIS: When we said, when we moved to California. Right down there in that paragraph?

WILMOT: Okay. [reads] “When we arrived in California, we stayed with our
cousins in Richmond at 1361 Kelsey Street. Our cousins had a large place
they’d renovated into a rooming house with apartments for rent to the many
relatives who were leaving the farm and moving to California to work in the
shipyards during World War II. The cousins with whom we lived were Beryl and
Charlie Reid and their children Ivy, Florence and Charlie Junior. They had moved
to California with the first wave of sharecroppers who had left the south during
the Depression. Beryl and Charlie, in particular, had been able to find work,
and for Negroes at that time, were doing quite well economically. They had work
in the shipyards and factories, pooled their money, and purchased a large
rooming house located on the edge of the city limits of Richmond.”

LEWIS: Yeah. Well we -- Chester Ray wrote that [laughs] and Chester Ray was a
baby when his mother was in California so he doesn’t really know our history,
but that’s his view of how we got to move together.

WILMOT: I didn’t know she was your cousin.

LEWIS: They’re not really my cousins, but we got to be very good friends. In
1996 when I was living in Louisiana and I had to go to Pine Bluff, Arkansas, and
I called him up and told him I was there, and I hadn’t seen him since he was a
baby, and he came over, he and his wife. He’s a minister in a Methodist
Church, United Methodist Church, and we had got to talk and that was really
nice. But he, I guess someone told him that we were there cousins. They stayed
with us, and my mother and his mother got to be very good friends.

WILMOT: It’s interesting, too. They said that you were -- your family came
from the first wave of sharecroppers to come from the south, which also was not
your story.

LEWIS: Was not true, but that’s what probably he thought because they were
sharecroppers and they came and I had not realized how hard she had -- Minnie
had to work. When we were children, I was two years older than she, and she
would always tell me, “When I get to be grown, I’m going to change my name
to Joycelyn,” because she didn’t like Minnie Lee. She was named after her
mother’s mother. Her grandmother. And she didn’t like that name. But she
turned out to be the Surgeon General under the Clinton administration. But they
were always smart. The kids were really smart. I think one of her brothers was a
veterinarian and they all did very well after growing up.

WILMOT: So, what year did th</transcript><transcript_alt></transcript_alt><rights></rights><fmt>video</fmt><usage></usage><userestrict>0</userestrict><xmllocation></xmllocation><xmlfilename></xmlfilename><collection_link></collection_link><series_link></series_link></record></ROOT>
