


BLUMENTHAL:	I’m ready.

CLERK:	This is Celeste Clerk interviewing Barbara Blumenthal, class of ’75, for the Smith College Archives.  Hi Barbara.

BLUMENTHAL:	Hi Celeste.

CLERK:	Can you tell me where you’re from?

BLUMENTHAL:	I grew up in Baltimore, Maryland.  And that’s where I lived until I came up here to Smith and I’ve essentially lived in Northampton ever since then.

CLERK:	How did you come to Smith College?

BLUMENTHAL:	Well, I didn’t initially apply to Smith when my first round of applications, but I’d applied to some other schools like Middlebury, and I did get into Middlebury, but I wasn’t offered a scholarship and I needed a scholarship.  And it’s going to sound maybe crass, but a lot of my friends said, Barbara, you have to apply to some other schools, schools that have money.  So we chose Smith as one of those.  I did know somebody.  I had visited somebody who was spending a year at Smith so I knew the area and I liked it.  So that’s really why I applied to Smith, partly because I liked the look and feel of the place, but to be honest, because they offered me enough scholarship money that I could come here.

CLERK:	What did it mean to you that Smith was an all-women’s college?

BLUMENTHAL:	It was a little — it wasn’t my intention to apply to an all-women’s school.  I’d gone — all of my schools had been co-ed and I must admit that when I was sitting in John M. Greene Hall during the first convocation I turned around, watched people come in, after a few minutes it struck me that they were all women.  Or at that time they probably said they were all girls.  But it just didn’t really matter to me.  I mean I know a lot of people come here because they feel that solidarity with it, it’s an all-women’s college, but it just happened to be an all-women’s college, that wasn’t why I chose it.

CLERK:	How is the campus different now?

BLUMENTHAL:	Well, how is the campus different?  It’s clearly — I’m going to sneeze and I guess you’ll edit that.  [sneezes] So I guess you’ll edit that out.  I hope you’ll edit that out.

CLERK:	Yeah.

BLUMENTHAL:	It’s allergy season!  Anyway, I have to think about how the campus is different.  Well in, what. ’75, this is, what, 42 years later?  There are certainly some other buildings, but the feel of the campus isn’t that different from when I was here because it still has beautiful gardens and trees.  A little more cluttered with buildings, but it just doesn’t strike me as that different as from when I was here, when I arrived in 1971.

CLERK:	What do you remember about the political climate at Smith College?

BLUMENTHAL:	I’m a fairly apolitical person and — so I arrived in 1971 which is after most of the major Vietnam War protests, which I actually did go to some marches in Washington, but didn’t really participate in any of that while at Smith.  And I feel like the campus, at least in the ’70s, was pretty quiet that way.  But that may just be that it was something that I wasn’t involved in.

CLERK:	Do you remember what students were saying about Vietnam on campus during your time at Smith?

BLUMENTHAL:	It was certainly still something that was on our minds.  In fact, a boyfriend of one of my housemates in Tenney House, he was drafted and we all gathered in the kitchen at Tenney House and she gave him a really short haircut because we didn’t want strangers or somebody at the draft board to do that haircut.  And so now that I think about it I was more affected than I — from your initial question.  But most of the people I knew, including my brother and other people that I knew that I was more close to, just in the lottery there was never any chance of them being called up.  So it wasn’t something that affected me really closely.

CLERK:	You mentioned a boyfriend.  What was dating like at Smith College?

BLUMENTHAL:	I may be somewhat of an anomaly.  I married my current — the husband — my only husband — at the end of my junior year.  And I had met him the summer just before I came to Smith.  And even though both of us were kind of resolved not to have a long-distance relationship it turned into that.  So I think I may have had one date when I was at Smith.  But most of my time was, or what I aimed to do at Smith was to leave early on vacations and come back late so I could see him, who was my boyfriend in Baltimore.  And so I just wasn’t that much of a part of the social scene or the dating scene.

CLERK:	Did you know other students that were married on campus?

BLUMENTHAL:	Another student in my house also got married.  I think that was at the end of her junior year so I didn’t actually know other married students.  I can tell you that it’s surprising to me that even this was — I got engaged in, this would have been in the fall of 1973 I got engaged and then got married in the summer of ’74.  And when I came back, I think was after October break, I had an engagement ring on.  Actually, obviously the same one.  And first when I came back everybody in my house said, “Did you get married?”  Because they just seemed to know what this was about and I said, “No, I’m engaged.”  And I had the engagement ring on, but when I would go to classes or tell people that I was engaged most people assumed that I was not going to finish Smith, that I just going to leave at the end of my junior year.  And I was shocked.  I thought, This is 1973, how can you think that just because I’m getting married I’m not going to finish?  So I actually just put the ring away and I stopped wearing it because I got really annoyed at people’s attitudes about that.

CLERK:	Who was the typical Smith student of your time at Smith?

BLUMENTHAL:	The typical Smith student?  I’m not sure there is a typical Smith student of any era, but most of the people I knew were — I don’t want to sound silly to say we were studious, but we were fairly serious kind of, you know, focused on what we were doing here.  Again, since I was not a real social butterfly or everything there were probably other people who were more involved in that kind of thing.  But I went to my classes, did my stuff.  I was always just a good student and so I don’t really know what’s typical.

CLERK:	Were you part of any organizations at Smith, any clubs?

BLUMENTHAL:	I have to — let me — I’ll talk — I don’t think I was.  It may come back to me.  I lived in Tenney House, which is a co-op house, for two years so that I was very involved actually, I should say, in the — obviously the 16 of us who lived in that house were close and that was kind of our family and our social group to a large extent.  Because the house system was much more rigid when I went to school than it is now.  It literally wasn’t as easy to eat at somebody else’s house.  So that you tended to eat in your house and know people who either lived in your house or you had classes with.  So Tenney House, as I said, was this small — there were only 16 people — and I was very involved with Tenney House and I was — at the time the job was called the stewardess.  I think after I graduated it’s now called the coordinator because there are jobs in Tenney House that people do and somebody has to coordinate all that so the house runs smoothly.  So Tenney House was more the focus of my life at Smith than anything else.

CLERK:	What was Tenney House like?

BLUMENTHAL:	It was really nice.  I liked it because I like to cook and so we did a lot of our own cooking.  But like any other group of people, particularly only a small group of people, there are tensions and difficulties.  Somebody once brought some kittens in and they were really cute, but then of course they weren’t really litter trained and they got into the laundry.  And so there were stresses, but in general it was a really great experience living in a co-op.

CLERK:	Was the co-op a vegetarian co-op?

BLUMENTHAL:	It wasn’t then.  No.  And I don’t know what it’s like now, but — I mean I know it’s more vegetarian now, but there was always a refrigerator where you could keep your own food so even if you really wanted — nobody objected if you had meat when a vegetarian meal was being served or vice versa.  So I know that it’s really structured differently now, but it wasn’t then.

CLERK:	What sort of rules were at Tenney House?  Were there curfews?

BLUMENTHAL:	No.  I mean there were no curfews.  Because when I was a freshman, I was called a freshman, not a first-year, there were still parietals and there were still house mothers.  So each house had an older woman who lived there, probably a middle aged — probably somebody my age and now I shouldn’t call her an older woman — who lived in the house and kind of helped, you know, be there to help people out.  And then literally in my sophomore all the house mothers left.  They had basically graduate students who became graduate residents.  They still had that figure.  And I think now it’s seniors or other students who are student residents.  So once you didn’t have the house mothers and people got a key to the house as opposed to having somebody who was at the door to open it who served on watch, would sit at the watch desk and people would sign in and out, that really ended at the beginning of my sophomore year.  That wasn’t in place anymore.

CLERK:	Do you remember President Jill Ker Conway?

BLUMENTHAL:	Oh, very well.  I got to know her in part because of my working in the Rare Book Room and she would sometimes come in there.  But I also, I took typography and calligraphy at Smith, so I’m also a letter press printer, a calligrapher, and I’m a bookbinder, aside from working in the Rare Book Room, and she occasionally had me design even personal stationery for her and her husband.  And so I got to know her and I liked her very much.  She actually — she became president the fall after I graduated, but I did know her, again because I worked at Smith.

CLERK:	What do you remember about Smith’s administration during your time at Smith?

BLUMENTHAL:	What do I remember about it?  I knew some of the deans and the registrar.  I think, yeah, President Mendenhall was the president and one thing I remember is him, and I’m sure maybe a lot of people probably tell you the same stories for these histories, but he would come into Neilson Library and chase people out on Mountain Day and say, “You’re not supposed to be studying, you’re supposed to be going and hiking.”  And Tenney House is very close to the president’s house and he personally paid for a subscription to the New York Times for our house.  So we sort of knew him, you know, somebody to wave to, because his house was just — the president’s house was just behind Tenney House.  And I think it was Dean Russell whom I really liked — was one of the class deans.  Some of those people I got to know a little better after I graduated and started to work here.  But I didn’t really have that much contact with any of the administration when I was here.

CLERK:	Do you remember any tensions on campus, either from the student body towards the administration or within the student body?

BLUMENTHAL:	There was one thing.  There’s a house on Bedford Terrace which I don’t even know if it’s still called Unity House, but it was called Hampshire House initially and it’s behind Chase House, I think?  And it was a house that students who didn’t live on campus, either commuting students or then people like me in my senior year once I was married and lived off campus, it was a place where you could leave things, you could stay overnight if you wanted to.  It was basically a place you could take a break and cook a meal because you didn’t have any other house on campus.  And there was, there may have been a sit-in in College Hall by a group of—I don’t know if it was only black students or other ethnic groups, other groups, because they felt they didn’t have a meeting place.  And so Hampshire House, I think it moved.  I don’t know if it moved all the way over onto Green Street then, but Hampshire House was moved and then that became Unity House.  So it was more a center for both black students—I don’t remember if it was also Asian students, but it was a place that they could kind of call their own.  And so that’s the only thing I really remember during my time as a student.

CLERK:	Were there racial tensions within the student body, do you remember that?

BLUMENTHAL:	Not that I was aware of.  And growing up in Baltimore, there were some racial tensions.  I went to public schools so there was certainly — I felt there was none of that here.

CLERK:	Did you study abroad?

BLUMENTHAL:	I didn’t.  I spent all four years here.

CLERK:	Do you remember what spiritual life was like here on campus?

BLUMENTHAL:	I can’t really say much about that.  I’m Jewish, but when I came here I didn’t participate in Hillel.  I just chose not to.  So I really, I just can’t comment on it.  You know, it was certainly available.  There were services here.  There were chaplains of various faiths, but I didn’t really participate in that.

CLERK:	Do you remember having a favorite professor?

BLUMENTHAL:	I probably had several of them.  One of them was Elliot Offner from whom I took — I studied printing and calligraphy with him.  And in part he’s responsible for the fact that I am in the book arts and I’m a bookbinder and work in the library.  Because I took his course as a sophomore, and usually you had to wait even until your senior year to get into his course.  And I think the reason that that happened is because I discovered the Rare Book Room literally almost my first week at Smith.  And the curator at that time was Dorothy King and I guess she took a liking to me and we got along really well and she showed me books.  And she may have been the person who mentioned this course that Elliot taught.  And I have a feeling she said, “You should let this student into your course early.”  Otherwise I probably would have to wait till my senior year.  Plus, he also wanted, I think, a student assistant for the next two years, by now my junior and senior year, to help with the type studio, keeping it clean, showing people how to do things.  But it really turned my life around, having done that.  Because I’d always liked books and reading, but really learning how to set type and design books, it opened a whole ‘nother world for me.  And then Elliot also mentioned a bookbinder in Pittsfield [Massachusetts] named Arno Werner and I ended up apprenticing with him as a bookbinder while I was still an undergraduate at Smith.  So again, that just totally changed the course of my life.
[There were two other professors who were very important to my life at Smith, and afterwards, as a bookbinder and staff member in the Mortimer Rare Book Room. The first is: Frank Ellis, professor of English, whom I first met because he lived at 146 Elm Street, next door to my freshman house at 150 Elm. I took classes with Frank, and he became a friend when I worked in the MRBR and because I did bookbinding for him for many years. Frank's large collection of 17th- and 18th-century English pamphlets is now part of the Mortimer Rare Book Collection. Second, I want to mention Frank Murphy, also an English professor, with an affinity for American material culture and fine arts, who influenced my exploration of American Studies. I've maintained a friendship with him and did bookbinding for him as well.]

CLERK:	We need to repeat that last part.  Can you start with Pittsfield?

BLUMENTHAL:	Oh, with Pittsfield.  So he had mentioned — OK.  And Elliot Offner also mentioned a bookbinder in Pittsfield, Arno Werner, who took apprentices.  And he mainly — he usually took apprentices from Harvard.  He did a lot of binding for Harvard and then — so actually I was his first female apprentice and I spent a summer in Pittsfield and just the whole thing changed my life, getting into book arts.  When I got married I actually got a printing press as a wedding present and it changed the course of my life.  I came to Smith thinking I was going to study English and literature and then I ended up going off into book arts.

CLERK:	(unclear) as we’re concluding, we don’t always get alumni who have such a long relationship to the school.

BLUMENTHAL:	I was going to ask if I could say something about other influential and people I worked with.  I was hoping I could say that.

CLERK:	And we’re at the point in time when the library system is going to be changing and it would be really interesting to hear that part of your story as well.

BLUMENTHAL:	Sure, I’d love to do that.

CLERK:	If you could include that in your background.

BLUMENTHAL:	I’d love to do that.

CLERK:	Reflecting back on Smith, what do you think of your time here?

BLUMENTHAL:	Well, as I said before, it really changed my life because you often come with an idea that you’re going to study something and then something happens and you do something else.  But I also feel — I mean it’s probably true of a lot of people who come to Smith, you’re in the top of your class in your high school and you come to Smith and all of a sudden you’re among many people who were the top in their high school.  So you’re not necessarily the shining student.  And I would say that one thing, you could almost say it is a regret, that I feel like I didn’t work hard enough at Smith.  I’m perfectly happy to admit I was a B student.  I got some As, but I was essentially a B student.  I feel like I studied well and I got a lot out of it, but I could have done more.  Part of it, as I said before, was trying to spend time with the guy that was going to become my husband.  But as I said, I did apply myself to my studies.  But I feel that — sorry, I’ve lost my train of thought about my time at Smith.  But it was just, it was a fabulous place to be.  The area is so beautiful.
And I’ve ended up — I obviously like it because I never left.  I went home for summer vacations, but I’m still in Northampton.  I live a mile from campus.  And my relationship with the Rare Book Room, which started literally the first month I was at Smith, I also asked for a job there from the curator, Dorothy King, but at the time she wasn’t hiring students to have work study jobs.  But I kept bugging her and unfortunately, she died at the end of my junior year and a new curator came, Ruth Mortimer, who was here from 1975 until 1994 upon her death, and I worked with her for 11 years in the Rare Book Room.  Because in 1976 she literally called me up and said, “Do you still want a job here?”  And that’s when I started working at Smith.  And basically in a clerical position which just has grown and grown to include so many other things relating to the rare book room, helping readers, doing exhibitions, cataloging, just probably I don’t know how many things are in my job description that I do.  And it was just fabulous working with Ruth and I was also doing bookbinding in my own studio at that time.  And in 1987 I decided to leave Smith so I could really devote myself fulltime to bookbinding.
And then in 1993 the associate curator, Karen Kukil, asked me to come back because Ruth Mortimer was very ill and she died the next winter, or the following January.  And so I’ve been back at Smith since 1993 and I’m actually — I guess I’m doing my second retirement.  I’m going to retire at the end of this summer, probably August of 2017, just because of all the changes that are happening I just feel like it’s a reasonable time to make a break.  But I feel as if the collections here have just been built up so much and starting with Ruth the undergraduate students can use the material so much more than they could before.  And that’s happened in all of special collections.  They have classes taught specifically to use the materials and the teaching and showing things to people is probably what I’m going to miss the most.  I hope I can still stay involved somehow.  And I am a part of the larger book arts community.  So I feel like I’ll still be able to do that sort of thing.  And I also worked with Martin Antonetti for 19 years.  He was here from 1997 until June of 2016.  And I’ll be working a couple of months with the current curator, Shannon Supple, who just came to Smith a couple of months ago.  So I don’t know if I can tell you anything else about my time here or not.

CLERK:	(unclear) Yeah, that sounds good.  I really liked that you mentioned about the changing library and the people that you’ve worked with, that you have (unclear) here.  I know we touched a little bit on that in the last question, but do you have any additional thoughts?

BLUMENTHAL:	Well, libraries in general are changing and Smith’s library certainly has changed and there’s much more teaching and hands-on which is such a — it’s so great because Smith is small enough that people can use primary sources, and other sources, and the concept of the teaching library and in group study and collaborations is very different from how library was even when I was a student.  When you certainly came in, you got advice from reference librarians, but pretty much people had their study carrel and they studied alone.  And you might study with somebody in your house or in your room or something, but it wasn’t the sort of collaborative projects that are happening now.  And of course, digital content is something that’s developed in the past 40 years also, which of course wasn’t around when I was here.  So things are really different and I think the library is doing a good job of adapting to that while still, I hope, honoring and using those original materials.
Because I often say to people that a Google book is not a book.  It’s a picture of a book and it’s really important to see the real thing because it’s now-- book arts and book studies is really, it’s sort of the archeology of the book.  That you’re looking at this artifact and what is the binding telling you?  You see a stain on it, is that candle wax in a fifteenth century book?  Because we do have fifteenth century books here.  Candle wax from somebody looking at it.  You see how many hands have used this book over the years and you can’t get that by looking at a digital image of a book.

CLERK:	And on that, I’m just curious, how do you think about the nature of looking at a book in analog fashion versus looking at digital images?  It’s two dimensional.  If that opportunity is different when you have the physical thing in front of you.

BLUMENTHAL:	Oh, it’s completely different.  I mean it’s the same thing — I mean you can even — there’s a big difference between looking in a digital — they still don’t call them card catalogs, but the library catalog online.  Looking through that, browsing through that, is not the same as walking around in book stacks and looking at books and oh, I’m looking for this book, but six books away there’s another book which I never would have known about.  And I worry a little bit about not being able to browse books, physical books, because those serendipitous events won’t happen.
But it’s just so important to look at the physical book because there’s a — I mean not everybody gets excited about the sound of old paper when it turns, and it’s not just old things, because at Smith we have this amazing collection of modern artist books.  Literally they’re being printed today and just to see people’s thoughts and how — why did they choose a book when they could make a video?  Why did they choose to put it in book form to express their thoughts or their art work?  So it’s so important to value and protect, but also to let people use those materials.  We don’t want a museum of the book or an archive that nobody can look at and it’s just a question of handling things carefully and respectfully so that people 100 years from now can look at them again.

CLERK:	That’s it.

BLUMENTHAL:	OK, that was pretty painless.  I hope that was good.



