

ANDREANI:	This is Vivian Andreani and I'm conducting interview with Marlene Futterman from Class of '58 on May 26, 2012, for the Smith College Alumnae Oral History Project.
FUTTERMAN:	I need to stop you for a minute.
ANDREANI:	Okay.
FUTTERMAN:	I'm hard of hearing.  I have hearing aids, but you have to speak slowly, distinctly, and loudly.  (Laughter)
ANDREANI:	Okay, all right.  Let's do this again.
FUTTERMAN:	I'm sorry about that.
ANDREANI:	No, no, no, that's fine.
FUTTERMAN:	I should have told you that ahead of time.
ANDREANI:	That's fine.  Let me go ahead and just put the camera a little bit closer to you and then I'll sit closer to you to make sure that you can hear --
FUTTERMAN:	Just speak slowly.  Don't --
ANDREANI:	Yeah.
FUTTERMAN:	-- don't speak fast - -
ANDREANI:	If I -- okay.
FUTTERMAN:	Because I won't understand a word you are saying --
ANDREANI:	Yeah, I -- we don't want --
FUTTERMAN:	Even with the hearing aids.
ANDREANI:	Yeah.
FUTTERMAN:	Very frustrating.
ANDREANI:	So is this pace --
FUTTERMAN:	That's fine.
ANDREANI:	Is that --
FUTTERMAN:	Yeah.
ANDREANI:	Okay.  And please feel free to tell me to change how I am talking -- just -- I want to -- I have a really bad memory, so if I -- if I forget and start talking quickly again, please just let me know.  It's not out of disrespect.  Okay, so let's take two.  All right.  So let me -- this is Vivian Andreani and I'm conducting an interview with Marlene Futterman, Class of '58 on May 26, 2012 for the Smith College Alumnae Oral History Project.  Thank you for agreeing to be here.
FUTTERMAN:	Delighted.
ANDREANI:	So how did you choose Smith?
FUTTERMAN:	Oh, that's a fascinating question.  Well, I wanted to go away.  I grew up in New York City and I wanted to go away to college, and of course Smith was a fine college.  It's always had a wonderful reputation and I visited several and applied to Smith because I liked it.  And when I was accepted I thought, that's great.  And another reason I chose Smith was I was interested in the junior year abroad, and at the time Smith was one of the few colleges that actually had a junior year abroad program.
ANDREANI:	That's great.  So how would you describe a typical Smithie of the time you were here?
FUTTERMAN:	A typical Smithie of the time I was here?  Bright, interested in getting married, interested in what was going on in the world and willing to work hard but also have fun.
ANDREANI:	So how would you -- did you fit into that typical Smith?
FUTTERMAN:	Yes and no, because I had gone to a very good public high school in Manhattan in New York, but I wasn't socially very adept, and a lot of -- it seemed to me that a lot of the freshman in my class were more socially adept than I was.  So I felt kind of out of place that way and yet one of the women in my class and in my dorm at one point said to me, whom I thought really knew what she was doing and I admired her very much, she was very nice.  She said to me, "I really admire you because you're so sure of yourself."  And that was an eye opener, because I realized we were all in the same boat.
ANDREANI:	So do you think everybody kind of felt out of place at Smith?
FUTTERMAN:	I think people had different adjustment situations.  You know, some found the work academically challenging.  I had gone to a very good high school and was used to the kind of -- the level of work at Smith at the time.  Some were -- I think some did feel socially challenged, others too.  I think some adjusted very well and some just didn't talk about it.
ANDREANI:	What was the campus atmosphere while you were here?
FUTTERMAN:	The campus atmosphere?  Well, it was an all girls school, of course, and we didn't have -- at that point we didn't have the interaction with the other colleges.  So it was really very closed except for the weekends, when you had dates Friday night and Saturday night and the guys came from Amherst and from the U of Mass and from Yale and from Harvard and blah, blah, blah.  But I think during the week it was pretty -- it was academically oriented, but it was also -- there were a lot of student government clubs, that kind of thing, so you had a pretty well-rounded -- without the men, a pretty well-rounded life.
ANDREANI:	Did you participate in clubs and organizations?
FUTTERMAN:	I -- no, I didn't very much, not at Smith.  I had in high school, but not so much at Smith and then I spent my junior year abroad, and so when I came back I was honorary and I had to take a lot of courses, basic courses that you normally took your junior year when you were here, which of course I hadn't taken.
ANDREANI:	So can you tell me a little bit about your Geneva experience?
FUTTERMAN:	Fabulous.  It was -- it changed my life.  I had -- you know, we spent six weeks first in Paris and then we went to Geneva and they put us in families in Paris and I got the best family in all of France with whom I'm still in very close contact with all these years.  As my French brother said to me when I was there last year, "You realize we've been friends for 55 years?"  That's not bad.
And the academic program in Geneva, we had  a wonderful professor who emphasized a lot about geographic and economic history as it shaped nations and that was a real eye opener, because that was not the kind of approach that was taken in America at the time.
So Smith -- that junior year abroad -- and then I became a foreign service officer.  And I'm convinced, I never would have become a foreign service officer if it hadn't been for the junior year abroad experience.  It was a wonderful experience.  It was really -- I was so lucky and those of us who were in the program were very, very lucky.
And we lived -- in Geneva we lived partly with families and partly in the hotel because they didn't have enough families for the whole group for the whole year.  So we split -- and that was also a very interesting experience, because the family I lived in had taken a Thai girl also and she was very nice.  She spoke beautiful French, much better than mine, and she was very nice, and so we would do things -- you know, together in the afternoons when we weren't in class.  It was a wonderful experience.

ANDREANI:	So what led you to choose Geneva?
FUTTERMAN:	I'm sorry?
ANDREANI:	What led you to choose Geneva?
FUTTERMAN:	Because I was a government -- I was going to major in government and I had really wanted to go to Paris.  My mother had been in Paris and lived in Paris for six months, but I thought if I was a French major I could only teach.  Whereas with a government major I could go into government, I could teach, I would have a broader possibility of job experiences afterwards and Geneva was where they sent the government majors.
ANDREANI:	So after that experience, how was it coming back to campus?
FUTTERMAN:	Well, it was -- it wasn't as restrictive as it might have been because as I said I was honoring, so I had to do a lot of work.  I didn't have time for a lot of extracurricular things, and also I was very close friends with three other women, two of whom had been in Geneva and we managed in our dorm to get a -- on the fourth floor of the dorm they had six rooms and they were the four of us and then two freshman, poor souls, so you know we really had -- and it had a little kitchenette.  So we really had our own kind cloister-like social life, you know, when we weren't studying.  The three of us had been in Geneva -- all of us were honoring, so we all had, you know, we had to do a thesis, we all had a fair amount of work we had to do.
ANDREANI:	What house were you in?
FUTTERMAN:	Franklin King.
ANDREANI:	King House.  So were you participating in the house community or were you too busy for that?
FUTTERMAN:	Didn't really participate very much in the house.  We had a house mother and she was -- you know, in retrospect, she was really terrific, but at the time we thought she was a little bit old fashioned, and she would hold teas every Sunday afternoon and we would have to go to her tea and -- which in fact was wonderful training but at the time, you know, we thought -- hmmm.
ANDREANI:	(Laughs)
FUTTERMAN:	But she was really -- she was a nice woman.  She was available if we needed help with something and not judgmental and you know, actually a very nice person in retrospect.
ANDREANI:	So was there a desire to break with old fashioned Smith when you were here?
FUTTERMAN:	Was what?
ANDREANI:	A desire to break with old-fashioned Smith?
FUTTERMAN:	No, because we were in the '50s, and those of us -- even the late '50s, we were very -- we kind of went by the book.  Most of us -- not everybody, of course.  But we weren't revolutionary.  Russia had just put up the Sputnik, which was a major eye opener for Americans at the time, and no -- I think we more or less went along with the rules and did what we were supposed to do.  We -- I think it was a little bit later.
We got caught.  We were a caught generation, because we were too young for the old system, and too young for the new system -- we were too old for the old system, and too young for the new system and it wasn't until a year or two later when they really broke through and became modern.

ANDREANI:	So what were some of the rules that you remember from Smith?
FUTTERMAN:	Well, we had to -- we had a curfew in the dorm.  We had to be in at 10 o'clock during the week and midnight on Saturday and they had a tribunal if you were late and you were reported and you had to go through all that stuff.  Men were not allowed above the first floor.  What were some of the other things?  Oh, we had to wear skirts to dinner.  I'm trying to think about some of the other things.  Gym, of course was mandatory with the gym uniforms.  It was -- it was a much more controlled -- although we didn't necessarily feel it was controlled, but it was a much more controlled environment than what you have today.  You are much freer today.
ANDREANI:	Did you have to take posture pictures?
FUTTERMAN:	Oh, yes.
ANDREANI:	What was that experience like?
FUTTERMAN:	I haven't got a clue.  I don't remember that at all.  All I know is that we had to do it.
ANDREANI:	Mm-hmm.  You don't even --
FUTTERMAN:	Haven't -- I don't remember it at all.  I mean I've seen pictures, you know, at some of our reunions, we got pictures of the stuff.  It -- apparently it just didn't register very much with me.
ANDREANI:	So do you think that Smith was accepting of outsiders while you were here, as in like racial minorities, Jewish individuals, et cetera?
FUTTERMAN:	More so than a lot of the other schools at the time.
ANDREANI:	Mm-hmm.
FUTTERMAN:	Not compared to what it is today.  But the world is very different today.  I'm Jewish, so I was one of the Jewish students that was accepted, and I've never found any kind of prejudice from either my classmates or the professors on the religious grounds.  But I do think that Smith was more liberal in that respect than some of the other sister colleges, and I think it had a reputation for that, being a little bit more liberal in the times.
But today we didn't have -- I mean we had -- we had few international students, of course, but we didn't have anywhere near the number you have today because we didn't have -- television was brand new.  We had -- Davis Center was the student center and they had a television there, but we didn't have television in the dorms.  So you know, a lot of the stuff that people -- of course, we didn't have computers -- you never had computers, you weren't allowed to have phones in the rooms, as I recall.  There was always a student on -- I say on guard, but that's not what we called it, at the front desk, you know.

ANDREANI:	Mm-hmm.
FUTTERMAN:	Make sure that nobody came in that shouldn't come in.  So it was a very different world really from what it is today.
ANDREANI:	What pressure did you feel as a woman in the 1950's?
FUTTERMAN:	I personally didn't until I went into the foreign service, and I'll tell you why.  My parents were very -- they always treated me as an individual, my sex was sort of irrelevant, you know, in terms of -- they always felt anything I wanted to do, I could do.  They never discriminated against me because I was a girl.  Same thing -- I went to an all girls high school, so I never had that problem, and here there was no problem either because you were women.  What the problem was, we didn't see it as a problem then, but what the situation was was that the world expected women to get married and have children.  Very few went into professional work other than nurses and teachers.  You didn't have female engineers.  I mean virtually none.  You had very few female foreign service officers.  It was a real -- there was one in the class of '57 and me and I think she was the first, I think, and I was probably the second, you know who were not secretaries, who were diplomats, officers.  You had very few women doctors, very few women lawyers.
I mean it was just a different world and it was still sort of accepted.  The woman's movement didn't happen for another five to ten years, so you didn't have the kind of pressures that you might think that you would have as long -- I mean I knew I was bright, and I knew I was going to do something that wasn't typical.  But my parents were supportive and the college was supportive and I went to Yale for graduate school and they were supportive.  So I personally was very, very lucky.  Now I think a lot of other women weren't as lucky as I was.

ANDREANI:	Did you see any of that on campus?  With the dating culture was there pressure to --
FUTTERMAN:	The dating culture -- yeah, there was sort of -- it wasn't pressure, but it was sort of expected that you would date.  And if you didn't date a lot, you were a little unusual.  But again, it was -- it was the situation that was the pressure rather than the individual people who put pressure on you.  Do you understand the distinction I’m making?
ANDREANI:	Yes, ma'am.
FUTTERMAN:	It was expected that you would date because it was expected that you would get married and have children.
ANDREANI:	Mm-hmm.  So you mentioned that Geneva was one of the things that maybe ---
FUTTERMAN:	I'm sorry.
ANDREANI:	You said that maybe Geneva was one of the things that brought you to foreign service.  So can you talk more about how more your Smith experience and your JYA experience shaped your life?
FUTTERMAN:	Well, I mean certainly.  First of all being in Europe.  I mean my mother had lived in Paris when she was 19 and she had never been back in 40 years, and I think the first word I ever heard was Paris.  Not Poppa, not Mama, but Paris.  So all of my life up to that point I had wanted to go to Europe, and we were not -- we didn't have a lot of money, so being able to go to Europe, you know, for just a few hundred dollars more than coming to Smith, and I worked the summer before and the summer after for spending money, you know, was a dream come true, and then when you -- when you got to Europe -- in those days, Europe was still not Americanized.  Remember this was 1956, it was only 11 years after the War was over.  Vienna was still in rubbles, portions of it.  Paris, the family I lived with, they still talked about the food deprivation during the War.
So it was a totally different society and situation from what I had grown up in America, and then they had all these wonderful I mean museums and culture.  The culture is different.  You know, sitting in a Paris café and drinking coffee and watching the world go around.  We had nothing like that in America at the time.  We didn't have sidewalk cafes.  We didn't have sidewalk restaurants, very rare.  And then getting to know people of a different nationality.  It just -- and the professors had a world view that most of the American professors didn't really have at that time.  You know, we knew a lot about America growing up, but we knew relatively little about the rest of the world, virtually nothing about Asia, Africa or what we knew about the rest of the world was Europe.  And so, you know, when you're there and then you meet people from all over the world, you know, have a Thai girl living in the same house that I did, and the professors there had a much broader view in some respects, certainly of the world than the American professors, most of the Americans, but we had a wonderful advisor and he was an -- I mean to me he was a wonderful advisor.  I mean he was exceptional, one of the professors from Smith.
But so it opened a whole new world, and then you travel through countries that are centuries old.  You know, America thinks 200 years is old.  Well, you know, Europeans, 200 years is nothing.  It's a blink of the eye.  So it's -- you -- it's just a totally different perspective and a totally different way of living.  The women and the families that I lived with in Paris and Geneva never -- most -- first of all, they didn't go to college, or if they did it was a one year college or something, secondly they never dreamed of having any kind of a profession.  It was clear, you know, they were going to be married, and their husbands were very important in a lot of -- in Switzerland, when I was in Switzerland, the women didn't have the right to vote in 1956.And they were very content with not having the right to vote.  You know, it was one of the things that sort of struck us because we voted, you know.
So it was -- it was -- you really learned a lot about different cultures and how different people live.  Well, you know, that can't help but expand your way of thinking and your way of understanding of people in the world.  So I think -- I'm sure that's what got me into the foreign service.  I think I probably wouldn’t have gotten in without that experience.  I know I wouldn't have had as rich a life.  No, that's true because everything I've ever done now has been internationally (inaudible)
ANDREANI:	You mentioned you had a really great advisor.  Are there any other adults you had at Smith that inspired you or --
FUTTERMAN:	Well, the advisor we had was Mr. Overstreet, and he was a government professor and he had a very, very strong personality.  He had taken the Smith group before.  Some of our members couldn't stand him and some of us liked him very, very much.  And then we had the local responsible was a woman named Madame Davenmore (phonetic).  And Madame Davenmore was extraordinary.  She was French and she did both the French and the Geneva group that went to Paris in the Geneva group.  And she had been -- she didn't talk about it then, although later I kept in touch with her and later she did.  She had been in the French Resistance and she had been an important part of the French Resistance, although she didn't talk about it when we were there.  But she was a wonderful woman, you know, and she was really responsible for finding the homes -- we all lived in homes.  She was responsible for finding the homes, and you know, if local problems arose, she took care of them.  I mean we didn't know all that stuff at the time.  We knew she found the homes.  We didn't know about local problems because they didn't talk about that.  A lot of stuff wasn't talked about in those days that's talked about today.
ANDREANI:	Mm-hmm.
FUTTERMAN:	But yeah, and he -- he was -- I mean I admired him enormously.  He had a -- also a world view, and he was very bright.  He taught a -- he taught a course in government while we were there.  We had to write a research paper while we were there.  And I did a paper on the European economic commission which had just been formed, and I used the French parliamentary debates as my source and I wrote the paper in French.  Now you wouldn't have had -- as a result any paper I ever had to do when I came back was a piece of cake because, you know, my French wasn't that great, even after a year in Geneva.  And to write a paper in French, a 40 page paper in French was, you know, reading French parliamentary debates was an achievement.  I mean, you know, for a 19 year old girl.  So -- so there were a lot of -- you know, a lot of things like that, travelling alone.  You know, I mean when I say alone, there would be two or three of us who travelled, but we made all of our own arrangements, we rented a car, we sat up on the trains all night to get to Vienna.  You know, all that stuff is very -- not only fun, but -- but it informs your whole way of living.
ANDREANI:	So what -- where have you gone with your -- your international --
FUTTERMAN:	Travels?
ANDREANI:	Yes.
FUTTERMAN:	Well, when I was in the foreign service, I was stationed in Scotland and then in Washington, and then I left the foreign service for other things, but I've travelled to -- I've travelled all over the world.  I mean I've worked in different -- short periods of time, not long like Scotland.
ANDREANI:	How long were you in Scotland?
FUTTERMAN:	I was in Scotland for two and a half years.
ANDREANI:	Two --
FUTTERMAN:	And you know other places I've worked for a week, two weeks, a month, you know.  I've been in France.  I took -- I took kids with the -- what was then called the experiment in international living, I took three groups to France.  So we lived there once it was five months, I think, and once it two months.  Yeah, twice it was the summer, so it was a couple of months.  And then we lived with families.  But I -- you know, I've been a -- I've been a lot over in Southeast Asia.  I've been over a lot of places in the Middle East.  I've been to Australia. I've been all over Latin America.
ANDREANI:	So what has your career been like?  Can you describe your career?
FUTTERMAN:	Well, I can describe my work because what happened with me was that I would get bored and change jobs. So -- and I always went to an interesting job not necessarily following a career path.  But after I left the foreign service, I worked for the US government in the poverty program which was new.  And I worked in that for six years, and then I went to work for the League of Women Voters, which a non-profit organization as the director of -- the staff director of the organization, and then I was executive director of the Overseas Education Fund of the League, which worked with developing countries abroad.
And then what did I do?  And then I took time off to take roots abroad.  And then I worked -- and my last job I actually stayed in it a long time.  I was the executive director of a small education foundation that worked with consumer advocates and with marketing professors in the United States and overseas.   So I've always had some kind of an overseas component or almost always.  That's what I've done.  And that stems directly from junior year in Geneva.

ANDREANI:	And you always seem to be a little bit politically conscious.  You worked, you know, with poverty and with a non-profit.  Was that -- did that come from your Smith experience or where did that -- do you know where that came from?
FUTTERMAN:	It was in me.
ANDREANI:	It was just in you?
FUTTERMAN:	Yeah.  I don't really think that came from the Smith experience.
ANDREANI:	Okay.  So can you --
FUTTERMAN:	But the ability to go into different jobs, I think -- I think the confidence from that came from the Smith ability and also every job I've ever been in I've been able to write concisely, think clearly and that certainly came from the Smith experience.  Not the writing concisely so much, because that I learned in high school, but certainly the ability to think and see different points of view and all.  That was certainly a -- Smith had a large influence on that, no question.
ANDREANI:	Is there anything else that you would credit Smith for, or is that kind of --
FUTTERMAN:	Well, friendships formed.
ANDREANI:	Do you still have contact with --
FUTTERMAN:	Oh, absolutely.  I'm still -- the four of us who were up in that rooftop thing are still friends and I made a lot of other friends.  A lot -- a lot -- not so much from when I was at Smith, but through the reunion experiences.  But there's no question that -- and when you go out in the world.  I mean I've met Smith women in different jobs and there's an immediate connection and a desire to help each other.  I mean I was taking diplomats -- foreign diplomats in the US to New York on a trip and I went to the UN, because I wanted to arrange a special visit for them to the UN, and the woman who was in charge of the volunteer coordination who did this stuff was a Smithie.  Well, the minute -- I had a Smith bag with me.  The minute she saw that, she couldn't do enough.  So you know, that kind of connection, and I had never met her before.  So that kind of connection really is invaluable.  There's something about Smith graduates that transcends age and distance.
ANDREANI:	All right.   Well, we need to wrap things up but our last question is there any piece of advice you would give to current and future Smith students?
FUTTERMAN:	Learn from it and enjoy it.  It will really -- really a Smith graduate has a leg up in the world and really stand -- any graduate in great stead, whether they loved Smith or hated Smith, ultimately.
ANDREANI:	Thank you very, very much.
FUTTERMAN:	Thank you very, very much.
