

SCHNEIDER:	This is Hannah Schneider and I’m here with Vanessa Henneke for the Alumnae Oral History Project.  And just to start things off, where are you from?

HENNEKE:	Right now I’m living in Maine but I’m from Oklahoma.

SCHNEIDER:	And how did you come to Smith College?

HENNEKE:	I looked for colleges along the East Coast because I wanted to come to school in the East.  I wanted to leave that part of the country and experience a new geography.  I actually came to Smith for an interview on the way to somewhere else and had such a fabulous interview that that was my number one school after that.  Being from Oklahoma, that was an unusual thing to do at that point but I had support from my high school and people that kind of cheered me on and so I was accepted and came.

SCHNEIDER:	And what did it mean to you that Smith was a women’s college?

HENNEKE:	That’s a good question.  What’s interesting to me is it has remained a women’s college.  I came from the last graduating class of a private high school and — not the last, the last all women graduating class.  They moved men up behind us.  I don’t know.  I think I felt that this would be a freer place to learn without a lot of pressures of the things that having men in the classes give you.  That was my perception.  Part of my favorite study time here was when we did have co-ed classes with students from Amherst.  Hampshire was first starting — this was in 1967, my graduating year — but — so it was — we got the benefit of both.  But I was very comfortable in that environment.  I’m trying to think — there was only one other school that was not a women’s college.

SCHNEIDER:	And what did you study while you were here?

HENNEKE:	I started majoring in psychology and enjoyed it.  And then after two years said, I’ve taken all the courses I want to take in psychology.  And in the meantime had had a fabulous English course.  And there were not nearly as many majors as there are now but English just captivated me.  So I switched my major and was an English major.  And glad that I was.  (laughs) Except for memorizing Chaucer.  That was tough.  In Middle English.

SCHNEIDER:	I don’t believe we have to do that anymore.

HENNEKE:	Really?

SCHNEIDER:	But we still read a lot of Chaucer.

HENNEKE:	How could they not keep that?  I don’t know.  (laughs)

SCHNEIDER:	And why did you come to reunion?  What made you decide that you had to be here this year?

HENNEKE:	I’d come to my 25th reunion where most of my friends — we all decided we would come together.  I came to my 45th reunion because I had just moved to Maine and didn’t have a lot of friends and didn’t have — most of my friends were not coming, my closest friends, to the reunion and I just said, Well, I’m going to go because I’ll meet new friends.  And was glad that I did.  Same situation here.  There are a couple of people that I’m really excited to be seeing, one of whom I haven’t seen for 50 years.  But I just said, okay.  You don’t know who you’re going to meet and there are always interesting people and it certainly happened last time.  So, same reason.  And also 50 years is a big deal most of us would say in the class in the sense of we’ve all traveled different types of journeys.  And what I have found is that the people I was most close to have had different life experiences and now I’m close to the people who have had some similar life experiences.  And that’s one of the things I learned at the 25th.  Okay, don’t just say “Here is my group of friends and here are—” there’s a whole world out there of people with similar experiences.

SCHNEIDER:	So I have to ask: could you describe the typical, or who you perceived to be the typical Smith student of your time here?  Like, who was she?  What did she do?  Your average Smithie.

HENNEKE:	She was very driven intellectually I think.  Far more disciplined than I.  My roommate would go to the library every morning right after breakfast.  And I would say didn’t hold back in opinions.  And interested in learning about whatever field and many fields.  And I was — I came saying I will — I can’t wait to just see all the different things and the people that I will meet.  So I went to every lecture that was offered on campus, you know, outside.  Humor in a Humorless Era.  I went to science lectures.  I went to this.  I said, I’m not — I don’t want to miss anything.  But there was also the other side of people who were wandering around a little bit in a daze, like me.  And they were — I would say it’s a broad scope but what really impressed me most was, Oh my gosh!  These people are really serious.  A lot of them don’t have a lot of sense of humor.  It was interesting kind of breaking into that particular — I came from a, what one book that we use in our work is a “hot culture” and came into a colder culture.  Thomas Jefferson divided states and the world and parts of the country into that and I was that “Howdy!  How are you?”  And people would go “Oh my gosh!  Who is this person?”  Because we don’t know if we want to associate with her or not.  (laughs)

SCHNEIDER:	So I guess that’s a good segue to your social life on campus.  What house did you live in?

HENNEKE:	Jordan.  In the quad.  And stayed there all four years.

SCHNEIDER:	Do you remember your house mother?

HENNEKE:	Mrs. Butterfield.  She was fabulous and she was quirky and wonderful.  We invited her, my first husband and I invited her to our wedding and she came to Virginia.  A lot of people were, you know — I wouldn’t say put off but felt it harder to interact with her.  She was a Southern lady.  She would correct your table manners.  And she would tell you how to pour the coffee and the tea in the afternoon when we would have it.  It wasn’t all bad.  And I also had a couple of times with her where things were tough and saw a different side of her that was not I would say totally approachable but wise.  She was an anomaly I think.

SCHNEIDER:	Do you remember some of the rules that you had to follow in the house or for curfew?

HENNEKE:	Well, we didn’t have — we had curfews.  I think it was 10:30 in the week and 12 or one in the weekends.  We had, of course, at that point no men on the floors.  I think the last year you could have someone come up during a period of time in the 2 to 5 on a Sunday afternoon or something like that.  We had napkins that fit into little slots.  They were damask napkins and on Monday you’d get a new napkin and on Thursday you’d get a new napkin.  And if you had ravioli on Tuesday you had to live with that napkin until Thursday.  But actually, it was a very efficient way to do it.  You’d roll it back up and stick it in your slot.  We learned to use institutional dishwashers because we rotated that.  We rotated who sat at the table to serve and we rotated who would be the wait person.  I don’t know if that still exists or not.  It looks like it’s buffet line pretty much now.  I actually thought that was great.  I learned a lot.  Breakfast in the morning.  You didn’t have places that you had to serve and wait but the other two meals you did.  And then Thursday night was formal.  Kind of faculty night.  You could invite members of the faculty.  Every night, every dinner you had to wear a skirt.  I’m trying to think of other things that we — we had people that were on watch and all day you signed up for slots and that meant somebody was sitting at the door when a guest came in or something like that.  There was a phone booth down by the watch desk and then we could get a line installed in our rooms — which was quite expensive.   So about eight of us would be on the same phone.  Ours had a very long cord and people would be sitting out in the hall talking in the middle of the night.  So there are a lot of things that are — have changed.  Those are the ones that popped into my mind.

SCHNEIDER:	Did you ever get into any trouble?

HENNEKE:	I was late a few times which meant you had to do dishes at such-and-such a time and you had to come before the house council and I think that was it.  But then second semester of sophomore year I was on 1.8 probation.  I said, Okay, you’ve got to pull this one out.  And did.  Those are two things I remember.  I’ve suppressed everything else.  (laughs)

SCHNEIDER:	Were you part of any organizations while you were here?

HENNEKE:	I was in the acapella Russian chorus.  I had tried to get into the Smith, one of the Smith choruses, very naively, because I loved to sing.  But I wasn’t a very — I’d never sung in chorus so I just went, Hey, let’s do that.  I went in and they played a triad and I had to pick the middle note and sing it.  And they quietly said, “You may leave now.”  So I went, Wow, what do I do?  So there was an acapella Russian chorus.  Not everybody wanted to join that one.  We had a ball.  And we did concerts at Amherst and we’d do those sort of things.  I still remember some of the Russian songs probably because that’s a part of my brain that those things stick.
I had been Student Council president and I’d been head of the yearbook at my school and so I didn’t want leadership in the class.  I didn’t want a lot of other organizations.  I really wanted to just be kind of like my husband who does, did interviewing for Yale.  He said, “These are your years that you stretch yourself like a pizza crust. You watch somebody stretch the crust and you just make the pie very big and the rest of your life you get to put the toppings on.”  You can put a few on and I really did.  That’s what I felt.  I didn’t want to miss anything that might be interesting.
We also didn’t have as many causes.  I do remember George Wallace came and spoke and, oh man, I was out there picketing.  I picketed Kodak.  I would go out and do some of those things we were not afraid to do in the ’60s and really felt called upon to.  Didn’t always know exactly all the pieces of it but—and I see that coming back.  It’s very interesting.  Very interesting having lived through the ’60s and what we called bra-burning days.  Those are past but it’s an interesting time, just as the ’60s were.

SCHNEIDER:	Can you tell me a little bit about what causes you saw Smith students being interested in politically?

HENNEKE:	I had a sociology professor that was adamant about that.  Coming from Oklahoma I’d grown up in a very Republican state.  Republicans were more centrist at that point.  I got here and started really listening on all the political views.  My parents had to endure the fact that I changed parties when I went to New York afterwards.  Voted for Humphrey even though my buddy from Middlebury and I went to the convention in Berkeley and got thrown out of the Republican convention because we were — had false tickets and didn’t know it.  I was just, once again, just exploring.

SCHNEIDER:	Do you remember your Commencement speaker by any chance?

HENNEKE:	Oh.  (pause) No.

SCHNEIDER:	Okay.  I only ask–

HENNEKE:	It was a man.

SCHNEIDER:		Yes.

HENNEKE:	And it was a pretty good address.  Oddly enough, I remember my high school speaker better and it had a bigger imprint on me because he was the one that told a story.  And the story was that he had gone to Princeton or to Yale and was down in the pool room shooting pool with friends instead of up and participating in what was going on at that time.  And obviously that cue made me say, “Okay, I want to participate.  I want to learn about these things.  I don’t want to be down in the pool room and miss it.”  And, as I say —I wish I did.  I remember, because I’m a visual learner, I know where we sat.  I know how the chairs were.  I know it was a sunny day.  I think it was.  But I don’t remember the speaker’s name.  And it was a political, I think it was — who was it?  Do you know?

SCHNEIDER:	Yes, it was Mr. Kasselbaum.

HENNEKE:	Yes, yes.

SCHNEIDER:	And there was a protest.  Do you remember anything about that?

HENNEKE:	Yes.  People were wearing armbands.  Yes.  Maybe that’s why I don’t remember it.  (laughs)

SCHNEIDER:	You were focused on something else.

HENNEKE:	That’s right.

SCHNEIDER:	Do you remember what students were saying or doing about civil rights on campus?

HENNEKE:	That was a very hot topic.  That’s why when Wallace came — and Wallace was a very charismatic speaker.  That’s one of the things that I realized.  I went to see it.  People booed and this and that.  And we picketed.  We did all those things but I could see what a charismatic speaker could do and how to listen in a different way.  Or just listen to what’s being said but also be aware of other elements of who that person was.  And so, yes, there was a lot of civil rights sentiment.

SCHNEIDER:	Do you remember — so that’s the Commencement speaker.  Do you remember your president?

HENNEKE:	Mr. Mendenhall.

SCHNEIDER:	Yes.  You guys were freshmen together.

HENNEKE:	Yes.  And he was like your grandfather and was very welcoming and was very — he was approachable.  I’ve heard people’s opinions of him, that — Oh well, he was really thinking that he was grooming us to go and be good wives and not make an impact in the world.  I didn’t get that impression.  I thought he was a much broader person than that.  But he was— I was perfectly content and comfortable with who he was.

SCHNEIDER:	And did you have good relationships with the rest of the administration or your professors?

HENNEKE:	The Dean’s name was Josephine Orr and I went to her at a particular time when I was a senior, I guess — no, no, it was freshman year.  And I saw a side of her that was really caring.  She did not project that normally.  She was wise.  She was not effusive but she gave me the information that I needed and — but it was also with a sense of “I care about you as a student and a person.”  I don’t know what others have said but I saw a side of her that I really respected and was impressed with.  Others in the administration?  No.  I wish I could remember the person’s name but when I came as a freshman I had put my tuition money in a bank in Tulsa, Oklahoma.  And I came and I wrote the check for that and about three, two weeks later they called me in and they said, “Well, you know, your check bounced.”  Because the bank went under and we got the money out of the whole thing but it was an interesting — there was another person who called me in and said, “Hello.”  (laughs) “Your check bounced.”

SCHNEIDER:	Can you just take me through what your average school day was like at Smith?  You wake up and?

HENNEKE:	I’d wake up and I would get dressed and go down to breakfast.  Sit.  Talk.  I did not then go immediately to the library.  I would usually go back and study in my room.  If there were a class in the morning I would go, come back, have lunch.  Basically classes.  I finally figured out in junior year, I think, it would be nice to have a carrel in the library but what I did do that I realized — and it’s this kind of sad, wonderful story.  On the corner of Green Street there was a little restaurant.  You walked in and I walked in one day — and I’m still looking for friends — and so I saw the woman behind the counter and she said, “Hello, Joanne.  Hello, Adrian.”  And I went, I want her to say hello to myself.   (laughs) So I came in three or four times and then she did which was kind of my home away from home.  In the back there were a number of booths and you could sit there with your cup of coffee and study.  And I didn’t realize that I was dyslexic and a little on that spectrum.  I now know that if you can sit someplace that’s not completely quiet, with things going on that you don’t need to be aware of but it’s kind of noise, you do better.  And I studied better.  And I still go some place if I have to really write something that’s important, I will go to a restaurant and sit with my computer and let things go around and then I can concentrate on it.

SCHNEIDER:	Can I ask what the dating was like?  Did you date?

HENNEKE:	(laughs) Yes.  We were bused to different places.  I — remembering going, bussing to Dartmouth one time.  Boys would come here over the weekend.  And they would come into the house and one of them would have a friend who — the person had a date with somebody in the house and they’d bring a friend and say, “Anybody want to go out?”  (laughs) I did that a couple of times.  The look on this one poor fellow’s face when I came downstairs — I was all dressed in my red outfit and my red spit bow and my this and that which was perfectly normal where I came from.  The poor guy went, Oh, my god.  Do I really have to go out with her?  We hit a nice medium on it.  So it was not — it was an artificial kind of situation.
The summer before my senior year — and I had friends.  Most of my friends who were male were at Wesleyan and I loved to go to Wesleyan.  That was a neat place and I had a beau there but I also really liked his friends sometimes even better.  Before my senior year I met someone in Tulsa who was a year younger and in a different school.  So our families knew each other but I didn’t know him.  I really thought, Wow, this is great.  He was going to Yale.  He was a junior.  So there was a running joke that I spent more time—  I would come and pick up my mail and go to my classes in the middle of the week and then I would go off.  And I went to classes there and had a ball.  That was one thing I think that I didn’t see.  You didn’t have a lot of real friends who were male.  So it was more artificial.  That’s why I’m interested in — but I have argued with a friend of mine who went to Princeton and whose daughters went to Princeton subsequently about — and I’d say “Well, maybe I should have gone to a coeducational school.  Maybe that would have been better.”  By the time we’d gone full circle in the argument, I said “Nope.  I did the right thing.  I’m glad I went to a women’s college for the benefits that that gave me.”

SCHNEIDER:	So, unfortunately, we’re almost out of time.

HENNEKE:	Okay.

SCHNEIDER:	But it does sound like you’ve had a very interesting life since Smith.  Can you tell me a little bit about that?  Maybe how Smith has affected your life?

HENNEKE:	I would say the main thing I learned was to just go out there and don’t let any barriers stop you.  And probably I would say a number of my class felt that way.  As a woman, you can go do it.  Now you hit walls but I ended up going to New York with a couple of my roommates.  I started at a production company and became a producer and then became — we were the first women editors in videotape that had just come out.  It felt like being a pioneer.  That’s what I ended up writing in the book.  I’ve had subsequent careers and all of them except that first one have been entrepreneurial.  I had a retail business for many years.  I had — but now, once again, kind of saying, Okay, you can go do this.  	My husband and I have gone to Tanzania in 1998 to work with a bishop and his wife there.  And out of that and listening to what the people wanted have started a program that’s now 18 years old and they are subsistence farmers and they’re planting trees because that’s what they wanted to do because their elders could remember sustainable agriculture.  But we knew it had to be a business that was sustainable and neither of us had ever been in international development.  I’m an English major.  He was history and business degree.  Fortunately, I think that was the case because we didn’t know how it was done.  All we were doing was responding.
And it has been an incredible experience.  We started with 77 farmers in Tanzania and now there are 78,000 or 79,000 in four countries that are doing this small-group work of taking degraded land and bringing it back to fruition.  And they know they’re doing it for climate change.  They know they’re doing it for — and that they are making a difference on the planet.  Because it’s a business solution we decided to train people to count the trees and do the circumferences when they were large enough and aggregate that carbon and take it to the world market so that they could have an income.  But what’s turned out is that that’s — we give a small prepayment — but the co-benefits or I say the main benefits of the fruit, the nuts, the medicines, the firewood, the windbreaks because your roof doesn’t blow off or your clothes don’t go off the line — wouldn’t have thought of that in Maine — are far more important.  And so they’ve taught me a lot.  And they are incredibly hospitable people and we made it from the very beginning so that women could have access to it.  And did some work of having one man and one woman come for leadership.  Oops!  (sound of a chime) I’m sorry.  That’s my phone.  And so that’s been incredibly rewarding and it continues to be rewarding.

SCHNEIDER:	Well, thank you so much for coming in.

HENNEKE:	Thank you.

SCHNEIDER:	It’s been wonderful to hear your story.  Really interesting.

HENNEKE:	Well, you’re kind.  Thank you.


