

REES:	So this is Carolyn Rees and I'm conducting an interview with Ally on May 18, 2013 for the Smith College Alumnae Oral History Project.  Would you mind stating your name just because – for transcribing, so they know it's your voice?
HECTOR:	My name is Ali Hector.
REES:	Thank you, Ali Hector, for being a part of this.  So, why did you choose to attend the reunion this year?
HECTOR:	I haven't been to a reunion before and it's my 10-year, so I really just wanted to come back and I hadn't seen campus in like nine years.  So, that's why I wanted to come to my tenth reunion.
REES:	Great.  Are a lot of your classmates back as well?
HECTOR:	2003 made a pretty good showing at this year's reunion, but some of my favorite folks are not here, unfortunately.
REES:	That's too bad.  So, what was your journey to Smith, how did you come to be here for college?
HECTOR:	I never take the easy road.  So, I left high school a year early to go to an early entrance program at USC.  I hadn't really intended to do that but it just kind of happened last minute.  I didn't have a reason to stay in high school.  It would have been complicated for me to do so.  So I went there even though I didn't want to live in L.A.  So, I had a good experience but I really wanted to go to school on the East Coast and I applied to three schools in New York and Smith.  I had heard about Smith from some folks that had spent a previous summer in Portland, where I'm from, and it sounded like it was a good combination of academics and fun, which is pretty much what every 18-year-old is looking for, and perhaps every 31-year-old as well.  So, but I didn't really know what I wanted to do after that year, so I actually took a semester off.  And then Smith gave me the most financial aid of any of those schools that I applied to, and it just seemed like that was the right place to go.  So in January of 2000, I transferred in as a first semester sophomore, so.
REES:	Awesome.  So what was it like when you first arrived?  What was – what were your impressions from your first day, first encounter?
HECTOR:	I actually remember calling my mother from, I believe, I think I took the bus from New York.  I'm not sure why I flew into New York or what I was doing.  But I took the bus in and it was covered in snow, it was January.  And I called my mother and I told her that I would now be living in a postcard.  So, that was my very first impression.  It was like it really is as adorable and quaint as they say.
REES:	Yeah, absolutely, it's very quaint.  What were your expectation of Smith before you arrived?
HECTOR:	Expectations?  It's hard to say what my expectations of Smith were.  I kind of looked forward to college all through, you know, school intensely.  I was so excited about college and I didn't really think beyond that.  So, just being here really was exciting.  I was excited to have, you know, rigorous academics and, truthfully, be surrounded by a bunch of ladies and queer people, and that was all I wanted, so.
REES:	Did Smith meet your expectations, exceed them?
HECTOR:	It certainly did.  No, it did.  I had a great time here and I think that I found what I was looking for.
REES:	What house did you live in?
HECTOR:	I lived in Capen for a year-and-a-half, and Chase my senior year.
REES:	And what were the – how did the house communities in the respective houses that you lived in, like, affect your overall experience?
HECTOR:	Yeah, you know, the house system is interesting here.  I appreciate what they're trying to do with it.  But at times, it could be – I mean, I feel like, you know, 18 to 20-year-old women might tend to be cliquish anyway, but the way that the house system is set up here can make that intensely so.  And then, obviously, I was not only a transfer but a mid-year transfer, so, I mean, it's kind of a wonder I managed to make friends at all.  So, you know, so I came in to Capen and there were a great group of people and I've even kept in touch with some of them, but they very much had, you know, their house system very set up.  And so people, it seems like you were either really into your house or you weren't.  And I kind of couldn't be, you know, as a transfer student, and so I wasn't as attached to Capen as the other Capenites were.  And so, I became one of the people that sort of, "Oh, I moved houses, or it's not as important to me," which is why I was in Chase my senior because that's kind of everybody, it's like, "Oh, I'm a senior, I don't want to do house activities.  I don't care if we interact with each other."  And we didn't, so.
REES:	All right, so where did – what spaces did you make friends, like how did you make friends and did you, like, meet more than friends?
HECTOR:	Right.
REES:	How did you establish relationships?
HECTOR:	You know, I didn't do a ton of extracurriculars, but I did The Siren, which was a queer literary journal briefly.  But my biggest extracurricular and where I met a lot of my friends was WOZQ.  So, I loved the radio station.  I did also have, I had two friends that I knew from Portland that went here.  One was a senior when I arrived and one was – a sophomore, I believe.  And so, you know, I was lucky enough to have friends that were already here, one of whom did radio as well. The senior, her name was Kate Hardy.  So, I think, you know, also, I think through radio is where I met a lot of people but just, of course, in class.  And I did, I think, maybe once go to our LBTA group at the time.  But you know, because there's such a large portion of this campus is queer, there really wasn't a need for it and everybody sort of recognized that then.  I did also, I think, I'm trying to remember what it was called but we did also have a Trends group on campus that I went to and made friends with.  And then also, just, you know, so just through the couple people that I knew already as well.  Oh, and I had a friend at Hampshire, as well.  So, I had some folks over there.
REES:	It's a good place to have folks.
HECTOR:	It is.
REES:	So, what were like the hot topics on campus during your time?  Were there any like controversies or big issues?
HECTOR:	There definitely were.  As to whether I remember them, it's hard to say.  But, you know, there was– it was kind of a beginning, and I wouldn't say it was the very beginning, but it was some of the first classes of students that had started to transition.  And so that was definitely a big deal.  People always were and still are, I'm sure, talking about race, so that was a big deal as well.  You know, as to what the specific issues were, it's really hard to remember.  But I do – oh, well, I know one gigantic issue while I was here was, of course, the Iraq war.  So, there were a lot of war protests.  Actually, 9/11 happened while I was here, as well.  I was actually getting ready to go on my junior year abroad.  And I was here – British schools start a month later, so I was here for pretty much the entire month of September, and left out of JFK, like, two weeks after.
REES:	Wow.
HECTOR:	So that was kind of intense.  The presidential election of 2000 – was it 2000?  Yeah.  Was gigantic here.  And I remember, you know, we all waited up as late as we possibly could and there was still no results.  This is the Bush/Gore election.  And of course, we were all angry and devastated at what happened with that.
REES:	Yeah, what happened, like, what was the response like when the results came out?
HECTOR:	Really shock.  And I remember also a lot of comedy routines about chads.  Chads were a big – like, I don't think anybody has used that word before and I don't think they've used it since and, well, because nobody uses paper ballots anymore anyway.  Apparently, only Florida did even in 2000, so.
REES:	And what was it like to be on campus when 9/11 happened?
HECTOR:	You know, I'm actually really glad that I was here.  For one, you have a huge community of support.  I think, you know, a lot of people, it's terrifying.  And so if you're going to be terrified, at least being around your loved ones, your family and friends, which Smith definitely came to be for me, was really important.  I mean, in some ways, it might have been harder, too.  I mean, I'm from Portland, so it wouldn't have necessarily – and I do have family in New York.  I feel like almost everyone has family or friends in New York.  But it might not have felt quite as present if I had been home.  Here, we're obviously, we're three hours from New York, it was a huge deal.  You know, everybody was scared.  It was intense.
REES:	Yeah, I can imagine.  So tell me about the challenges of being a Smith student or a Smithie?
HECTOR:	What challenges?  Now or during when I was there?
REES:	How about both?  Because that's an interesting question.
HECTOR:	I think what was challenging while I was here was how to – was living in the bubble.  And maybe, I mean, maybe it's not so much while I was here, but let's say what was difficult was the transition from Smith to the rest of the world.  And I mean, I tend to – living in Portland now is actually a little bit of a bubble, as well.  And you know, I think that it's natural to gravitate to places that you comfortable being and that you don't necessarily have to struggle on a daily basis.  So, I'm not actually anti-bubble completely.  But you do have to deal with the rest of the world.  And I think that was probably the biggest challenge.  As I was saying earlier, I was very excited to go to college.  I wasn't the first person in my family.  My mother did actually go to college.  She started when I was three and finished when I was about 12.  So, she was first and that was very exciting.  But I was certainly the first person in my family to go to Smith and, you know, the second person to go to college.  And so, you know, deciding what to do after college was a huge challenge.  Yeah, let's just go with that.
REES:	So when you think back on your time at Smith are there particular stories or memories that come to mind?
HECTOR:	I'm not sure that they're ones I want to say on camera.  No, I mean, I remember my first convocation being memorable and emotional.  Clearly, all of us standing together in Davis watching the news after 9/11.  Sitting up in Capen watching the election results in 2000.  I had a really great drag ball one year where nobody recognized my girlfriend and I because she came as a frat boy and I had a gigantic blond wig and heels.  And I do not think I have worn a skirt since that day.  So that, actually, that was a great memory.  Our commencement speaker was Madeleine Albright, so that's pretty amazing.  Yeah, lots of great memories.
REES:	When I was name-searching, there seemed to be some clash between people who were excited about when Albright was commencement speaker, and those who were not.  Was that like a heated topic or was it not?
HECTOR:	You know, I guess having Madeleine Albright was a big heated.  I think we were discussing it today at the reunion luncheon, and sometimes you selectively remember.  So it's hard for me to say.  Now that you mention it, it's like, okay, yes, there probably was some discussion around that.  So, I actually prefer to just remember that, oh, she was an engaging speaker, an exciting speaker.  I'm not upset that people have differing opinions.  I think that's actually one of the greatest things about Smith.  But in my own rose-colored memories, I just think, "Well, we had a great speaker.  That was fun."
REES:	Yeah, definitely.  That makes sense.  This is backtracking a bit, but what was it like to have been here when 9/11 happened and then go abroad so, shortly afterwards?
HECTOR:	That was really difficult, actually.  It was – I remember someone pounding on the door.  I was staying with my girlfriend, Jessica, at the time – and it was something I thought un-Godly early like 9:30 in the morning or something.  And so I just couldn't, because we were one of the only people that had a TV in that particular – in the senior hallway.  Senior hallway?  Anyway.  And so, Priscilla came into the room and that was actually, like, we turned on the TV in time to see the second, the plane had hit the second tower on live television.  It was just, it was a moment of intense disbelief that this was actually happening right now.  And then after that, you know, some of my loved ones didn't want me to go.  It's not so much, I mean, probably in some ways the U.K. would have been a safer place to be than the U.S. at that point.  I mean, as if any place wasn't safer than, probably the safest, you know, in the weeks following 9/11.  But I did, I did go.  And it was really interesting to see the protests from a European perspective.  And I think of the Western European countries, you know, Britain is the most, like, our staunchest ally, etc., etc.  But even they were – you know, saw things in a different way and sort of had – were more cautious about retaliation, certainly, than a lot of what people in the U.S. were saying.  So it was interesting to have that perspective and be there.
I did end up coming home early, which I think has more to do with, you know, my own personal circumstances.  You know, I was 20 years old and Bristol was – I don't know why it was a difficult place for me to be, but it just wasn't very fulfilling.  My flat-mates were all younger than me and seemed very privileged, which you would think I would be used to at that point.  But I just think that, you know, the combination of being upset about that and having left Smith in this weird, quick way, and I had been with my first girlfriend at that point for six months.  So I had applied before we'd really met, but it had gotten serious.  And so, a year apart was long.  So, in Ally tradition of not doing anything the simple way, I left after the first semester of which you can't really do in the British school system because you take your finals for your first semester at the end of the year.  So they had special finals for me in late January or February so that I could go home.
REES:	So who have you become since Smith?
HECTOR:	I haven't changed a ton since Smith.  I am proud of say that I knew a lot about who I was even then.  And perhaps in that same vein, I still do, maybe less, you know, maybe I'm a little bit less sure of who I am, in all honesty.  But at the core of my being, you know, I have the same beliefs.  Smith helped foster my ability to express them and – but it didn't fundamentally change them.  Because I think I gravitated toward the people here that did have similar belief systems and there were plenty.  So, I saw it as a community I wanted to be a part of, and I was right.
REES:	Do you have any advice for future and current Smithies?
HECTOR:	It's hard to say.  Do it all.  If you think you're going to be tired, you're right.  Do it anyway.  Work hard, play hard.  Don't miss something because you think it's going to be scary.  Absolutely go abroad or go someplace else for at least part of your junior year.  Smith is a great place, but you need to experience other schools and other countries and other people, absolutely.  So, those two things, don't miss anything and go abroad.
REES:	So what are you doing now?
HECTOR:	I am a web developer for Alta Bicycle Share which is a fairly – well, the bike share portion of the company if fairly new.  We have two big systems up and running and we're launching two or three really big ones this summer in New York, Chicago and the Bay area.
REES:	Wow, how about that.  Well, I think that that's it, but thank you so much.
