

MOE:	Which, actually, it wasn't that far, but it felt really far to me.
KRAUS:	Yeah.  Where was home?
MOE:	Parsons.
KRAUS:	Oh, nice.  Very cool.  I have a lot of friends in Parsons right now and they love it.  It's a really, really wonderful house.
GEIS:	Can I borrow — Is there a pen underneath?
KRAUS:	Yes.
GEIS:	Can I borrow this?
KRAUS:	Mm-hmm.
MOE:	I'm ready when you are.
KRAUS:	OK.  So just for the record, this is Maggie Kraus, and I'm conducting an interview with Nina Moe –
MOE:	Let's close the door.
KRAUS:	Oh, that's a good idea.  Conducting an interview with Nina Moe, on May 15, 2010, for the Smith College Alumnae Oral History Project.  So first of all, thank you so much for being here and agreeing to do this, and share your stories with me.  I just want to start off with kind of how you got to Smith, and that decision in your life.
MOE:	Yeah.  I — So I'm originally from Norway.  I'm half-Polish, half-Norwegian, and I was born and mostly raised in Norway, and then I lived for a few years in Warsaw, Poland, where I went to an international school.  So basically, all of my classes were in English, and it was sort of roughly based on the U.S. system and we did the International Baccalaureate and AP.  And I had never been to Massachusetts before; I'd been to The States just on vacation once with my family, and I did a student exchange program in New York.  But I basically had Smith recommended to me by a bunch of my teachers and a guidance counselor that I really liked and trusted, and so I applied almost on a whim, really, and got accepted, and I went sight-unseen.  I didn't have a phone interview, I didn't know anybody who had gone here, I just knew people who said that this would be a good place for me, and I just kind of showed up with two suitcases and no comforter, no blankets.  I just had — I just had some clothes.  (laughter)  Some books.  I don't even think that I had figured out how to get from Bradley to Smith once I arrived.  Like, I had booked my plane ticket, and then I was like, Well, I'll just figure it out from there.  (laughter)  And I ended up meeting another first-year Smithie in the motel that I was staying right close to Bradley, and she had already arranged for a shuttle or something, so I just kind of tagged along with her and showed up.
KRAUS:	Wow.  So I mean, what was the reaction from your family and friends to go to school at Smith?
MOE:	I don't think they really knew what to expect.  I think they had kind of expected me to go to school either in the U.S. or in England, but the idea of a women's college doesn't really exist very much in Europe.  I mean, there are girls' boarding schools and high schools, but at the collegiate level that doesn't really exist.  So I think there was some confusion from my family, I think.  But they trusted my teachers' recommendations and things like that, and just kind of figured that I probably knew what I was doing?  (laughter)
KRAUS:	Oh, yeah.  Were the older women in your family or in your life college graduates, or –
MOE:	Yes.  So, my mom and all of her female siblings have — I think they all have graduate degrees of some kind.  And same on my father's side, but neither of my grandmothers went to college.  So my grandma on my mother — on my father's side, I think she may have completed seventh or eighth grade?  And I think my grandmother on my mother's side finished high school.  But they were both from pretty poor, rural families, on my mother's side in Poland and on my father's side in Norway.
KRAUS:	So you — I mean, you spoke a little bit about not having a ton of kind of expectations about what you were kind of getting into, so what was it like to get on campus and realize, you know, This is happening, here I am?
MOE:	It was surreal for a while (break in audio) and I had always lived in pretty big cities, and so the idea of sort of a campus in a small town in a pretty rural area was completely new to me.  And so, I mean, I think I must have been a little bit confused at the beginning.  But I remember being amazed at how beautiful it was here, and how, despite all of the sort of normal chaos of move-in week, it was — there was something really serene about the campus.  And I think that the housing system also really works.  And because I lived in Parsons — and it's a pretty small, contained house — that you kind of just get swept up with everyone else who's there for the first time.  There's such a good support system that it didn't feel — I wasn't distressed in any way.  I think it took me a little while to figure out kind of where I would find my place within it all, but –
KRAUS:	Did you at all feel, like, a little out-of-the-loop or maybe on a different end of the spectrum, coming from Norway, coming from a different schooling system than probably most people that you met, or –
MOE:	Yeah.  I mean, I think I had fewer expectations.  I mean, it — I did realize that I didn't know what to expect, and so I think I came with a little more of a blank slate than other people.  I really didn't know what to expect from campus life, and I kind of trusted the academic side of it, but –
KRAUS:	So, I mean, what did that prove to be for you?  I mean, in terms of campus atmosphere or the people that you met outside of your house, what — I mean, was it a transition that took a while, or was it — did you immediately click with certain people or certain aspects of life here?
MOE:	It was really fast for me, actually, and I think I was really lucky with the first-years that were in my house.  We all got along really well and it was clear, even just from orientation, that, you know, there were definitely a lot of people that I got along with, and a lot of people that I just found really interesting.  And it was — it was a really friendly atmosphere, and much more so especially because I'm used to big cities where you kind of just look straight ahead (laughter) and you don't bother anybody and you hope that nobody's going to bother you.  And so this — It already kind of felt like a family from day one or two, which was really nice.
KRAUS:	Were there any times when you were kind of like, Oh, my God, this isn't the right choice for me, this isn't working out?
MOE:	I'm not sure.  I remember — I have vague memories of having kind of a rough time towards the end of my first year and the beginning of my sophomore year.  I don't think it was ever because I felt like this wasn't the right place, but I think it was more just that sort of natural transition, where you've kind of been on your own for a while and you're trying to figure yourself out, and where you fit in with other people and what you really want from your life.  And — So it was more of that than having doubts about coming here, I think.
KRAUS:	So, did you get involved with any clubs or sports or organizations on campus?
MOE:	I was briefly part of the International Students' Association — I think I only went to maybe two or three meetings.  (laughter)  I thought that that would be a really good connection for me somehow, but actually, I ended up finding that I had a much closer connection with the people in my house and the people that I was taking classes with.  And it seemed, after a while, it seemed like sort of a forced connection on my side, and so I didn't really pursue that very much.  I was in three or four choirs while I was here, so that was kind of my steady outside (pause) — I don't think I did any sports, really.  I've always been kind of solitary that way, so I would go running some mornings, but I think that was pretty much the extent of it.  I always secretly wanted to join the fencing team, but I never really got around to it.  (laughter)
KRAUS:	Oh, yeah.  That's great.  So I mean, can you talk a little bit about the campus atmosphere?  Like, what were people talking about, what were debates that were going on that you remember?  What — Did there seem — I think there's — Just from the interviews I've already done, there seems to be a wide range of things that people took away from the campus community.  So, I mean, what did that feel like for you while you were here?
MOE:	It felt mostly very supportive within Smith.  (pause)  I'm having a hard time remembering, actually.  (pause)  I remember vaguely there being some — maybe it was Quad Riots one year?  That — I want to say it was '99 or 2000 — that kind of went a little out of control, and I was hardly ever in the quad, and I don't really remember the Quad Riots that year, but I remember reading about it and I remember people talking about it, that there was something really uncomfortable, racially, going on.  And I'm pretty sure that that was in the Quads, I want to say '99 or 2000.  Which was really surprising to me - on one hand, on the other hand, Smith is a really white campus.  (laughter)  I mean, part of that is just New England, it's just the school reflects its location, I think, but I think being a school that prides itself on having really open dialogue, on being pretty progressive and open in that way, I found it really surprising that those things could happen here.  And it wasn't really clear to me whether it was actually a threatening situation, or somebody trying to be really provocative and put it out there as a way of starting a dialogue.  My own recollections of this is very vague, so –
KRAUS:	So, I mean, in terms of maybe not living up to the things that Smith is putting out into the community or out into the world, I notice you're wearing a rainbow ribbon.  (laughter)  Can you speak at all to what the climate was like in terms of queer, lesbian, transgender issues?  Was that a big part of your life here, or was that something that maybe came later?
MOE:	It was, and it always — I always felt really safe here.  It felt really supportive.  But in a way, I think it was taken for granted.  I think after leaving Smith, I felt that the school probably should have had a better infrastructure for kind of preparing you for what it's like when you're not somewhere where it's a given that you can talk about it, or even that you don't really have to talk about it.  And seeing what kinds of programs exist at other schools, where that's not necessarily a given, I actually think that's something that maybe the school does better now, but that they definitely could have done better.  I think with the student population, it's just something that we took for granted, but I think there could have been more kind of organized — organized institutional discussion about it.
KRAUS:	So, I mean, did Smith aid in your maybe coming out or coming into your own, or was it a process that took place, or did — were you OK with kind of that aspect of your life when you got here?  I know everyone, it's a totally different story.
MOE:	Yeah, it was a little bit of all those things, actually.  I mean, it was something that I kind of pretty much knew before, but it wasn't entirely clear to me how that was going to affect me.  I think being at Smith definitely made it easier, and coming out to my family was really, really difficult, and it took (pause) I want to say eight or nine years for that to really become something that we could talk about with anybody, you know, sobbing or flying out of a room, or — and so, having a really supportive community here was really, really important.  And I don't think I realized that until I said something out loud to my parents.
KRAUS:	And did that happen after you graduated, did that happen while you were here?
MOE:	While I was here.  And I hadn't anticipated it being that hard; my family's not really very religious, they're — at least, on the surface — politically very progressive.  And so, I think I had expected it to be something that we needed to talk about but not something that was going to become an issue, and I think — I mean, some of that was certainly just, you know, my own blinders.  But that's, I guess, part of what I mean when I say that the school actually could have a better support system.  And maybe it doesn't need it just because everyone around you is going to be supportive, but –
KRAUS:	So that was the — I mean, that was the general feeling about the Smith community at large, that it was a support system and there was no need for —OK.  Because I mean, I've been talking to a lot of alums who it was the exact opposite five or six years before you probably got to Smith or that you graduated.  You know, in terms of Smith trying to sweep it under the rug and not wanting an overly — which I'm sure is, you know, they're an institution that prides itself on a lot of things, and maybe that just didn't fit into the agenda for the time.  But it's interesting that, you know –
MOE:	Yeah, I mean, I do recall there being some tension between the more progressive elements of the student population and what ended up being called the, you know, white-gloves-and-pearls contingent of the alumnae association and the deans, and whether or not that was anybody's personal belief, there was definitely some tension between what kind of public image Smith was willing to portray to different kinds of audiences.  But in a way, I really understand, and I have to say that as someone well into their professional life now, I understand why you have to do that and there's a certain amount of institutional protection that you have to be willing to do, even if you personally disagree with it.  On the other hand, it may be something that, you know, does you a long-term disservice, in the end.
KRAUS:	So did you study abroad?  Just kind of switching gears, back to Smith talk.
MOE:	Yeah, I didn't.  Partly (pause) — Mostly because I realized that I could accelerate by a year.  I had kind of been planning to double-major, either in comp lit or Italian and music, and so I had just kind of been taking a lot of extra classes.  I had also been taking extra lessons outside the music major, and so I realized, halfway through my first semester sophomore year, that I had a lot more credits than I needed to have at that point.  And so I decided that rather than going JYA, I would try to accelerate, so I graduated in three years and saved a lot of money.  (laughter)
KRAUS:	I bet you did.  That's a good thing to be able to do.  So, I mean, what — in terms — I mean, besides your house and besides the general support system you felt from Smith, I mean, faculty, your advisors, was there anyone who pushed you or who helped you kind of realize your — the academic path you were going to take, or –
MOE:	I want to say almost every professor I had, in some way or another, did that.  I took mostly classes that either had really small sections or that were just small classes, and I felt that I really got to know a lot of my professors really well.  I don't know that I could actually single any one person out, but I felt that all the faculty were really an amazing resource and incredibly receptive during office hours, and even outside office hours, to provide advice and guidance, both academically and personally.
KRAUS:	Great.  So, you graduated a year earlier than you thought you would: what, at that point, was kind of your goal?  I mean, if you — you had been on a pretty focused path, I guess, to have been able to kind of get everything together and graduate early.  So, what — I mean, what were your plans when you graduated?  What did you do that summer?
MOE:	I did a summer program in Italy for opera studies, and then I went to do a master's at a conservatory in New York. So I think I pretty much knew, even when I was coming into Smith, that I wanted to be a singer, and that was sort of always the focus and I wanted to kind of snatch up as much of other disciplines as possible, but that was always kind of the goal that I was working towards.  And I don't think that really changed at Smith, but I think having come here changed the way that I approached performance and how that fits into the rest of my life, in a really healthy way.  I think performers tend to get overly-focused, sometimes, and have a tendency to make sacrifices in quality of life that many end up regretting, and I think my Smith experience kind of kept me grounded in a different way.  In some ways it probably slowed down the trajectory a little bit because I was willing to try other things, but ultimately, I'm really, really glad that I did that.
KRAUS:	So, I mean, you obviously could have — I mean, if that was a focus early on, you could have easily gone to a conservatory or gone to a school that was primarily focused on music, and so did you want, like, a more well rounded experience?
MOE:	I did, and also, Smith's music department is extraordinary for a school this size.  I think they've cut some positions since, so (laughter) I'm not really sure exactly where that stands right now.  I mean, it's just — there are cuts everywhere, so I understand that.  But that was really the reason that Smith was actually the only liberal arts school that I applied to that wasn't a conservatory or a very focused program, and it was because the resources and the music department are so phenomenal.  And the performance library is really, really incredible.
KRAUS:	So, I mean, how has that served you outside of Smith?  You know, going on to pursue a career or to do graduate work, how have you been received maybe differently because you've gone to Smith, or is that something that people recognize?
MOE:	It is.  And not so much specifically in performance circles, but it has helped me with other work.  Occasionally, it's helped me with casting directors and directors, less than with singers or other musicians.  (pause)  It kind of comes with an assumption that you're willing to work hard, and that at least at a very basic level, you know what you're doing.  (laughter)  Which has definitely, definitely helped.  I can remember two separate occasions where someone who had not gone to Smith more or less offered me a position because they knew that I had gone here.  So, basically just on reputation, and that's a worthwhile thing to have.  (laughter)
KRAUS:	Definitely.  So, I mean, just for — in terms of yourself and maybe your own self-confidence or your own belief in your ability to do things, how has Smith affected your life on a personal level?
MOE:	I think as someone (pause) socialized in a culture that likes to see women succeed but without being aggressive, (laughter) it has helped me temper the instinct to apologize when you do something well or when you do something better than somebody else, or to play down achievements in order to make yourself more comfortable in a situation.  There's a certain ability to move through the world, understanding that you earn what you get.  Obviously, there are a lot of things out of your control.  (pause)  I'm having trouble pinpointing it, but there's something about a quiet confidence that I think Smith has had a lot to do with.  But I think the downside of that is sort of similar to the LGBT issues, that because you can take it for granted here, sometimes it can be very jarring the first couple of years that you're out, that you kind of don't really expect what you might get.
KRAUS:	Right.  And so, it's my understanding that you're still in a relationship with someone that you were — that you met at Smith?  Is that true?
MOE:	Yes.  Yes.
KRAUS:	So, how has that played out in your life?  I mean, how has that shared experience, that relationship, has that been a support system for you, has that been, you know, something that you look at maybe that never would have happened if you hadn't been here?  Like, what has that become after Smith?
MOE:	It's hard to say.  I mean, it's definitely been an anchor.  I don't know how to answer that, actually.  It's — I mean, it's obviously been very important.  (pause)  And I think, again, having the support system of Smith itself and lifelong friends from Smith has helped tremendously through the times that it's been really difficult.  And again, with that sort of very basic knowledge that it can be done and — it sounds silly to say this out loud, but that there's nothing wrong with it, (laughter) not everybody can take that for granted.  And that's been invaluable.  But beyond that, it's hard to say exactly where all of that fits in.  It was just — I don't know, just how things turned out, I guess.  (laughter)
KRAUS:	So, what does it mean for you two to come back this weekend and be back at Smith together, and kind of be experiencing all these traditions and seeing younger women?
MOE:	It's a lot of fun, and it's nostalgic, in a lot of ways.  And I — I mean, I feel it this weekend, but I was also here in early September this year, and that had been the first time that I had been here for several years, and it was amazing to walk around campus and see people that I felt I recognized.  I mean, people that I could really identify with; people that looked or behaved like my friends when we were here.  I mean, it's sort of like — it's kind of like meeting yourself ten years ago.  (laughter)  And I think that I do sometimes have the impulse to, you know, walk up to somebody and say, "It's going to be really hard but it's going to be OK."  (laughter)  You know?
KRAUS:	Yeah.  So, I mean, on that note, what — I think we're almost out of time, so to close, what could you offer to current Smithies or future Smithies who might share in any of the experiences or struggles or joys that you had while you were here?
MOE:	Take advantage of everything: go see as much as you can, meet as many new people as you can, take your professors seriously, take their time really seriously because even that extra ten minutes that they're meeting with you when it's not office hours is when they could be grading or they could be working on their own stuff, and they're making that time for you.  (end of audio file I)  And that's something that you won't get at a lot of other places.  And it takes time to realize how much they're really giving you, and I think it's almost taken me ten years to realize that.  But I still have moments in my own work where I remember something somebody told me, as criticism of a paper I wrote in a Renaissance music class, or things that come back to me and I'm only really realizing now how much of a gift that was.
KRAUS:	Great.  OK, well, thank you very much for sharing.
MOE:	Thank you.
KRAUS:	I really appreciate it.  Disconnect you here.
MOE:	Yes.
