

ANDREANI: 	This is Vivian Andreani and I'm conducting interview with Brenda Lewis on May 25, 2012 for the Smith College Alumnae Oral History Project.  Thank you for agreeing to be here.
LEWIS:	Thank you.
ANDREANI:	When you were talking to Kelly Anderson, you said that your class was the last traditional class at Smith College.  Will you talk a little bit more about that?
LEWIS:	Yes.  When we entered Smith in 1963, we had distribution requirements.  And our freshman year we actually took classes that lasted throughout the entire year.  They changed that, I want to think, perhaps very quickly thereafter, either in our sophomore or junior year where almost all classes were semester long.  And also the distribution requirements were rather quickly dismissed.  Those would have required us, if I recall, to take a science, a social science, I remember taking a full year of English -- English 11.  I took that with Mr. Van Doren.  It was quite -- not the game show host, but his brother, and we read such classics as parts of the Bible and Shakespeare, it was quite interesting.  However, for my paper, as I was a sailing aficionado, I wrote a paper on the aerodynamics of sailing, which he did give me an A on, although he confessed that he was left hanging by the content, some of which was fairly technical, but of course it was an exercise on structure and -- as well as on content as well, how to organize and so forth, so that kind of basic program was part of the distribution requirement intent.
ANDREANI:	And was that still valid for you for the rest of your Smith career?
LEWIS:	No, no, as I recall once you met your distribution requirements, you were completely free to, you know, select your major.  I mean there was -- there were a certain number of courses you had to take in your major and so forth, but there -- once you had complied with those distribution requirements, it was just -- you know, it was over.
ANDREANI:	Was there anything else that was changing on campus that makes you say that about traditions?
LEWIS:	Yes, actually when we came the library closed at quarter of 10, and a number of us sat in the library one night to protest the short hours and -- at John M. Greene because we always had a -- I believe it was a Wednesday chapel, President Mendenhall issued his famous statement that "patience, politeness and persistence" would get you anything, and he basically said that there was going to be a committee of faculty and some of the student body to determine whether or not this could be achieved in the interim, it was a disservice to the staff who were hardworking and had already spent a full working day to have sat in at the library, so we were encouraged but chastised at the same time.  So that was another thing, and we did eventually get the library hours extended.
The other thing that was quite different, we lived in houses where everybody stayed.  There was no turnover whatever unless somebody had an illness and had to leave for family reasons or transfer away.  There was a stigma in changing houses back then, and of course, we ate in our houses.  We had white napkins -- you remember the little white napkin holders, probably, that you've seen outside some of the dining rooms made of wood.  We had linen napkins we had to make sure they were used properly for a week, as I remember.  We all waited on table, we had a cycle.  We had to wear a skirt to dinner, and I have not worn a grey flannel skirt since, since my dinner skirt was a grey flannel skirt, but it was -- let's see, and we also -- we had Friday tea.  I don't know if you guys still have that.  I think that tradition has come forward.
The other thing was we sat watches or bells up to midnight.  The houses were locked at midnight.  But we had -- that was part of our obligation as part of the, you know, membership in the house.  It was unpaid, obviously.  Just -- we all -- there was a schedule and when you were on watch, you had to show up on time and you had to be there for your watch and you had to greet visitors and announce visitors and rather quickly, I think it was two years after we graduated, so maybe '69 or something like that, they did away with watches and locked the houses outside doors and you can check the date on that, but that's my recollection.  The difference is that when the houses -- when we had someone on watch and the door was, you know always "guarded," if you want to think of it -- we didn't lock our rooms.  Our rooms were -- our doors were always open unless somebody was studying for a final or something, but those -- that was very different.  And as I say, my recollection is within a couple of years that was pretty much gone.  And as you know, rather shortly, you know sort of five years later, you know, Kent State and all of that had dramatically changed things.  So I think of our class as kind of on just the last of those traditional classes.  That's why I made that comment to Kelly.

ANDREANI:	So did you feel safe at Smith?
LEWIS:     	Than when?
ANDREANI:	Well, just in general.  Did you feel like this was a -- like you mentioned that your doors were unlocked and everything -- was that a safe space?
LEWIS:	I never worried about my safety at Smith.  Not ever.  There was -- I mean they told you not to -- I think we weren’t allowed to walk down by Paradise Pond, you know, where it went over by the mental institution, but apart from that -- we had a thing called in loco parentis -- meaning in place of parents.  So the college administration functioned in place of parents, and there was a rule book.  You had to memorize. You took a test on it.  There were some really funny rules.  One of them was I think you couldn't go riding in an airplane -- I don't know about that.  I did that though -- a private airplane.  You couldn't swim in the Connecticut River.  I think that was polluted at the time.  You had -- we had six weekends a year that we were allowed to be off campus and you had to sign a blue card which was required to put -- you had to put down where you are staying and a contact phone number, so no hanky-panky.  And -- oh, you couldn't stay any place within I think it's a 30 mile radius of the campus.  So no -- you know, motel nights, I guess that's what it was designed to prevent.
Anyway so it was very structured, as I say, and that whole policy of in loco parentis was struck down, I believe, by the Supreme Court rather quickly after we -- I think it was within a year or two.  So that was another big change that came to the college rather quickly after we were here.  The other big difference was tuition.  I don't know if my classmate told you, but I remember them telling us that we would not have an increase in tuition beyond the $3250 for tuition and room and board that we paid, I think it was -- that was our freshman year tuition.
And I remember graduating and I had a $900 loan which was -- you know, considering what kids graduate with today is just sort of stunning.  Of course, it was all in different dollars with inflation and so forth, but it was very different because the scale relative to a parent's income of what the tuition, room and board was very modest in terms of discretionary, after-tax income.  That is not the case today, as you well know.  So that was another big sort of element, although at the time we weren't -- you know, we weren't thinking of it that way.  I don't think any of us thought of it that way.  You couldn't have a job off campus.  I don't know if that's the case today.  There were campus jobs, so you could run the dishwasher in the house.
The very big difference for us in terms of living in the house continuously was that sense of being part of a family and we got a lot of counsel and, you know, made a lot of cross class friendships in the house.  Today -- when we come back for reunion, you know, there is a lot of house spirit and I don't know if that will be the same for classes, coming along, but that's certainly those traditional classes that were before us and ourselves.

ANDREANI:	So what class were you in?
LEWIS:	I was 1967.  That was my graduating --
ANDREANI:	Sorry, house I mean.
LEWIS:	I was in Jordan.
ANDREANI:	Jordan house?
LEWIS:	Yeah, in the quad.  And a kind of fun story, I had chosen Jordan.  I was admitted early and the way it was set up is that if you are admitted under early admission back then, of course you pledged that you would attend Smith and you had to withdraw applications at other places.  But the plus side was you usually got your first choice house.  And I had wanted to be in the quad, and I chose Jordan because it was the closest house to campus in the quad, but it turned out to be a great, great house.  We were known as the Jordan Jocks.  There were a lot of really fine athletes in our group.  Of course, we didn't to inter-school athletics then.  We did a lot of intermural and inter-house athletics.  It was a lot of fun.
RIDEOUT:	What made you decide to come to Smith?  Sports or -- ?
LEWIS:	Yeah, that's a really interesting story.  My mother is Janet Tuenisin Lewis, Smith '39, Phi Beta Kappa.  A pretty awesome lady, but I was at that stage in my life where I wanted to differentiate myself from my mother, obviously, that I guess every girl goes through that, or every boy probably too, and so I had made up my mind I wanted to be a Chemistry major and Mount Holyoke had just put in a fabulous new chemistry building, so I had gone to Wellesley.  I didn't really like the feel of it.  My mother had been a professor at Wellesley and she didn't like the idea that all of freshman lived together.  She thought the house system here at Smith was superb.  And so she had sort of -- I didn't like the feel of Wellesley.  It was very sterile.  And I don't know if you have been there, but it has a lot of pine trees and, you know, didn't seem quite as friendly somehow.  I hadn’t seen Smith at that point.  It just seemed very cold.  I had also gone to Vassar and I thought that was quite isolated, and I had decided against Radcliffe and Bryn Mawr and I should preface this by saying my father gave me the following choices for college.  I could go to any of the seven sisters I wanted to, and I could go to I believe it was Swathmore, Middlebury because my mother had done a degree there and one other which escapes me.  Some friend of his had had a child who had successfully gone to -- so you know, three coed schools and the seven sisters.  And I didn't want an urban school, so anyway I'm down to Mount Holyoke because of the chemistry lab.  I go to have my interview, and I basically ran the interview and I was shocked by that.  In other words, I asked all the questions and then I had a tour and the guide was not well groomed particularly and not very articulate, and I remember coming back to my home, sitting on the living room rug and saying to my parents, "I cannot go there for four years."
And my mother who had never pushed Smith, ever, she was so shrewd it about it.  She said, "Oh please, won't you just go and look around Smith."  So sure enough we set up an interview, I came up here, I absolutely fell in love with the campus.  I had a wonderful Gold Key guide.  I had a wonderful interview with, I think it was Jane Seymour at the time and I applied early.  So that's how I got to Smith.  Anyway I'm sure there are a lot of fun stories like that.

ANDREANI:	Yeah.  So how would you describe a typical Smithie during your time here?
LEWIS:	I don't know that you could ever put anyone in our class in the category of typical.  We are a rather extraordinary class and have been throughout our years.  We think of ourselves -- several of our reunions we have had a theme of a tapestry with the diversity of backgrounds and interests comparable to what a rich tapestry would be.  My thought is that we had a pretty good geographic distribution.  There were women from the west and south and Midwest and, yeah, predominantly New England I would say overall in our class, but -- or the Mid-Atlantic at least, sort of New York, New England, New Jersey.
We had, of course, not nearly the number of international students that Smith has today, that was one very different characteristic to our class.  I can't remember any international student in Jordan house.  But -- and we had very few women of color in our class.  We had a couple.  But not, you know, nearly in the numbers represented in the population, so in that sense we were probably prototypical of other colleges in the Ivy's and the Seven Sisters at this time in the '60s.  I don't think we were different greatly or in any way distinguished from the others, and as you know, the integration of the -- I mean when I say integration I mean active recruitment of women of color came rather quickly.  I can remember being in New York working in 1969 and supporting an initiative to bring young women to the campus early for orientation from backgrounds where they needed tutorial, you know, support in order to do the work here.

ANDREANI:	At that time when you were at Smith, could you feel that it was a transitional period for Smith or --
LEWIS:	No, we didn't -- I don't think -- except for the in loco parentis which people had talked about, we weren't the -- and I did speak about the sit-in in the library, we were pretty polite, I would say.  Patient?  Well, probably more so than folks are today, but the other thing that happened in this was at our graduation, as you know the Vietnam War was being escalated and Nicholas Katzenbach who has recently passed away was our graduation speaker, and some of us wore black armbands in protest.  That was about as, "militant" as we got.
I mean -- our class did a lot of things that you would think of today as feminist or pioneering.  There are many women in my class or people who were first this and first that, but I don't think any of us thought of ourselves as feminists in that sense.  I mean, you know, Gloria Steinem at that point everybody knew about Gloria Steinem, but I don't think we thought of ourselves as feminist particularly.  I myself was the first woman to sit in the boardroom of Pechiney Ugine Kuhlmann in 100 years.  That was at the time one of the largest corporations outside the United States, a 25 billion dollar company.
I was the first woman to represent Exxon at an international conference.  I was one of 30 professional women out of 150,000 employees at ESSO -- it was ESSO International then, not Exxon, but you know, same company.  So yeah, I mean we -- we took some leadership roles, but we didn't think of ourselves as feminists particularly.  I don't think the self-awareness maybe was there, in spite of the fact, you know, most of us had read Betty Friedan and -- as I say, we're certainly aware of Gloria Steinem who wasn't that far ahead of us.
ANDREANI:	I was about to ask you about Betty Friedan, so were there any discussions about gender at all or nothing on campus?
LEWIS:	Vassar became co-ed very quickly after we graduated.  Again, I'm a little fuzzy on the exact date.  But it was all being discussed.  It was in the offing.  I had a friend whose mother was on the board of trustees at Vassar so I sort of heard a back channel discussion of that, and I had a very good friend who was at Vassar and we were dating guys at Yale, so I would hear from her about what was happening at Vassar in terms of discussions on co-education.  I personally felt strongly that at Smith all the leadership roles are taken by women and I didn't feel any great need for co-education here.  Like a lot -- and especially with my own mother, you know, looking back, and many of us were legacies in the class of '67.  Looking back at that, you know, long history of women and leadership roles, I didn't feel the need for Smith to be co-ed.  I still don't.  Haven't changed my mind.
ANDREANI:	What about the civil rights movement?  Were there any discussions of that on campus?
LEWIS:	There were.  I would say again you know, very civilized discussion.  I mean no strikes or things like that.  I mean there was a great deal of discussion that many people were particularly thinking about women in the south and their concerns.  I think there was a lot of tolerance here because, again, we lived in the house.  We did not move from the houses.  You went into the dinner table and you didn't know who you were going to sit with.  Maybe it was someone that you never cared if you ever saw after Smith, but you had a tolerant civilized discussion of whatever came up.  It was sort of a hallmark of this institution and I think that ran the gamut, whether it was politics or the war or the civil rights movement.  I mean I'm not saying there weren't probably people who were more active in the civil rights movement that came out of Smith in my class.  I don't know that.  But as far as on campus activities, we were aware of it but there wasn't a lot of strike here or demonstrations.  We did have some very fine speakers.  We had -- often had speaker series where a topic would be addressed by a series of speakers, so you would have Pro and Con and then people who were nonprofit or profit, that sort of thing.
ANDREANI:	So what were some of the topics discussed?
LEWIS:	One of the ones that -- actually it wasn't -- I'm not even thinking of the speaker series as much, but I'll tell you one of the things that I really thought was wonderful and that was the exposure to a lot of foreign films we had.  I don't know if you have ever seen Sophia Loren in Two Women. This is a classic, classic film.  I mean it's pretty gritty.  It's about rape in a wartime situation and the visual imagery is very scary.  It's done in black and white.  I saw that at Smith and it really raised my awareness of violence towards women.  I think, you know, we were probably a relatively sheltered group of women as we came into Smith, and we had grown up in the 50s and the early 60s, and those were, you know, very sort of years of growth and yes the Cold War and all of that.  I mean we were the ones that hit under our desks when the Cuban missile crisis was around, so it isn't that we didn't have bumped into our childhood, but it was back when most of our mothers were homemakers and volunteers so you would have whole communities have women with young children at home during the day and then dad would come home at night.  We ate together as families.  My mother waited dinner for my father to come home from the office and we all ate together.  That was a hallmark of my own upbringing, and so Smith was very, you know, segway, you know, almost no bump in the road there because I'm eating with my classmates and housemates every night together, and that dinner hour was sacrosanct.  So that was one thing.
ANDREANI:	Your mother was a Smithie and then your sister was one as well?
LEWIS:	Yes.  It's interesting because my mother attended Smith at a time when she was a Spanish major and she would have gone to Madrid for her junior year, but the Spanish Civil War was on, so she ended up going to Mexico, which was, you know, considered a third world nation back then.  I mean the electricity was on half the time in Mexico City for people with, you know, odd numbered licenses or -- I don't know how they did it, but half the city had electricity half of the time kind of thing, and they -- so that she had this great sort of adventure which was quite different from what a young woman would have had in Madrid had she -- you know, there not been a Spanish Civil War on.
This was -- also -- one of the other things that she told me, and she's still alive incidentally.  She's 94.  She lives in Wooster in the house I grew up in on her own, cooks for herself, does her books.  I mean I do check everything, but I'm not there every 18 days.  But she's truly a marvel and she told me a story, and this is kind of an interesting story about the hurricane of 1938 when she was on campus.  She lived in Lawrence house, and the eye of the storm passed right over Northampton and of course nobody knew very much about hurricanes than, all -- a bunch of the girls walked out, down to the river, you know where Sage is now, and there were at the time on Green Street a great canopy of elm trees and so they saw the wind picking up and it started to rain again, so they came back to Lawrence house and when they looked back these great elm trees were falling like match sticks because the wind of course and the hurricane comes from the opposite direction once the eye passes over and the root balls of the trees had been so soaked by the rain that it was just like -- and she said the idea of watching these silent giants crash where they had just been.  So I remember her telling me that story.
And my dad was very proud of the fact that she went to Smith.  She sold, as many women in the Smith clubs do, pecans for benefit for the scholarship fund and I will never forget one time, you know I was home -- this was obviously before I was at school, or maybe I was home on vacation, I don't know.  He said when my mother sat down at the telephone to make her orders for pecans, "Watch this Smith girl in action."  So that was kind of cute.
RIDEOUT:	We have about five minutes left.  How about a summary of what she's done since Smith --
ANDREANI:	Yes, can you give a --
LEWIS:	After Smith?
ANDREANI:	Yes, what has your life been like.
LEWIS:	Right.  I wrote my thesis on global shipping and I was recruited by Exxon, then it was ESSO International to be part of their international department as a result of that.  They had the largest private tanker fleet in the world at the time so it was a pretty good fit.  However, I will tell you that when I interviewed for jobs in other places, I interviewed at two banks.  One was JP Morgan in the pension department, a classmate of mine did accept that job, and another was with Banker's Trust and I had two European languages, so at the time Banker's Trust -- "We don't hire women for the international division," that's a direct quote.  JP Morgan told me I would have to wait at least two years to be part of the officer training program. Oh, and Merrill Lynch I had to go to Amherst to interview, and here's the direct quote, "Oh, you're young, pretty and a woman, we can't use you," for a brokerage job.
So that's the -- I can tell you -- it was a no brainer to take the job with Exxon where they were actively recruiting me, and I had been told that I was the highest paid graduate in my class.  I know there was a higher offer, but that woman when to Harvard Business School, so that was pretty interesting and it was big time industrial.  It was not commercial, it wasn't consumer, it was industrial marketing and working on the IT side with systems.  So from there I spent six years in the guts of the international oil business.  I then took a year off and went in a camping bus around Europe.  I came back and ten days later I had a job with a company I had met through Exxon in software for the international shipping business.
So I went from the biggest company in the world to arguably one of the smallest, you know, under a million dollars in revenue, a start up.  It was really exciting.  And eventually there was a squabble with the main client, which was Mobil Oil between their -- internal to Mobil -- between the business unit and the IT department about the computer we were using, so the project was terminated and half of us were laid off and there were tears -- you know because when you work in a start up, it's such a tight knit group.

ANDREANI:	(Inaudible) Early computer --
LEWIS:	But everybody understood that it --
ANDREANI:	-- early computer days.
LEWIS:	Yeah, this was software for international shipping, as I said.  So anyway, I was then out of work for a year, and I ended up going as a -- the direct of market research with an aluminum company which was fully integrated from smelting the aluminum to rolling it and extruding it, which is the interim step and then finished products, and this company was a subsidiary of Pechiney Ugine Kuhlmann which was one of the largest companies outside the United States, based in Paris.  I was the most senior officer who spoke fluent French, so I represented the company in the boardroom for the budget negotiations, which was pretty heady, and I had hoped to be transferred to Paris, but Jacques (sic) Mitterrand came to power in -- what's his name, Jacques or is it Francois?  I'm not sure, anyway, Mitterrand, came to power in the Fall of 1980 and the Assemble Nationale nationalized Pechiney because they had been so outspoken, they were not publicly owned in any way, it was all private shareholders and as a result, Howmet Aluminum which was the subsidiary for which I worked was sold for half book value in the middle of the '81/'82 recession to our arch competitor and every one of us in the corporate staff was laid off.
So at that point I started my own business.  And I'm still doing that.  I've been in business 30 plus years.  I launch mission critical startups.  So you take the two guys in the garage with intellectual property, a good idea and some management skills and we build a business around them.  We do the research for demand, the positioning, we do competitive frame, we do a business plan and a revenue model for them, and then raise the Series A, that is the first round of institutional funding to take them to their launch.  And we've launched 18 companies in 30 years.  The focus is mobile which is a pretty hot area right now.  It makes me look great for having chosen it, but it wasn't always that great.  You know, it's just because when I was at Exxon, I had worked on a team launching the first global interactive positioning and vessel communication system in the world.  So there's another first.  You know, you -- as I've said, this is all background stuff –

ANDREANI:	(Inaudible)
LEWIS:	-- you didn't think of it as being breakthrough.  It was just what you were doing at the time.  But that was how I got hooked on wireless was back in Exxon days with satellite, and now it's funny -- right now it's coming full circle.  We're getting more and more satellite applications integrated with cellular and mobile IP.  So you know, you never know where you're -- I mean if anybody had asked me when I started my business would I launch a business in China, I would have laughed at their face.  But I've launched two, and I've just -- you know, I've been very lucky and I attribute my ability to continue in tough times in the business as an entrepreneur to -- I'm a multi-tasker, but I also think, the confidence that I gained early on at Smith and my willingness to adapt and learn new things, those are all qualities of Smith women, as you well know.  So anyway --
ANDREANI::	Thank you very much for talking to us.
LEWIS:	Oh, thank you.
