

REES:	So this is Carolyn Rees and I am here with Lisa Laskin on May 17, 2013 for the Smith College Alumnae Oral History Project.  So could you have her state her name too?
LASKIN:	Lisa Lauterbach Laskin.
REES:	Okay, thank you.  So thank you for agreeing to be a part of this.
LASKIN:	Sure.
REES:	We'll start off by why did you choose to attend reunion this year?
LASKIN:	Oh, I would never miss a reunion.  I've been to every one and I love reunions.  I have a great time.  It's great to see everybody and it's great to come to campus.  It's just -- I've been involved in alumnae activities for awhile.  I find coming to Smith is like a spa weekend for me in a way, even with the bare bones dorm room.
REES:	So how did you end up at Smith?
LASKIN:	Well, my mom went to Smith.  She was Class of '57 and so there was a certain amount of Smith salesmanship when I was growing up, but you know, I applied widely to colleges and I think like a lot of people in my class, Smith was the best school I got into, but it was also for me -- I moved around a lot growing up and so coming -- Smith was something I knew about from the beginning, so there was really a sense of coming home.
REES:	Hmm.
LASKIN:	So it really -- it had a place in my sort of mind as a place that I already knew about and I already felt comfortable with.
REES:	So what was it like to finally arrive?  What was your first encounter with Smith?
LASKIN:	Well, it's funny.  We came to visit when I was a senior in high school, and we did the traditional college tour, you know, seven schools in three days, up and down New England.  I was living in Cincinnati at the time.  And it poured rain the entire trip.  Poured through Skidmore, through Vassar.  It was a deluge at Yale.  Pouring, we get to Northampton.  We wake up in the morning, the sun is out, the birds are singing, the leaves are colorful and my mother just looks like the cat who ate the canary.  It was like she planned it.  So it was beautiful and very, very different from what I thought it was because what I thought it was my mom’s year books of 1950s.  So a very different place, more diverse.  More -- in a way -- more energetic although I don't know that that's a fair comparison.
REES:	Did you only apply to women's schools?
LASKIN:	No, I think Smith was the only women's college I applied to.
REES:	Did that play a factor in you choosing to attend?
LASKIN:	Not at all.
REES:	It was just Smith?
LASKIN:	Yeah.
REES:	So what were your expectations at Smith before arriving?
LASKIN:	Well, as I said, my expectations were very much based on what my mom’s year books that look like.  So I had this sort of traditional women's college of the 1950s image.  It was all black and white in my head.  So I knew I was in for an intellectual experience, but I don't think I was prepared for the sort of social energy -- not -- I was not prepared in a bad way, I just -- that wasn't something that had occurred to me about how different that would be.
REES:	Right.  Right.  What house did you live in?
LASKIN:	Wilson house.
REES:	Did you live there all for years?
LASKIN:	All four years.
REES:	And what was the house community of Wilson like?
LASKIN:	It was very, very tight with my group there.  We all lived there all four years.  A few people came in.  I don't think anybody left except for junior year, and not even that many did that.  It was so tight, I think, and such a big group that by our senior year it was little bit untenable in a way.  So since then, we come back for reunions but we get together in smaller groups in between.
REES:	How did the Smith community affect your overall Smith experience?
LASKIN:	I would say that the house community affected my experience very, very strongly.  I stayed in the house all four years.  I remained very close friends, my best friends are my Wilson house friends.  And I just was reflecting when I arrived at King this morning at our headquarters, I have never been to King house.  It's next door, and I've never been to King house.  So I think it was a huge, huge influence was having that support group in the house on my experience.  Although it was funny, when I got the assignment before I came to Smith, I said to my -- my mother was in Wilson, and I said I got this assignment.  It says I'm in room G.  She said, "Room G?  I think that's in the maid's quarters," in this horrible tone like I was going to be -- she said those are singles -- like I was going to be this social outcast or something.  And I wasn't.  We were all freshman in the maid's quarters.  We all got along really well and it was terrific, but it was funny -- her view of what my experience would be was different than what it actually was.
REES:	Yeah, that’s interesting.  So what are some of your favorites with traditions?
LASKIN:	Well, I -- in terms of favorite Smith traditions, I still tell my office that we should celebrate Mountain Day.  When we get the e-mail saying it's Mountain Day, I tell everybody we should be leaving the office, but nobody seems to go along with that one so I love Mountain Day.  I love the whole idea of it, the spontaneity of it.  In Wilson house they always would ring the bells and so we felt privileged to be the first to know about Mountain Day.  I'm a lifelong tea drinker and still think with great fondness on those teas, and love when I come back for alumni events that there is always a tea involved.  I remember our senior banquet, the senior banquet every year being a huge, hugely important thing at the time.  And still have great memories of it.  I'm trying to think of what were some of my other -- well, we had Thursday night candlelight dinner, which was always fun.  At that time we all ate in the houses in our own houses so that was a, I think unique experience in colleges and really a wonderful one.  And again, contributed to that sense of house bonding that we all have.
REES:	Were you involved with any extracurriculars?
LASKIN:	I was involved with student government.
REES:	And what did you study?
LASKIN:	I was a history major.
REES:	Okay, how did you decide to be a history major?
LASKIN:	Well, I was going to be a theater major when I came here and took a couple classes, had the classic crisis of confidence, don't know what I -- this just doesn't feel right but I don't know what else to do, and thought well, I've always liked history and I had lived abroad for a few years growing up so had been exposed to history in some different ways through that experience and so I chose history as my major, modern European history.
REES:	Did you have any favorite professors or mentors?
LASKIN:	Oh, Klements Von Klemperor.  You probably hear that from everybody who comes in here.  KVK was just -- he is the reason I went on to study history in graduate school.  He was just so inspiring as a human being.  I think he is the one who stands out the most.  Oh, I also had Alfonzo Procachini (ph.) Italian who was fabulous and Giovanna Vilacea (ph.) and they were very -- I ended up taking three years of Italian because I liked them so much.  I think those are the ones who really stuck out.  KVK was really, you know, the giant among professors for me.
REES:	Yeah, that's what I've heard.  Did you study abroad?
LASKIN:	I did not.
REES:	You did not.
LASKIN:	I find that as -- I regret that decision, but I had lived abroad for six years when I was growing up and my dad basically said, do you really need to go abroad again in college?  And I didn't really have a compelling reason to do it, so I didn't, and I wish I had.  Ironically I work helping to develop study abroad programs now, so I wish even more that I'd had that experience.
REES:	Yeah.  So how would you describe the typical Smithie during your time here?  It really was not what your mother’s experience was.
LASKIN:	No, no.  Well, I think Smithies during my time were very smart as they always are, and continue to be.  Smithies were very engaged.  Everybody had their thing they were passionate about, whether it was Glee Club or student government or occupying college hall in protest of the endowment investment policies, people had their thing they felt passionate about and that's something that endures to this day.  Everybody had an opinion on everything and it's kind of exhausting, but it's great, it's terrific.  I think the other thing is that Smithies talk -- you guys probably know this -- they just talk all the time.  All the time.  I got on a bus once for an alumni thing here.  We were staying down at the hotel in town and the shuttle driver said -- we get on the bus and everybody is happy away and it's getting louder and louder and he's just rolling his eyes at the volume of women talking on bus and these are women who aren't even classmates, they are just on some board together something so -- so talkative, that would be another way to describe us.
REES:	Thank you.  Did you notice changes in the campus atmosphere over the four years that you were here?  Or how did the campus change during your four years?
LASKIN:	That is an interesting question.  I feel in a way that I was too close to notice a great change.  I certainly now -- when I came in it was during the Reagan era, and there was still a fairly strong contingent of political conservatives on campus, and I don't see that now, which is probably not the best thing in the long run, even though I myself don't follow those politics anymore, I would like to see a little bit more of that now.  So I don't know if that was changing while I was here, that might have been happening and I just wasn't aware of it, but it's hard for me to say that I saw changes.  We did have a big change when Jill Conway retired and Mary Dunn came in in our sophomore year, so that was a big change for our group, although I don't know that it affected our day-to-day experience really.
REES:	And how did you feel about President Dunn?
LASKIN:	I didn't really know her.  In retrospect I did my graduate work as a historian and I have great respect for her in that field.  But I -- oh, Mrs. Dunn, President Dunn, but I didn't -- I didn't really know her as president and I wasn't active at an alumnae level at the time that -- where I had much engagement was a really, so I can't say that I felt strongly about her one way or the other.
REES:	Did you see any like regulations or traditions change on campus during your time here?
LASKIN:	I don't -- I don't think I saw anything change in terms of regulations.  We were already allowed to have men in the dorms, you know, that was the big change that will preceded us, but I don't believe that I saw anything huge change in terms of relations or traditions while I was here.  Things have since then.
REES:	Right.  Right.  So tell me what are the challenges of being a Smithie?
LASKIN:	The challenges of being a Smithie are getting your voice heard when they are all talking around you.  I think -- I really love being a Smithie because I love being associated with this institution and I love being able to say to people well, at Smith they are doing such and such.  I work at Harvard and it's a very different place and so I can say at Smith they do such and such and it's much better and my colleagues now roll their eyes because they know I'm going to come out about that, but I think one of the challenges of being a Smithie is -- for some of us on account myself as the perception versus what we see it as -- versus our self perception.  You know, I have an enormous group of very accomplished friends, sometimes I don't feel I fit in with that group.  You know, my path may have been a little bit different from somebody else's path, and so there is constantly a sense of them in measuring up.  Am I really being a Smithie about this?  Am I making the Smithie decision?  Am I feeling confident in my decisions, and I don't -- I do question that sometimes, so do I really fit in with the perception of a Smithie.  Is my self-perception aligned with the way people see Smithies?  So I think that is probably the challenge of the Smithie is that some -- probably all of us harbor inside, wow, everybody else is so amazing and I'm just, you know, putzing along.  So that would be a challenge.
REES:	Let's see.  So do you remember any campus-wide issues around issues of like religion or race or class or sexuality when you were here?
LASKIN:	Well, when I came -- when I came in the mid-80s, I think sexuality was really sort of just beginning to really burst out, and that was probably from my mother bringing me up here.  The biggest shocker is there are a lot of women holding hands on campus and to her credit, she got through that.  But I think we were in a period of just becoming more comfortable with people of all approaches and Smith was a good place to be in that respect.  Politically there would be issues around investment from companies doing business in South Africa at the time.  That was the big one that I remember.  I don't think we -- God, I hope I'm not forgetting, I don't think we had any racial incidents on campus when I was here.  None stick out, but I will say my group in Wilson house was not a particularly diverse group.  We weren't diverse sexually, racially, I'm not sure that we were even particularly diverse from a religious perspective, so I -- I do like to see that change on campus now that I think is terrific.
REES:	Did you notice a change and diversity among like the student body or faculty during your four years here?  Was there --
LASKIN:	I didn't see it.  Again, I think I was so in -- and it's funny, because I was involved with student government and you would think that that was -- would give you a little more meta-level to see changes in the student body, but I didn't -- it doesn't strike me as something -- now I see it enormously.
REES:	And so during the past few days we've been researching things that happened during your time there.
LASKIN:	You probably remember more than I do.
REES:	And so I was wondering if you were aware and or were a participant in the sit in in college hall during 1986?
LASKIN:	Very much aware of it.  A close friend of mine was involved in it but I was not involved in it.  I think we sat around thinking about and talking about it, but she was the only one of our group and she came from a politically more liberal background than most of us did and she felt very comfortable and confident in her positions, and I think in retrospect I certainly feel like I barely understood what the issue even was and didn't feel qualified to even have an opinion on it at the time, so -- very much aware of the divestment issues, but not participating in the protests around them.
REES:	Let's see.  There's so many questions.  Well, what difference has your Smith education made in your life?
LASKIN:	Boy that's --
REES:	Oh, and mention -- you've mentioned (indiscernible) --
LASKIN:	Oh, sure.  So it's interesting.  My Smith education I sometimes feel in some respects I feel that my academic education here was kind of secondary almost to the friendship groups I made and the connection I still have with the college.  I was a history major.  After a few years working in fund-raising at Harvard I went to graduate school and got a Ph.D. in history, which seems to follow directly and does in a way although at Smith I studied modern European history.  My doctorate is in American history, so that was a big switch.  I will be honest and say that because I didn't focus on my academics as an undergraduate, I found the first couple years of graduate school incredibly hard.  I felt woefully underprepared and found myself thinking repeatedly God, why didn't I pay attention.
If I had only paid attention I would be in better shape for these classes.  I was a little older than the rest of my graduate cohort in graduate school so I -- they were coming right out of schools like Smith, very good schools, and they were very prepared for an academic career, and I really had not thought when I was an undergraduate about academics as a career, so I did get a PhD .in history, I did do some teaching, now I am the associate Dean of the summer school at Harvard where I work with the Dean to set the summer curriculum, choose courses, hire faculty, I also oversee the development of a number of our study abroad programs.  So in that respect -- with respect to the fact that I work in education, I would say Smith had an influence on that, but I don't -- other than being a very strong communicator in writing, I am not sure that my Smith education contributed directly to that, which is always something interesting to think about.
REES:	Would you say that the Smith experience more so has contributed to the --
LASKIN:	Oh yeah, yeah.  I mean my Smith experience was so positive.  That's why I'm here this weekend and why I come back every five years.  I wouldn't -- I wouldn't exchange it for anything, so.
REES:	Who have you become since Smith?  How have you changed from when you arrived, the first day?
LASKIN:	Well, I think I am certainly more confident in my own opinions and taking my own stands.  Coming in as a freshman was very much the child of my parents, as so many freshmen are, but I'm not -- I think today's students may come a little bit more independently formed intellectually and socially, and I really was following in my parents footsteps.  I was at Smith where my mother had been, and so I've developed my own views on things in a way that I didn't have when I came here, and certainly developed some confidence in my abilities to handle certain situations that I wouldn't have had when I came here for sure.
REES:	So what did you and your friends do on Mountain Day?
LASKIN:	What did we do on Mountain Day?  Well, I do remember one Mountain Day I think we went up to -- well, I remember going to the Ms. Florence Diner once on Mountain Day, and I remember hanging around Paradise Pond.  I remember sitting in the library one Mountain Day sad about something that I don't even remember. I think we had had some spat about something and in retrospect I can't even remember what it was, so it obviously wasn't that important.  But it was the idea -- it was the idea that somebody thought today is a good day to have off that we love very much, so -- I never did the trips to Boston or New York the way that other kids did.
REES:	So when you think back to your time at Smith are there particular stories are memories that always stand out more than others?
LASKIN:	I can't share some of them.
REES:	That seems to be the general --
LASKIN:	You hear that a lot from people?  Yeah.
REES:	Yeah.
LASKIN:	Oh gosh.  Particular things that stand out.  I remember our senior year we had a senior ball, which I think they still do and my parents had just moved back to Massachusetts and they came out and catered a little cocktail party.  It's a little emotional because my father is ill now, and so -- but all my friends brought their dates up to meet my dad.  My dad wore his tux.  He poured champagne for everybody.  My mother had made all this food and it was this lovely party, and it was sort of like my parents were kind of like the parents and meeting everybody and sending them off, so that's a very nice memory.
REES:	Yeah, it is.
LASKIN:	Thank you.  I should say that my dad -- my dad went to Dartmouth, really wanted me to go to Dartmouth.  I didn't get in.  He said a year later, “Smith was the right decision for you,” so --
REES:	Good, good.  So do you have any advice for current or future Smithies?
LASKIN:	Well, for future Smithies, they should make sure to choose Smith and come here.  I keep trying to tell -- I'm now reaching an age where we have friends with daughters who are coming of college age, and I am working very hard and none of them have taken my advice so far, but I'm trying very hard to recruit that way.  I think current Smithies should in a way not get too tied up in the idea of being the all successful Smithie.  Whatever they do is what they do.  We were just talking about this at lunch that the path is very meandering.  It's not a success path like that.  It goes up and down and up and down and you ended doing things you never had any idea.  I thought I was going to go into advertising when I graduated and here I am working in academics, totally different.  So I think really not getting hung up on the idea of everyone else is being successful and achieving and I'm not, so I'm not good enough, or I'm not enough of a smithy.  I don't fit in that way.  The path is so interesting and so varied for everybody that that -- people really need to keep that in mind.
REES:	Yeah, absolutely.  I think that's hard for some Smithies to do.
LASKIN:	It is.
REES:	Okay, do you have any -- anything else they want to talk about or any memories or stories you'd like to share?
LASKIN:	It's funny, here I am back and I'm trying a total blank.  No, I was struck moving into the maid's quarters that I was moving into the maid's quarters and I -- you have to stop me if I just told you guys this, but I think I just told it at lunch.  My mother was also in Wilson house.  I get to the maids -- and I get my housing assignment before freshman year --
REES:	Right.
LASKIN:	And I said -- did I say this already?
REES:	Yeah.
LASKIN:	Okay.  I'm sorry.  I've only been here two hours and I'm repeating myself already.
REES:	(Laughing)
LASKIN:	Anyway that was a very -- that was -- it was very weird going up there this afternoon, so -- anyway.  Gosh, I can't think of anything that stands out at the moment, but it was all great.
REES:	How does it feel to be back?
LASKIN:	Oh wonderful.  Wonderful.  Well, on a day like this it’s -- this is a reunion weekend, the gods have smiled on us for reunion, so it feels -- it's great to be back.
REES:	The reunion god.  Yeah, well, thank you for participating.
LASKIN:	Well, thank you.

