

REES:	So this is Carolyn and I'm conducting an interview with Barb on May 18, 2013 for the Smith College Alumnae Oral History Project.  So, would you state your name for the record?
DYBWAD:	My name is Barb Dybwad, Class of 1998.
REES:	So thank you for agreeing to be a part of this.  So why did you choose to attend the reunion this year?
DYBWAD:	I haven't been back since my fifth reunion.  So it had been a while and I just felt like it had been kind of too long.  And I really wanted to come back and renew some of those connections, see the campus, see some of the professors that I still kept in touch with.  And more recently, I had started doing a little bit of work with the Smith Alum Club in L.A.  And had sort of gotten a renewed sense of how powerful the networking effect of the Smith Alumnae network is.  And I had recently in the past year or so, in some sense, had a bit of a light bulb go off on how much of an asset that is to graduates and to alumni.  So, I was sort of renewed and fired up, in general, about my Smith education as well, so it seemed like a perfect time to come back and enjoy all of the ceremony and tradition of reunion.
REES:	Yeah, absolutely.  Are a lot of your friends and classmates back this year as well?
DYBWAD:	It's interesting because I would say this was true of my five-year reunion, as well, where it wasn't necessarily so much that there were a lot of my super-close friends of my class year who were attending.  But I always have a good time here meeting people who maybe we were acquaintances at school or we had a class together.  So, we recognize each other and we feel camaraderie has part of the wider Smith network, but it's a new opportunity to get to know them in a different context.  Get to know them later, even if we didn't really hang out so much at school.  So I find that to be really valuable.  One thing that I would love at some point, if somebody could figure out how to structure a reunion so that there were maybe plus or minus one year to get some of the other folks that you might have been close to who weren't necessarily in your same class, which I think is definitely true for me and true for a lot of folks that I know.  I was in the Smiffenpoofs since one of my major college activities, and so really, really close with that group, but only a few people were actually in my class.  And I was very connected with folks who were older than me and folks who were younger than me.  So, it would be great if there were more of an opportunity to network beyond the sort of five-year tiers that tend to come to reunion.
REES:	Yeah, so there's so much interaction between the four years?
DYBWAD:	Yeah, exactly.
REES:	So, how did you come to be at Smith, what was your journey here?
DYBWAD:	I knew that I wanted to go to a good school.  I wanted to go to a place where education was very important to the undergraduates.  I knew that I wanted to go to a liberal arts college, even though I majored in science, because I wanted to have that 360-degree view of the world and be able to do a lot of critical thinking and writing and communicating beyond just tactically sort of getting a major and launching off into a career.  So all those things were very important to me.  I grew up in Pennsylvania, so I wanted to go somewhat far from home but maybe not too far.  So the New England area seemed like a great location.  And although I didn't necessarily choose going to a women's college as a particular goal, in hindsight, I'm very, very glad that I had made that choice.  And it was definitely a powerful factor during my time at school.
REES:	What was it like when you first arrived?  What was your first day like?
DYBWAD:	I did the Preludes pre-orientation program.  So, we got a chance to go off-site and do things like ropes courses and other sorts of bonding activities in a smaller group before the actual school year started.  And that was a really great opportunity.  I met a lot of folks there that ended up being pretty close friends for the duration of my time at Smith and beyond even.  I can think of a handful of people that I still keep in touch with regularly and even see fairly regularly that came from that Preludes group.  So that was extremely valuable.  And as far as actually arriving on campus, my mom and my little sister drove me from Pennsylvania with a car full of stuff and, you know, we said our tearful good-byes, sort of, at the end of the day.  And they were sad to see me go, I was sad to leave, but I was also really, really excited about the next four-year journey that was just kicking off.
REES:	You have to leave.  So when you think about your time at Smith, what are some of the first like memories?
DYBWAD:	Definitely being in the Smiffenpoofs was a big, big part of my time.  Three of the four years that I was here, I was in the Poofs.  And it was just a really tight-knit group.  It was a lot of fun.  A cappella was sort of a big thing on campus.  We did a lot of arts things.  We did a lot of traveling to others schools and hosting other schools' singing groups coming here, which was a great opportunity both to get out and see what's happening at other colleges as well as interact with folks from Brown University and all over the place, sort of see how the other half lived which helped sort of reflect back on how unique and special of a place that Smith is.  Definitely, a lot of my classes, I have a lot of memories from not just things in my major but stepping outside of that.  I took a really great class on the Picaresque tradition which was a literary class, read, you know, a bunch of amazing novels that I still have on my bookshelf at home.  I took art history my junior year for the full year.  It was the two-semester course which was completely outside of my major but one of my favorite classes and some of my fondest memories.  I also remember several different finals weeks that have sort of blended together at this point that I spent with sort of a similar core group of study buddies.  And we would pull all-nighters and go downtown and try to get coffee before the convenience stores closed, and come back and keep working.
And we would change location.  Sometimes we'd be working in the science Quad, and sometimes we'd be working in the art history building, or sometimes we'd be working in someone's room.  And I just remember that camaraderie around being really interested in what we were doing and wanting to do well and wanting to support each other in doing well.  And I think that that, the gravity with which the students tended to take seriously their education was something that, that environment was really, really formative in ways that I wouldn't even really come to realize until much later in terms of how formative that is in terms of developing a career and finding something that you're passionate in.  So, there are many, many more memories, but we only have half an hour, so we can stick to some of those highlights.
REES:	Good.  So how did you decide on your major?
DYBWAD:	I was always really, really into science, and credit my father with inculcating that sort of interest in me.  He was physicist.  So, you know, he was always sharing knowledge with me, doing puzzles and taking me to science fairs and all sorts of things.  So I had been very involved in science in high school and my original plan had been to get a degree in science and be a professor.  And interestingly along the way, discovered that I didn't actually enjoy the lab research component.  But actually that's another point sort of worth mentioning is that I got into the Stride program at Smith, which was a really, really excellent work-study program where I was able to actually work with a professor doing lab research for two years instead of working in a dining hall or whatever else you might do.  And it was an amazing, amazing opportunity, which paradoxically led me to the conclusion that it wasn't something that I wanted to do.  But which I think is a good story to tell as well, because I think there's sort of this perception or misperception that we have to have this life planned that's all mapped out from an early age that we just sort of get on this track and keep following it.  And it's really not at all like a track.  It's more like a crazy, winding, branching path with lots and lots of opportunities that will come up that you don't expect.  And it's less about picking some point in the distance and trying to get there and more about seeing what's coming your way and following the path that feels right to you, and following your passion and trusting in your intuition as well.  So, I would definitely love if that were a bit more of the mantra of sort of Western civilization than this idea of trying to decide what you want to do 20 years from now when you're in high school.  It's just not viable.
REES:	Who were some of your favorite professors?
DYBWAD:	Nalini Bhushan, I would say, was a really great professor.  Again, totally out of my major.  I took a few philosophy courses with her.  George Robinson, who's actually in the psychology department.  Again, not at all part of my major.  And, in fact, I didn't even take a class that he taught.  I had – one of my best friends was a psych. major.  So, she took a lot of his classes and just spoke so highly of him and said, you know, "You should take one of his classes."  But it didn't work out in my schedule but I felt like I wanted to work with him.  So, we met and sort of developed our own curriculum for a course that I could do solo one-on-one with him.  So that was a really great experience.  Lali Burke (phonetic), in the chemistry department.  David Bacar (phonetic), also, in the chem. department.  A couple of my favorite professors actually in my major corner.  I would say those are some of the big highlights for me.
REES:	So how would you describe the typical Smithie of your time?
DYBWAD:	It seems fairly similar to the Smithies of today.  Very outspoken, confident, smart, creative, wide range of interests and intellect.  Lots of agency and leadership activation.  Smithies are not the type to sit back and hang back and let somebody else run the show or make the decisions.  We really like to get in there and be a part of shaping our environment and shaping our world.  And that was true in my day and it very much seems to be true today, which means the college is doing something right.
REES:	What house did you live in?
DYBWAD:	I lived in Talbot my first two years, and then was in Wilson House, in the Quad for one year, and then lived in Hawkins A my senior year which, sadly, is no longer with us.  But the main Hawkins is still here, so.
REES:	Right.  What were the – how did the house committees affect your overall experience?
DYBWAD:	Quite a bit, I would say.  And having the opportunity to participate in three different houses over the course of my time, I think, was pretty interesting.  Definitely, the Quad was an entirely different universe from anything else.  So, it was good to have that experience, you know, sort of larger houses and all, you know, the entire ring of folks versus some of the more one-off houses.  So I'm glad I got to have both of those experiences.  And then Hawkins was also another totally different experience because we had three different buildings.  So there was Hawkins A and Hawkins B and then the main Hawkins, and everyone would congregate in Main Hawk which was where our dining room was.  So all three very different experiences which I loved.  And also, the Smiffenpoofs spent a lot of time in Lamont House because we rehearsed there as well.  So, also spent a lot of time in the Lamont basement.
REES:	You really spent a lot of time all over campus.
DYBWAD:	Yeah, I got the full tour.
REES:	Let's see.  So, were there, like, what were the hot topics of the time, or were there any controversies or issues or discussions that stood out?
DYBWAD:	It seemed like there were hot issues all the time.  Politics was always a big thing on campus, both national politics, global politics and very, very hyper-local politics.  I would say that's probably the biggest theme that comes to mind.  To some degree, the environmentalism which I think is a much bigger issue foregrounded in our minds today.  That sort of was kind of starting around that time, so definitely it was another big theme for those four years, yeah.
REES:	Were there any discussions about like race or sexuality?
DYBWAD:	Always, always.  So frequent, it seems hardly bears mentioning, but definitely.  And class, as well, I would say, was another constant theme.  Here and elsewhere, but here, definitely, people really get into the issues.
REES:	Yeah.  Would you say that Smith was a, like, very queer and open space like it is some would say now?
DYBWAD:	That's good to hear because, absolutely, it was at the time, very, very welcoming and opening – open for queer identified or questioning or not knowing what the heck is going on.  All of that was fine during your time at Smith.  And I think it's a very, very unique environment in that regard.  And definitely, as a queer person myself, that was very, very important.  And actually one of the reasons that I did choose Smith, knowing that that was a very open place versus my high school where I had come out and been out with my last two years of high school and it was definitely not a very welcoming place.  So, to come to an environment like this where it's not only accepted, but expected in some sense, and certainly supported, it was transformative.  It was great.  So, it's amazing that there's a space like this that has that level of support and welcoming for young queer women.
REES:	That's great.  So, how – what are your feelings about Ruth Simmons?
DYBWAD:	I loved Ruth.  She was great during our tenure.  Very well-spoken.  Always seemed to be, you know, where the President ought to be.  And had a very appropriate way of dealing with a lot of those issues and controversies that would come up.  So, yeah, I think the general sentiment at that time was very positive.
REES:	When we were researching earlier this week, we like ran across the Chain for Change that happened in '96 and I was wondering if you remember anything about it participated or what came of it?
DYBWAD:	I did participate.  And I do remember it, although I probably haven't thought about it since November 21st.
REES:	Since then, yes.
DYBWAD:	Yes, so, I'm glad you brought it up.  That's – yeah.  I remember, I mean, probably most of campus participated.  And I remember standing outside and, you know, joining with my fellow classmates to do something we felt was important.  And it was one of those transformative moments that you have where you feel like I'm in the right place at the right time because we're doing something that has impact and that's important and that has value.
REES:	Yeah, it sounded amazing.  It sounded very like a productive way to handle.
DYBWAD:	And creative, you know, I mean.  There's all kinds of approaches to activism and, you know, the creative and intelligent way of approaching an issue is always awesome.
REES:	So, what – tell me about some of the challenges defeating the Smith students?
DYBWAD:	Well, definitely the workload.  Very, very demanding academically, which is awesome.  I definitely am glad that I went through it even though it was definitely a big challenge at the time.  And balancing that with also trying to have a social life and being in the Poofs was also very time-consuming.  Trying to juggle all those things and find time to sleep – was very challenging.  Yeah, mostly time management, I would say, was the biggest challenge and pretty much remains the biggest challenge in life.  Once you know what you're sort of capable of and all the things that you want to do and keep in your life, and you don't want to compromise on any of those things, you figure it out.  Figure out how to manage the time, so.
REES:	What are some of your favorite Smith traditions?
DYBWAD:	I have really grown to enjoy Ivy Day, although I never seem to have anything in white.  So, I'm always having to buy some new clothes.  I really, really love Illumination Night, in particular.  When I was an undergrad, the Poofs would always participate and we would sing.  And as an alum, I get to go back and sing, you know, usually do one of the traditional numbers with the Poofs again, so that's always fun to relive.  We were talking at the barbecue lunch earlier about the Immorality Party which was another thing that I had forgotten about.  But upon remembering, think is a very excellent tradition.  One of the things that seems to no longer be a tradition is the Whispering Woman, who was an unknown person on campus who would call people in the middle of the night and just whisper creepily into your campus phone.  And then at breakfast the next morning, you would tell everyone, "I got a call from the Whispering Woman!"  And no one knew who it was, but it had been going on for years and years, so it must have been handed off, passed down.  So, unfortunately, I haven't met anyone in the current class who has heard of the Whispering Woman yet, so I don't know if she graduated or retired or went to haunt some other school.
REES:	Did you ever get a call?
DYBWAD:	I actually never did, but I knew a lot of people who got the Whispering Woman call.
REES:	Wow.  And had it been going on before you arrived at Smith?
DYBWAD:	Yeah, for many, many years.  For as far back as anyone could remember.  Like, the outgoing seniors when I was a freshman were, you know, when I was a first year, "Excuse me."
REES:	Careful.
DYBWAD:	I know.  See how quickly we forget?  Gosh.  Yeah, the outgoing seniors were, you know, "This has been going on since we were first here and before that," and folks in the singing group who, you know, kind of new people back and back and back, were, you know, it had been going on for a long time, yeah.
REES:	Wow, I haven't ever heard of that.
DYBWAD:	We should reignite it, maybe tonight, you know.  I'm going to get on the phone, wait, don't tell anyone.  Don't publish this interview until after this weekend.
REES:	You have this weekend.  The Whispering Woman, I won't tell anyone.  Don't call me.
DYBWAD:	Fair enough, fair enough, it's a good trade, good bargain.
REES:	So, have you unnoticed any challenges of being a Smithie and not being a Smithie, or what has it been like to leave the bubble?
DYBWAD:	Definitely, although it's good, too, you know.  You have to go out into the world at some point and, hopefully, bring a lot of that wonderful Smithness with you.  And I would say that, if anything, it's been wonderful to stay connected with folks that I knew here, but also to meet a lot of Smithies out in the world from other years or who were here when I was here, but we didn't really interact.  And just having this instant sort of camaraderie and bond without even needing to say too much.  There's just something about the Smith sort of environment that really makes a connection immediately.  And also, sort of, the more years go on and the more now that I've gotten a little bit involved, at least more involved in the past than in the alumnae affairs, I definitely, appreciate that networking effect a lot more.  And career-wise every once in a while I'll, you know, have a colleague or a potential hire or someone who works in another division of the company or somebody I meet at a conference from Smith, and it's just – it's great to have that instant recognition.  So, I think it's very powerful.
REES:	Yeah.  Do you think that single-sex institutions are still important and still needed?
DYBWAD:	Insofar as sexism still exists, we have not solved that problem yet, then yes, I think it is valuable.  Certainly, for me, I can look back on how having a space like this really helped transform myself from someone who was a little more reluctant and would hang back and be a little shy about raising a hand in class, and how, I mean, it's not like that melted away quickly overnight.  Being in this sort of environment where, you know, I hear a lot of my friends who are teachers or professors talk about the dynamics in their classroom and how gender really, really affects that.  And I think that that's still an important issue that we need to address.  So being in an environment where I didn't have to worry about some dude always, you know, coming to the foreground with a question or an answer to a question, I think it is really valuable.  It was certainly really valuable for me and I think that it's still incredibly relevant today.
REES:	So who have you become since Smith?
DYBWAD:	Wow, that's a big question.  Well, more sort of tactically, I work in technology.  I'm the Director of Business Development for a website called Engadget.  We're the largest consumer electronics blog on the web.  And I've been working online and working on the web, first as a developer, later as a writer and a professional tech blogger, writer and editor, and later manager of content teams.  And now more on the executive leadership and the business side.  And definitely relish the opportunity to have sort of a wide range of experiences, none of which I really set out for or expected to come, but as I continue to follow what seemed the most interesting, it turns out that, you know, that's a good strategy for building a career.  And try to gather as many skills as you can.  I would also say, take challenges when they come, even if you don't think that you're ready for it.  And there's also, there's a lot of gender issues in that.  I 'm currently reading Cheryl Sandburg's excellent book, Lean In, and, you know, she talks about how she's hired thousands and thousands of people and sort of the patterns that she notices are men tend to assume that if they have about 40 percent of the skills for the role that they feel like they're pretty qualified, versus the women tend to think that they need to have at least 80 percent of the job description sort of already on lock to even, you know, sort of take that chance.  And so I would say, if I were to impart advice, I would say, you know, don't be afraid to take those challenges even if it's a stretch and, you know, reach for it and go for it because that's how we grow.
REES:	Is there anything else you wanted to share or say?
DYBWAD:	Just that I've had a really great time at reunion so far.  Tonight's Illumination Night, so I'm really looking forward to that.  It's been great to come back and see the campus, see the new campus center, which I'm really jealous of, that we didn't have.  See the engineering building which is another amazing initiative that happened after my time but that makes me very proud to be a Smith alum.  And yeah, having a great weekend.
REES:	Good.  Good.  Well, thank you for doing this.
DYBWAD:	Yeah, no problem.

