

ANDREANI:	This is Vivian Andreani, and I am conducting an interview with Natalie Field, Class of 1957 on May 26, 2012 for the Smith College Alumnae Oral History Project.  Thank you for agreeing to be here.  So you said that you could sing some Smith songs.  Would you like to go ahead and do some of that?
FIELD:	All right.  I don't want to drop that on -- I was just thinking as I walked in that something reminded of the Class of 1950 senior song, which is probably the best class senior song I ever heard, and it was still being sung in 1957 when we graduated and our class usually sings it at reunion.  And it just says everything so well, and it's such a zippy song, I guess I'll treat you to that.
ANDREANI:	Please do, please do.
FIELD:	(Singing) Fifty has gathered.  We're ready to go.  Fifty's music is gay.  Fifty will walk with a spring in its step on the great commencement day.  We will pretend that reaching the end is easy, if you know how.  We have the laurels to win, there's a life beginning.  Fifty's future is now.  We hate to remember that here in September our place will be filled with no strain.  We give up a lot if we could turn on the spot and start four years again.  But we're a new Smith Class, the 75th Class.  We've brand new lives to create.  The Smith we know we'll keep as our own.  1950 is at the gateway.  (spoken) And then, (singing) Fifty is gathered, ready to go (spoken) and so on.
ANDREANI:	Oh, my gosh, that's great.
FIELD:	There's another verse that precedes the -- the one I just sang, but that's the one that has everything in it.  The Smith -- well, when you talked about buildings were different, it's "the Smith we've known we'll keep as our own," because the rest of it they're going to mess up at some time or another.  Singing was really a big thing.  There were signs around on the campus saying everybody sings at Smith and there were step sings, have you heard of them?  And --
ANDREANI:	Where were the step sings done?
FIELD:	Well, they were done on the steps of Studes, which is the building that's not --
ANDREANI:	Studes?
FIELD:	The students building.
ANDREANI:	Okay.
FIELD:	Which was somewhere near where it was -- it was across -- well, it was near alumnae gym and on the same side of the road, but they tore it down I think making room for the new science center.
But it had broad steps that ran almost the full width of the front of the building and six or eight steps or maybe more, so there was plenty of room for the whole senior class to sit there and they were the senior steps and everybody else sat on the grass in front, and it would be like each class would sing a song to the senior class, and then the senior class would have a response and then there were a number of other songs that we sang.  I've got one in my bag, I don't think I brought it up, that I don't know well enough to sing that well.  But there were traditional ones we sang like old class senior songs, and another one that our class really liked that had been written the year before we came to college for a faculty show, and a well-known poet who was -- I think he was William Alan Neilson professor that year or something wrote the words.
(Singing)  Twang the liar, forcifier – (spoken) I love that word – (singing) ayd yea (inaudible) days of learning, glorifier her and inspire every heart with passion burning.  For the intellectual life are removed from storm and strife perched on learning's lofty heights, tasting reasons pure delights.  We'll admire our Sophia until our days on earth are done.  She is still a blazing fire to her daughters, every one.
(spoken) And I think it was meant as kind of a spoof but some -- for us anyway, it caught on and we've just always liked it.
ANDREANI:	Yeah.  How did you all dress for a step sing?  Was there any special way to dress or --
FIELD:	No, no.  Casually.  I mean you were going to be sitting on the ground.  We might wear jeans.  We might wear bermudas.  Bermudas were popular then.  We could be wearing skirts because we did a fair amount of the time, but I don't think I would have to a step sing when we were going to sit on the ground.  I don't know.  And then the final step sing of the spring, the PUSH committee pushed the seniors off the steps and I understand they still have a ceremony of that kind.
ANDREANI:	Yeah.
FIELD:	But there aren't very -- there aren't enough steps for the whole senior class to be sitting there, but there were at Studes, and the PUSH Committee would line up behind the last row and walk down the steps and seniors were supposed to graciously relinquish them, and then the junior class would come in behind PUSH and take the steps (inaudible).
ANDREANI:	Wow.
FIELD:	Another occasion when we sang would be when we had an important outside speaker.  On Rally Day for instance, we know -- two that I can remember were McGeorge Bundy and what was the other one.  Oh, darn.  Well, I'll probably think of it -- who were, you know they were important in the government or sometimes from something academic and it was a custom for us to sing them a song, and I don't remember any of those songs all the way through.  I went to a couple of Rally Days after I graduated when I came back to visit my sister when I had time on Washington's birthday to do that, so I'm not sure when these would have been -- somewhere between 1954 and 1959, one of the guest speakers was McGeorge Bundy and the song began, "Mr. Bundy, we're so glad to have you here."  But that's all I remember of it.  I think that's the tune -- the song of the '20s, Jadda-Jadda, Jing-Jing -- Jadda-Jadda-Jing-Jing-Jing, something like that.
ANDREANI:	Mm-hmm.
FIELD:	Oh, yes, and there was Mr. Morrison, "Come along and bring the chorus on.  Sing a song for Mr. Morrison."  And that's all I remember of that one, but that was a customary thing.  I don't know who wrote them, some of the students.
ANDREANI:	And people wrote it specifically for everybody that came?  It wasn't just like one --
FIELD:	No, it wasn't one song that you put different words to or reuse the tune.  No, it was to the tune of something generally, it wasn't -- the music wasn't composed individually for the occasion.  But it was for the individual speaker.  And you know, Rally Day only came once a year.  I don't recall whether we had songs for other.
We had to go to what we call chapel every Wednesday morning in John M.  It was a requirement and sometimes the class -- the college president spoke, sometimes some invited person from nearby or farther away or somebody important or interesting or whatever.  There was always some kind of speaker, even if President Wright had to do it himself.  So that -- and that was a very, you know, regular practice.  And I'm sorry that that kind of thing isn't done -- because it was good to have the whole college together under one roof once a week just for the symbolism more than anything.  It was a really nice thing.

ANDREANI:	How frequently did you have step sings?
FIELD:	We had one -- an introductory one in the fall right after we got here so the freshman could have their first experience and then there were I think -- well, there were at least three and maybe four in May leading up to graduation.  So there were about -- I think they were once a week in the Spring.  It may have been every other week.  Somewhere in the archives there's a copy of the Sophian from our senior year with articles about step sings and their origins and that sort of thing and what the schedule was going to be for that particular year.  I got distracted a little bit.  (Inaudible).  I jotted down some of the things that happened then that look significant now or maybe not, and you know if something happened, we never did know whether it was significant or not.
ANDREANI:	Mm-hmm.
FIELD:	Some things were and some not -- hula-hoops were really a big deal, but they didn't make any long standing impact on the culture or anything, I don't think.  But in the fall of '56, it was an election year, and our house, Sessions House, rented a television set for a couple of weeks so that we would be able to watch the returns and the television coverage and we watched other things on it too while it was there, and that was really my first exposure to television.  Not that it wasn't around, but my family wasn't very interested in it and we hadn't had it and I hadn't experienced any watching it so after that I kind of got hooked.  I found out -- well, either before or after that, I don't remember for sure just when it was.  Well, it couldn't have been much after, because that would have been my senior year, but Elvis Presley was going to appear on the Ed Sullivan Show and they set up a TV in Davis Ballroom, which may not be --
ANDREANI:	Mm-hmm.
FIELD:	But -- do you know where Davis is?
ANDREANI:	Yes.  We still have dance parties over there.
FIELD:	Oh, do you?
ANDREANI:	Yes.
FIELD:	Well, good.  I'm glad it's in use.  It had a lovely snack bar downstairs.
ANDREANI:	Yeah, yeah.  That's Mwangi now.
FIELD:	It's what?
ANDREANI:	We still have a Center there.
FIELD:	Oh, with food?
ANDREANI:	Mm-hmm.
FIELD:	I didn't know that.
ANDREANI:	Oh, no, not with food, but just a place you hang out.
FIELD:	Oh, oh, okay.  Yeah, well, ours had burgers and sandwiches and sodas and malteds and all that good stuff.  So anyway they set up a TV up in the ballroom and everybody who was interested went and we sat on the floor and I think there were two or 300 of us or something, and our first view of Elvis Presley, and maybe that -- maybe it was then when I discovered that that television set lived in Davis and there was a small room near the ballroom where that television was kept, and I kind of got in the habit of going over there usually Friday evenings and watching things like Highway Patrol, and DragNet and I don't remember what else.  So that's when television was taking off.
Also -- okay, when I took physics sophomore year, Mr. Scott told us about the Sigma Psi lectures, Sigma Psi, you know, it's an honorary science fraternity that students who show excellence in two or more sciences would be elected to it and they would have a banquet and all the people who had been to that would be coming in in their formal dresses and so forth, but anybody could go, and so starting my sophomore year, after Mr. Scott, I went every year.  I only remember two of them with any distinctness.  I think it was the first one and all I can remember is that the talk consisted of a discussion of the stomach contents of an extinct moa.
But the two that I really remember, there was one, it was the beginning of heart surgery, and there was a -- they showed us a movie of opening up a heart valve surgically, and that was fascinating.  It was when -- I think -- was it Houston where they were doing that?  I don't remember for sure and I don't remember the doctor's name either.  But the lecturer that brought the movie, when we started, he said, "Now some of you may want to avert your eyes when they do the incision because," he said, "some people can watch an operation, but they can't stand to watch the incision while it still looks like a person."  And I kind of peeked, I was a little cautious, but it was just fascinating, you know, they opened up the rib cage and pried their ribs apart.  I think they even cut out one rib in order to have access, and then they got inside the heart, if I remember correctly, with a scalpel blade attached to one finger and got in there and opened up the blocked valve.  So that was certainly the beginning of something.

ANDREANI:	Right.
FIELD:	And my senior year the talk was on putting a satellite in orbit.
ANDREANI:	Okay.
FIELD:	Which had not yet been done at that point.  It was about the work that was being done at Cape Canaveral and what they were doing and what they were planning, so it was that fall after we graduated that the Russians put up their satellite and everybody was oh my goodness, this is awful.  They've done it and we haven't.  It really didn't bother me.  I kept saying, but, we're working on it.  It's not like we haven't even thought of it.  (laughter) But both of those were rather significant things.  And being at Smith I had a chance to get a peek at them.
Rally Day of course was a big thing.   Rally Day shows were – everyone, a lot of people worked on them, and that's another thing that –

ANDREANI:	Can you describe a typical Rally Day in your time here?
FIELD:	The day as a whole?
ANDREANI:	Yeah, mm-hmm.
FIELD:	Well, we had to go to chapel in the morning.  Rally Day chapel and that was when we found out how many people that didn't -- illicitly cutting chapel the rest of the time, because on Rally Day it was hard to find enough seats.  And we wore our white dresses and colored ribbons, class ribbons and each class sat in a different section, so that the one color here and another color there.  And there was a formal academic procession back then.  And then we had a special speaker.
And for weekly chapel, the freshmen and sophomores sat in the balcony.  The juniors and seniors sat downstairs and I could hardly wait until I was a junior so I could sit downstairs, and what did they do but that year the balcony was getting a little too crowded and so they picked a few houses and said that their freshman and sophomores could sit downstairs too, and my house had to be one of them.  I wish it hadn't.  There I was ready to enjoy my privilege -- well, anyway that was how the day started.
Then there was the freshman/sophomore basketball game which took place -- I think that took place in Scott gym, but it may have been Alumnae gym and for some reason the freshman class president was wheeled in in a little flower decorated cart with, I don't know, a wreath of flowers on her hair or something -- I don't remember the details of that, and of course the sophomores didn't want to be defeated, and the freshman were dying to be able to do it.
And then there was the Rally Day show and sometimes the Rally Day show was -- it was also shown on the nearest weekends, so sometimes it had already been shown.  And the Rally Day show was where the seniors first wore their caps and gowns and sang a senior song, but not unless -- not until Rally Day itself.  If the show had already been shown we didn't do it that week, we waited for Rally Day.
And I think we all -- we sat all -- I think we marched in and sat all together down front and central, and I worked on the -- on my sophomore show in scenery and so I was there for most of the rehearsals and picked up all the songs and was -- knew the plot well and really enjoyed it.  And senior year I had been there for some rehearsals of senior song and had a pretty good idea how it went.  Junior year I was on the properties committee, but I was never there for rehearsals and I never enjoyed that one at all.
But our freshman show had the theme that there had been a big flood, because it was really rainy that year.  It seemed like it rained all the time, so there had been a big flood and we were going to have to build an arc and rescue pairs of the most significant people to continue Smith.  And so they decided that we should have somebody to represent the athletic student, the intellectual and the social butterfly, and so they had songs to sing and so on, and then someone being a dewy-eyed freshman came onto the stage and told them all -- you know, she said, (singing) "They're being too thrifty -- this thrifty committee -- I must stop them now before it's too late.  Can't you remember the way that it felt when you first went through that Grecourt Gate," which you could do then because it was (inaudible).  "I can't understand what has happened to you although you've forgotten you once felt it too, that simple exciting essential thing, feathers that shine on an eagle's bright wing.  We're part of a bigness although we are small.  They can't have a Smith if they don't have us all.  There are languages from countries where you will never go.  Someone has a secret that you will never know.  There's a girl who is awfully continental, and a shy one whose thoughts grow sentimental.  Some have averages, others have pins," (speaking) that was boyfriend's fraternity pins, (singing) "when a senior is finished a freshman begins, it's simple exciting essential this thing.  Feathers that shine on an eagle's bright wing.  It's all of our faces.  It's everyone's song.  It's everyone's dream that makes all of us strong. We're part of a bigness although we are small.  They can't have a Smith if they don't have us all."  Think about -- you know, I think of that and think diversity.  That's what that was all about, and it was diversity within a fairly narrow group, but you can get a lot of diversity even so.
And our senior show was technology.  And there were robots who were controlled by a computer.  And they wore black boxes around them to make them look like robots and they came in and sang, "We are Things from Outer Space.  Electronics sets our pace.  Machines today will lead the way.  So come along to where we are.  Turn right or left beyond the farthest star."
Then there was another group that was the intellectuals and they were wearing long sweepy skirts and sacheting around the stage and singing about the importance of individuality and doing your own thing, and I can't remember much of if any of their song right at the moment, but that was the general (inaudible).
So then these two groups run into each other and neither of them understand the other one and each of them thinks the other one should adopt their ways and there's a song whether both groups are singing at the same time, the different song and the robots are singing about the importance of absolute unity and all doing the same thing and the others are signing about the virtue of doing your own thing and so on.  And so they can't seem to settle their differences and they consult the big computer and it clunks and grinds and spits out a slip of paper which they look at and it says, "RX NaCl."  A grain of salt.
ANDREANI:	Yeah.
FIELD:	Okay, so then they say, "Oh, this robot knows an old philosophy.  Maybe if we could laugh at cerebral supremacy then they might renounce an ounce of unity."  And -- I liked the ending song, but I can't really remember at the moment, to enter into it a the right spot, but anyway.  So what have we got now?  Robots trying to -- or machines telling us what to do.  It seems to me we were an awful prescient class.  Maybe a lot of classes used those same themes, but they -- they certainly are echoed right now.
ANDREANI:	Mm-hmm.
FIELD:	Oh, yeah, I was going to mention some various traditions in general.  There were college traditions of course, and there were house traditions.  I hope there still are.  And many of them -- many houses may have had the pinning party.  Do you still have a college pin?
ANDREANI:	No.
FIELD:	Okay, well, there was a college pin, a discreet little diamond with SC on it.
ANDREANI:	Mm-hmm.
FIELD:	And it was known as the senior pin because you couldn't wear it until your senior year.  And they were ordered in winter or spring of senior year and of course, there was a person who was in charge of this process and so of course, she was the head of it, which -- people didn't watch what they were saying occasionally referred to her as the "senior pin head," which didn't seem like a very good idea.  But anyway, and part of that -- of the tradition with the pins was that each senior after spring vacation loaned her own pin to a junior until the junior's pin came in.  So that was a kind of special thing, and we always had what was called a pinning party, and by that time a couple of seniors might have cars so we could go out of town and have -- I think there must have been -- I don't remember anything about dinner, but there were drinks, and so some of the juniors and seniors would come back from the pinning party (inaudible.)
And my freshman year one of the juniors drank too much and her room was right over the house mother's room and she was carrying -- and she was a very quiet, restrained sort of person, and she was carrying on quite loudly and everybody was trying to hush her down so the house mother wouldn't find out how much we had been drinking.  And part of our tradition was when the seniors loaned their pins, there was some kind of maybe treasure hunt or something for the juniors to find them and they would be hidden somewhere and there would be clues and when we were juniors, I remember one of the clues directed us to salix babylonica or something like that, which it turned out is a willow tree.  You may recognize acetylsalicyclic acid in there.  And one of our member -- no, it wasn't -- she was in our class -- well, anyway, that was one of the places where the clues were hidden and where the clues led us was to what was called coffee clutch.  It was in Seelye basement and it was a little corner with a counter and a coffee machine in there.  The pastry things spread out and there were a couple of people who would man it and take money and so forth.
And there was a refrigerator and one of our seniors in our house was head of coffee clutch that year.  Our pins were frozen into the ice cubes in the ice cube trays at coffee clutch.  We did find them.  I don't know but we did find them.  That was pretty ingenious.
Then on May Day we had conflicting traditions.  There was a college tradition that all the seniors got up early early in the morning and went -- 8 or 9 o'clock or something to serenade the top administrators, like I think it was -- you know, the dean and maybe the warden.  We had somebody called the warden at that time.  Anyway we went and sang to them.  Yet the house tradition was that May Day, the freshman were supposed to bring the seniors breakfast in bed.  So I've forgotten whether we ran back from the serenade and got into bed to get our breakfast in bed or whether we did it the other way around, but it was kind of hard to accommodate both of those things.  I was in Sessions by the way.
Do you know about the kingsmen?
ANDREANI:	No, please tell me about it.
FIELD:	You don't know anything about the kingsmen?
ANDREANI:	I --
FIELD:	The first director of buildings and grounds was Mr. King -- what's his first -- Franklin King.  And so --
ANDREANI:	And that's where the King House is named?
FIELD:	Right, it was who it was named for, and so people came to call him -- the people he supervised as Mr. -- called him Mr. Kings' men and by the time I was in college, they were just referred to as the kingsmen.  And they not only did buildings and grounds, they did what campus security there was and they would drive you to the infirmary if you got sick in the middle of the night.  (Inaudible)  And they always -- they brought in all the trunks when we'd arrive.  At least if you came by train, you usually shipped a trunk.  And they carried all the trunks upstairs and set them in the hall outside your room and after a certain number of days you were supposed to have your trunk unpacked and they would take them down and store them.
ANDREANI:	Mm-hmm.
FIELD:	They were stored in the basement I think it was.
ANDREANI:	Mm-hmm.
FIELD:	And of course men were ordinarily not in the houses, so when any man was -- if a kingsman was going to come in to change a lightbulb or something like that and coming upstairs, he would call out, "Man on the floor."  And we would quick dodge back into our rooms if we didn't have our proper clothes on and we -- you know, we ran to the bathroom in our slips and pajamas and occasionally nothing at all, I think, and we were accustomed to feeling free to do that.
Step sings we did -- oh, yeah, I don't think I sang you this one.  But I did say that the first step sing was in the Fall when the freshman –

ANDREANI:	In the Fall, yeah.
FIELD:	And one of my housemates had -- I forgot we'd been asked to write a song for us to sing as new freshmen, and another -- one of my classmates remembers it, by the way, which surprised me, and Sonny (phonetic) asked me to help her, so I was pretty familiar with it, so --
(Singing)  “We're the Class of '57.  Glad to be here.  All we have we want to give you, year after year.  Dee-dee-dee-de” — and then the second part, "At the end of college life when we go away, yet our thoughts will still be with you" – no, it must be.  I think this is the one that's year after year.  (singing) "Though a Smith tales other's tire, our class they will still inspire.  We will make you proud Sophia, throughout the years."
So that was the kind of song we often had at step sing, and then there were some favorite ones.  I can start this one, but I don't know how much of it I can do.  (Singing) “You're sharp as a pinpoint.  You're marks are really ten point.  You are Dean's list Sophia Smith, but when a man wants a kiss-kiss, he doesn't want a quiz kid.  Oh, you can't get a man with your brain.”
And then there's quite a lot more of it that -- if we've got time, I can dig it out of my bag because I've got it --
ANDREANI:	Mm-hmm.
FIELD:	-- with me.  I just didn't think.
ANDREANI:	Actually, I'm just going to stop real quick.  Our interviews usually last 30 minutes.  Let me just pause this real quick.
(Recording paused and continued)
ANDREANI: 	All right, so we're back on tape.
FIELD:	Okay, Well, here's some more song.
ANDREANI:	Okay.
FIELD:	We were talking about traditions and you know, there was a period when traditions were being thrown out everywhere.  It was those doggone baby boomers, I think.
ANDREANI:	(Laughter).
FIELD:	And I think a lot of the traditions were broken and I re -- I think maybe it was about 1972 when we came back for reunion or '77, the students at that point were interested in reviving traditions because they had been just wholesale discarded.
ANDREANI:	Mm-hmm.
FIELD:	A crazy thing to do.  (Laughter).
ANDREANI:	Yeah.
FIELD:	There's a song.  I thought it was right in front of me.  Oh well.  This was one of our most popular step sing songs, Spring Fever.  (Singing)  "We've all got a touch of spring fever, though it's not much this, this spring fever.  The only real cure for spring fever is lying all day in the sun.  The flowers all nod with spring fever, trees in the Quad have spring fever.  Everything is filled with spring fever once springtime at Smith has begun.  All the old buildings look new.  Once more there's tennis and crew.  Paradise never seemed so nice now that the winter is through."  And then repeat the first verse with a background of boom, boom, noises, like frogs kind of.
ANDREANI:	Mm-hmm.
FIELD:	And I can't do that solo, so, but half the -- part of the people sing the boom boom, and the other ones sing the -- and then there's a bit at the end.  Let's see.  I'm not quite sure how this part goes.  I think it's, (Singing) "Spring dance, romance, float nights are bright, crewing, step sings bring at Smith."  That part of it I don't remember as well.  And I just saw the slicker song from that.  Where did it go?  Hmm.  From that sophomore show when we were -- when it was raining all the time.  There it is.  Slickers were very much in when I was --
ANDREANI:	Slickers?
FIELD:	Slickers.  Long, like oil cloth coats.  You could get them in any of several colors.  I got mine in blue because I like blue.  I -- later I had kind of wished I had got it in my class color, which is yellow, slickers.  And corresponding hats, they looked like a New England fisherman's hat, kind of thing.  And we wore those a lot.  Bermuda shorts were also very much in fashion.
ANDREANI:	Also in fashion.
FIELD:	Wool ones for winter with knee socks.  We also had summer ones, but -- (Singing) never say rain though there's water falling.  Where's your philosophy?  Though it's dank and dampish, all around the campus, gay is the way to be.  Water fights, shampoos, no more bikes, canoes.  Slickers, boots, umbrellas we now wear.  This undue precipitation has extended our vacation, let it go ahead and rain for we don't care.  If your outlook's right, every day will turn out bright and rain is only atmosphere."
And there are -- I hear there are a couple of songs from Amherst and other places too, and one or two of us who remember -- we were reminding each other today of some of the sort of raunchy songs that we picked up from -- picked up from brothers or boyfriends or something that.

ANDREANI:	Can you sing any of them?
FIELD:	Not right through.  The one I remembered.  I can kind of tell you the plot.  It's -- this woman who has the baby and no father for it and she's planning -- let's see.  "Your father is Yale man.  We must be married soon"..yaddee, yaddee -- I don't know.  And then somehow she winds up in Boston and is singing "I'm going to get lost in this fine town of Boston and to hell with your daddy at Yale."  But I don't remember it very much.  There was one about "let her sleep under" -- no, "let her sleep at" -- "think of your mothers and sisters, boys, and let her sleep under the bar."
Oh, oh, yes.  "You can't get a man with your brains."  Yes.  (Singing) "You're sharp" -- did I already sing this part?
ANDREANI:	I don't think so.
FIELD:	"You're sharp as a pinpoint, your marks are really" --
ANDREANI:	Oh, yes, you have.  Yes.
FIELD:	Oh.  "You can't get a man with your brains.  Your French may be flowing.  Your Russian just as knowing.  You may sprechen the Deutsch with ease.  But love for a man is the universal language.  Oh, you can't get a man with your brains.  You know the futility of marginal utility that our enterprise is free.  But that's all irrespective for love's a thing collective.  Oh, you can't get a man with your brains.  You may know your Lucretius's (phonetic) and all the things he teaches.  You may think with Socratic skill.  But when a man wants a mate-o, he isn't quoting Plato.  Oh, you can't get a man with your brains.  You may have a cranium that understands uranium at home with a cyclotron.  But a man after hours wants anatomic powers.  Oh, you can't get a man with your brains.  You have Joyce in your carol, you write like James T. Ferrell, you recite all of Shakespeare's plays, but you can't get a Romeo with a Smith diploma-eo, as you can an exam.  Oh, you can't get a man with your brains."
There's a line missing here.  There's something about you can't cram for -- oh, it is there.  "You can't cram for a man as you can for an exam.  Oh, you can't get a man with your brains."

ANDREANI:	These are all so great.
FIELD:	I know.  You should do more of this sort of thing.
ANDREANI:	Yeah.  Yeah.  So when you think about Smith and traditions, is there a really strong connection for you, your memories with Smith, are they more about traditions or --
FIELD:	No, not particularly.  It's part of it certainly, but probably -- I have memories like the day freshman year, History 11 which was European history and I had always liked history before, but I did not like that class.  I couldn't make heads nor tails of it.  It was so confusing and we'd drop one country and take up with another one and go back again, and it was just awful.  But I was -- I was trying it and in lecture one day, the lectures were in Sage Hall, I was trying harder than usual.  I was trying to take good notes and I was listening to Mr. von Clapperer (phonetic), who would have been at our class dinner last night had he not been ill, and I was bending over -- they gave us boards to lay our papers on there.
And I was bending over my board writing away like mad and all of a sudden, he stops speaking and he said, "You back there.  Wake up."  I paid no attention.  It certainly wasn't me.  And I went on writing.  And he said it a couple more times and then finally I finished, you know, everything he had said, finished writing it down and sat up and looked back up for him to say something more.  And he said, "That's better."  And the sophomores who were sitting up in the balcony said afterwards that they -- that he was looking right at me.  I never quite forgave him for that.  Not very nice of me, is it.
But yeah, you know, and I remember -- well, that was tradition in a way.  I remember all the stuff about lots of house rules and signing in and signing out and it was custom rather than what you would call tradition.  Oh, yeah, and I remember forgetting to sign in once.  That was awful.
ANDREANI:	What happened?
FIELD:	It was early freshman year and they -- there was a freshman mixer at Davis, and I was absolutely no good at parties.  I couldn't dance at all well and I was extremely awkward, but I knew I should try, and so I went to this thing, and I just stood there.  You know, kind of holding up the wall and finally I thought, this isn't getting me anywhere and I'm just feeling more and more miserable, so I went back to the house.
Well, I had signed out to go to this, and I got back long before house closing time.  There wasn't even -- there was no need for me to have signed out, actually.  And nobody else was signing back in, because they were all still at the party.  And I totally forgot, walked right by the sign-in book.  Well, I didn't -- I stayed downstairs and played solitaire or something for awhile, but anyway I stayed downstairs for quite awhile and finally I went up to bed and then people came back and the house closed.  And somebody came knocking on my door, "Are you there?"  "Well, yeah, sure I'm here."  "Well, you didn't sign in."  And that was a house council offense, and house council sentenced me to sign in at the house president's room at 9:30 every night for a week.  The big problem with that was that at 9:30 every night they put out milk and leftover desserts for us and I thought that that was pretty -- you know, I was totally unused to this routine at that point and having come back unhappy in a -- when nobody else was -- you know, other people -- there were other freshmen, they were with somebody else that was signing in, I thought that that was a little excessive.  All they had to do was tell me once.  They didn't have to --
I find it's remarkable how many of my classmates have strong memories of feeling, not belonging, not part of things, not accepted, not sure that they belonged here, and feeling left out and all sorts of things.  Yeah, one of my housemates talked about the terrible time she had with freshman chemistry and she was just overwhelmed by it, and I was taking it and liking it, and I was a chemistry major for awhile.  I maybe could have helped, but she didn't say anything to anybody about it and a lot of freshman maybe still do struggle with things that somebody could help them with.
ANDREANI:	Did you ever feel like you didn’t belong here?
FIELD:	Oh, all the time.  I feel more like I belong now when I come back to reunions than I did when I was here.  I was from the Midwest and had gone primarily to public schools, and a lot of people here were East Coast types and some of them, you know, families even I had heard of way out in -- (laughter) and they all seemed so much more sophisticated than I.  And I -- I kind of felt -- I was glad of the house I was in because there were a lot of sort of misfit types there.  Not really misfits, but you know, the kind of people that didn't do everything just the way everybody else did and that was a comfort to me.
One of those people who liked to -- I think she went on camping expeditions and stuff like that.  Anyway, she told me about Rabbit Hollow.  It was that -- I don't even know if it's still in existence.  Probably not.  It was a camp in -- in Vermont for what we then called underprivileged children from the slums of New York.  Well, maybe it wasn't the actual slums, but they were kids that would never have much chance to get out in the outdoors, and they would go there for a week or two in the summers, and college students from all around the area would go up there on weekends in the spring and help prepare the camp for summer.  You know, do cleanup, repair the baseball backdrop, backstop.
I remember one time we carrying stones and building a bridge over a little stream for some reason.  Anyway that sort of work, and we stayed overnight.  We took sleeping bags and spent the night and we could sleep in their cabins outdoors, depending on circumstances, and then they cooked a bunch of turkeys for us for dinner on Sunday before we came -- the winter wasn't much, but anyway, oh I remember smelling that turkey and thinking all morning that it smelled so good. But they had in my view overcooked and I didn't really -- the smell was better than the dinner.  But they had this saying, "Nobody ever goes to Rabbit Hollow just once."  They -- they always come back and -- well, I did go twice, but I didn't become a -- what you'd call a regular.
ANDREANI:	Did a lot of students go to Rabbit Hollow or just --
FIELD:	I don't think very many people knew about it.  I just happened to know this woman who did know about it.  And there were people there from other colleges when I went.  There were two camps actually.  Rabbit Hollow was a boys camp and there was a companion girl's camp called I think Forest Lake.  In fact there's one reason I mentioned that because I don't know that very many people did know about it.  Let's see now, what else was odd -- oh, you'll love this.  We had this sign in our living room, which for some reason had been known as the Hilarium.  It was over the door to the dining room.  It was a quote from King Lear, "Her horse was ever soft, gentle and low.  An excellent thing in a woman."
I don't know that today's women would like that -- in fact, we didn't like it a whole lot, but -- but it's a bit of a reminder.  Dining rooms can get awfully noisy.  And there was -- there was a sampler that some wanted.  I don’t know where it came -- maybe it belonged to Mrs. Session's family or something.  On the mantle in the living room, it was a poem and I can't remember anything but the very beginning, "When ere you are by grief oppressed, repose it in a mother's breast."  And it goes on in a similar vein.
We had -- they must have the same rules, but I don't know if they call it the same thing.  There were two parlors on the ground floor, the front of the house.  One of them was the house mother's parlor where she could sit if she wanted to, or entertain other house mothers and play bridge or whatever she wanted to do.  And then next to it was what was called Pussser's (phonetic) parlor, and pussing was the name for courting in earlier times.  It was outmoded by this time but both of those rooms had fireplaces and so did the living room.  They all had working fireplaces which were occasionally used.  And the house mother's parlor is where we had after dinner coffee two -- I think it was two nights a week in demitasse cups, and a few reunions back they were selling those demitasse cups, the college china.  And I bought one for a souvenir, because I think it's -- I like that -- it was pretty (inaudible).  And I take it you don't do demitasse anymore.
ANDREANI:	No.
FIELD:	And we all had to help, you know, we had house jobs and one of which was drying dishes, which I did quite often.  And we dried them with a dishtowel.  We had a dishwasher.  I mean it was a new thing.  We had -- I think for my freshman year.  Maybe not, they may still have been washing in the sink my freshman year and a girl from town had the job to come and wash our dinner dishes for us, and put them in the wooden racks and shove them into the thing and take them out the other side and then we dried them and put them away.
And let's see what other house -- there wasn't anything terrible -- the same thing most anybody -- other houses, and especially the Quad houses had something called Squad that apparently you were on that and you did that sort of stuff for a week and then you were off for awhile but we had picked -- you know, we picked our jobs by individual days and we'd sign up for waitress on Monday noon and dry dishes Thursday evening and then watch, whatever –

ANDREANI:	So it was equally split up?
FIELD:	Well, each job was assigned an hour value.  Whether it took -- it was supposed to correspond with how long it really took, but some things took very little time, but they still -- you had to make sure you did it so -- so I was chairman of arranging that one year.  It was fascinating.  The custom was, actually, that the freshman had to do more hours than the next and so on.  The seniors, you know, we only did two and a half hours, and the juniors did three and the -- and it went down to freshman did four.  So whoever was in charge of it went around with a diagram and all the slots to fill in and -- and I believe we drew for first -- first the seniors drew numbers and picked their jobs and then each of the other classes.
ANDREANI:	Okay.  Natalie, I think we need to wrap up, but thank you so much for talking to me.
FIELD:	Oh, you're welcome.  I could go on forever, as you can see.
