
PEARSON:	This is Tanya Pearson and I’m conducting an interview with Mary Rose Pattee Caldwell Schlatter, Class of 1955, on May 22, 2015 for the Smith College Alumnae Oral History Project. Thank you very much for participating and I know we’re also going to be talking a bit about your mother, Rosemary McGinnis Caldwell, who was the class of 1915?

SCHLATTER:	Yes.

PEARSON:	So how I’ve generally been starting – you know, this is different because we’re doing the compare and contrast interview, but my first question is always how did you chose Smith?
SCHLATTER:	Well, kind of obvious. (laughter)  Well, I only applied to two schools. One was to Pembroke where my sister was, and Smith, but I always wanted to go to Smith and mama was always so proud of having gone to Smith. So we used to talk about it and so I applied and I got into Pembroke and mama said, “You make the choice,” and papa did, too. So that’s exactly where I wanted to go. My older sister – two years older – we’re very close – she was always the pretty one. (laughs)  She really was. She was like 5’7” and everybody remarked about how beautiful she was. And they said well Pattee does really well in school. She did just as well, but I was the little sister. I had an older brother, and he had gone to Princeton as I think I told you. He skipped a grade – so he was class of ’50 at Princeton, though he was like four and a half years older than I.

PEARSON:		So, it was not any-

SCHLATTER:	It was more like we were following – my father went to Princeton, mama went to Smith, so it was kind of up to me. And we had a couple of aunts who had gone to Brown, so that’s where my sister – so it was kind of a family thing. I never thought of applying anyplace else. I think somebody suggested I look into Mills College in California. Papa said, “Are you going to pay the train fare?” (laughs)  So, that didn’t happen.

PEARSON:		So you’re from the East Coast?

SCHLATTER:	Oh, I grew up in Morristown, New Jersey, which is outside of Philadelphia, and my father was a professor at Temple University. He was the Dean of the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences, and was a chemist – an organic chemist – and so is that enough question?

PEARSON:		Yes, that’s good.

SCHLATTER:	I just rattle on; everybody tells me I do.

PEARSON:		Trust me, that’s great. If there’s anything you feel like I’m missing.

WENTWORTH:	That’s what I was going to ask, where she was from, so that worked out well.

PEARSON:	OK. I’m so sorry about that. If you can think back to freshman year, how did you feel when you first arrived? Was it what you expected? Did you have an idea of what a typical “Smithy” was or-

SCHLATTER:	Well, I just was so excited to be going off to college. I have to say my whole experience – I was just a very happy camper. I had gone to Morristown Friends School for 13 years, which at that time was a very small school, but – in the Philadelphia area there’s a whole kind of Quaker league and as part of the story about my mother and father, though they met in the ninth grade, they didn’t get married until 19 and they both graduated in 1915, but my grandmother wouldn’t allow my mother to get married. One of the reasons was religious; papa was an Episcopalian and mama had been raised as a Roman Catholic although her father was a Presbyterian and was not real strong on the Catholic Church, but there was lots of tension going on. So, anyway after they did marry – they actually eloped finally – they are in their twenties by then – they eloped and when we children all went to Morristown Friends School where we had a religious training and background, but it was not denominational. We never went to church, per se, as a family. We used to go up to the Princeton chapel, but that’s kind of non-denominational, or maybe it was Presbyterian because Princeton was founded as a Presbyterian school. But anyway it was not the – but the Quaker – both mama and papa liked the Quaker ideals, you know.

PEARSON:	Before I get too far ahead in your Smith career, I know you want to talk about your mother’s history at Smith, too. So how did she come to Smith?

SCHLATTER:	Well she came as a transfer student. She was very high standing in her very small class at Princeton High School, 1911. I have in the folder the pictures of my mother and father when they graduated from Princeton High School, so the priest in Princeton where she grew up wanted her to go to Trinity. So she went to Trinity in Washington, DC – which is now a really dynamic school, kind of an inner-city school in Washington, but when my mother went there she thought all the girls were lovely and they were all so sweet to her. She was a very sweet, modest kind of person and I think they elected her secretary. In her letters she writes how much fun it was, but then she started studying and she began to feel that a lot of the girls were not serious about their work and she said, “I want to make something of myself.” Her father, unfortunately, Walter McGinnis, came from a wealthy family in Princeton, but he had a problem with alcohol and his parents threatened to disinherit him unless he quit drinking – and he had married my grandmother who came from a simpler background and she lived on a farm outside of Princeton and she was ten years younger than my grandfather, but she was the practical one. She would work hard and he was a dreamer – he was very intellectual – but he couldn’t get his act together, so to speak, and everybody loved him, but of course my grandmother was terribly disappointed in him because he really couldn’t hold a job, and so they were dependent – the grandparents bought their house – which is still there in Princeton on Vandevender Avenue – a block the college – from Princeton University – and mama was pretty much controlled – if that’s the right word – by her own mother and she said, “I want you to go to Trinity,” so off she went. She had some interesting letters in this portfolio that I have because one of her friends had a close connection with one of the senators so when the hearing of the Titanic came around my mother went to it – the friend got her into the hearings – and that’s pretty remarkable. She wrote all about the different – home to her sister – so she had an older sister, my Aunt Florence who is a very talented musician – was a pianist and she played as the accompanist for the Princeton Choral Society and also at Westminster Choir College for their choir. She really was quite something, but then she felt my Aunt Florence needed to earn some money and she had students and she began to develop some problems with arthritis in her fingers for some reason and she didn’t feel that her touch – she wasn’t concert – she couldn’t go on to study – they didn’t have that much money. In fact when my mother went to Smith, my grandmother would take in students – it was a great big house they owned – and they rented out – it was a double house, they rented out half of it – and they also took in roomers, students, who lived there. It was kind of – it was a struggle for them – and money was scarce. The tuition – she wanted to go to Smith or Vassar she applied to – and she was accepted at both. I think she sort of favored Smith because one – the tuition was, I think $350, that did not include her room, and then Vassar was $50 more and she said – another thing was that she thought the girls at Smith had a very good reputation and that the girls at Vassar – some of them were pretty fast (laughter). That was in one of the letters, which is kind of funny. So she was thrilled. She couldn’t get into a dorm her sophomore year, so she transferred her sophomore year because she just felt that if she wanted to make something of herself, she said, she wanted to be a teacher. She kind of put up with everything, but she was always anxious about whether she would pass and she made friends easily but she had to live I think on West Street – I’d have to look it up – she had like a rooming house.

PEARSON:		That sounds familiar, or Green Street?

SCHLATTER:	Yes, it’s right next to Green Street. And then she lived at 21 Green Street? I have that in the letter. It’s on the computer, so I just transcribed them a long time ago.

PEARSON:		You’ll probably find them-

SCHLATTER:	I know it’s just so provoking that I’m coming to this interview.

PEARSON:	Can I jump back to you? You graduated in ’55, so you were here from ’51 to ’55?

SCHLATTER:	Right. And as I said when I got here, I had come from this small school – there were 25 people in my class – at Morristown Friends School, so I was into everything and I wasn’t over confident, but I just kind of thought – when I got here I really had to study and then we were assigned – our first assignment was an English composition class and I wrote about this in my 25th yearbook. I wrote this very moving vignette about the homeless men who were living under the Delaware River Bridge – which was the section of Philadelphia that we crossed over, the Delaware River, when we went into town – I thought it was very poignant what I wrote (laughs). So I handed in this paper – it was a teaching assistant, she had dyed jet black hair, and she was kind of terrifying looking – and she gave me a D+. But not only that, she wrote across the top, This is ridiculous.

PEARSON:		Oh, no (laughs).

SCHLATTER:	I was crushed because everybody says, Oh you write so well, Pattee, blah, blah. Well anyway, but I persevered and I studied history and I majored in history, and I finally worked my way – I lost my $100 scholarship at one point, but then-

PEARSON:		You said it was a $1,300?

SCHLATTER:	I think it was 16 or 17 when I started in 1951, and when they raised it – I was kind of worried about that – anyway I don’t think I got any financial help. I could go to Albright and mama said, “No, I don’t want you to” – she was sort of proud and she said, “You’re not going to do that. You have to concentrate on your studies.” As I said, she worked with me in high school because she taught Latin – I took Latin, and I was terrible at things like math, I just don’t get it, my brain doesn’t work that way – so I was very, very happy here and I made two very, very good friends. One was Virginia Cooper – Ginger Cooper – and my lifelong friend is Patricia Peterson McCurdy now. She was Patsy Peterson and we were all in this house – Gardner House – together. Both Ginger and Patsy went away for their junior year, back to Philadelphia and Patsy was actually had a small scholarship just like I did – and Patsy is now a very distinguished author and has written some wonderful books, all of which are at the Nielsen Library and which Reese Julian – I was calling him Julian Reese for a long time in our emails – but we have on display at our headquarters – but she wrote three biographies about natural historians. Her last one is The Man Who Had Been King about Joseph Bonaparte, the brother of Napoleon, who lived in exile in Bordentown, New Jersey for 20 years, which is right near Philadelphia and Princeton. So, his home there was a beautiful estate on the Delaware River – and very few people really knew anything about it because the house was destroyed and there’s nothing there – there’s some kind of a Bible Institute or something that’s there on the property now. But anyway, she then co-authored the 200th anniversary of the Academy of Natural Sciences in Philadelphia – which is a mega-book, which is full of fantastic illustrations – the whole history of how they founded the Academy of Natural Sciences and that was in 1812. Is that right, yes, it was 2012 when the book came out. We had stayed friends and she is still writing and our friend Ginger from Philadelphia didn’t come back to Smith and graduate, but Patsy did. And then several friends stayed with all these years that were just special, Margaret Reed Moran, who is out in Birmingham, Michigan, but I didn’t have a huge class. I got more active with the class about ten years ago after the 50th, and I became the class secretary. So that’s how I met a whole lot of new classmates. Now in my fashion run the class website.

PEARSON:		Yes, I read that in your email (laughter).

SCHLATTER:	Well, it’s this big cliff that I fall off every once in a while because I don’t know how to do it, but – and 95% of the class never even looks at it anyway. Some of them are very computer-literate and some of them – like Jan Orsman – laughingly I said, “Jan, do you realize when you go on to the on-line directory I can’t access any information.” I was trying to get her telephone number. And she said, “Oh, well that can’t be true, I know I’m in the directory, I know I’m in the directory.” So I said, “Look, go on-line right now.” She didn’t really know how to look up the directory. And so the last time I looked, she still wasn’t on it. But she has her print out of one. So then I had the 50th yearbook and so I just dialed that phone number which was still the same phone number – that’s how I got to talk to her (laughter). I don’t do very much with it, but it’s just to get everybody’s information out there, so it’s there.

PEARSON:	Do you mind talking just a little bit about social life on campus? Or the campus atmosphere in general? We asked a lot about academics, but I find that the stories about the Father’s Day – the pinning of the Amherst men – and it seems like it was a very rich social life.

SCHLATTER:	Well I didn’t have a rich social life – I had an assortment of crushes that went nowhere. I did date – this is funny because the new dean – I’m going blank on her name, of course, talked at lunch for us-

PEARSON:		Lisker, Donna Lisker?

SCHLATTER:	Yeah. She’s the new dean and she came here from Duke?

PEARSON:		Yes.

SCHLATTER:	That was great. That was exciting. I guess she went to Williams College. Well I had a date one time with this boy who grew up in Philadelphia. He was very academic. Bill Mismer was his name. Big, good-looking guy and I met him someplace and so then he invited me to come up to Williams. So he said, “I’ve got a friend so bring a friend.” This was my junior year and so I asked a senior girl – a girl who was a class ahead of me – maybe it was my sophomore year – her name was Patricia Pack Patsy Pack. She was class of ’54. So she said, “Oh sure.” She was real fun and cute girl. So we go up there and this was OK but he wanted to go to the football game. We thought we were going to get lunch or at least a hot dog, so we get whisked off and the date that he brought for Patsy was just – ugh – horrible (laughter). Jerk. So, we say, “We’re a little hungry and we’re just coming up to sit.” So he bought us a candy bar, an Almond Joy. So that for years was our standing joke – are you hungry? Do you want an Almond Joy? (laughs)  But anyway, so then they wanted to go to the frat house, so of course, I didn’t drink – I hated the taste of beer. I think I had a rum and ginger – no, what was it – rye and ginger ale. They made some little weak drink for me that I sort of held onto. And they were drinking beer and wanting to party and I was like, Oh God, how can we get out of this? What are we going to do? So we ran into some other classmates – some Garnerites – who were going back and we said, “Is there any chance that you can-? By then they were off partying and back at the bar. Patsy and I are just, We have to get out of here. And so they said they would take us back and I said, “I guess I should go up and tell them we have to leave.” So I went up to where they were and the last scene I had of him was that he’s in a conga line, literally, with a lampshade on his head (laughter). If only I had an iPhone, you know, taking a video (laughter). I  I could still see that. Later I was visiting a friend of mine in Florida who went to Mt. Holyoke and married a Williams’s guy and it was in the same class. So I looked up Bill Mismer and he had a very distinguished life. He had a big job; he is a vice president of something or other (laughter). So I can’t say that I had any rip snorting social life at all. 

PEARSON:		That’s pretty good.

SCHLATTER:	I went out with some – Patsy had two cousins who went to Dartmouth. They were – one of them Ari Judson was the nicest, nicest guy in the world. But it wasn’t romantic. He was just a nice friend, and that was fun. We went out some. But there was no great romance. And there was a nice guy that I dated who went to Trinity and he used to go ice skating on Paradise Pond and that was kind of fun. That was it. So then I graduated and I was going to room with an assortment of people and they all decided they were getting married. So this little string of people – and I had met who’s now my husband’s – younger sister – who came in as a transfer student to Smith. She had gone to Duke for two years and then went to Italy. Well, she went to travel because my husband’s father was an Air Force General with a NATO assignment – head of the allied forces in Italy. So he had this difficult assignment in Naples (laughs) in a villa. And then he moved up to Florence and Anne had left Duke for a year to live with her family in Italy and she studied Italian, but mostly just had fun. Then her father said, “You’re going back to school now. Your playing is over.” So they were moving to Florence and she didn’t want to leave Italy so she joined the Smith group in Italy and then she decided not to go back to Duke but because she liked the Smith girls so much, to come and graduate from Smith. This was in 1954, so it was ’53 when she actually came back, and no one had ever only spent one year in residence and gotten a Smith degree. But because she had been over in Europe they say, “Well if you make the dean’s list, then you will be able to graduate.” So, she was a very smart, bright girl and she majored in accounting and literature and – was it Mr. De LaFranca or something – I’m kind of remembering some of these names. She and I were going to go work for Time magazine, I think, someplace – or New York – we were going to be career women. Well she ends up a year ahead of me – we had become friends – and she graduated and went to work in Norfolk, Virginia because her father was then down in Norfolk and she worked for the newspaper there and wrote the women’s pages. So I had to kind of look around. She was married, Ginger was married, Patsy, Biani, everybody was married – Margaret Reed out in Michigan. So, I said, “Well, I think there’s nothing for me to do but to go home.” So I did go home and then I tried to get a job at Curtis Publishing Company in Philadelphia because they did Ladies Home Journal, Saturday Evening Post, Holiday magazine – which I don’ think they have – American Home – I can’t remember-

PEARSON:		Were you a writer or-?

SCHLATTER:	Well I just wanted to work for a magazine. I was a history major so I really didn’t qualify for – we had no career center or anything like that. You were just on your own. So I went home to live with my parents – and my sister was getting married – so I thought well, maybe I can get an apartment with somebody but there wasn’t anybody I really knew and my high school friends – they were having apartments in New York, but with their Mt. Holyoke friends. So I applied at the Curtis Publishing Company and they said, “Can you type?” and I said, “Well, yes.” And they said, “Can you take shorthand?” and I said, “No.” (laughs)  So then I went to the Philadelphia School of Office Training for my graduate degree. I took six weeks of shorthand (laughs). Then I got a job working as the secretary for the assistant managing editor of the Saturday Evening Post who turned out to be a mentor. When I first went in, he was in charge of copyrights and new manuscripts that came in that people could submit. And more and more he started passing things off to me, letting me read stories and see if it was worth passing along, and then there were a lot of form letters – if someone had published an article in the Saturday Evening Post you had to get the copyright – I can’t remember all of the terms anymore – but you had to get the rights, certain letters you had to write. So first he had me come in and I’d be in there with my pencil and he’d say, “Dear Sir.” (laughs)  “Dear Sir I am writing” he was just laboring along and I’d say, “Slow down, slow down.” (laughs)  So he said what he wanted to say and so I managed to laboriously take it down and I just saying, “I hate this so much.” And then he kind of looked at me and would say, “Well, that’s what I want to say, why don’t you just go in and write the letter?” So, I thought, oh good, and from that point on he just handed me the letters and said, “Say this on the top,” and then I wrote the letters and off they went. He just kept giving me more responsibility. It was great, you know. Then Curtis opened a publishing training program – Curtis Publishing Company – and guess what? Only men. And so I came in and said, “Well, can I apply for this?” and they said, “Well, right now they are only soliciting men.” So, Mr. Stevens – William J. Stevens – he has since died a long time ago – he was like 20 years older – he’d be 100 now, God (laughter). But anyway, he died – he was a big smoker – we all thought that was so cool – and so he said, “Well, they are doing all these tests.” He did let me take the test and I guess I did well enough on whatever it was they were looking for that I actually got the job and finally got my name on the masthead as “editorial assistant.” So I was really impressed with myself, but in the meantime I had met my friend Anne Schlatter’s brother at the wedding. He was a fighter pilot, he was a West Pointer, and he was a fighter pilot and he was down in Georgia. So we had a lot of fun at the wedding, danced away. I think his parents were trying to marry him off because he was four years older than I and the mother wanted to make sure – his southern mother really wanted to make sure he married the right sort – although I really wasn’t quite the right sort because I wasn’t a southerner. She was from San Antonio, Texas and had very rigid ideas about what was what. She was a great person, but she was a very powerful person. So we had a long distance romance over the next two years because he was down in Georgia – he flew up – he asked me to go to the Army Navy game in Philadelphia – he was going to fly up for that – but I couldn’t because my sister got married that weekend. My brother was in the Navy – a flight surgeon in Florida – so I flew down there, but I really didn’t spend much time with him (laughter). I didn’t even really know who he was. But I liked him a lot, and felt like I kind of loved him, too. And it kind of grew on me and when he asked me to marry him, I said, “Let’s do it.” And so after two years we did get married, and that was 1957, so we’re married 57 years now, going on 58. And he’s doing fine but he got out of flying and he wanted to go to graduate school – he was going to go to Texas – and they sent him to MIT instead. So he got a master’s in aeronautics and astronautics there and then went into the aerospace business when he got out of the service. He stayed in 21 years, I think. But he really was an engineer. He was not a general-type like his father at all. He’s very quiet and he’s an engineer, you know – they’re different – they’re not the big hail fellow – type of leader. He had an interesting career; he’s a scientist, good at a lot of things that I’m not very good at.

PEARSON:		Did you stop working when you got married?

SCHLATTER:	Well, yes, I did. Because I had to move to Georgia, which was horrible (laughs). I lived in this awful housing and he was flying these jets, you know. I was there and had my first baby within a year and I got pregnant three months afterwards – what did I know? (laughter)  When I got there it was Air Force wife – (tone sounds) does that mean my time is over? I’m blathering on here.

PEARSON:		We do have five minutes left.

SCHLATTER:	OK. Let me answer one more question. I probably got way off subject, I tend to do that. My family tells me, Mom you’re way off subject.

PEARSON:	Sometimes those are the best interviews because I wouldn’t have even asked a lot of the information that you’ve given. Some of the funny stories – some of them aren’t that funny – so I appreciate the conga line dating story. That was really funny.

SCHLATTER:	It was very different. The only way you could really meet anybody – of course now you can get on the bus and you meet a boy (laughs). None of that was available – somebody would know somebody – and a lot of girls had friends and I just didn’t know anybody.

PEARSON:	Well, you kind of already started answering one of the closing questions, which is how has your Smith education served you since graduation personally, professionally or both? And with your job, that kind of covered the-

SCHLATTER:	Well, that was very short-lived. After that I had four children and they are wonderful children, but I was pretty much a stay-at-home mom, did the PTA – but I always did some writing – like I edited – like the wives club newspaper, I edited the church newsletter, I used to write funny sketches – I worked when we were in the Los Angeles area – I did a lot of volunteering type stuff. The biggest regret of my life is that I did not go back and get a master’s degree in museum work because now my volunteer job – I’m at the library – I live in Colonial Williamsburg – I mean I live in Williamsburg, not in the town, but I volunteer at Colonial Williamsburg in the library, the Rockefeller Library. I would’ve been a very happy person doing museum work, but I didn’t really know how to manage that. My husband, he was travelling all the time when he was in the aerospace business and there I was with Spaghetti-Os and the four kids and getting everybody to school and they all did really well in school and they all have master’s degrees themselves. My oldest daughter is a neurologist and second daughter has an MBA and now she’s going through a traumatic time because her marriage is changing status – that’s been going on a long time – but she decided she would do a different career field. She was an economics major and so forth and was really good in investments, and she worked for Arthur Andersen in Europe until Arthur Andersen imploded. But she is now studying speech therapy – she’d like to do something completely different kind of career. My son lives in Las Vegas and works at a company called JT3 which is a spin-off of Raytheon – military accounting – and I’m not exactly sure what it is.  My youngest daughter is a dean. She got a master’s degree in special education and she’s the dean at Pierce College, which is part of the Los Angeles Community System, and she is the Dean of Special Services – or anyone with any kind of disability whether it’s autism, it could be deafness, it could be physical, cerebral palsy, any kind of disability – and they have programs and she has to administer them. She’s very good at math – she was sort of a late bloomer. She was not academic in high school – her older sisters were very academic – but she’s just as smart as they are and so much more practical. The two older ones kind of fly off here and there, but it’s interesting you know. And they are not my accomplishment at all, but I think they had a happy home life and a good start and they are all friends, which is nice. So I enjoy my volunteer work but I am frustrated with myself because I kept thinking I was going to write something and have it ready and all of a sudden 2015 is here and it’s a hundred years, and I feel like I let mama down – that I didn’t get it written. But maybe not I’ll be inspired to kind of-

PEARSON:	Maybe this visit and this interview will – talk to Nancy and look at the yearbook-

SCHLATTER:	Yeah, a lot of her letters are very mundane, but they are interesting about what things cost. Like a nickel for an ice cream cone, of course when I was a kid you could get a nickel ice cream cone, but she felt so guilty if she bought something, but then she writes – one of the interesting things she wrote – she bought I think it was $10, which is a lot of money, but it was a ticket, a series ticket – I’ll have to find it in the letters – for concerts that were at the Academy of Music. The last two people she mentioned in her senior year were Fritz Chrysler playing, and then a Russian pianist – whose name I can’t remember now, I’ll have to look it up – and she had it spelled correctly. So I Googled him and he was this amazing pianist and he came here-

PEARSON:		I saw that in the Sophian Newsletter.

SCHLATTER:	In 1915 when he came?

PEARSON:		Yeah, that’s so strange, I forget his name.

SCHLATTER:	He’s a Russian pianist – it’s right in the letter. I’ll print them all out again so I can get all of that information. 

WENTWORTH:	I have a question when you’re done.

PEARSON:		You can ask but then we’ll have to-

WENTWORTH:	Did you write letters a lot in your adult life, after Smith?

SCHLATTER:	I used to, yeah. I have a huge box of letters home, but a lot of letters I sent to my sister which were nothing about – this boy smiled at me today – (laughter). I was just an airhead, I really was. Today’s young women are writing about – and I am aware – that’s why I can’t stand the politics today with all this fundraising is making me crazy. We’re talking about political donations – like a pyramid scheme – you bring someone in and they get $20,000 and those people bring in $20,000 and we’re getting millions to waste on stupid television ads, which are completely misleading and meanwhile people in Nepal are suffocating in mud and I said, “When we’re talking about fundraising, I don’t understand it. Politicians throwing mud at each other. Let’s talk about programs and the infrastructure, building bridges and doing something about the train.” I wrote to Patsy Peterson McCurdy because she rode the train out of Philadelphia to New York all the time and so many people commented for him to be going 100 miles an hour. Why isn’t our system where we’re spending money – millions and millions and millions of dollars – on fixing that train line routes and not on this ridiculous public relations politician. I don’t understand – but I think I’m just an old lady – nobody cares what I think.

PEARSON:	I care. I’m seeing your next career move right now (laughter). Thank you very much for participating. I want to show you the yearbook, too, so-

SCHLATTER:	That would be-
