

SCHNEIDER:	This is Hannah Schneider, and I’m here with Ileana Jiménez for the Alumnae Oral History Project.  And I’ll just start with, where are you from?

JIMÉNEZ:	I am originally from the Bronx.  I was born, actually, in a hospital called Flower Fifth Avenue Hospital on the corner of Central Park and right near the El Museo de Barrio.  Right.  Right.  But it’s no longer a hospital.  And my parents — that’s — the hospital’s in Manhattan.  And then my parents raised me in the Bronx and Long Island.

SCHNEIDER:	Cool.  And how did you come to Smith College?

JIMÉNEZ:	That is a story that changed my life, so if you want to hear that story — I was a senior in high school and was taking an AP English class and Mrs. Welcome, Mrs. Angela Welcome, was my AP English teacher and we had just finished reading a whole host of texts like Ibsen’s A Doll House, Hamlet, et cetera.  And we finally got to James Joyce’s A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man, and I remember just being completely entranced by the main character, Stephen Dedalus.  Within the first few pages, he’s bullied on the playground, and I immediately connected to him because I had been bullied on the playground.
I was called, “Afro.”  I was called the N-word.  I was called, “Spic.”  I was called all kinds of names that were racist words from the early ’80s, and it was Reagan era.  And by the time I got to high school, I had never read a text that reflected that kind of bullying on the playground in a book.  And I thought, This Stephen character, I connect with him.  And then I would see him in scenes where he was writing underneath the bedcovers, and he was becoming an intellectual.  And he was, you know, resisting the authority of the Catholic Church and just a whole range of things that I could identify with.
But the main question I had was, Why haven’t I read a novel by, first of all, a woman portraying a female character that has the same storyline?  And in particular what I was looking for at 18 years old living on Long Island, going to a large public school, why haven’t I read a book by a Puerto Rican author?  Both of my parents are from Puerto Rico.
Why haven’t I read about a protagonist who’s also Puerto Rican, who’s living in the 20th century, who’s been bullied and became a writer or wanted to be a writer?  Just, I wanted to know why, so my AP English teacher said, “End of the year, we’re going to write this big research paper, and you’re going to select a text that meant something to you from the class.  And you’re going to do research on other texts, and, kind of, bringing them in conversation with each other, and do research.”
So I already knew I wanted to do James Joyce’s A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man, and then I went to the local library and back then there were card catalogs.  And I, you know, started opening these card catalogs and finding books like Sylvia Plath’s The Bell Jar, Erica Jong’s Fear of Flying, Simone de Beauvoir’s The Second Sex, and I would find myself really in these, like, empty library bookshelf rooms in this library — a public library.
And I remember picking up Simone de Beauvoir’s The Second Sex and Sandra Gilbert and Susan Gubar’s Mad Women in the Attic, and I thought, “I’ve never read anything like this.”  I thought I was discovering feminism.  I didn’t even have a word for it.  I just thought, “These are women talking about women,” and I’d never read any of this before.
And so I wound up reading — writing this long paper about A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man, Sylvia Plath’s The Bell Jar, Erica Jong’s Fear of Flying and Judy Chicago’s Through the Flower, which is an autobiography about her piece of art called, “The Dinner Party.”  And I put all those texts in conversation, and what I found through my research was that people had gone to places like women’s colleges.  I’d never heard of women’s colleges.  And Sylvia Plath, obviously — and I thought, This is it.  I want to go to Smith College.  I want to go to a women’s college.
But by that point in my senior year, it was the spring.  Applications had been already sent in.  Acceptances were coming in, and I had gotten accepted to BU [Boston University].  And so, I went to Boston University, and I had a plan, which was to get on the T [Massachusetts Bay Transit Authority] within the first week.
I had an interview at Wellesley.  It went really awful.  It was an awful interview.
And then I got on the Peter Pan [Bus] about a month later, and I went — I headed to Western Mass [Massachusetts], and I arrived at Smith at night.  And I remember my host, my Gold Key guide, picked me up, and I saw her.  She was — it was — she was wearing some kind of, like, wintery sweater, and she — you know, her face was kind of sparkling, and I thought, Oh my, God.  I want to be her.  And she walked me to Talbot [House], and then she walked me the next day to the admissions office.
And I had my interview, and it went beautifully.  And then I went to a Shakespeare class, and it was beautiful.  And I thought, This is the place where I want to be.  So I had to transfer in the middle of my first year of college because I wanted my first year so badly to be here.

SCHNEIDER:	What was the transition like coming from BU to Smith because those are two very different–

JIMÉNEZ:	It was awful. (laughs) It was awful.  In fact, I went through a very serious period of depression in that particular winter of ’94.  So I graduated from high school in ’93, and I arrived in the winter of discontent.  It was just heavy, heavy snow, January ’94, transfer student.  I’m a first year — and the other thing was I really wanted to be called a first year and not a freshman, so that was my other, like, 18-year-old mind saying, I have to be at Smith in order to be called a first year determination.
Yeah, and that’s how I got here, and it was not a good transition.  Everybody else had already bonded.  Everybody knew their HONS [Head of New Students] and had their big sister.  Yeah, I’d — and I’d felt kind of out of the loop, and it took a few months for me to kind of settle in and feel like I was a part of Smith College itself.

SCHNEIDER:	What house did you live in when you were here?

JIMÉNEZ:	I lived in Lawrence House.  I lived there all four years.

SCHNEIDER:	And so as far as your social life goes, I guess, was your house part of your social life at all or did you–

JIMÉNEZ:	When I arrived at Smith, my HONS actually surrounded me — they’d be — they — it’s actually sophomores.  They were sophomores.  They were sophomores, obviously, at the time.  And they were the ones who kind of brought me into their fold, so I’m kind of almost closer to the class of ’96 than I am to the class of ’97.  Especially initially, they were the ones who really welcomed me.
And so my social life — I mean, I can go into the fact that I started dating a senior. (laughs) That was my social life my first year — my first semester at Smith.  I didn't really have close first-year friends, and I was dating a guy who had gone to Cornell [University].  And there was a senior at Lawrence House who would wear this, like, black leather jacket and, you know, cool earrings and black pants and black boots, and she would walk into Tyler House, like, cool.
And I thought, There’s got to be a way for me to seduce this person (laughs) somehow — you know, befriend this person first probably.  And I would just kind of listen to her at dinner, and she really didn’t quite know that I existed.  And then one night, I asked her to go to ice cream at Herrell’s.  As we walked downtown to Herrell’s and — it was like a movie — there — it was going beautifully, and out of nowhere, some guy walks up to us and starts saying my name.  And I’m like, There’s no one here who knows me.  No one should know me in Northampton besides my Smith community, especially not a male voice.  And he was, like, Oh, we went to high school together.  Don’t you reco— I did not recognize this person at all.  And I thought, This guy’s totally blowing my cover.  Here I am trying to, like, somehow get together with this senior, and I’m a first year.
Anyway, on the way — I kind of got rid of him, and then I — we walk — we were walking back home to Lawrence House, and I finally said to her, “I like you.”  Like, that wasn’t just some outing to Herrell’s Ice Cream.  That was, like, me asking you out on a date, and she just got completely flustered, this rough and tumble, kind of tough exterior, got totally flustered.  So we wound up dating for the rest of the semester until she graduated, and then she went off on a Fulbright [Program].
Yeah, the rest of my social life at Smith was a combination of really my becoming a very involved student government geek, so I was, like, on the honor board.  I was a senator sophomore year.  I was junior class president.  I was involved — you’ll appreciate this.  So, I was involved on the original Campus Center Committee because the junior class president, by default, gets to sit on the Board of Trustees, at that time.  I don’t know if that’s still true.  So the junior class president, at that time, got to sit on the Board of Trustees, and you got to be a part of the college — what did they call it?  It was some committee on, like, facilities or programs or I couldn’t — I can’t remember exactly, but it was an important committee, and we were tasked.
Ruth Simmons was the president, and we were tasked to create a task force to do focus group interviews across campus — different constituents, students, faculty, staff — and gather data about what they wanted out of a campus center.  And this was in ’97, like ’96, ’97.
And we put together a report, and Don Baumer and I were — we —  he was kind of the chair of the committee, and I was, kind of, the student co-chair, I guess.  And we put together this report and it lead to the building of — that we know now.  And I remember that one of the key things that we got out of that — those focus group interviews — were, We want light.  So whenever I see that campus center, I think in some indirect way, I was a part of making sure that that building has a lot of light.

SCHNEIDER:	That’s a nice moment.  So my next question, just out of curiosity, so, like, I think while you were at Smith there were some party rules that changed over time.  And I guess my question is, did you get into any trouble ever?

JIMÉNEZ:	(laughs) Yeah, there were people — it’s — I remember the social chair rules, like, they were extremely — there were all these, like, sub-parts of them, and they were very complex, and I never understood the rules.  I never understood them.  I kind of just let it — the social chairs figure it out.
Honestly, trouble — I mean, I think the most, I guess, crazy that I got in was, I think I — I think that I was drinking at a party at Smith — at Lawrence House, actually — and there was this first year — I was already like a sophomore or junior.  There was a first year that I liked, and her boyfriend was there.  And I had drunk a little too much, so I wound up kissing her in front of her boyfriend to kind of spite him.
Things like that that are (unclear) not — the poor decision making of drinking.  But, no, I didn't really get in trouble in terms of the social life so much.  I — that’s not really an area that was–

SCHNEIDER:	So Smith was pretty political.  Like, I mean, it still is, but (laughter) (unclear).

JIMÉNEZ:	It still is.

SCHNEIDER:	Yeah. (laughter) But there were a lot of, like, on-campus protests and that sort of, like, sit-ins, rallies, that sort of thing.  Did you–

JIMÉNEZ:	Yeah, the ‘90s.

SCHNEIDER:	Yeah.

JIMÉNEZ:	So I was here between ’94 to ’97 because I got here in the middle of that first year.  I remember — first of all, just to give it a little bit more political context — I remember voting for Clinton on an absentee ballot while I was here.  And it was the first time that I got to vote for a president, and I remember feeling like, Is this going to count because it was an absentee ballot?  I also remember doing jury duty downtown.  I also remember that — I don’t know if this is still true — that the mayor of Northampton was a woman at the time.  So that, like — so nationally it was Bill Clinton.  Also, just as I had entered my first year of college, Ruth Bader Ginsburg had been seated as the second woman on the court [Supreme Court of the United States of America].  And the other end of my high school years, in the beginning like early ’90s was the Anita Hill sexual harassment charge against Clarence Thomas.
When I graduated in ’97, Ellen came out on television.  Like, we li–  that was like an event in the house.  We all sat in our Lawrence House living room, which by that point there wasn’t — we had lost our in-house dining by that point, so that dining room had been turned into another living room.  And there was a television in there, and Ellen — everybody knew that Ellen was about — was going to come out, and so we all watched that.  So that was like — that was what kind of book-ended my years.
Politically, ’93 to ’97 there was a lot going on there.  I was — I was attuned to it, but I was so focused on my own personal identity development.  The fact that I was first generation, was first in my family — my personal, kind of, nuclear family to go to college.  You know, coming from a household where neither of my parents had gone to college, so I was so focused on being a student that I didn't always focus on what was going on around me, in terms of the global political climate.
But, like, while I was there — while I was here at Smith the Hill–  like, Hillary Clinton said her famous words in 1995 at the Beijing conference.  You know, “Human rights are women’s rights, and women’s rights are human rights.”  And it’s like, I knew that that was happening, but somehow I didn’t — I wasn’t always as engaged as I should have been.
And it wasn’t until I left Smith that I became incredibly and increasingly more politically aware, but it was because of Smith.  Smith gave me the tools to do that, even if I didn't always do it while I was here.
I will say that what I’m remembering right now is that the Nosotras group used to do these, like, No Grape signs as a way to protest farm — you know, to support farm workers in California.  So it was in the air at Smith.  I just wasn’t always as connected to it.  And I think maybe part of it had to do with, you know, I was just really focused on being a student and not always, for some reason, on the outside world, which is unfortunate.

SCHNEIDER:	So I do want to talk about what happened in your life after Smith.  Firstly, you mentioned like being first gen and — how did you feel — so you’re exploring, like, these new aspects of yourself or some old aspects of yourself and just who you are at Smith.  And I guess I’m wondering how that played into your experience here.  Did you  — was there, like, a lot of classicism, racism, homophobia, like, that sort of thing, sort of running through the student body?

JIMÉNEZ:	That I remember more.

SCHNEIDER:	Yeah.

JIMÉNEZ:	Yes.  So the way that I felt that were through the little things like even just food.  Right?  So the first time I’d ever had spanakopita was here.  I’d never had mesclun greens.  I’d always had iceberg lettuce.  Never had hummus.  There were just a rea– sushi.  I’d never had sushi.  So, like, there were — and, you know, people would talk about sushi, and I was like, What?  I don't know what you’re talking about.  I’d never had tofu.
I remember one time we went — we was like — It was Mountain Day, and we had — or one of those days when we had off, and we went to — we drove to Boston, and we spent the day in Cambridge.  It was lovely, and we stopped at a Chinese restaurant near Harvard.  And we sat down, and everybody ordered a plate.  And we, kind of, shared, and I started eating this incredibly tender chicken.  And I thought, “Wow, this is really good.”  And someone said — I said, “This is really great chicken,” or something like that.   And someone said, “That’s tofu.”  And I thought, “Oh my —” and I was kind of embarrassed because I didn’t know what tofu was.  I had heard of it, but I didn’t — I’d never had it.
So it was things like that where food became one of the first indicators of difference and the fact that my friends had had experiences in restaurants or eating a range of food.  I had grown up with, like, rice and beans, avocado, plantains, like, everyday Puerto Rican food.  Iceberg lettuce.
The other way that I was an outsider in that sense was my accent, which was I came to Smith with a very strong Long Island accent.  And I was made fun of by my peers, and, you know, I remember sitting in the dining room and listening very carefully to how people said words, like, instead of saying, “Mwall,” I would say, “Mall.”  Or “Dwug,” dog.  And just really being conscious of how people were saying certain words and just embedding that and imprinting it in my mind.  Like, that’s how she said it.  She’s from Ohio.  She’s from Illinois.  I should listen to how she talks or she’s from Portland and went to private school.  I should listen to how she talks.
So that was much — I was more aware of that — and that’s — and maybe that’s what I mean by personal identity development.  Like, I was so focused on becoming this other person, in a way, and, like, shedding what I had come from in many ways that I didn't always have time to read the paper because I was so focused on whatever pol– like, the intra — interpersonal politics than I was with what was going on out here.  So, yeah, so food, accent.
It’s funny.  I have wanted to join Nosotras, but I felt kind of embarrassed because I wasn’t Chicana.  And even though I was coming to my own feminist/queer identity through reading Chicana feminism and from this text — and, actually, so the end of that story is that when I finally came to Smith, I took Nancy Sternbach’s Latina and Latin American Women Writers class.  And when I arrived, I actually – this was back in the day when there was, like, directories.  And you would, like, open up the directory.
And I called Nancy Sternbach on the phone, and I said, “I’d love to take your Latina/Latin American Women Writers class,” as soon as I arrived at Smith in January of ’94.  And she said, “That class is only for sophomores.  You — why don’t you take it in two years?”  And I said, “You only teach this class every other year, which means I’m going to ha– I would have to wait until I’m a junior to take your class.”  I said, “I need this class now.  Like, I am hungry for this class now.”  When I’d just wrote this big paper about Portrait of the Artist and Sylvia Plath, and I’m like, I need to see myself.  Like, I didn’t say, “I need to see myself,” but that’s really what I was saying because I was so desperate.  And she said, “Yes.”
And to this day, I credit Nancy Sternbach as the professor who changed everything for me, in terms of why I became a feminist teacher.  All those early texts that I read in her class shaped my consciousness.
So, as much as Chicana feminism was a part of awakening me to my body and my political consciousness, I didn't join Nosotras because I was too embarrassed.   I was, like, I’m not Chicana.  Maybe I don’t speak Spanish enough.  I’m Puerto Rican.  I’m (unclear).  I’m from New York.  I’m not from California, so it was this like regional thing that I had in my mind, like maybe I wouldn’t be accepted or they wouldn’t accept me.  Maybe I created a narrative that wasn’t true, but that’s what I perceived.
I didn’t join the — what was then called — the LGSA [Lesbian Gay Straight Alliance].  I perceived it as mainly white, queer women, and back then we didn’t say queer.  It was, like, white lesbian women.  And I just could not fit into a white lesbian group, and I couldn't fit into the mainly Chicana/Latina group.
And so, I joined student government.  Student government was, like, my space to just be me because I couldn’t go to either side.

SCHNEIDER:	So that sounds like a good segue to what you’ve been doing since Smith and how Smith has helped you, hindered you, guided you.  Any thoughts on that would be great.

JIMÉNEZ:	Yeah.  There's not a day of my 20 years in teaching that Smith has not imprinted in what I do.  It’s just — it is the DNA of my entire career.
I remember drawing on my Smith College notebooks my whole schedule for the following year, and I would, like, rearrange it with different courses.  But what I was doing really was — when I was choosing my English courses, I was also choosing what I imagined myself teaching in the future.
And it’s funny that I never took an education class here, not a single education class.  And yet, I’ve been in teaching for 20 years.
So I left Smith in ’97.  I got a job.  I had — Ruth Simmons was the president at the time, and I had — at that time she had visited the Young Women’s Leadership School in East Harlem.  It was pretty much in its early stages.  It might have been like its first or second year or maybe a few years in.  And I had this fantasy that I was going to work at the Young Women’s Leadership School in New York, in Manhattan, East Harlem.  And I was solidified in that when I saw Ruth in a New York Times article featuring her visiting the school.
I somehow secured an interview and the principal kept saying, “No.  No.  No, you have no teaching experience.  You have nothing to offer.”  And I said, “I can work for free.  I can be a tutor.  I don’t have to be paid.  You don’t have to hire me.”  I was just (laughs) — I was just offering myself, and she just kept saying, “No.”
So I came back to my campus with my tail between my legs, and I made an appointment with Ruth — President Ruth Simmons.  And I said, “What did I do wrong?” (laughs) And she said, “Ileana, sit down.”  She said, “First of all, you are graduating from Smith College in a few weeks.  For the rest of your life,” she said this, “people are going to be threatened by you.”  And it was like she predicted my entire life because that is exactly what happened.  And I looked at her, and I said, “Threatened by me?  I don’t have a day of teaching, and, like, why would they be threatened by me?”  And she said, “Because you’re graduating from Smith College, and you have an excellent education.  And people are going to think that you want to take over, that you want to change things, that you want things done your way or whatever.”
And I just was so struck by this, that somehow my education was not — it was going to give me a doorway, but it’s also going to close things.  And I hadn’t imagined that before or that I would have to fight and struggle in a way that I hadn’t thought I was going to have to.  And she really gave me a reality check, and said, “You will go far with your Smith degree, but people will feel like, afraid of you, essentially.  They’ll be inspired, certainly.  There’ll be people who won’t feel that way, but then there’ll be that group of people who won’t be able to see past the degree.”
And that happened.  I mean, there have been lots of moments in my career where I’ve — not that people are like reading Smith on me, but they’re reading what it is that Smith gave me, which is a voice.  And it gave me strength, and it gave me confidence, and it gave me a sense of vision and thinking outside of the box and being innovative.
And so the fruits of that act — I’ve become — I’m 42.  I am more radical at 42 than I was at 22, and I see more and more people — particularly like white, patriarchal mediocre men in positions of leadership — afraid of me because they’re so threatened by what it is I offer and can say that they cannot say, they don’t have the ability to say or the intelligence to say or the imagination to say or they had it once, and they lost it along the way.  I don't know, but I have gotten in trouble by a lot.
Like, you asked the earlier question about getting in trouble.  I have gotten trouble because of my voice.  So throughout my career, I have definitely pushed back, and nevertheless, she persisted.  Like, I have pushed back on racism in schools, homophobia in schools.  Transphobia has been a big part of my work too.  Classicism, sexism, misogyny, like, just all of it, and bringing that intersectional lens to schools.  When I first started out, people didn’t know intersectionality, but that’s what I work — that’s what I learned here.
And now, people are suddenly learning this word that was coined in the ‘80s but was really coined by Sojourner Truth, and, you know, Audre Lorde and Bell Hooks — everybody was doing that work before it was coined.  And women of color have been doing intersectional work since the whole genealogy of black feminism, and Latina feminism is all about intersectional thought.
That’s what I learned here in the ‘90s.  And I brought that with me as a 22-year-old into the classroom, and forget it.  Within the first five years of my career, I was being brought into backrooms, like principals’ offices, being told, “What are you doing?”  Or emails from parents who would say to me, from fathers, who would say to me — and I was working in girls’ schools — “What are you doing standing on your feminist soapbox?”  This was at a girls’ school in [Washington] D.C.
Yeah, so, yes.  I have gotten in trouble many times behind closed doors where administrators would say to me, basically, “You’re too much for us.”  They didn’t say it that way, but I was a newspaper advisor, for example, at one girls’ school.  And the girls wanted to do a feature or features on diversity, and they wanted to write about the GS– like the fact that we didn’t have a GSA [Gay Straight Alliance].  And they wanted to write about a lack of writers of color in the English program.  They — there was a girl who had gone to The Mountain School and had met, for the first time, another queer kid and stories like that.  Like, typical high school stories that you — that they wanted to write in the newspaper.
I said, “Great.  Let’s write these fantastic stories in the paper.”  I got called in by an administrator at a girls’ school that I had worked at, and she said, basically, “Do you think it’s appropriate to have stories about,” she didn’t say queer, but, like, GSAs and lesbian teachers.  And I said, “Well, the teacher that we interviewed gave full permission, and everything else has been cited and sourced, and everything is thoughtful writing.”
“Well, we’re a K through 12 school, and young children see these — see the — read the paper.”  And I said, “We are a K through 12 school.”
And, by the way, I had come to the meeting completely prepared.  I had done my homework on First Amendment rights, which private schools actually do not have First Amendment rights, in terms of, like, school publications.  But the — what I had found was it doesn’t mean that schools should not try to protect the First Amendment right because we live in a democracy, so you should still live up to the ideals of the country.
So I had come in very prepared with my, like, scholastic journalism rights, and sh– because I knew what was up, and she said, “Well, you know, we’re a K through 12 school, and our younger students see this.  And, yes, this is published by the upper school.”
And I said, “You know, yes, we are a K through 12 school.  Yes, this is a high school publication.  On top of that, we also have a mission statement for this school, which is that we empower young women and girls to find their voices and to make those voices come to fruition in their papers, in their research, in their running for election for student government or whatever it is.  This is the enactment of the mission of the school, so if I were you,” and I was so bold.  I said, “If I were you, when you get those parent phone calls, you should remind them of the mission of the school or they can find another school for their child.”
And I just — I really felt strongly that, you know, heads of schools should be the lead teacher in modeling the mission of a school, especially for young women and girls.  Like, what are we doing if not helping the next generation be able to persist?  If that’s not what we’re doing, I’ve signed up for the wrong job.

SCHNEIDER:	Wow.  Do you have any other thoughts?  I mean, that sounds like a great place to, like, close things off, but do you have any other thoughts on Smith as an institution or anything you want to say?

GEIS [videographer]:	I think that I have one question.  You were describing (unclear), your sense of identity here, knowing you thought when you were a high school student coming here you wanted to change yourself in some way.  What’s your sense of yourself now looking back at that time and–

JIMÉNEZ:	I love that.

GEIS:	–the desire to do that?

JIMÉNEZ:	Yeah.  When I was here, people used to wear these, like, pink triangles.  They were felt.  And rainbow rings —  it was like the rainbow rings and the necklace.  I did none of that, not because I didn’t want to know but because I did — well, no, that’s not true.  I did do the pink triangles.  What I didn’t do were, like, the overalls, which I just thought was, like, I can’t do overalls.
The other thing was, and I’m sure this is still the case at Smith, but when I was here, they used to — women who were coming out would cut off their hair.  I’ve had the same hairstyle since I was 10.  So there is no — I’m 42.  So there’s no — there was no way that I was going to cut my hair.  Like, it was just such a huge part of my identity, and I didn't understand, like, at that time, what we would call kind of fem-butch identity.  And I didn’t see any of that modeled here.  Like, GSA or the LGSA, everyone was white.  Everyone had the Smith chop, shaved their head, wore overalls.  And I thought, “I do not look like them.”
And so, when I went to Nosotras, they weren’t what I perceived.  I didn't know whether or not they were queer.  I should’ve asked.  This is very — I still regret this.
So my perception of myself now is that I — I’ve been able to embody who I am and embrace who I am.  I have long, curly hair that I’ve had since I was 10.  I have a big voice.  I have a big face.  I have large gestures.  I have a big laugh.  And so all of those things I bring to the classroom as well, which is that I embody my pedagogy and I embody — which came from Smith.  Like, Smith taught me to embody, even though I didn't always do it while I was here.  But they planted what it was I needed to be and who I wanted to be while I was here so that would come to fruition later.  And that’s really what education is.
Like, it’s not always going to happen at Smith.  And this is what I try to tell Smith students.  It’s like everyone thinks they have to have the Fulbright immediately after Smith, and I say to them, “I got a Fulbright when I was 36.  Like, it doesn’t have to happen all right now.”
So that’s what I came into was embodying myself, embodying my consciousness, politically, intellectually, philosophically, sexually.  And I feel more radical now than I ever was when I was 22.

SCHNEIDER:	Thank you.  Yeah, that seems like a good place to stop.  Is there anything else you want to add?

JIMÉNEZ:	No.  I mean, I could talk to the both of you forever. (laughs)



