
AMANNA:	So this is Ellice Amanna and I'm conducting an interview with Carol Dwyer, class of '58, on May 24th, 2013 for the Smith College Alumnae Oral History Project.
Thank you for agreeing to participate.  So Carol, do you come back often for reunion?
DWYER:	I think I've come for most reunions, yeah.
AMANNA:	Okay.
DWYER:	Yeah.  As Carol McConville (phonetic).
AMANNA:	As Carol?
DWYER:	That's what – I mean that's how I'm known here.
AMANNA:	Oh, okay, okay.
DWYER:	Yeah.
AMANNA:	Excellent.  And can you say a little bit about why you do that, what it means, why you come back?
DWYER:	Oh, I enjoy coming back to the campus but I enjoy particularly seeing a lot of old friends, you know, but –
AMANNA:	So you know a lot of people who come back and –
DWYER:	Not this year, but usually there are more.  But there is still a lot of people that you see and catch up with, and it's very interesting – I think it's very interesting, people's lives who are in my generation.
AMANNA:	Yeah.
DWYER:	Because I happen to feel like we had the best of it.  We really did have the best of it in our years.
AMANNA:	In what sense?
DWYER:	Well, there has been so much change and so much change for the good, but, you know, it's been sort of a mixed bag, as it always is I guess, and I just feel like we had kind of more stability, or at least in my family we did, had more stability than most kids have today in their families, because there's so many pulls on women especially today.
AMANNA:	Yeah.
DWYER:	And I don’t think it was quite the same then.
AMANNA:	Okay.
DWYER:	Maybe there were, but they were different types.  Maybe it's that way.  But it just – it seems it's been such an exciting time to be alive with so much change and so much radical change.
AMANNA:	Yeah, yeah.
DWYER:	You know?
AMANNA:	Absolutely.  Do you remember Smith when you first came?  Can you say something about how you chose the school.
DWYER:	Well, how I – I don’t know exactly how I chose it because – but my mother had come here. My mother had come here before.
AMANNA:	Oh.
DWYER:	And my father had gone to Amherst.  So – but we're not kind of a – I don't know, that might give the wrong impression of why I came.  I thought it was a magnificent campus and I – it seemed totally attractive to me when I came to visit. I think that was it.
AMANNA:	Did you specially want an all—women school?
DWYER:	No.
AMANNA:	No.
DWYER:	No.
AMANNA:	That wasn’t –
DWYER:	I don’t think so.
AMANNA:	No, no.  Had you gone to public school or private school?
DWYER:	No, I hadn’t.  I had gone to private school and I had gone to a women's college.  But I was an only child and all my cousins that I was very close to are all girls.  So it probably would have been a good thing to go to a mixed –  you know, to go to a school that was mixed, but anyway, I didn’t, and – except when I was in Europe in my junior year which was one of the big –
AMANNA:	Yeah, I want to talk to you about that.
DWYER:	I'd say one of the big things about going to Smith that I really enjoyed, yeah.
AMANNA:	Yeah, yeah.  I definitely want to talk about that.  Do you remember your first, you know, days on the campus, you know, coming here what your impressions were?
DWYER:	I remember it as being absolutely beautiful, you know, just exquisite in appearance.  And I remember going to the – they had a tea at the president's house, and I remember standing in the circle, you know, kind of wondering what was going to happen.
AMANNA:	Yeah.
DWYER:	And it just was a very – actually, it says something about me that I still have the dress that I wore that day.
AMANNA:	Wow, wow.
DWYER:	It's a jumper.
AMANNA:	Wow.
DWYER:	Which, I don’t know what it says, but – and there's probably not many people who still have the dress.
AMANNA:	That's great.
DWYER:	And can identify it as being the address that you –
AMANNA:	Yeah.
DWYER:	Yeah, yeah.
AMANNA:	Amazing.
DWYER:	Well, just, I hold onto things, that's what it says.  Yeah.
AMANNA:	And what about your house life, was that important?  Did you have a strong —
DWYER:	Oh, very, yeah.  Yeah, yeah.
AMANNA:	— (indiscernible) around your house?
DWYER:	It was.  I was in Emerson.
AMANNA:	Okay.
DWYER:	And which I — of course some of my closest friends are from that house experience. No, it was a good experience, but it was very different then I think with the meals being in the house, and we had a tradition of doing — having this Christmas medieval banquet at Christmastime in Emerson.
AMANNA:	Wow.
DWYER:	I don't know if they still do it.  But they — well, they wouldn’t do it because they don’t — you don’t have meals in the houses.
AMANNA:	Right.
DWYER:	But it was quite a big event that the house sponsored, invited faculty members to come, and it was a very nice, yeah.
AMANNA:	Was it costumed?
DWYER:	Yeah.
AMANNA:	Wow.
DWYER:	Yeah.  And everybody —
AMANNA:	Do you have your costume?
DWYER:	No, no.  No, no.  But it was just an interesting — it was a tradition of the house so — which I think is nice to have.
AMANNA:	Yeah.
DWYER:	Yeah.
AMANNA:	Yeah.
DWYER:	No, I still keep in close touch with some of the people in the house, yeah.
AMANNA:	Do you have other traditions that you remember from Smith that you associate —
DWYER:	I remember meetings.  I remember our house mother, Mrs. Irwin (phonetic), who — I don’t think she'd be the typical house mother today, you know.
AMANNA:	Why?
DWYER:	I think she was a little old fashioned and out of sync with the students in a way, because —
AMANNA:	Did you feel that way then?
DWYER:	— was a different – mm-hmm, oh, yes.
AMANNA:	Oh, yeah.
DWYER:	Yeah.  I mean she was a very nice woman but she just wasn’t sort of with the program.  I shouldn’t – in this space, you know, in terms of the students.  Yeah.
AMANNA:	So was she strict you mean or did –
DWYER:	She was just of another era.
AMANNA:	Okay.
DWYER:	You know, she was just of another era, so she wasn’t, you know – but anyway, it was – she was fine.
AMANNA:	Okay.  And what was your major?
DWYER:	I majored – well, I changed my major actually, which was a mistake, but I think it was – that was a foolish thing to do, but I changed my major from government, which I'd done very well in and just, you know, it seemed to be kind of natural to me.  But then when I went to Europe and I took a class in art and history and baroque art and I was so wowed by the class which I took on Saturday morning to the concern of Mr. Overstreet (phonetic) who was shepherding us, and – anyway, I took this wonderful course in baroque art and it was just – it just transformed me, so I really thought I wanted to go – be an art major, so I switched, which  meant that when I came back I had to take all these prerequisites and things so I didn’t get to honor, you know, and I didn’t get to study in that way.  So that – I think that was probably a mistake, but at the time that's what I decided to do so —
AMANNA:	Well, it sounds like your trip abroad or your time abroad was —
DWYER:	It was very important to me.
AMANNA:	Was important.
DWYER:	Yeah.
AMANNA:	Can you talk about that.  When did you go and where did you go?
DWYER:	I went to Geneva, which is kind of a cool city – oh, sorry – it's a – and  I – anyway, I had a – what was most important to me actually, if I'm truthful about this interview, is that – were the vacations which – because in Europe they have very long vacations, and it gave you an opportunity to travel and to experience this in different countries and to be independent, you know, be on your own in a foreign country, and it was just wonderful.  And the trips over and back on the boats – we took boats over.  It was the – you know, what was it, the – oh, now I can't even remember what the boats were but I should remember.  It was the Ile de France I think was the first boat we took over.  It was just glorious.  It was such a glorious experience.  I loved it.
AMANNA:	Yeah, yeah.  And how long were you there?  So you in Geneva for?
DWYER:	I was there for a year.
AMANNA:	For the year.
DWYER:	Yeah.
AMANNA:	And then you traveled during the summers or in between semesters?
DWYER:	Well, between semesters.  They had like three weeks at Christmas, three weeks in the spring, so you really had long interludes to do – you know, to go someplace and do something, and I really took advantage of those.  And one time I went south through Italy with another friend that I met up with finally, and then the other time, the summer after we finished, I traveled all through the northern countries, and it was a terrific experience.
AMANNA:	Yeah.  So it sounds like you – this would have been the mid-'50s —
DWYER:	That's right.
AMANNA:	— when there was a lot happening politically.
DWYER:	Yeah.
AMANNA:	Did you witness any of that?
DWYER:	Oh, yeah, because that was the time of the Hungarian revolution.  And so there were a lot of students – in fact, we had two students which were – who made students – Smith College students, that they kind of – I don't know what the arrangement was, but that they harbored or took care of these – took these two women in to be part of the class or part of the – you know, kind of protected by the – or part of that school.  I never knew exactly what the arrangement was, but they were –
AMANNA:	So they lived with you there you mean?
DWYER:	See, I was living – I don't know.  I think – I'm not sure where they lived actually, because I'm not sure about that.  That's a good question.  But what I remember is going down when there was a big rally downtown, and I went and – down to see what was going on, by myself I think, and I remember getting back into the bus and the whole bus was so full of gas, tear gas, you know, in the bus that it was just like fumigating the bus, and all our clothes were covered with it.  So that was my first – not my last, but my first involvement with demonstrations and so forth.  So that was —
AMANNA:	Yeah, what an experience.
DWYER:	Yeah, yeah.
AMANNA:	I mean you were so young.
DWYER:	And then you started to realize I mean what was going on, and I mean I'd never been part of a demonstration or seen people, but people were very active at the time so I think having the students was a really good thing for Smith to have done.  But I'm not sure that we communicated that much with them because I don't remember speaking with them because they couldn’t speak English and I couldn’t speak – but I remember what they looked like and I remember their being there, yeah.
AMANNA:	So did you come from a politically-active family?
DWYER:	Not at all.
AMANNA:	No.  So did this experience launch any activism in your own life?
DWYER:	That and other things I think, yeah, did launch —
AMANNA:	Talk about that.  What —
DWYER:	— and I really became – well, I became – but I think it's actually mostly the influence of another woman who was in your archives, and that is – but not a Smith graduate — she's Linda Stout (phonetic), and she was a woman from the South.  She came from North Carolina.  And I met her in – I can't remember what year – but anyway, she had a big influence on me, and I became – she was a – she still is, I would say, the best organizer in the United States.
AMANNA:	And how did you —
DWYER:	Bar none.
AMANNA:	— meet her?  You met her through your Smith experience but she wasn’t a Smithy?
DWYER:	No, she wasn’t a Smithy.  No, it wasn’t really through Smith.  I met her because she was speaking at a friend's house in Concord, raising money for her organization, and I went.  And there were two people speaking, there was a man speaking first and then she spoke second, and I was electrified by what she had to say.  So I kept in contact with her and we established a deep relationship, and I spent a lot of time in the South with her and on trips with her and learning from her.
AMANNA:	What years would this have been, after graduation then?
DWYER:	Oh, yeah.  This is long after.  This is —
AMANNA:	The '60s?
DWYER:	Yeah.  This is in the '70s.
AMANNA:	In the '70s.
DWYER:	No, wait a minute, it's even in the – even later.  I guess it's in the – I think it's in the '80s that we first met.  But I'm still in touch with her and she's – she came here actually and she was head of the Peace Development Fund in —
AMANNA:	OH, yeah.
DWYER:	You know?
AMANNA:	Mm-hmm.
DWYER:	And she was director of that organization at first, and then she – now she's gone back to North Carolina where she lived originally.
AMANNA:	So what's your memory of the political awareness on the campus?  So your sort of post or at the end of McCarthyism.
DWYER:	Yeah.
AMANNA:	Do you remember being at that time in your politics?
DWYER:	I don't remember there being that much.
AMANNA:	Okay.
DWYER:	If there was, if it existed, I don’t – I don't know how much there was.  Because we had — Kennedy was our graduation speaker.
AMANNA:	Yes, absolutely.  I was going to say that.
DWYER:	So that was very interesting.
AMANNA:	What's your memory of that?
DWYER:	Oh, I do remember.
AMANNA:	He was a senator at the time –
DWYER:	Yes, he was a senator, exactly.
AMANNA:	— but thinking already toward the mass.
DWYER:	Right, right.  No, it was —  we were – and it was a gorgeous day too, so it was very – it was a terrific experience.  I do remember it.  I don't remember what he said exactly, but I remember, yeah, being there and everything, yeah.
AMANNA:	And so when he was elected and of course subsequently in '63 assassinated, do you think that connected you in some personal way?
DWYER:	Oh, yes.  I think having seen him and heard him speak that way at our graduation definitely, definitely brought you closer to the family.  And we knew the – we didn’t know the family at all, but we had contact with them because they had boats and we had a boat down on the Cape.  And so we were all – you know, we'd see them at Dead Neck, see the boats there, and so forth, but it wasn’t – you know, that wasn’t – my parents were republicans so they —
AMANNA:	So what did they think of your later politics?
DWYER:	Well, they – I don’t think – I think they were both passed when I really got involved.
AMANNA:	Okay.
DWYER:	Yeah.  That's – anyway, that's what happened.
AMANNA:	Yeah.  So looking back and just reflecting on your education here and just your social experience, your time abroad, how would you say that Smith prepared you for the world when you left college and the kind of world you encountered?  Would you say it was a good preparation?  Was there something missing or —
DWYER:	I think it was – no.  I think it was probably a good preparation.  I think – first of all, I think I started college too early.  I think I should have waited a year and had more experiences in between times, because I was very young and immature, and, you know, I just – I think that was an issue, that it would have been waiter if I had waited longer.  But I still remember the time when I – I was told that I was accepted to go to Geneva, Switzerland with the government program, see, because I was a government major at that point.  And I saw Marshall Shock (phonetic) who was the geology – my geology professor, and he commented to me, he said, oh, Carol, I'm so glad to see you’ve been accepted to go to Geneva.  I said, well, I don’t think I'm going to go though.  And he said, come have a cup of coffee with me, and that really changed me because I didn’t have any relationship like that with any other professor at Smith, so – but he said, you really should make use of the opportunity, and those were wise words.  I really loved him.  He was a geology professor and he was a fabulous guy.  He was very down to earth.  In fact, one of the things I remember best is going over and helping him plaster the ceiling of his garage.  Now, I mean, you know, but I think all these things say something about me and what appeals to me.  I'm sort of a down-to-earth person I think and I'm just – it meant a lot to me that he noticed, one, that he spoke to me, two, and that he then convinced me to go.  You know, I mean he didn’t commit (indiscernible) but he really pointed out all the possibilities that would be open for me to do that.  And I thought it was such a good advice because it was very important.
AMANNA:	It changed everything, right?
DWYER:	Yeah, it changed it everything, yeah.
AMANNA:	Did you have any other teachers like that that you recall?
DWYER:	I don’t – no, not that —
AMANNA:	He was —
DWYER:	Yeah, he was the one.  He was the one.  I mean I recall like Alan Burr-Overstreet (phonetic) and his wife.  They were very important.  They were our guides there, and that was a good course and everything, but I didn’t have that kind of personal relationship with any of the other teachers, yeah.
AMANNA:	So you did end up majoring in art history —
DWYER:	I did.
AMANNA:	— or art.
DWYER:	I did.
AMANNA:	And did you go – use that after you graduated?
DWYER:	Well, I was thinking at that time that I was going to be an architect.  That's when I was – all had my – in fact, I was going to leave Smith and be an architect when I was coming back from Europe and I was – you know, about to come back from Europe.  I told my parents I really wanted to leave Smith and go to architecture school and be an architect.  Bu I actually did have a job with an architectural firm when I left, and I realized that I felt like a lot of it was designing elevator shafts and it would not have been for me at all. It was not where I was.  No, no, it wouldn’t have been – I mean I'm sure you can do other things than design elevator shafts, but I mean that's kind of what it seemed like.  It was very plebian for most people.  And that wouldn't have been – so I really, you know.  No, I got into organizing and involved – very much involved with organizing, and what that means is just rallying people rounds at issues and trying to find ways to be effective in getting your message out and – so that's really what has been the thing that's occupied me in the last maybe 30 years.
AMANNA:	Okay.  So do you feel that was part of the Smith culture to sort of give back to the community or to –
DWYER:	Give back to the community maybe, but not politically, to be politically involved, no.  I think it was a fairly conservative, really, feeling in the '50s.  No, there weren't – I mean to be honest, you know, most women in Smith at that time, they wanted to have a ring on their finger when they left, and that was preeminent.  That was preeminent for most people at that time.  '58, you know.  It was before – that's the way it was.  And I definitely wanted to do something, but I didn’t really find the niche for me here.  Because most of it was academically-oriented, in teaching or, you know – I mean there are people in my class that have done fantastic things.  You know, lots of people in my class who have done – you know, Ruth probably among them.  But again, anyway.
AMANNA:	So just to sum up, because we're coming to the end of our time, is your identification as a Smithy important to you, and how do you think about your connection?  You do come back to reunion.
DWYER:	I come back to reunion.  I think it's – you know, I think I had a good grounding.  I think one of the courses that I actually liked the best was economics, and I don't know why at the time I took it, but I really liked that class.  So things that I would never have thought of having any interest in, business or anything like that, I think I'm more interested in now, and maybe partly because of that, so you don’t know.  You don't know.  I think when you're so young you just – maybe people – most  people may be more directed, I don't know.
AMANNA:	Okay.  Well, thank you very much for sitting with me.
DWYER:	You're very welcome.  It's been a pleasure.
AMANNA:	I really enjoyed it.
DWYER:	It's been a pleasure.
AMANNA:	We've got to wait for reunion.
DWYER:	We will, we will I'm sure.
