

KRAUS: 	OK, so just for the record, this is Maggie Kraus, and I’m conducting an interview with Katie Evans on May 15, 2010, for the Smith College Alumnae Oral History Project.  So first of all, thank you so much for being here–

EVANS:	You’re welcome.

KRAUS:	–and agreeing to share your stories and experiences with us.  So I guess we’ll just start with how you got here and how you decided on Smith and—

EVANS:	How I got to Smith?

KRAUS:	Yeah.

EVANS:	My college advisor in high school, he was my English teacher, which I didn’t really have a good bond with him, but so he had suggested it initially, and I hadn’t heard of it before.  And so my mom and I and one of my best friends and her mom, the four of us did this huge New England college tour, and we visited it, and I really liked it.  And I think I must have—so it sort of made the short list, and then I think I came back again with my dad, and we walked around campus.  And it was just, you know, a beautiful campus.  And I was just really struck by—a few times I would stop random people, sometimes it was just to ask directions, but then they would ask where I was from, and, you know, I would tell them I was looking at schools, and I just got the most thoughtful and intelligent answers from students here than I got at any of the other schools that I visited.  And so I think that was one of the reasons that drew me here.

KRAUS:	OK.  So you said you were originally from Philadelphia.

EVANS:	Mm-hmm.

KRAUS:	So it wasn’t too far of a stretch distance-wise.

EVANS:	Not too far, no, no.

KRAUS:	You weren’t going across the country or anything.  Did you have support?  I mean, what were the reactions from your friends and family in choosing an all-women’s college or—?

EVANS:	Oh, they were fine with it.  I was a little apprehensive, and my mom, she said probably the same thing that she would have said if I had gone anywhere, you know, “If you don’t like it, you can transfer.”  But that, quickly, after a couple months here I was settled and happy and—  Yeah, so.

KRAUS:	Right.  Were the older women in your family, or had any of them gone to all-women’s colleges?

EVANS:	Mm-hmm.  My mom had gone to Penn State.  My aunt had gone to Wilson College, which is still, I believe, a women’s school, but it is—it might be in Pennsylvania.  I’m actually not sure where it is.  So she thought it was neat that I was coming here.  And my aunt is a graduate of I think Bryn Mawr, so—

KRAUS:	Very cool.  So there was a little bit of that.  So, I mean, what were your expectations for Smith, academically, socially?  What did you think you were getting into, really?

EVANS:	I wasn’t sure.  You know, my closest cousin in age that was older than me that had gone to college that I really, you know, didn’t get any information about what college was like, and I am the oldest of my siblings—I have two younger brothers—so I had no idea (laughs) what was coming.  But I had a feeling that I wanted to be a science major, and, you know, from what I had read about Smith, they had a good biology program, which is what I was interested in.  And I was hoping to play sports.  Since it was a Division III school, I figured that was something I would be able to do.

KRAUS:	Were you able to do that while you were here?

EVANS:	I did.  I played a lot of sports when I was here.  I tried out—I hadn’t contacted any of the coaches before I came, so I was a walk-on for the field hockey team when I got here.  Actually, I was walking around campus, I think it was during orientation, and I spotted someone with a field hockey stick, and so I just ran up to her and asked her, you know, like, “How do I find out about this?”  So I made the team.  And it was the same coach for field hockey and lacrosse, so I ended up playing lacrosse in the spring, and then I’d actually played squash in the winter.  And I played all three sports all four years, and it was tiring but fun.

KRAUS:	Yeah, great.  That’s terrific.  Were you involved—I mean, I don’t know if you had any time outside of school and sports—but with any organizations or clubs or anything?

EVANS:	Not so much.  I mean, the sports took a lot of time.  I was a HONS my sophomore year, I did do that, but I think that was probably about it.

KRAUS:	And you said that you were in Lamont for–

EVANS:	I lived in Lamont House, mm-hmm.

KRAUS:	–all your time at Smith.  Very cool.

EVANS:	Mm-hmm, mm-hmm.

KRAUS:	So, I mean, when you first got to Smith, did—was there an overwhelming house community?  Did you feel accepted in your house?  Did you feel supported?

EVANS:	Yeah.  I mean, I was quiet, so I was, you know, nervous and was afraid about not having any friends.  But you know the first night, all the first-years got together and, you know, I could tell right away that there were some really great people that I would be friends with, and so a lot of the fears went away.  And my roommate and I, we ended up not being best friends, but we ended up getting along, so that was a good situation.

KRAUS:	So when you kind of got situated, did you know right away that you were going to do the science thing?  Was that something that stayed with you throughout your four years?

EVANS:	Pretty much, yeah, yeah.

KRAUS:	Did you receive any guidance or—I mean, were there any particular advisors or professors that kind of helped you along that, or—?

EVANS:	Not really.  I mean, I was interested in bio.  I wasn’t really—a lot of people that wanted to go into biology were pre-med.  I was never pre-med, but I just—I found learning about science more interesting than—you know, I enjoy reading, but I’m not the English literature type.  I knew I wasn’t going to major in that, so.  For a little while I was thinking about—it was like, What science do I want to do?  I was interested in geology for a little while but ended up staying with biology and chemistry.  I was a minor in chemistry, so.

KRAUS:	Oh, nice.  Did you try to take advantage of the open curriculum and exploring different random departments [and maybe you?]—?

EVANS:	I did somewhat.  I did take the advice of an upperclassman, which I thought was great advice, which was, you know, take at least one class because someone tells you the professor is great.  It doesn’t even matter what the subject is, but take it for the professor.  And so I did that with econ.  I took an intro to I guess macroeconomics.  Randy Bartlett maybe was the professor?

KRAUS:	Yes.

EVANS:	I mean, he was totally worth it.  It was great.  And, you know, my goal was to take at least one class in the seven areas anyway, so I did branch out from just the science quad. (laughter)  But that was really great advice.  I’m trying to think.  I took a couple, you know, archaeology classes, archaeology and religion—Religion and Archaeology, I think it was, and that was pretty interesting, too.

KRAUS:	Yeah, that’s very interesting.

EVANS:	There were some classes—I was somewhat restricted by the athletic schedule into some classes that I wanted to take that were outside of the sciences that just didn’t work out.

KRAUS:	Right, yeah, I took a lot of geo classes my first year and constantly found conflicts with sports and having lab during the week and—

EVANS:	Yeah, those labs are long and you’ve got games two to three times a week and—  Yeah, so.

KRAUS:	So what role did your team play or your teams play?  Was that another separate outside of your house community that you had?

EVANS:	Yeah.  Nobody in my team save for one person lived in Lamont, so it was a nice outlet.  And actually, one of my good friends from high school came to Smith with me as well—there were three of us my year, which was unheard of, (laughs) that came to smith—and so my one friend, she was on the lacrosse team with me, so that was nice.  It gave us—we had a little bit more history.  But yeah, it was just a great group of people.  And, you know, we all didn’t do everything together, but it was just a nice network of friends.

KRAUS:	So what was—I mean, I don’t know what your experience or your friends experience, but what was the dating/relationship dynamic?  Was there any time for that at Smith?  Was there opportunity?

EVANS:	No, I didn’t date. (laughter)  I think I had in four years, literally, I think I went on like two dates or something.  One of those was in the summer. (laughter)  No, I think my junior year—I thought it was so exciting—I met at a field hockey game the older brother of one of my teammates, and he was my year at Harvard, and so he invited me to a dance at Harvard, and I thought it was like the coolest thing ever.  Not only was I going on a date, but it was in Boston, and—so that was fun.  Nothing came of it.  But no, I didn’t really—I didn’t date.  I didn’t get—I didn’t ever go over to Amherst to try and, you know, do the social life on the weekend over there, and—

KRAUS:	Was that, I mean, out of just being too busy or just—?

EVANS:	Busy, but it wasn’t something that I was really needing at the time, so.

KRAUS:	Great.  I mean, what was the campus atmosphere like?  Do you remember—I mean, was there an overwhelming dynamic going on among the community outside of your house, or—?

EVANS:	That’s a good question.  I can’t—that’s a hard question.  It’s hard to answer.  I mean, overall, I don’t remember anything—I don’t think there was anything negative at that time.  Something happened at one point, but I can’t remember.  There was some night that we had a candlelight vigil in the quad for something, and I honestly can’t remember what that was.  But overall, it was just a really, you know, good experience.  Yeah.

KRAUS:	Yeah.  Did you go abroad your junior year?

EVANS:	I didn’t.

KRAUS:	You didn’t?

EVANS:	No.  I thought about it, because I had always wanted to, and I was like, Well, I’m doing—my junior year I was captain of the squash and lacrosse teams, and I was like, Well, you know, I could stay and do the athletic thing or—you know, I can always travel later.  I can’t study abroad later, but—in the end I decided to stay, and I was happy with that decision.

KRAUS:	Do you—was there any—I mean, was there ever a time when you felt like maybe you should have gone abroad during that year?  Did a lot of your friends go?

EVANS:	Sure, yeah, I had friends go away, and it definitely was odd fall junior year not having as many people around.  But overall, I mean, I was happy.  I was busy with, you know, between classes and athletics.  I never regretted it.  I think it would have been fun and it would have been a fun opportunity, but I never really regretted not going.

KRAUS:	Right.  So I know now there’s a lot of emphasis on women in the sciences, women in engineering, and that Smith is a huge kind of supporter and makes a lot of things possible for women in the sciences.  Did you—was there the same kind of encouragement or direction for - ?

EVANS:	I don’t think it was as prominent when I was here.  I know you could be an engineering major—I forget how it worked.  They had some program with Dartmouth when I was here that you would do—you graduated from Smith, but you spent maybe a year, maybe it was like your junior year, at Dartmouth if you wanted to do engineering.  I mean, because it’s a women’s school, there was always that support and encouragement, but I definitely think there’s more of a push to make it more known now, yeah.

KRAUS:	And did you, I mean, in your time after Smith—well, I mean, what did you do after Smith?  What did you do the summer after you graduated?

EVANS:	Yeah, I was like, Well, what do I do?  I have this degree in biology.  What can I do?  I can research or I can teach, and I was like, That’s all I know that I can do.  So I went home.  I didn’t have a job.  I had spent—you know, my dad was on my case, so I had spent hours and hours in the Career Development Office getting nowhere. (laughs)  I ended up sort of stumbling into a job.  My mom ran into the parent of one of my elementary school friends who had this nonprofit in Philadelphia that was—it was called Biosis, and they’re a nonprofit publisher, and they published a huge database of scientific research journals.  And so I ended up—it was a perfect starting job.  I knew it wasn’t something to do long-term.  But I worked there for four years.  After two years, I had decided I wanted to go back to grad school, and so I was taking evening classes for the second two years or the last two years that I was there, and then I went back to grad school four years after Smith.

KRAUS:	And where’d you go to grad school?

EVANS:	I went to Arcadia, which had formerly been Beaver College, so another women’s school.  It’s now coed.  And I got my doctorate in physical therapy there.

KRAUS:	Cool.  So what has that done for you in your life now?  What are you up to?

EVANS:	So I’m a physical therapist.  I work in a hospital-based outpatient clinic in the suburbs of Philadelphia, and it’s nice.  I think it’s a really great career for me.  Unlike my first job, where I sat at a computer all day, no days are the same.  You know, I work with people all day long, different people, so I get to meet a lot of people, which I sometimes think is funny since I used to be a very quiet person, and I find myself being very loud (laughs) and talkative all day long.  But it’s nice, because you can help people and you really see that they appreciate it, and they improve.

KRAUS:	Do you get a lot of athletes coming in?

EVANS:	I don’t.  Because it’s a hospital-based practice, I get a lot of call it the Medicare population, so the majority of people are like 60 to 90, with a—occasionally I get a teenager, and that’s a nice change.  But it’s an older population.  But they’re actually—really, they’re fun to work with.  They surprise you sometimes with their spunkiness and their comments.

KRAUS:	So, I mean, going to another institution after Smith, did that make you realize anything about Smith?  Did you maybe have a little more appreciation for Smith after leaving, or—?

EVANS:	Yeah.  I was—it was such a different experience in grad school.  The program is so structured, what I did.  It was a three-year program, and I kind of joked that it was like kindergarten sometimes, because we just had this one curriculum, and you started day one, and we were the same 50 people and we had the same classes together all day long for three years, and so there wasn’t any variety in what any of us did.  But I think when it came to how we conducted ourselves in class, I—I don’t know if maybe it’s just my generation or the fact that I went here, but I definitely saw differences in sort of how I went about learning and studying and paying attention to the professors, whereas some people just wanted the knowledge to be given to them and, you know, just give me the handout, give me the PowerPoint, that’s what I want.  You know, I really appreciated just listening to the lectures and taking it in and trying to figure it out and think it through.

KRAUS:	So, I mean, in terms of your personal experiences, what has—what did your time at Smith mean to you after you left?  I mean, a lot of people talk about it giving them this, you know, quiet confidence or, you know, a feeling of, you know, like you accomplished something terrific.

EVANS:	I agree with that.  I remember being so incredibly—I was just so proud when I graduated.  It had been such a fun time, and I was so sad that senior year just flew by.  But yeah, it really did give you a lot of confidence.  I just felt like this empowered person after I graduated.  And, you know, who knows what I’ve done with that since.  And actually, it was—the neat thing is that every time I come back here, and I’ve noticed this, because it’s been—you know, over the years, I’ve stopped back, and kind of like it renews every time I’m here.  Like, whenever I leave, I feel like I have just gotten this surge of empowerment being here, and that’s a nice feeling.

KRAUS:	Did you have—was there like an overwhelming presence of alums when you were a student here?  You know, were you kind of updated or told news of what people were doing?

EVANS:	A little bit, some of the more prominent ones.  I met—I remember I thought it was really nice.  There was—one alum came—I don’t remember her name—but she came into town and she was from the Philadelphia area, and I think it was my first year, and she invited all the Philadelphia area first-years to tea at the alumnae house.  And she brought us Tastykakes, which, I don’t know if you’ve ever had Tastykakes.  It’s a Philadelphia area treat. (laughs) And it was really nice.  It was really sweet.  And I just thought that, you know, you wouldn’t get that everywhere.  That was sort of my first real, I think, interaction with how the alums might associate with the students and with the college.

KRAUS:	Right, mm-hmm.  Are you a part of any, like, Smith chapters in Philly, or are you—?

EVANS:	Off and on.  I did probably the first few years after Smith, I was part of the—they were really trying to revive the—I can’t even think of what they called it now—like the young alum club in Smith, in Philadelphia, but the person behind that I think moved away.  I’m not as involved as I would like to be.  I know it’s there, and they kind of—I think they go through phases where they’re more active and less active, so.

KRAUS:	So what has it meant for you to be an alum?  Like, do you feel like you have a role to fulfill, or do you—I mean, is it something that kind of changes the way you look at coming back here, or—?

EVANS:	My role.  Well, I mean, I definitely try to motivate people both through  my work and just in general to kind of do what they want to do, you know, like be the best that they can be with it.  If someone’s not sure about—I can’t think of a good example right now—but just trying to motivate people to, you know, really go to their full potential and strive to be their best and really encourage them to do what they can.

KRAUS:	Would you encourage other young women to look at Smith or to go to Smith?

EVANS:	Oh, yeah, I do, I do, yeah.

KRAUS:	Is that something, like—I mean, do you—maybe you don’t deal with that age group so much in your work, but—

EVANS:	Not right now.  I definitely—I mean, when it comes up, I definitely, if people ask me, I tell them where I went.  You know, it’s not for everybody, the women’s school, and especially there are some girls’ high schools in the area, and so they certainly wouldn’t ever want to consider an all-female college after doing that in high school.  But I tell people, you know, if they’re coming up to New England, going to be in Massachusetts, at least stop by and check it out, you know.

KRAUS:	How has life in Northampton or in New England differed for your time in Philadelphia before and after you were here?  Is it different kind of life?  Is it a different pace of life?

EVANS:	I don’t know.  Well, living in the city, I guess, it’s a little bit quicker pace of life—well, “the city,” in Philadelphia—quicker pace of life than sort of this part of Massachusetts.  I don’t know.  Honestly I didn’t spend that much time in Northampton when I was at Smith.  You know, I went down to go to the drugstore, and occasionally we might go out to dinner, but really I was mostly on campus a lot.

KRAUS:	Mm-hmm.  Do you have any—I mean, do you still follow Smith athletics at all?  Do you still—is that a part of your life at all?

EVANS:	I do.  I check in periodically throughout the various seasons to see how the schedule’s been going, if they’ve been winning or losing, and then I try to pay attention if they’re down in the Philadelphia area.  Usually it’s a Seven Sisters tournament, and so I have—probably not the last two years, but I have gone to see all three sports at various times when they’ve been down in the area.

KRAUS:	Oh, nice.

EVANS:	And the first few years, when I still had friends on the team, I would come—I would either go to Boston and stay with friends and go to a game, or I think I came up here a couple times, so.

KRAUS:	What was your—I mean, what was, like, your record, or were you guys a good team?  I know Smith sports tend to fluctuate sometimes, but—

EVANS:	Yes.  I don’t know.  I’m not one of those people that remembers, Oh, that season we were such-and-such.  I think Smith athletics has a hard time as a women’s school.  I think they’re not as good as they could be.  So I think some seasons we were probably 50–50.  We never won Seven Sisters or, you know, placed really high in the conference.  But we had some good seasons.  The squash team when I was here was pretty strong.  Oh, we had such a fun time with that.  That was a good time.

KRAUS:	And was that something that you came into at Smith?  Had you ever played squash before?

EVANS:	No, I had played.  Not a lot.  My dad taught me when I was little, and I played on my high school team.  And so most of it—interestingly enough, most of the people on the squash team, at least when I was here, were brand new to the sport.  I was one of only a couple people that had played before.  But yeah, we always had a great time.  And the new people, they always did amazingly well.  They really learned how to play.

KRAUS:	Right.  So was that a focus for you coming into Smith?  I mean, did you  know a lot about Smith athletics before you made your decision to come here?

EVANS:	No, not at all, and I hadn’t been planning to play three sports.  You know, I wanted to play field hockey, because, as I said, I was a little bit nervous about meeting people, and I was like, Well, if I’m on a team at least I have people that I know will have to like me (laughter) and be nice to me.  And then I kind of stumbled into squash, too, and I was like, Oh, I’ll do this.  It’s fun.  It’s a good group of people.  And I was like, That’s it, I am not playing lacrosse.  I was like, I’m tired.  I want to know what Smith is like when you’re not an athlete and you have time.  And because it was the same coach and my friend from home was on the lacrosse team and there was a lot of people that played field hockey and lacrosse, they kind of twisted my arm.  And then once I went, I was fated to play, so.

KRAUS:	Yeah.  Did you guys ever go on—because I know—I play Ultimate Frisbee, which is a club sport, but we take it pretty seriously. (laughs)

EVANS:	One of my squash teammates is on the Ultimate Frisbee team, yeah.

KRAUS:	Oh, nice.  So we go away every spring break to a tournament in Georgia.  Did you have—were you—did you feel like athletics were kind of a big part of your life even outside of Smith?  You know, when people were going home for vacations or when people were going home on the weekends or going out, did you feel like that was kind of a constraining force, or was it more of just something that you enjoyed?

EVANS:	It wasn’t negative, no.  I didn’t go—first year, the lacrosse team—the lacrosse team went to Florida three or four years and went to California one year.  And so the first year, I didn’t go to Florida with the team, I went home, but the other years I went.  And I didn’t think that I missed out on doing other things by going.  The trip to San Francisco was actually a lot of fun, and we got to do a little bit of sightseeing, too.

KRAUS:	And what was, you know, your coaches’—or, I guess, did you have two coaches for the three sports?

EVANS:	Yes, yeah.

KRAUS:	Did they have an overwhelming presence in your life?  I mean, were they kind of behind you on and off the field?  Were they—?

EVANS:	Yes and no.  The field hockey/lacrosse coach, not as much.  You know, she could easily ruin your day (laughs) at practice, but our squash coach, Tim Bacon, he has a degree or a background in sports psychology, and so he—squash was much more of a mental game because it was only you on the court, and so if you lost a few points, you could very easily spiral down into this, you know, negative thought pattern.  So he tried to do a lot with our mental preparation, and in the process, you know, it applied to life outside of squash as well.

KRAUS:	Mm-hmm.  And what was the general attitude—I mean, because Smith is known in a lot of ways for its academics—what was the attitude of the coaches in terms of academic work coming before athletics or—?

EVANS:	The coaches were—I never really had a problem with the coaches.  In fact, once Judy, the—it was probably lacrosse season—did actually talk to a professor for me, because it was really the academic side, it was the professors that had a hard time dealing with the athletics.  The coaches, you know, they would—if you had to travel, you know, there were times you’d miss class, and sometimes it was you have to be here when, but they were supportive of your academic life.

KRAUS:	Mm-hmm.  Great.

GEIS:	I think we’re actually at two o’clock.

EVANS:	Yeah.  I’m going to wrap up.

KRAUS:	OK.

EVANS:	But so do you have any advice for current or future Smithies?

KRAUS:	Just to enjoy the time here and take advantage of all the different experiences that the school has to offer.  And I’d pass on the advice that was given to me, to, you know, take a class that maybe you wouldn’t take normally, but take it for the—if there’s a good professor, just take it for the professor, because that was really a good experience.

EVANS:	Great.  OK, well, thank you very much. (laughs)

KRAUS:	Thank you.

