

KRAUS:		OK, ready?

ROWE:		Yeah.

KRAUS:	OK. So just for the record, this is Maggie Kraus and I’m conducting an interview with Jess Rowe on May 15th, 2010, for the Smith College Alumnae Oral History Project. So first of all, thanks a lot for coming in and doing this. I’m really excited to hear whatever you want to tell us. So I guess we’ll just start off with kind of how you got to Smith.

ROWE:	I wanted to come to Smith for a while.  I was pretty set on it.  I think I saw some kind of brochure when I was like a sophomore or maybe a freshman, because I was really focused on it, and my mother was like, You have to apply to more schools than just Smith. Like I didn’t do the early admission thing. I think I actually applied to like nine schools, but when I got into Smith I was like, But I’m going there, like that’s what it is. So the whole, all the other work seemed kind of silly. So when I toured it — I toured probably when I was like early junior in high school, and I just really liked it. Everybody seemed really interested in everything, and the campus is beautiful –

KRAUS:	Of course.

ROWE:	– but I didn’t have — Like a lot of the other colleges like it felt kind of — I couldn’t really feel what was happening, but at Smith it seemed like at least the tour guide thought Smith was awesome, and like I think I kind of needed that kind of thing, so I just really wanted to come here.

KRAUS:	Right, a little push.

ROWE:	Yeah.

KRAUS:	And what reaction did you get from your friends or your family about an all-women’s college, or being so set on one school? Did anyone try to encourage you to, you know, seriously consider anywhere else, or—?

ROWE:	Only for money reasons, otherwise no. I mean, I’m from a really small town and not very many people were college bound anyway. My parents, though, were professors, so they were really like happy that I wanted to go to a really good school and continue being academically involved, so they’re — they did some bargaining, because Mount Holyoke gave me better aid, but I didn’t want to go to Mount Holyoke, so that was like the only thing, but no one was really like, You shouldn’t go here, except for like some tangential people were like, There are a lot of lesbians there, and I was like, OK, like I don’t know what that’s supposed to mean. Like because at the time I wasn’t like out or thinking I was going to be out, so it felt a little random that people — I was like, So are you — do you have a problem with that? Like that seems weird to me, like I thought you guys were all really liberal, you know, so that was — But it wasn’t really like pressure, it was a couple weird comments, so –

KRAUS:	So where are you from?

ROWE:	I’m from mid-Michigan.

KRAUS:	OK. So, I mean, what were your expectations academically or socially, you know, anticipating your arrival at Smith College? What were you thinking you were getting into really?

ROWE:	I think I was just hoping I was coming to a place where there were a lot more people who were going to be more like me, because I was pretty much not involved with like other people with interests like mine when I was in high school at all. And I think I pretty much found that, like I was really happy like right away with — I was happy to be on Green Street, like I specifically wanted to be on Green Street because I had been told that it was more sort of quiet and study focused, and I’m not really sure that’s what I ended up doing in college, but I liked Green Street! (laughter)

KRAUS:	Right.

ROWE:	And — I’m sorry, what was the—?  You asked me — that was a two-part question, like –

KRAUS:	I mean, just academically did you—?

ROWE:	I really liked the fact that Smith didn’t have any requirements, so that I could really like take classes I was just interested in and that would be it. And I was already really interested in English, and my parents were both, are both artists, so I ended up doing a double major in painting and English, but — So I kind of feel like I didn’t really branch out very much, but at the time it felt great, because I was like, I’m interested in that, I’m just going to take it, and they mostly happened to be in either the art department or like comp (inaudible) English, but — Yeah, I really liked what I did here, and I didn’t really feel pressured by anyone, although maybe it would’ve been good if I’d been pressured by an advisor to think about things a little more kind of abstractly, like plan my, plan my career through Smith, but I didn’t really, but I was really happy with that at the time, so —

KRAUS:	Were you involved with any clubs or organizations on campus, or did you play any sports? Anything outside of academics?

ROWE:	Not really. I — A friend of mine and I like bought this weird like weekly paper thing from someone else and like did that every week and distributed it. We had like five or six people, I think, that wrote for it, and we like distributed it to like lunch tables, but that’s not really a club. I don’t know what that is. Yeah, I wasn’t really very involved in like organized anything.

KRAUS:	So you double-majored. Did you at all, I mean, did you have an ultimate goal after Smith? Did you feel like you were working towards something specific, or you were just kind of going along for whatever?

ROWE:	Yeah, no, I didn’t really have a plan, like I didn’t have a specific plan, and I was sort of hoping I would form one at some point while I was here, and I did. Actually, I think that I probably shouldn’t — well, I formed a plan when I was a junior that I was going to go into film, and I did that, I went directly into graduate school for film, but I think that was probably not the best choice for me to do that right away, because I just moved to Los Angeles and dropped into being in film directing graduate school, and I was like, Ah! Because it wasn’t at all like being at Smith, and I left at like after, under a year, so — I don’t know what to say about that. It felt fine at the time. I was like, Great, I found a direction! I’m doing this! And like I was really excited about like applying to those grad schools and everything, but I think maybe there was a little bit of pressure, certainly from my family, to like continue and like do the whole thing, like do graduate school, whatever it was going to be, and just, and be done. So I think I kind of pushed myself into doing that. Yeah.

KRAUS:	Yeah. And can you describe what the campus felt like in terms of people who — I mean, obviously tons of people have an unbelievable amount of things going on in their own lives. What did it feel like for you coming in as a first year? Did the campus feel supportive? How was your house community?

ROWE:	Yeah, the campus felt really supportive. I really liked my house, and I didn’t leave my house. I stayed in Hubbard all four years. I thought it was great that they had mixed levels in the houses and they weren’t going to stick me in a freshman dorm, and I felt like people were really interested in like explaining how things worked and like being helpful in that way. I hated my roommate, so that was not good, but she moved out about halfway through the first semester, because she also hated me, so I kind of won that round! (laughter) I — She just didn’t want to be at Smith. She had been forced to come to Smith by her family, and she was really annoyed that I liked it, so like that was like a constant thorn in her side as far as I could tell, but everyone else in the house was fantastic, and I actually was happy to be fed like in the house, and like it was not stressful somehow, like even if I didn’t like the food on any particular day it was like, Oh great, someone’s just providing that. You know, like I don’t know, (laughter) it was just — it felt safe somehow and like nice, yeah.

KRAUS:	Yeah. So do you think there’s a common, you know, duality between people who love Smith and people who are like, This is not for me, I have to get out of here?

ROWE:	Yeah, those were pretty much the two kinds of people. There was — nobody that I met seemed very neutral about the place. Yeah.

KRAUS:	Right. So, I mean, obviously we just spoke to your wife, and she had lots of stories about, you know, being gay, being part of a queer/lesbian community on campus. What was that like in the years before, you know, the graduating class of 2000 got there? Because I feel, you know, in talking to alums there was a definite trend in more acceptance, more, you know, support in that area. Was, in your own time at Smith, was there a noticeable trend towards maybe it being OK to be part of that community, or—?

ROWE:	I’m not sure that I would be able to tell, because I came out at the beginning of my freshman year, and so I just became progressively more comfortable with it my, the whole time I was here, so how everyone else was doing with it — I don’t know if I just felt better or if there actually was a trend. There were a lot of people who were lesbian in Hubbard. There was no trans in the, at all. Like that was a thing that sort of came in after I was gone, like I think probably after Jean’s first year that maybe that added to the name of the — which, it was the LBA when I was here. And I had nothing to do with the LBA, and nobody that I knew had anything to do with the LBA. There were like tons of people who were gay, but they had nothing to do with sort of like that whatever that official thing — we couldn’t even figure out what it was for, exactly. It was like, well, that’s kind of a social organization, but I feel social anyway, so like — (laughter) You know, they only planned the dances, like and that was it. I think that I felt — and I don’t know if this is true, but I thought afterwards that it seemed like we were kind of in a transitional time, like the people that were older than me that were in the house that were gay had been sort of mentored by or came out of a much more of a feminism kind of perspective, like you weren’t supposed to shave your legs, you weren’t, you know — but kind of like almost like what my mother would have been reacting to. Because like when I wanted to come to Smith she was like, You don’t have to be a lesbian to be a feminist, and I was like, Cool, Mom, I think I get that, like — But I think they were kind of still kind of part of that, and then — Because I remember just feeling conflicted. I never knew what to wear the whole time I was at Smith. I was like — because nothing seemed right, somehow, and I think maybe that was part of because we were in this weird gap between what that was and like what then kind of gelled when I think Jean was here.

KRAUS:	So, I mean, what — it seems like your relationship with Jean towards the end of your senior year, end of her first year?

ROWE:	Yeah.

KRAUS:	How did that come to happen? I mean, was that something that had been sort of going on all along and just came to a head at one point, or—?

ROWE:	We were friends, I think, from — I liked all the people in her class a lot, actually, and they were such a nice change from the people in the class before that, because like everyone that was in the class preceding hers that came into our house hated Smith, like universally, and they all left after that, like that whole class — there was no one in that class who stayed in the house, and I don’t know what — That was just some weird coincidence. But everyone that came in the next year all seemed like smart and happy and happy to be there, and like so I was like, Great, these people are cool! And I also had had a — I had been slowly becoming very disenchanted with the crowd that I had been hanging out with, too, so I think I was probably looking for, you know, new friends and stuff. And so we were friends throughout the whole year, but we didn’t actually date, if you can call it that, until after I graduated. Jean just seemed like kind of like a good kind of person, like and not fake in a way that like I think I had suddenly been like, all these people are really fake that I’ve been hanging out with for like two years, and I just noticed it like somehow! And so I think, you know, it was just a nice change.

KRAUS:	And how long did it take for you to realize that she clearly had a massive crush on you and (laughter) was totally enthralled?

ROWE:	I don’t know, like it’s been so long now. Like I think I was a little clueless about the whole thing, because I hadn’t really dated anyone the whole time I was at Smith. I just — I guess I was pretty shy, and I just didn’t really think that anyone would be that interested in me, so I wasn’t really sure, even though, I mean, it was obvious, but I think I was just kind of like, that’s not really real, like until almost I was ready to graduate, and then I was like, oh, I’m going to leave and like move to Los Angeles and this isn’t good. And so then everything was like really fast, so —

KRAUS:	So what did that change in your mind about your moving? I mean, a lot of people who graduate probably feel this sense of freedom and this feeling of, you know, I can do anything, I can go anywhere. Did that make you feel like you had something more important to attend to, or that, you know—?

ROWE:	Yeah, I — well, it just made it very sort of like fraught. I mean, I’ve always not liked to leave the place that I’ve been, like I’ve always been like someone who’d get really homesick, you know, or not want to do the transition, so I think that was like maybe not even just Jean, that I was kind of like a little — I felt like I had to move on, you know, I have to go do graduate school, and it’s like this is like the plan somehow for me. I never even considered like not going to like — before I was, before I dated Jean or after it was like that wasn’t like — but I was also like, this sucks, like I don’t — I always hate this and now this is even worse, like I don’t want to do this.  So she moved to Chicago with me for the summer, and so that was cool, but then it just seemed like I did not know how that was going to work out. Like I kind of thought probably like we were not going to make it as a couple because like I was going to be on the West Coast and she had to finish school, and like it wasn’t — She wasn’t going to leave Smith, and I didn’t want her to do that either, so — But then film school kind of sucked, so that kind of solved that problem, but –

KRAUS:	And so did you come back to Northampton?

ROWE:	Yeah, I moved back to Northampton, and that was not a good — Like it was great to be with Jean, but there aren’t really a lot of jobs here, so, I mean, I just came back to be with her, and it was kind of like, Oh, you’re around Smith, but you’re not really of Smith anymore, and like I felt super lame, so (laughter) like — But I was year for like a year and a half, and then I like got my act together to go to do a different graduate program, but then when I was leaving it was like, OK, I’m — we’re only going to be apart for like nine months or something, or — I think it was under a year. And then Jean was going to move to Chicago, which seemed to sort of fit in with her theater thing, so that seemed a lot more well-planned, in general. Yeah. (laughter) I don’t know, that part of my life seems like — I spent a long time like feeling like I shouldn’t have quit film school, and now I’m like glad that I did, but like it took me a long time to feel like that was like a good decision. I felt like it was like I had to do it, but also that it was probably like ruining my career in some like major way.

KRAUS:	Yeah.

ROWE:	I don’t know, I haven’t thought about that in a while.

KRAUS:	And how did — I mean, despite all of the relationship things that you had suddenly, had been thrown upon you upon graduating, I mean, what did it mean for you to be going out into the world having just graduated from Smith? Like what—? Was there the sense that you needed to do something big, that you needed to do something over the top to like live up to, you know—?

ROWE:	Yeah, like I did feel like Smith was like a place where everyone was told like, You’re here because you’re really great and you’re going to do really big things, which is great, like you want to be told that, but also then you’re like, OK, now I have to prove that. But you know, that’s not just Smith, like I think a lot of people’s parents put that on them anyway, so I did think I was going to go do some sort of major thing that would be in the creative arts somehow.

KRAUS:	Right. So we’re almost out of time, we’re going to wrap up. What does it mean for you to be back this weekend with Jean, coming back for a reunion, seeing all these other alums kind of having maybe a different perspective on life after Smith, or like what it means to have this shared experience among a lot of women? Like what is — what do you feel when you get here?

ROWE:	I was really happy to be back? I haven’t been back in probably eight years or something, and it was — it’s just nice to see everybody. Everybody seems the same somehow, like everyone wants to just talk, and it’s not fraught. You know, I don’t feel like I have to prove anything to this, to the people that are here. That, like the previous question about like did you feel like you have to do something big, like I think people feel like that when they’re away from Smith, like they have to like live up to something from Smith, but when you’re actually here you’re not like exchanging business cards and being like, I’m really great, you know. It’s just fun, you know, it’s just nice.

KRAUS:	Right.

ROWE:	Yeah, so I’m having — I’m glad that I came. I wish I’d come for my ten year one actually, too, but I’m sure I’ll come to the 15.

KRAUS:	Many more. (laughter)

ROWE:	Yeah. (laughter)

KRAUS:	Great. OK, well thank you so much for sharing with us.

ROWE:	Sure.

KRAUS:	Sorry we had to cut it a little bit short, but –

ROWE:	That’s fine, yeah.

KRAUS:	– I appreciate everything you shared. I’ll grab your mic from you.

ROWE:	OK, wonderful. So where are you headed next?

