
CLEMENT:	That’s right.

SCHNEIDER:	This is Hannah Schneider, and I’m here with Diana Cornerly Clement for the Alumnae Oral History Project.  I’ll just start off with where are you from?

CLEMENT:	Sure.  I’m from Miami, Florida.

SCHNEIDER:	And how did you come to Smith College?

CLEMENT:	I just lucked out.  I think I just lucked out.  I was a really ambitious high school student in Miami.  I went to a big, very diverse public high school, and I think my mom encouraged me to — she went to Penn in the ’70s when it was just going co-ed, and I don’t think that was the greatest experience.  She said, “Oh, you should check out Smith.”  I did, and the campus — I fell in love with the campus.  And I think the admissions — my mom tells a really good story about how we went to the Admissions House, and you go to all of these — the college tour and all the small liberal arts colleges.  We went to Williams and Amherst -- all around.  And just how they were like, Well, you’ve been on the college tour, and this is how Smith is different.  My mom was more convinced than I was.  I was still like, “Oh, there’s no guys there.  I don’t know.”  But once I saw the campus I really fell in love and learned more about the amazing network of women that I could be a part of.  I really wanted that after coming from a really big, urban school as a high schooler.  So that’s how I ended up at Smith.  I just sort of lucked — I don’t know.  I don’t even remember making that decision, actually.  I remember that part, going to see colleges.  (laughs)

SCHNEIDER:	While you were here, did you have a favorite Smith tradition like Brownie Day or anything like that?

CLEMENT:	I love tea, and I played rugby, so I loved all of the traditions around rugby.  And I loved all the traditions around living in houses and having meals together.  I think the dining has probably changed since I was here, but just being able to have breakfast, lunch, and dinner really forced people to get to know each other and cultivate these really deep, meaningful friendships in a way that I don’t think you get in a lot of other school experiences.  There’s also something really feminine about that, eating together and taking time to do that.  So I loved that.  What else?  The house traditions — every house has a little bit different traditions.  I lived in Morrow House, and I just — we loved throwing parties.  (laughs) I lived in a triple, and there was a tradition that that triple got — threw parties because there was space, so I liked that tradition.  What else can I think of?  Yeah, and a lot of great stuff around rugby, and I still — they do a pretty good job of keeping the alumna — or alumnae up-to-date with what tournaments they’re going to and stuff like that, which is really fun.  So I loved playing rugby and lots of secret rugby traditions, lots of songs passed down.  (laughs)

SCHNEIDER:	I know rugby now is pretty boisterous.

CLEMENT:	Yeah.

SCHNEIDER:	A pretty party reputation.  Was it like that when you were here?

CLEMENT:	It was, yeah.  It’s great.  I also really loved convocation.  I always thought — I remember — I grew up in Florida, where things are — my life revolved around football.  I was a cheerleader.  And coming and going to convocation was like, this is a pep-rally for women and for learning and for just being quirky and smart, and that was really amazing for me, and freeing because I had — the only pep-rallies I had ever been to glorified masculinity and men were always the center of it.  So I loved convocation too.  Yeah.  And rugby was very boisterous when I was here as well, and it was wonderful.  It was a lot of fun.

SCHNEIDER:	So do you feel like there was a typical Smith student while you were here?  Like, maybe if you had to describe your average Smith student, what would she be like?

CLEMENT:	Let’s see.  I think I find that there’s an intensity about Smithies that is pretty across-the-line.  Whatever they’re into, they’re really into it, and I think that if they haven’t found that intensity they find it by the time they graduate.  And I think you have to choose Smith, which gives you a little bit — people choose Smith because of its intensity, so it kind of self-selects.  But I would say people are just more comfortable in their own intensity, whatever that is.  Whatever it is, they’re just comfortable being into it, whether it’s rocks or whatever — English literature or their hair.  I don’t know.  They’re just more secure, which — that might be a part of the space here too.

SCHNEIDER:	Do you remember your relationship with your professors at all?  Did you have a favorite professor or a class you took?

CLEMENT:	I had a favorite professor that I’m still close to — she’s no longer a professor here — Professor Antonetti, and she ran the Landscape Studies program.  I took a socialized landscapes class with her, and her class and her advice set me on a trajectory that has definitely helped — I totally blame her on where I am today, which I think is a pretty good place, in my career.  But Landscape Studies.  I was just really excited about everything and interested in — Landscape Studies was one of those programs where I could take a class in lots of different departments and it counted.  And I was really interested in Environmental Science and how the urban form came together and architecture, and Landscape Studies gave me this way to put a name to it.  Then I went and then became an urban planner, which makes a lot of sense now.  She also helped me just — there was this new idea about sustainability and — which, imagine that 10 or 15 years ago, was a novel concept, and I was really excited about that, but I wasn’t really able to apply it to the real world.  She just encouraged me.  She was like, “Well, these are all the different ways you can make a living doing this.”  Eventually I got a praxis internship with a woman who I saw quoted in a newspaper article in Miami, and Professor Antonetti was sort of like my sponsor for that.  I don’t know if they still do that, where a professor has to sign off on your praxis.  And I went in there and was really nervous: “Can I have an internship?  You’re doing really interesting things.”  It was — she’s an urban planner, landscape architect in South Florida working on this big open-space regional — open-space master plan, which then concluded and was — won many accolades.  We talked about some of — I think I had mentioned a book that I had read — oh yes, Anne Whiston Spirn, Granite Garden — that I had read in Nina Antonetti’s class, and she was like, “Yeah, sure, you’re hired.”  And then I got a job afterwards, when I graduated, as an urban planner.  I didn’t even really know what urban planning was — so I got more mentors out of my first mentor.  So I had a very good relationship with her.  And then — you know, I think in college your professor’s always blowing your mind.  That’s their job.  (laughs)

SCHNEIDER:	That’s great.  So, I want to ask a little bit about your social life and the climate on campus while you were here.  Out of curiosity, what was dating like while you were at Smith?

CLEMENT:	What was dating like?  Difficult.  (laughs) I mean, I think I was one of the kind of students that I was — I ventured off campus at first, then I started dating another student for about a year, and like most college relationships, didn’t go so well.  I don’t know.  I think my last couple years — what was dating like?  (laughs) Difficult at best.  (laughs) I don’t know.  I hate to say that.  But I think it forced you to invest in your friendships more and also forced you to put yourself out there more because if you go to parties at Amherst or even at Smith, it’s like now or never.  You’re not going to see this person again, so say hello.  Actually, I came to Smith with a boyfriend.  That, obviously, did not work out long distance.  No.  I have — what was it like?  I think also, maybe because I was part of the rugby team, there’s more intense culture around the rugby — being sporty and stuff, I guess.  I don’t know.  And (baby coos) people definitely dated each other and each other’s friends, and that got complicated.  So I would say it was very interesting and juicy.  I don’t know.  (laughs) It was not — I wouldn’t go to Smith for the dating life.

SCHNEIDER:	Do you remember any of the rules and regulations while you were here, and did you get into any trouble, really, is what I’m asking.

CLEMENT:	Did I get into trouble because I didn’t follow the protocol?  I don’t know if you have this — let me think.  Well, I did get cheated on by another friend on the rugby team, and we were on the board together, and that was not protocol.  That was like, You’re dead.  So — and you know, whatever, people make mistakes.  But — so, she was sort of ostracized, and it was just really messy.  So, yeah, there was some protocol-breaking.  I can say I’ve never cheated on anyone on — but I would say that was sort of like — dating each other’s friends was always messy year to year.  Let’s see.  I know there was — what other protocols can I think of?  This is a really deep cultural question about what happens when you put 3,000 people together.  (laughs) Dating protocols.

SCHNEIDER:	We can come back to it.

CLEMENT:	Yeah, I can’t think of anything except for that.

SCHNEIDER:	But — OK, so technology was really coming up while you were in college, right?  Do you remember the facebook.com?

CLEMENT:	I do.  I also got my first cell phone at Smith.  I walked down the street to the AT&T store, and I got my first shitty cell phone that I never really used.  I also didn’t really — I thought about this.  I never even wore a watch or knew what time it was when I was in college.  I kind of was just like, Oh, I have this class in the morning, then I go to the library, and then look at the clock in the library and then go to class.  I didn’t have a phone or even sometimes I wouldn’t even carry my laptop around.  So my whole sense of time is different, just this whole different era of how you ran your life.  I joined Facebook my senior year, but it was around before then.  It was bizarre because it was organized by college, so you could see who had — it was like, Smith friends and Amherst friends, and it was organized like that, which, obviously, it’s completely morphed into this different thing.  And we would write things that we would say to each other, which is — could be offensive, and none of us could probably have political careers now.  I think most of us have since gotten smart and hit our walls.  For example, I don’t put anything on our son on any social media at all.  I think it was sort of fun then, and now it’s just scary and annoying because you’re like, Why am I giving free data to Russia on Facebook?  (laughs) So we — actually, in my life now I try not to use it, but — so I had this brief period at Smith for a few years that we used it — we actually utilized Facebook to do things or document things or say things to each other.  And then that era ended quickly, which is kind of sad, I guess.  Now it’s not so great.  We have whatever news tunnels or bubbles.  (laughs)

SCHNEIDER:	So, speaking of news, I guess, do you remember the political climate on campus at all, what people were interested in or what they did?

CLEMENT:	I mean, I think there was a really — I remember there was a really big push to make our Student Government Association documents gender-neutral, and I think that was really controversial — maybe it’s still controversial to this day — about what is — what Smith’s goals are around educating women, and then what happens when, obviously, the gender spectrum interferes with that black-and-white view.  So I know that was a big topic of conversation.  I was a senator, I think, from my house.  You voted by your house.  I don’t know if they still do that, but you’re a house senator, and then you go to the SGA meetings.  Dining was interesting because the right thing to do is sustainability, and jobs to centralize things.  But I think people felt entitled and wanted their own breakfast, lunch, and dinner downstairs.  So I remember that.  I mean, I don’t — I think today, right this second, the political climate is so outrageous that there’s just — I don’t even know what it would be like to be on a college campus right now.  It’s just unfathomable.  But I think being at Smith was this nice separation from the unfathomable politics of — I wouldn’t say the real world, but you’re able to explore ideas without the pressure of all the crap that you have to deal with in corporate office culture.  So in that way I think it was insulated, which was wonderful.  Yeah.

SCHNEIDER:	Do you remember — so, in preparation for this, we’ve been reading old Sophians, and there seems like there was a lot of tension between liberal students and conservative students.  There was a conservative student newspaper.  Do you remember any of that, or is it all just background noise?

CLEMENT:	Wow.  I don’t know.  I mean, I remember there was a Republican club, and I remember being friends with a couple of them as well.  But I think the issues that are most important to women and to — I mean, especially now that I have a child and I’m balancing my career and motherhood and literally nursing my child and you just realize how unfair and — that the world was not built for women or around women’s success, not even close.  So I think a lot of the issues that women care about transcend whether you’re a Republican or Democrat, frankly.  Even if you’re a Republican woman, you still care about access to basic — basic human rights, which I — so I think that’s why Smith is sort of elevates the conversation a little bit, and then you graduate and you live your life and you realize everyone else is 50 years behind where you are mentally (laughs) about all these issues.
So I don’t remember there being any fierce challenges.  I think I remember a lot coming to age, or realizing a lot about class.  So I was a middle-class kid from Florida, and so I didn’t have the cultural cues of wealthy, urban Northeasterners and a lot of those students — and I think a lot of those social skills you need to be successful at Smith.  I didn’t really have those, so I think I remember just learning about wealth and boarding school and feeling really disadvantaged.  And if you have parents that don’t really — my father still to this day doesn’t understand the value of a college education that you pay for.  (laughs) So I think that that was probably a big — that was starting to just start being talked about.  And very wealthy international students I think started in my — maybe 10 years ago started coming to Smith, so they started heavily recruiting in East Asia for students, so you had just this influx of a different kind of wealth, too.  Because even though you might be from — you might be a different color or speak a different language at home growing up, you’re all part of the same social class that’s really — there’s still a dialogue locker there.  (laughs) So I remember that getting started.  It was very taboo to talk about that.  Now, obviously, we would talk about it a lot, first-generation college students, and that’s great.  I can’t think of really — I mean, I think we had like — that’s the great thing about Smith is you have these really wonderful, esoteric conversations–

CLEMENT:	–all day long, right?  And not necessarily about detailed legislation.  (baby cries) Yeah.  Here, I can — oh, good.

SCHNEIDER:	Do you want to just–

CLEMENT:	Oh, I’ll just stand, if that’s cool.

SCHNEIDER:	One last question.

CLEMENT:	Sure.

SCHNEIDER:	So we’ve already talked a little bit about (baby cries) how you feel that your–

CLEMENT:	Sure

SCHNEIDER:	–Smith education has pushed you in different directions for your career and all that stuff.  But you’re back on campus now–

CLEMENT:	Yeah.

SCHNEIDER:	–for reunion, and I guess I just want to ask you how that feels to be back, and what its making you think about.

CLEMENT:	Yeah.  Makes me feel so privileged, really privileged.  And I work in a really male-dominated field.  I’ve always often — I was nine months pregnant negotiating a real estate deal with a billionaire (baby cries) five months ago.  And I thought to myself in that moment, actually, was like, I would not have the confidence.  I would have just — not be here if it wasn’t for my experience at Smith, where people — I was inundated (baby cries) with people telling me I could do it, and you can whatever, be a leader.  You don’t have to– (baby cries louder) Yeah, I know.  So, anyway, that’s why I feel just very grateful.  (laughs)

SCHNEIDER:	Can I see her too?

CLEMENT:	Yeah, yeah.  Sure.  Oh, you’re a little angry.  (baby cries) Oh, sorry.  You want to get out of here?  (baby cries loudly) OK.



