

SKINNER: 	Fifty-six, when there is a woman who had written about, like, the ladybugs that come in to the quad houses, for like the one week during the fall. And she was like, I lived in Wilson, on the third floor, and I was like, I live in Wilson on the fourth — third floor! And I looked her up, and, like, wrote her, and she, like, wrote back–

KRAUS:	No way!

SKINNER: 	And she was like in her eighties. And she was like, Oh, that’s lovely to hear from you! (laughs)

KRAUS:	That is awesome.

SKINNER: 	 	It’s like, ladybugs are still there! And they’re gross! (laughs)

KRAUS:	Yeah, they’re disgusting. (laughs)

GEIS:	(inaudible)

KRAUS: 	 	That’s what I hear.

SKINNER:	Allegedly.

KRAUS: 	 	All over my desk.

GEIS:			OK, whenever you’re ready.

SKINNER:	And should I be looking at you, or at that —

GEIS:	Ignore me.

KRAUS:	OK, so just for the record, this is Maggie Kraus, and I am conducting an interview with Brittain Skinner, on May 14, 2010, for the Smith College Alumnae Oral History Project. So thank you so much for coming.

SKINNER:	Oh, no problem.

KRAUS:	Agreeing to share your stories with us. So I guess we’ll start off with how you got to Smith. I mean, what influenced you to look at Smith, what were your other options?

SKINNER:	The sad story is that there was a boy (laughs) that I had a crush on in high school, and partially why I liked him was he was just this really interesting, really smart guy. And at our high school awards night, his mom gave the Smith Book Award. And I was like, Oh my God, like, that woman is amazing, and, like, she clearly has raised all these brilliant kids. I was like, What is — what is this Smith business? So I started looking into it. And years later, when I got here, discovered another woman in my class — he had moved in high school and broke my heart — and found out that where he had moved to, his mom had influenced another member of my class to come. And we both were like, Ahh! We’re here for the same reason! (laughs) So.

KRAUS:	Huh. That’s great. I mean, what were, in your eyes, the benefits of choosing an all-women’s college?

SKINNER:	You know, it’s interesting, because Smith was one of two women’s — I applied to Mount Holyoke, as well. But everything else was co-ed, and I never was specifically looking for a women’s college, and it really was — when I got on campus, my mom and I did a campus tour, and every single one of the Smithies we met were just so excited that I was there. Our tour group ended up just being my mom and I. And instead of being like a half-hour tour, the woman who was leading it was so excited about the college — it was like a two-hour tour. She took us up to her dorm room and introduced us to all her friends, and they all were like, Oh, you have to come! And it was like, no other college had quite this enthusiasm. And it’s gorgeous as well, so.

KRAUS:	Great. So, I mean what were your — what were the reactions that you experienced in telling people that you were going to an all-women’s college? (laughter)

SKINNER:	Yeah, being from Kentucky, no one had heard — very few people had heard of it. Those who did know where it was and what it was were impressed. Those who didn’t were like, Uh, whatever, you're not going to University of Kentucky? And I got a couple of, like, comments about Sylvia Plath or whatever. But it was interesting, because in high school, I’d say the majority of my friends were guys. And so people were like, You’re going to get up there and you’re going to have no friends. (laughs) So — but it’s just the opposite, I’ve got amazing women friends that, you know — last night we were all sitting around talking about how our lives had changed in the past ten years, and where they were going, and what having a Smith education had meant for where we were headed. And every single one of us was just like, you know, this was the best decision we could have ever made.

KRAUS:	Great. Were the older women in your family, or in your life, college graduates, Smith alums, anything like that?

SKINNER:	My mom was. My mom was the first college graduate, and she went to the University of Tennessee. My grandmother — we suspect maybe finished seventh grade. She didn’t really like to talk about it, because she had desperately wanted to go further, but was from a farm community in rural Tennessee and couldn't — so it was kind of — it was amazing to go to this kind of college and to sort of think, like, you know, I’m doing this for her, and if she could have had this opportunity, that would’ve just been amazing, but I'll have to do it for her, so.

KRAUS:	Great, great. So when you got here you had already had this experience of being very welcomed and having people being very enthusiastic about Smith. Did that — I mean, did that live up to everything that you experienced for yourself, or do you — did you — were you scared when you got here, was it immediately — was it easy for you, or was there a hard transition?

SKINNER:	It’s interesting. The first — I mean, I’d done things in high school where I’d been away from home for a couple weeks or something like that. So sort of that initial time period was great. I was just like, Ah, this is amazing, new people, new experiences! There definitely did come a point where, you know, part of why I chose Smith is I said I want to go somewhere where I don’t know anyone, and no one’s like me. But then (laughs) eventually there’s that part where you’re like, I don’t know anyone, and no one’s like me! (laughs)
You know. It sounds weird, but being from Kentucky, and, you know, there were lots of women on my floor who were from New York or California, and they were like — we’ve never even thought about Kentucky, and like, you know — people asked me if I really wore shoes at home, or (laughs) you know, like what do people do for fun? I was like, We go — in high school, we’d hang out in a coffee house, and they were like, Oh, you have coffee houses in Kentucky? OK. (laughs)
So there was that difficult period of, you know, having to realize, you know, I have to be my own self, and — but appreciating the fact that everyone around me was sort of doing the same thing. My roommate was from Singapore. And it was interesting, because for all the cultural differences we had, being from Kentucky and Singapore, personality-wise and family-wise and things like that, we were like, Oh, we actually have a lot in common! So sort of discovering the ways to make common ground no matter what. That was — that really helped first year. So.

KRAUS:	So I mean, what did your — what was your house community like? What role did that play in your overall Smith experience?

SKINNER:	It was huge. I lived in Wilson House all four years. And for that time period — actually yesterday at registration, one of the junior ushers said, “Oh, it must have been awesome there in the late ’90s.” And I was like, OK, I know that’s a compliment, but it makes me feel so old! (laughter) You know. But it was a really, really supportive house. We did a lot of things together. It never even crossed my mind to live in another house.
I ended up being house president my senior year. And just really trying to extend that to the first-years that came in, that sense of, like, you have suddenly arrived in a giant sisterhood, and, you know, you can’t hide in your room. (laughs) Like, we’re all going to be together and doing things, and — we keep in touch. And actually last — two years ago — did a sort of informal reunion of Wilson House from the late ’90s to the (laughs) you know, early 2000s. So it was pretty cool.

KRAUS:	Great. So I mean, did you — other than crew, for the year that you did crew, were you involved with any organizations or clubs or anything like that on campus?

SKINNER:	I did crew first year. I was really involved with Helen Hills Chapel. (laughs) In the Protestant group there. I also — what else did I do? I was involved in Wilson House government quite a bit. I did, instead of going JYA — I originally was looking at going to Russia and — there were sort of some political issues going on then, and my parents said, “You’re not doing that.” So I ended up doing two semesters at the University of Kentucky instead. Spring of my sophomore year and spring of my junior year. So in some ways I couldn't be quite as involved with large organizations on campus. But that was really interesting, because one semester I was at a small, private liberal arts women’s college, and the next semester I was at a gigantic co-ed public university, and it was — that was a neat experience to sort of weigh the pros and cons. And I appreciate both of them.

KRAUS:	Yeah, I mean, did that experience for you kind of put Smith in a different light?

SKINNER:	It definitely did. I will say I initially expected there to be — well I guess the main thing was, for me, the access that students at Smith have. I found that professors at Smith taught like they were teaching future colleagues, whereas my experience at the other university was, you’re taught that you’re, you know, you're a student, and I’m going to give you the education. But I found professors here would be like, Oh, what’s the idea that you have? Because that could lead somewhere. You know, and at the large university — because I have a biology minor — you know, you’re reading about what a nanospectrometer does, and at Smith, you’re going in the lab and using it. You know, something that in other places a grad student might get to touch. You know, so there was sort of this — this respect that I don't know if I’d earned at age 18 (laughs) or not.
But, you know, and the other thing is that here, you just felt like everyone’s going to succeed. You know, we’re all going to do well. We’re all going to be amazing, we’re all going to change the world. And you felt like that was recognized. Whereas at the larger university, if you wanted to be that person, you had to really fight against a lot of things. And it was nice, for four years at Smith, to have that, you know, confidence of, no, people think you're going to do this. And you might just do it. (laughs)

KRAUS:	Yeah. So, you mentioned that you were involved in a religious group on campus.

SKINNER:	Mm-hmm.

KRAUS:	Now, I know there’s a lot of groups on campus, and a lot of them are crazy, radical — they’re involved with politics, they’re involved with, you know, cultural aspects, but what was it like for you? I know Smith isn’t an overly religious place. I feel like there’s a lot of religious ambiguity, and there’s a lot of people coming from different places. What did that mean for you, the people that maybe you met, or the things you did, what was that like in your life?

SKINNER:	It was interesting. Kentucky is predominantly Protestant, predominantly much more conservative, Baptist. I’m Presbyterian. It did mean a lot of — I guess having come from Kentucky, I didn't really have exposure to people of other faiths, or people of, you know, drastically more liberal perspectives. And that was a big part of first year and sophomore year, of going, OK, like, I know these folks, and we’ve gotten to be close, and we’re good friends, and they feel this way about something and I feel this way. How am I going to reconcile this?
So for me, it was less about, you know, being in a very visible, active, radical group on campus, and lot more about internally, what changes and decisions on my perspective I was making. And also what that meant for when I went home, you know, and I was like, you can’t — you can’t say that about this group of people, because I know — you know, I know friends who are of that faith, or of that, you know, sexuality or whatever. And once you meet someone and become friends with them, totally changes how you respond to things that you thought your entire life were, you know, the way it was. (laughs) So.

KRAUS:	Right. And, I mean, was that a shocking experience for you at first? Or did you kind of just ease into it and say, here we go, look at all these people, I’m going to get to know them, I’m going to appreciate them — or was there a little bit of–

SKINNER:	It was — I don't know. Like, I love people, and so it was one of those things where I was just like, Oh my gosh, fascinating new people! You know. My roommate was an international student, and through her I got to know lots of other international students. And I think the great thing — and that was fostered here at Smith — was we became friends before we started opening, you know, things like — Oh, so your religion teaches something entirely different, or you don’t believe in anything, or your only exposure to people of Christian faith has been in a situation where they’re saying hateful things. Like, but, we’re friends. So we’ve got to work through this and we’ve got to talk through, you know, the perspectives we’re coming from. But we have this baseline of, we’re going to love and care for each other. And that was just, you know, really — I mean, a blessing. Yeah.

KRAUS:	So, I mean, obviously you have great memories of being in Wilson, and that was — seems to be a huge support system for you. Could you say the same thing about the Smith community at large? I mean, what was that larger outside-of-the-house atmosphere like for you?

SKINNER:	I think so. We definitely had a lot of house pride. (laughs) And in some ways, I don’t — that may have not been great, you know, for me expanding my friendships to other areas of campus. But, you know, I’m a talker, and outgoing and stuff, and — yeah, just, I always felt welcome here. I always felt amazed by the people around me, you know, and I’m very proud to have gone here, and, you know — and every quarter you get the Alumnae Quarterly, and you’re just like, Oh my God, look, so-and-so cured cancer, yay! (laughs) You know.

KRAUS:	So what was your major?

SKINNER:	I majored in English, and I had a minor in biology.

KRAUS:	Great. So, did you have any overwhelming support or — your, I mean, did you have an advisor that inspired you, or did you have professors that kind of led you on that path?

SKINNER:	Well, I started out pre-med. And made it through organic chemistry and realized, I did not want myself to be my doctor with that background. (laughter) So. Pat Skarda was my advisor. And between her and Bill Oram, they were just the two people on faculty that I got to be closest to. And they were wonderfully supportive, and just always there. Pat was always having teas at her house, or taking people out to dinner, or, you know, really looking after you. Like even when I was studying at the other university, I’d get emails from her, like, you know, You’re coming back, right? (laughter) So, yeah, they were great.

KRAUS:	And, I mean, did you come in — I mean you came in pre-med. Were you — did you feel as though maybe switching the path that you had come initially with — the ideas that you had of what you were going to do and where you were going to go — was there any feelings of, Oh my God, I’m not living up to what I thought I was going to, or was there any pressure from anywhere else about, you know, you should stick to what you —

SKINNER:	My mom is an English major who always said she shouldn't have been an English major. So I think that was probably why I started out pre-med. And when I said I was switching, you know, there was this whole, like, you can’t do anything except teach, and, you know. I still don’t know what I’m going to be when I grow up. I’m going to have lots of good stories and get there eventually, so. (laughs) Yeah, I — for me, it was just a difficult time choosing. I took classes in anthropology and religion, and I took a computer science course, like just all over the board. And really English was what I ended up with, more so than the one thing that stood out, because I just was like, I want to major in all! (laughs) So.

KRAUS:	Totally. So do you remember your commencement speaker?

SKINNER:	Yes. (laughs)

KRAUS:	Can you maybe talk a little bit about what you thought — it was Judy Chicago.

SKINNER:	Yes, it was. (laughs)

KRAUS:	How did you feel about that?

SKINNER:	Well, leading up to it, we had been — initially it was supposed to be Jodie Foster. And that was the whole, you know, like, Oh, Jodie Foster, oh, we love her, she’s great! You know, and I had family members who were like, Oh, well, we’d like to hear her speak! You know, like, we’ll — and they came up, and it’s like, it’s not Jodie Foster, actually. And we were debating last night if we remembered more of our commencement speaker’s speech than we would have because it was such a, like, what? (laughs) It was Mother’s Day. And a lot of her speech focused on, women have been told this big lie that you have it all, that you can be a mom and raise a family and have a career. And at one point, she was like, You can’t do it!

KRAUS:	It’s not true! (laughs)

SKINNER:	We were all just like — it’s, you know — well, it’s Mother’s Day, and graduation, and we thought this was supposed to be the, like, go do it, you know, get out there! And — which was interesting. It led to a discussion last night of, like, well, can you really do it all? Like — well maybe not, but was that really the appropriate place to tell us? (laughs) So.

KRAUS:	I mean, we — Rachel and I have been doing research on the commencement speakers to kind of prepare for these interviews and see what it was that you guys were being told, and what it was — you were kind of leaving school, and then we — most of them were like, you can do it all, and you can be what you want to be — and then this popped up, and we were like, Oh my God, what is this? (laughs)

SKINNER:	It was a very strange day. (laughs) And I don't know if you saw a video or whatever, but at one point, a chipmunk ran across the stage, and she like stopped and talked to it, and we were just like, What is going on, where are we? (laughter) So, I would like to go back and watch it again when I wasn’t just going, (gasp) what is happening? (laughter) So.

KRAUS:	So what did you do the summer after you graduated?

SKINNER:	I worked at my church camp in eastern Kentucky. I had done that the previous summer and ended up, after graduation, being a youth director at a church for five years. Which I never thought I’d do, and I loved it. Yeah, so I — you know, my roommate had gotten hired by Morgan Stanley and was just like, Oh, like, I have my career! And I was like, I don't know what I’m doing! (laughs) I go to camp!

KRAUS:	Yeah, that’s what I’m doing this summer.

SKINNER:	It was, you know — it was great. It was great to have a summer where you don’t really have to think about that, so.

KRAUS:	Right. And I mean, did you feel any — any pressure to do it? I mean, did you feel like, Oh my God, I’m going back home and I don’t have a plan. Was that something that was uncommon among your friends or the people you were graduating with?

SKINNER:	It depended. There were definitely those of us who were like, OK, well, I did what I was supposed to do, I went out and got this great education, but I really don’t know where I’m headed. And then there were the other women that I graduated with who, you know, from the word “go,” knew what they wanted to do, were super-passionate, you know, are still doing it. And I think that carries on not just right after graduation, but throughout life. You know, last night the alums who had gotten together, we were talking, like — and some of them were like, I found it, I’ve found what I’m doing. And some of the rest of us are like, Uh, well, I’m on try number four! (laughs) I’m getting closer! (laughs) You know, so.

KRAUS:	So I mean, looking back, would you do anything differently? Would you have maybe tried other things, I mean, are you generally happy with everything that you did while you were here?

SKINNER:	I think so. I think what I would have liked would have been to have about 48 hours in each day, and maybe four extra years. You know, because it really was something where you would look at, like, the events for a week, you know, and you’d be, like, I want to go to 97% of those, but I also have to go to class and study and, you know, so I think that was really it, was just — I loved what I did, I wouldn't change any of that, I would just add an entirely extra experience onto it, because there was so much.

KRAUS:	I mean, what has it meant to you in the world, in the real world, so to say, having been at Smith and having these experiences under your belt? I mean, has it given you the faith that when you find whatever it is that you’re going to do, that you’re going to be able to do it better than you ever could have done it because of, you know, your time at Smith? Or is it just–

SKINNER:	I think it’s — it gives you a confidence that is really difficult to explain in some ways. There was — I think it was a U.S. Representative who was a Smithie, and, well, one of the first women to be elected. And they asked her, like, Oh, like, you know, what made you think you could be a Representative? And she basically said, well, you know, at Smith, the representatives were women, and the president was women — or the president was a woman. And it didn't dawn on me that I couldn't do that. And I’ve found that when I went to grad school, the program was majority male, which was very interesting to go from Smith to that. And, I just — I wasn’t intimidated at all. You know, instead of being like, oh, you know, I’m really going to have to fight for this — I was just like, Pssh, you know, whatever, I can do this.

KRAUS:	Yeah, and what did you study in grad school?

SKINNER:	I have a Masters in city planning.

KRAUS:	Great.

SKINNER:	But yeah, I think I found that — is that — you know, if anyone tries to tell me I can’t do something because — maybe not overtly because a woman hasn’t done it — but more like, You know, well maybe you should try this more stereotypical female role, don’t do that. (laughter) Because that’s not discouraging me.

KRAUS:	So we should probably wrap up, we’re almost out of time. But just to close, I mean, do you have any advice for current Smithies, future Smithies, anyone who might be considering coming here — any words to them?

SKINNER:	Do it. As a youth director, I tried to — I’ve tried to get a number of my girls to look at Smith. And actually one of them is graduating tomorrow. And — or Sunday. And it’s just one of those things where I’m like, Until you get in that environment, you have no idea what it’s going to mean. And actually, as the years continue, since I’ve been at Smith, I think I appreciate it more, just having that network of women, having those four years where you can do anything because you’ve got this supportive group of people behind you saying you can do it and expecting you to do it. It’s a pretty big boost to your self-confidence. And you definitely need that when you get out into — outside the Smith bubble. (laughs) You need that sort of voice in the back of your mind that says, you know, I can do this. I can do this because I know I can do this. So, yeah.

KRAUS:	Great. Well, thank you so much.

SKINNER:	Thanks.

KRAUS:	I really appreciate your coming in and sharing everything with us.

SKINNER:	Well, this is fun.

KRAUS:	Yeah. So I will — I guess I'll grab your mike from you.

GEIS:	Before we finish — I just want to just get a little room tone. I’m just going to listen to the sound of the room for about 20 seconds just for editing.

KRAUS:	Sure.

