

MORGAN: 	Yeah.  So when I went to law school there was an incr— there weren’t very many women law professors, but, after I graduated, a few more and a few more.  And there would be this huge tension when women law professors who were feminists — who would begin to write about feminist theory.  And the sort of traditional, male, legal establishment in academia would say, Oh, no, that’s not legal scholarship, that’s just women’s stuff.  And it took a long time to get something like feminist legal theory to be recognized or to write about issues that were important to women.  Or you could write about it if you wrote it solely using, sort of, established legal theories, in how you would argue a brief in front of a Supreme Court.
But the whole social context, that was really considered, you know, something that was not worthy of important, legal discussion.  So just having that conversation here, regardless of how it turns out, I think is really important to kind of elevate how people think about organizing domestic workers — are they of value?  And that’s, I think, really what it’s about.  How — do we accord people equal value?  And that’s sort of the — to me, that’s the whole kernel of it.

CLERK:	You went from an all-women’s institution to a male-dominated field.  Can you tell me about that transition and those two spaces?

GEIS: 	And Celeste can you do your little statement at the top where you say your name and her name and–

CLERK:	Of course.  My name is Celeste Clerk.  I am interviewing Mary Morgan, class of ’67 for the Smith College Archives.  Hello.

MORGAN: 	Hi.

CLERK:	So, we’ll start with a general question.  Where are you from?

MORGAN:	I was born in New Orleans [Louisiana].  I grew up mainly in the south in the suburbs of Washington D.C.

CLERK:	How did you come to Smith College?

MORGAN:	(laughs) A friend who was a class ahead of me in high school came over to my house one afternoon and she had a shopping bag filled with college catalogues and she dumped them out on my floor and she said, “Let’s look at these!”  And I came to Smith College — I knew nothing about these colleges up here.  I lived in the south and girls in high school, no matter who you were or what you could do, were sent to secretarial school or Mary Washington College in Virginia.
So I knew nothing.  I picked up what turned out to be Smith College catalogue and I flipped through the pages and I found junior year abroad in Geneva to study international relations.  And at that point in my young life I wanted to be a diplomat.  And I said (clicks tongue), “That’s where I’m going.  I want to do that.”  So, I applied early admission and got in and — it was all serendipity.  I didn’t know where I was going or what I was doing. (laughs)

CLERK:	What did it mean to you that Smith College was an all-women’s college?

MORGAN:	You know, I don’t think I really appreciated the significance.  My parents — my mom didn’t go to college.  My dad was in the military all his life.  He went to college through the military.  I had an older brother.  He went back home to Louisiana to go to LSU [Louisiana State University].  I didn’t really know very much about colleges and I didn’t know — I never really knew very much about private or independent schools.  Seemed like a good idea, but I didn’t — it wasn’t anything that I weighed.  I don’t — I walked in not knowing.

CLERK:	What was your experience at an all-women’s college here at Smith?

MORGAN: 	I would say my primary experience didn’t have anything to do with it being all-women.  My primary experience was, number one, (clears throat) I had escaped the south, I had escaped my family, and this whole new world that I knew nothing about opened up.  I didn’t know anybody growing up who worked in a corporation.  I didn’t know anybody who was in — who worked in a labor union.  I didn’t even really know about such things.  So I met all these different kinds of people from all different walks of life and everybody was really smart.  And people were very welcoming.  I didn’t really know — my mother made most of my clothes, not because we were so poor, we were just kind of lower-middle class, but because that’s what she did.  So, I didn’t really know that people referred to their shoes or their clothes by a brand name.  I didn’t know about that. (laughs)
So, on the one hand, it was very intimidating and, on the other hand, it was very exciting and just liberating.  I remember when I went to first grade — I remember sitting in my little desk and chair and my little book and I thought, Oh, boy, I have finally gotten out of my house and I can sit here and I can read.  And I remember feeling that same kind of excitement and liberation when I came to Smith.  So that’s — and then I began to completely appreciate that life, during the five days when I was here and it was an all-women’s environment, was very different from the kind of craziness and almost chaos when we would go away for weekends to some men’s college.  And it felt very safe here.  It felt — I felt very encouraged and inspired and I could be completely my authentic self.  I didn’t have to prove anything and I didn’t have to compete and people weren’t competing with me.  People around me wanted to help me.
So — and I’m sure part of the juxtaposition of going someplace on a weekend that was a co-ed environment, that became exaggerated because it was sort of this dating kind of thing and you had to figure out what to say and what to wear and (laughs) it didn’t feel as much at ease and as authentic as when I was here.

CLERK:	What was dating like at Smith during your time here?

MORGAN:	Gosh.  Well, every once and a while, boyfriends of some of the women in my house would come here.  I guess they would spend the weekend.  I don’t know.  They tended to be, like, high school boyfriends.  So, people knew them.  We kind of integrated them as part of our family.  Otherwise, you went away.  You — and you were not supposed to spend the night within thirty miles — I think it was within thirty miles.  Like your boyfriend couldn’t come and you could get a motel room in Northampton.  No, no, you couldn’t do that. (laugh) But it was perfectly fine to go to Dartmouth or to wherever, where I’m sure things were infinitely wilder.  I don’t know.  It was fun, but it always had some level of chaos to it, like I was trying to keep up, which I never felt I did. (laugh)

CLERK: 	Were there rules and regulations dictating the social life around the college?

MORGAN:	There was a curfew.  I think it was like 9:00 or 10:00 o’clock on weekends — something like that — and 8:00 or 9:00 o’ clock on weeknights.  Men were never allowed upstairs.  I think those were the main things.  I don’t know.  In my house — I lived in a very small house.  I lived in Hubbard House.  And most of us were pretty good at breaking rules, so I think most people kept curfew.  I think the main rule that we used to break — particularly in sophomore — and particularly in our senior year.  You know, where everybody had, like, a bottle of scotch that you kept in your closet and we loved it when it snowed because you’d go out and get a cup full of snow and pour your scotch on something that was cold. (laughing) That was, sort of, the biggest rule I think that we broke.

CLERK:	Did you ever get in trouble?

MORGAN: 	No, not for anything like that.  The only trouble I ever got in was real trouble.  I had a boyfriend who was at UVA [University of Virginia Arlington] when I came here as a freshman and I went down to see him — October, maybe, of my freshman year.  And I came back and I was no longer a virgin and I was pregnant.  So, that was pretty serious.  This was like 1963.  And I remember I went home with a classmate.  Her mom was a doctor in New Haven.  And I had a pregnancy test and then I came back here.  So, when Thanksgiving came, I packed up all my stuff and I left and I told my parents.  They were appropriately aghast.  But to their credit, even though I was angry with them at the time, they really said, “You have to have an abortion.  This is not what you’re going to do here.”
So for a while I thought, Oh, no.  I didn’t have any religious feelings about an abortion or not.  But somehow I had taken it into my mind that this was — I was going to marry this boy and have this baby and, fortunately, I came to my senses (laughs) because my parents were very insistent.  In the District of Columbia at the time, if you had two doctors attest that it was for the physical or mental health of the mother, an abortion could be approved.  So my father arranged for that because he was in the navy and he was connected to a lot of doctors.  So I went to a hospital.  I had an abortion.  My father managed to call the Dean of Students and say, “Can she come back to school?”  And they said, “Yes.”
And I remember coming back and was called into the Dean of Students’ office.  I don’t even remember her name anymore.  She was very serious.  I had done a bad thing.  They were going to keep their eye on me and don’t ever do anything like that again.  And I never heard from her again.  I never felt any support, counseling, nothing.  But the women in my house were spectacular.  They were loving and supportive and said I was a brave soldier and life went on. (laughing) So, that was the only time I really got into trouble.

CLERK: 	What was the feminist dialogue around Smith College when you were here?

MORGAN: 	(clears throat) You know, I knew that Betty Friedan’s book came out ’63, ’64.  She came here to speak.  I don’t recall going to hear her.  The only context for quote ‘feminist dialogue’ is in my senior year there was a lot of conversation about should men be admitted to Smith.  And I guess, subsequently, the Five College Consortium was set up and Hampshire College and you could go and take classes, like at Amherst [College].  But those conversations, I think, were just beginning and I know I felt very strongly that Smith should remain a women’s college because I felt like women in the presence of men, at that day and age, were different and I could watch myself be different.  And I just felt like, No.  You have your entire life to go out and work in a male-dominated world.  Can’t there be just this little safe space where women can learn to be confident, to speak out, to — it’s not to develop intellectually because I think they — I think the Smith students and the Amherst students were completely equal.  But I think it took a women’s environment to allow women to feel completely comfortable and confident in their own abilities and to not back down and to be willing to say, No, you’re wrong, I’m right.  And to be able to say it in a way that was persuasive and calm — cool and collected.  So, that’s really the only context in which I would say I was aware of feminist dialogue.

CLERK:	You went from an all-women’s college to a very male-dominated field.  Can you talk to me about — a little bit about that transition and about both — the difference between both of those spaces?

MORGAN: 	So, I — and I entered law school in ’69 and that was the year the Vietnam War was going strong and that was the year they eliminated graduate school deferments for men going in — being drafted.  So, there were a lot of empty seats at NYU [New York University] law school and they needed to be filled.  So, for the first time, there was a significant percentage — it was not half, but it was slightly less than half, which was unheard of at the time.  So, there were a lot of women there, but it was completely male-dominated.  The year I entered — let me back up.  At NYU law school, there was a very prestigious fellowship for people who wanted to work in the public interest and it was called the Root-Tilden Fellowship and it not only paid completely for your law school education, it gave you a living stipend, a free place to live — I mean it was unheard of.  And for somebody like me that didn’t have any money, it was quite extraordinary.
So, there was a small group of women in the class or two ahead of me in law school who really pushed, badgered, cajoled the law school into opening that program to women.  It had been all men.  All these opportunities completely closed to women.  And I was one of the first women who got into that program.  So, I was really the beneficiary of other women doing great things to open doors for me and I was aware that there was an active women’s organization.   And by the time that I was in my second year, sort of the women’s liberation was just bursting out all over and I remember, when I first arrived there, some men in my class said, Oh, you’re one of those feminists.  I didn’t even really know what they meant.  I was just me.  And then, the next year — nine months or so — some women in a consciousness-raising group invited me to join them and I thought, I don’t think I need to do that.  I’m not the victim of anything.  I can take care of myself.  But ultimately I did and it was probably one of the most formative experiences in my entire life of just having the opportunity and the safe space to explore who I was as a woman.  And it was also during that period of time that I came out as a lesbian because not only was women’s liberation bursting out all over, but the gay and lesbian liberation movements were just going very strong.  And there were sit-ins and there were demonstrations.
And you know, and it all — there was — the anti-war movement was very strong, so there was so much ferment.  And I worked as a law student in a legal firm that was called the New York City Law Commune.  And most of our clients were people involved in political issues and we represented a famous trial for the Black Panthers in New York City.  And I remember one day a woman who was a class ahead of me who went to my consciousness-raising group and she told me, “Now, Mary, don’t tell anyone you’re a lesbian.  You’ve got to keep quiet because you’ll never be admitted to the Bar.  You’ll never get through the — there was some character committee of the New York State Bar Association.  It finally — in small circles it was OK to be a proud, strong woman, but God forbid you should tell anyone that you were a lesbian, which — I didn’t really take that advice and I was admitted to the Bar.  That was my feminist experience really in law school, not really at Smith.  But now, all these years later, I can really look back and see that what I got at Smith was that foundation of confidence — that I knew something and that I knew I knew it.  And that makes a huge difference.  So I don’t know if I answered your question, but (laughing) that’s all right.

CLERK:	Absolutely, thank you. Did you see any racial tensions on campus while you were here?

MORGAN: 	No, I did not.  I think there was only one African American woman in my class.  I did not know her.  My parents were from the south and very conservative.  And before I came to Smith they picked up the same Smith catalogue that I had picked up and they found a photograph of — they thought the professor was African American.  Not that it made any difference.  He was dark skinned.  And my parents were furious and I remember them screaming at me that if I had any idea of going out, you know, with a black student they would pull me out — they would yank me out of the that school faster than I could imagine.  So I had — I grew up with very clear boundaries about race, even though that’s not where my thoughts were.
But I can now look back and see my actions had very clear boundaries.  So did I see racial tension?  No, I didn’t because there weren’t any people of color here.  I think there was maybe — there was definitely one.  Maybe two Asian American women here.  But when we had the parade this morning I was stunned, just stunned at the number of women of color, the women who weren’t all skinny and white and long, straight hair, the number of — well, the number of young people who — either gender fluid or transgender.  It was dumbfounding.  And I felt, This is really extraordinary.  What a wonderful opportunity.  That was not the Smith that I knew.  The Smith that I knew there was a senior in my house when I was a freshman and we came back for our sophomore year — we had been told that that senior and maybe even — maybe there were two of them in our house — they had been kicked out because they were lesbians.  Yeah. (laughs) Surprise.  Yes, it was a different world.

CLERK:	How have you watched the campus change from your time here to now?  I know you answered this question some with the last one, but just — not just from then to now, but also maybe even during your four years here.  Did you watch any changes?

MORGAN:	(sighs) I don’t know that I was really aware of much change while I was here.  The changes of which I was most aware — number one I went to junior year abroad and that was like an epiphany to me, seeing the big, wide world.  And when I came back I had really begun my abrupt shift to the left in my personal life.  So, I was aware that Smith wasn’t — not everybody at Smith shared my political attitudes towards the war for instance.  Mainly, I — and quite frankly I didn’t have anything to do with Smith for quite a few years.  I loved it while I was here.  I felt very blessed to be here.  I was very grateful.  But I began to look at the world through such a different lens after I left here that I really equated Smith with the world of privilege that I didn’t want to have anything to do with.  So I never gave any money to the college.
So, it was only quite a few years later that I began to appreciate that Smith was actually an institution that was trying to encourage and develop and nurture diversity, not just say it, but actually nurture it.  And it was Ruth Simmons, really, who I just thought was the best.  And I’m not sure I’m accurate in this perception, but I thought that she was one of the main people who really developed relationships with feeder schools to make sure that there would be schools that Smith could have an active relationship with that would bring young women of color, young women who were of different class backgrounds and then bring them onto campus and then nurture and encourage them and support them while they’re here.  I just thought that was a wonderful, wonderful program.
And then the other thing that I have just loved is the engineering school.  I was stunned when I was looking at the list of prizes and awards at the Ivy Day ceremony and so many in the sciences and math.  It’s fabulous.  And to encourage women to do that in an environment that’s all women where they can just fully explore their potential without being held back or holding themselves back for any reason.  I just think it’s wonderful.  So, I’m a big advocate for Smith college now.  (laughs)

CLERK:	(unclear)

MORGAN: 	OK.

CLERK:	 (unclear) Very last question.  Who have you become since?

MORGAN:	Well, I — to tell you the honest truth, I think I’ve become myself.  (clears throat) A lot of my life, just like coming to Smith College, I didn’t have — I had no idea where I was coming to.  It was completely not-knowing.  I fell into law school, not knowing.  And I had a wonderful, small law practice for about nine years and then I became a judge.  I didn’t know anyone who was a judge.  Nobody in my family had ever been a judge.  It was sort of a gift and it gave me the opportunity to do a lot of things that only people with power and prestige can do in our society.  When you’re a judge, if you call a meeting, everybody comes.  And I could no longer, as a judge, be the kind of political activist that I previously had been, but I could be a very public figure.  So I was a very public figure and sort of — I look back, kind of, and think of sort of a professional lesbian activist — in that I was just very public.  I did a lot of speaking, appearances, because I wanted — first of all, I wanted young, particularly young lesbians and gay men, to know that you can do this too.  And you don’t have to hide and you don’t have to be afraid.  And even if you are afraid, and we are all afraid sometimes, there are going to be people there who will hold your hand.  And I found that being a visible role model for people had impacts way beyond anything that I ever imagined or even intended.  You never know when you drop a pebble in water what’s going to happen.  I also had the opportunity to do a lot of interesting legal work in the judiciary.  I taught judges.  I spent a lot of time teaching judges about fairness and using issues about LGBTQ or women’s issues, race issues, to teach judges how to be fair and how to conduct themselves appropriately.  I had the opportunity to do a lot of work around domestic violence and substance abuse and mental health issues in the criminal justice system, which, to me, was actually the most rewarding thing that I did.  So, I — it was a gift to me.  I was good.  I did a really good job.  I was a very smart judge.  But when it comes down to it I really felt like the people who appeared in front of me, people who most of society just kicks into the gutter, I felt like most of the time they were my teachers because they had strength and perseverance.  And even though if they got knocked down a lot they were able to pick themselves up over and over — more times I think than I could ever had done.  I’m very lucky.  I’ve not had that much suffering in my life.  So to the extent that I was able to reach out and give somebody a pull up, that was a good thing.

CLERK:	Thank you.

MORGAN:	Your welcome. (laughs)


