

DANA: 	I’m Illaria Dana interviewing Tao Kim for the Alumnae Oral History Project here at Smith College on May 20, 2017.  I just want to start by asking you where you’re from.

KIM:	I’m from Chicago.  So not born, but raised, in the city itself.

DANA:	And how did you decide to go to Smith College, or come to Smith?

KIM:	Well, so I was just talking to a friend about that and really, it was, you know, when you take the SATs or PSATs, you get the mailers, and Smith had a really nice mailer and before I received it, I had actually never heard of Smith College.  But there was just something about, I guess, the design as well as the content that I thought was really interesting.  And so that’s my first time I heard of it and sort of kept an eye on it as I progressed through high school, and obviously applied, and was accepted, and came here.

DANA:	Yeah.  What did it mean to you that Smith was a women’s college?

KIM:	You know, so for me personally, I think it — I — the fact that it was a women’s college when I was applying was not a factor.  I think coming in, I didn’t — I guess I didn’t have as much of an awareness about some of the challenges, I guess, biases against women and education and things like that.  I think just because fortunately I had not personally felt it up until that point, but I think it was a really eye-opening experience to see what value was placed in women’s education, or the need for women’s education.  I learned all of that once I got here.

DANA:	Where did you learn that from?   Like where did you get those messages?  From your professors, from other students, or–

KIM:	I think a lot of it’s talking to the students who were here and hearing about some of like their life stories and understanding the value of having a safe place to express themselves or be— and being in an environment where they felt like their voices could be heard.  I think I’ve never had a problem with voicing, once I could speak English, but that was a whole process (laughs) in and of itself.  But once I could actually speak English, I — I was pretty outspoken about things from the get-go, but really understanding that that’s not the case for everybody.

DANA:	And what was your average day at Smith like while you were here?

KIM:	Oh, the average day.  For the most part, I think I started my days pretty early.  I lived in the quad my first two years, so you have to allow a little bit of extra time to walk to classes — a little time, roll out of bed, get something to eat, and go to class.  So I usually started with a 9:00 a.m. class and went to a few classes.  I was pretty involved on the campus.  So I was a Gold Key tour guide, so once a week I’m giving tours.  Was involved with our class as an officer, and just doing other extracurricular activities on campus.  So I feel like my days were — a lot of it was class in the mornings and then club and other activities in the afternoons, and obviously dinner.  And sometimes those dinners could go into long conversations, and then try and sneak in a little studying.  (laughter)

DANA:	What other clubs were you involved with?  What were your favorites?

KIM:	I was really involved with — especially earlier on with, I guess the ethnicity-based or affiliations.  So I was an officer of the Korean American Students of Smith and also a member of the Asian Students Association.  So very involved in a lot of the different activities, taking on some of the leadership roles, and things like that.  So that was definitely a big chunk of my first couple of years here.

DANA:	What kind of work were you doing?  You were organizing activities.  What other kinds of things?  Were you working with the administration, or incoming students, or like what kind of goals did you have in those kinds of clubs?

KIM:	So I think some of it was just trying to spread awareness.  So for the Korean American Students, I was the secretary.  So my job, actually, back in the day was to create paper newsletters and stuff the mailboxes of anyone that had a Korean, like, identification or it sounded like they had a Korean name because you could just see from the names on the mailboxes.  So we would do that and we would cultural events.  So we would have like Asian teahouse, for example, where we would be able to share food and culture, whether it’s music or other things like that.  So involved in that sense.   And then the Korean American Students group, there’s actually a large population of Korean adoptees in this area, so we would do culture events with those adoptees and I had a little brother and little sister that we would meet with, unfortunately not as often as I think any one of us would have liked, but that was another good connection.

DANA:	So do you feel like you were involved with Northampton while you were here, too?  Like a town or if you like these different things or–

KIM:	Yeah.   You know, so not so much in the City of Northampton.  I think a lot of my time was spent here on campus.  And then I actually attended a church in Amherst and so I got involved with a little bit more of — there was a — there was a sort of student church and then there was sort of an adult church.  So a non-student church, and so we would get sort of involved with them too, but not so much in the City of Northampton itself.

DANA:	So what did you study while you were here?

KIM:	I was a Government major and that was actually one of the driving reasons of why I came to Smith.  I knew that I wanted to study poli-sci, [political science] or in this case government, so I came in very focused knowing that that was going to be my major.  And then the other thing that really drew me to Smith was the [Jean] Picker [Semester-In-Washington] Program.  So I was able to participate in that program and spend the semester and summer in Washington, D.C., which was a really great experience to be able to work full-time and then also to do an in-depth research work for the paper that we had to turn in.  So that was my major, but my focus really was more on international relations within that, and then I also did an economics minor.

DANA:	Awesome.  Did you have a favorite professor or class that helped you when you were studying government?

KIM:	You know, I think — so unfortunately I’m blanking on the professor, but the class that I keep going back to over and over is there was a class called “The Rhetorical Presidency.”  Especially in this day and age, I think just understanding the power of rhetoric is really important, but it was just a really great class to understand how leaders can use rhetoric to drive forward, or in some cases not drive forward (laughs) specific agenda.

DANA:	Yeah.  What houses did you live in while you were here?

KIM:	So when I was a prospective student, I got the advice to live in the quad, at least for the first year.  And so I lived in Wilder [House] for the first two years and then I was in D.C. for the first semester of my junior year and then I came back and moved into Baldwin [House].

DANA:	Where were you working in D.C.?

KIM:	I was working for a think tank called the Korea Economic Institute.  So it’s affiliated loosely with the Korean government and it was a really interesting time to be there because there was a lot going on in Korea-U.S. trade relations at that time.  So I got to really get a close look at some of the interesting policies that were being formed and their impact on both governments.

DANA:	Cool.   Do you want to talk a little bit about what you’ve done after Smith since you left here?

KIM:	Yeah.  So I went back to Chicago after I left Smith.  Actually, right after I graduated, I knew I was going to spend the summer in Kazakhstan so I went with the group, the church group, from Amherst and we went to Kazakhstan and taught English for the summer.  We set up an English institute and it’s something that’s — had been done for a previous years.  So the folks in the area knew we were coming.  We used the same buildings.  So I did that for the summer and then came back to the States, started my job search really hoping to find something in consulting because that’s sort of what (laughs) a lot of people did.  But also it sounded like it was an interesting way to continue learning.  So I worked at the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association which is based in Chicago doing healthcare strategy and corporate strategy for the association.  But I wanted to see what else was out there and do something maybe a little bit more dynamic.  Healthcare, it doesn’t move very fast in our country.
So I went to business school at UCLA [University of California Los Angeles] at the Anderson School of Management.  And then from there, I transitioned into a career in commercial real estate, actually, and restaurant development working for a large family-held business called Panda Express.  (laughter) And then from there, they actually — so I was based out in L.A. [Los Angeles] that whole time.  The company wanted — because they were growing more on the eastern half of the U.S. — wanted people to move east.  So that was a great chance for me to work — transfer back to Chicago where my family still is.  So I moved back with them and then I’ve been working since then with a company called Argo Tea which is a small Chicago startup company also doing sort of same things with café development for them.

DANA:	Do you feel like Smith helped prepare you for the work that you’ve done after?

KIM:	So I think the most important thing that Smith actually provided, in addition to the academics and all of that, was getting familiar sort of in mainstream U.S. society.  So I’m a one-point-five generation so that — meaning that I emigrated with my parents to the States.  And so we don’t have that cultural background of being in mainstream America.  And then at the school I went to — I went to the Chicago — through the Chicago Public School system and most of my peers were also one-point-five generation.  So really the only sort of mainstream experience I got was through some of my teachers and I — one teacher in particular was really influential in sort of showing me like what is “tea” or how do you do an “afternoon social” sort of the American way.  But just being at Smith and getting comfortable with eating meals — eating American meals and having those kinds of conversations over — over a meal or interacting with professors.  I took a lot of advantage of spending time going to office hours.  So just understanding, I guess, or developing the comfort level.  I think it’s something once I decided I want to be — to participate, I could, but just building up the practice and the comfort level gives you, or gave me, sort of a — not so much a vocabulary, I would say, but more of that comfort or the ease so that I could go into any kind of social situation and feel comfortable.  That I could navigate it and sort of say the appropriate things, and do the right things, and not make and social faux pas because I think when you don’t have that confidence, then that really can be a hindrance to really fully expressing yourself or achieving sort of your full potential, whether it’s professionally or academically.

DANA:	Yeah.  Why did you come to reunion?  Have you been to a reunion before or–

KIM:	No.  So this is the first reunion I’ve come back for.  Because of my job, this actually weekend coincides with one of the largest commercial real estate conferences internat— it’s a big international conference.  So for the ten-year and then also for the five-year, the timing didn’t really work out.  I had to make that tradeoff.  But with a little bit of a change in my focus, I’ve been able to come back for this.  And then I think it’s also — I felt like I got a little bit disconnected from the Smith community and so that this would be a really good way to come back and reconnect.  Had a couple good experiences going back for my high school and grad school reunions, and so I had a — really a lot of fun reconnecting with fellow classmates.  I thought, Smith definitely, this reunion I have to come back for.

DANA:	Did you mention where you went to a grad school?

KIM:	Yeah I went to UCLA Anderson School of Management.

DANA:	Oh.  Of course.

KIM:	Yeah.

DANA:	Yeah.  And do you have any advice for current Smith students that you want to pass on?  Have you noticed any changes between Smith now and Smith before?  Anything you’d like to see change or anything you’d like to stay the same?

KIM:	Well, I do think I appreciate the continued commitment to diversity and I think that finally there’s more, I guess, words or formats to discuss all different kinds of diversity.  So I just went — attended the diversity and inclusion panel and they asked a question there about, What are we doing Smith to allow for safe spaces for diversity of ideology, for example.  So I think Smith does a great job moving forward on racial or like class-based diversity, but I do think that when I was here, there was a sense of there wasn’t as much safe space for differences of ideas if it wasn’t in conformity with sort of the, what’s the accepted liberal college kind of stream of thought.
So it seems like there’s been progress in that front.   I would love to see more of that because one of the trends that I do see, whether it’s at Smith or other institutions of higher learning, is that there seems to be more of I do— maybe group-think or more of like, of a censorship that’s going on, of some things are considered — I think some things are in the name of protecting folks.  I think in many ways free speech is being sort of hindered.  And so I would just love to see Smith continue to be a place where people can feel comfortable voicing their opinions.  Whether they are in the majority view or not, and that this would be a place that really encourages that.

DANA:      	Are there any issues in particular that you think Smith like doesn’t want to talk about, like religion?  Or like what kinds of things would you like to see that people can talk about more here?

KIM:	So I guess, I mean, for me coming from a very like evangelical Judeo-Christian-like worldview, I felt like there was not that much space here for that, I would say.  Or some of the — the faith beliefs that I have would be considered like close-minded.  And so I’m not sure how much the college is doing currently to — I guess I’m not looking for so much validation but just like safe areas, or for people to be able to say, That is a point of view that is valid and, or that should be expressed and welcome.

DANA:       	Yeah.  OK.   So I think that I got most of the questions.  Are there any final thoughts that you would want to give for this interview that I missed?

GEIS:	I have a question too.

DANA:	You do?  Awesome.  Yeah.

KIM:	Oh, you said you have a–

GEIS:	Yeah.  I was curious about classes you took while you were here that were particularly mind-expanding.  You talked about the rhetoric class.

KIM:	Yeah.

GEIS:	When I think of some of the classes that I’ve seen here, sort of more as an outsider, that are around Asian studies that are —  that I think have been particularly mind-expanding for the students here.  Was that your experience when you were here or did that come — do you think that’s something that’s going on more now?

KIM:	I’m not sure about like exactly what the academic offering is currently.  I haven’t looked at the course catalog (laughs) but I think for me, because I came from such a multicultural background, I would say that was not so much — like those kinds of classes were not as mind-expanding.  Coming from the Chicago Public School system where we had really scarce resources, in some ways being able to take — I took science classes my first year.  Probably a third of the class, I thought, Oh, maybe I’ll do pre-med as well.  So I think taking the sci— the biology and chemistry classes and having those kinds of resources available.  And then while I was here this time, spending some time in the engineering building and seeing the kinds of lab technologies that they have and resources, I think that’s really something that is — something not — to not be taken for granted, that having those kinds of resources that really allow you to explore at a really high-level interests that you might have.
And then I think this idea of, coming from the Chicago Public School system, you’re in these larger classes.  And so what was really great for me was to be in even taking these larger 100-level science classes, seeing all my papers graded by hand by the professor or being in a lab class of just 16, or in some of these seminars.  Sitting in a class of like eight to 10 people and — and you having to actually carry the weight of moving the class forward.  I think there’s — that’s a very empowering thing.  To say, it’s not like you were just permitted to do this.  It’s a requirement and it’s your responsibility to help move these things forward.
I took an ethics class, actually, which was eye-opening in a lot of ways because we were able to introduce topics that have ethical dilemmas.  So that was the first time I really understood, for example, the ethical dilemmas of the funeral industry and how that really preys on people’s emotions.  And so I think just having things like that that were student-led but in an environment where we could all learn.  And there were theories, obviously, and different academic disciplines that go along with it.  But the experiences that people brought in, I think, were really eye-opening.  And I think the biggest thing really was the students.  You know, I just connected to — at this reunion, or reconnected with a friend from South Africa and she was the first person I’d ever met from South Africa, for example.  And so just being able to hear her story and perspective.  And it was actually the first time I met people from Brazil, actually.  So there were two students in my house at Wilder from Brazil.  I mean, even if they sort of have a normal story, it’s still different because of where they come from.  So I think that more than anything else really opened up my worldview, just meeting people from different cultures.

GEIS:	Did you — were there other students here who were evangelical Christians as well who–

KIM:	Yeah.  I think there were.  A lot of us, the people that I did know of, most of us sort of found ourselves at this church in Amherst.  And that was also something that the chapel actually allowed me to — I was in a leadership role in the church my senior year and the chu— and the chapel actually had cars that you could actually borrow so that you can drive to different things and I think that was a — really great resources.  So even though I didn’t have that, I guess, sort of resource directly here on campus, there were resources on campus that allowed me to go find it elsewhere.

GEIS:	Yeah.

DANA:	Did — so you went abroad after with the church.  Did you put on any other events here at Smith or in the community?  Or anything other than what you’ve mentioned already?

KIM:	Oh, you mean with the church?  Or–

DANA:	Yeah.

KIM:	No.  We — I mean, we would do like the — we would do like recitals and things like that for the major holidays.  But no, that was really the thing.  We were actually a part of a New England church consortium of sort of like-minded churches.  So there was a student — predominantly student-led church, or student body church in Boston [Massachusetts], and one in Providence [Rhode Island], and a couple others.  And so we, every other year, we would do — we called it “Neighborhoods.”  It was a retreat where you would have students from all of these different universities in different pockets of New England and we would get together.  And so that was also a really great experience too, to be able to meet like-minded students from other universities, different parts.

DANA:	Yeah.

GEIS:	I think we’re good.

KIM:	Yeah.

DANA:	Thank you.

KIM:	Thanks.  Thank you.


