
LAWRENCE:	OK.  Hi.  I’m Sunny Lawrence.  I’m doing this interview as part of the Alumnae Oral History Project.  Can you say your name and your graduating year?

WESS:	Deborah Wess, 1986.

LAWRENCE:	All right.  So, I just want to start a little bit with — you grew up in Southern California?

WESS:	Mm-hmm.

LAWRENCE:	Can you talk a little bit about what your life was like before you came to Smith?

WESS:	(laughs) Sure.  Average, middle-class life.  I have a brother.  I grew up with both parents in the home in Northern Orange County.  So, not the super-wealthy part of Orange County and not the on-the-beach part of Orange County, not that far from the beach either.  I don’t know how to describe it for people who have never been there.  It’s sort of like the land of endless malls.  And, also, it’s really close to Disneyland and Knott’s Berry Farm and, so, lots of tourists, not necessarily right in my town, but five miles away.  So, it was kind of odd to grow up in a place that other people came on vacation.

LAWRENCE:	Mm-hmm.  Yeah.  So, how did you end up coming to Smith, choosing Smith?

WESS:	Well, it was a very anti-intellectual kind of place.  It was hard to be a smart girl there.  I just knew I wanted to go to college in New England.  I had that dream, and once I took the PSAT and started getting mail from a zillion colleges — I don’t think I actually got anything from Smith, but I got something from Mount Holyoke that I replied to.  And then, when I heard about the five colleges, I honed in on Smith.

LAWRENCE:	Did you want to go to a women’s college?

WESS:	I didn’t necessarily want to go to a women’s college, but obviously, it wasn’t a deal-breaker.

LAWRENCE:	Yeah.

WESS:	Once I came here, I loved it for the fact that it was a women’s college.  I think I chose Smith mostly because it had no requirements.

LAWRENCE:	Yes.  Definitely.  (laughter) So, once you got to Smith, how — where did you find community here?  Where were — how did you find your friends?

WESS	In that — in my house.

LAWRENCE:	In your house?

WESS:	Yeah.

LAWRENCE:	What was your house?

WESS:	Scales.

LAWRENCE:	Uh-huh.  Cool.  What was that — what was the house community like?  What are — what were your favorite traditions?

WESS:	Well, Scales didn’t really have any traditions except for senior skits.  The — you know, I requested a single and I was very happy I got one.  But I think because Scales is all singles, it’s a little more — I don’t know how to describe it.  I think I remember one year the college gave everyone a survey about their houses and I described Scales as very laissez-faire.  (laughter)

LAWRENCE:	Yeah.

WESS:	But — so, my group of friends were all assigned to the maid’s quarters rooms when we were freshmen, and I lived right across the hall from them.  And so, they and I and then one other woman who came in that same year as a transfer just became really good friends and we’re friends to this day.

LAWRENCE:	Yeah.  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  Did you feel like — were you active in any, like, clubs or groups?

WESS:	I dabbled in a couple things.  Like I was in the — I can’t remember exactly what it was called — like Anti-Nuclear Group?  Might have been called Students for Peace and Justice.  I’m not sure.  The thing that I became most involved with and then I made another big group of friends was doing Rally Day every year.  So, I was in the show every year and then my junior and senior year I helped write the script and direct the show.

LAWRENCE:	Mm-hmm.  Mm-hmm.  Disarmament was a — like anti-nuclear stuff was a big deal in the ’80s, right?

WESS:	Yes.

LAWRENCE:	Can you talk about that a little bit?

WESS:	Well, you know, Reagan was a very bellicose president, you know?  He thought he was going to have this SDI, and it just seemed like a really imminent threat actually because he was such a sabre rattler.

LAWRENCE:	Mm-hmm.  Mm-hmm.  Yeah.  What kind of work did you do around that?

WESS:	Well, we just — you know, we went to meetings.  The group at Smith that was led by some Smith professors and there was also a lot of overlap with the friends group here in Northampton and we — I went to several rallies in Washington, DC.

LAWRENCE:	Mm-hmm.  Cool.  And you were also involved with divestment?  Were you involved with the divestment protests?

WESS:	I did — I was very involved with that.  Yeah.

LAWRENCE:	Can you talk about your involvement?

WESS:	My enrollment?  (laughs)

LAWRENCE:	Or your involvement.  (laughter)

WESS:	Oh, yeah.  It was a very spontaneous action.  So, I went the first day and I just felt like it was really important and decided to stay.  So, I’m a — I majored in education and American Studies.  So, it was a really big deal for me to stay because I was in the middle of student teaching.  So, when — not just for my graduation requirements, but to get my Massachusetts Teaching Certificate I have to have a certain number of hours.  And so, I wasn’t going.  So, that was kind of a big ethical dilemma for me, but I did it anyway.  But then, my American Studies part of me, my interest in government and process, it just became so fascinating to me I didn’t want to leave.  Because it was very much a group, like, with no leaders and trying to do things by consensus.  And yet, at the same time, I think, as these things always do, several people rose as leaders.
But I thought it was really interesting at that time.  We were just talking about this — a group of alums last night — how liberal Smith has always been and I said, No, I don’t think so.  I think when we were here certainly the vocal minority, which probably gave off an aura of having more weight, were very liberal, but I think the majority of people when I was here in the eighties were not necessarily rabid conservatives, but just sort of apathetic and — but more on the conservative side.  And then this divestment thing just brought out so many people, not just the vocal minority liberals, but just people who had never been involved in anything political before had just all of a sudden felt this was a really important thing to do because we didn’t want our college to be doing this.

LAWRENCE:	Yeah.  How do you–

WESS:	Some people would come for a couple hours and then — just like me — and then decide they were going to stay or they wouldn’t stay overnight, but they would come for a couple hours every day and it just grew and grew and grew and grew and grew.  You know?  And we shut down College Hall.

LAWRENCE:	Had you thought of yourself as political before this?

WESS:	I — I did.  Probably within my group of friends I was the most political, but not to this level.

LAWRENCE:	Yeah, yeah.  So, this really got you involved.

WESS:	Yeah.  I mean, it was the first actionable thing I did.

LAWRENCE:	Mm-hmm.  Were you also involved in a — like aware of it all — of the Jeane Kirkpatrick controversy?

WESS:	Not really.  It didn’t–

LAWRENCE:	Not really?

WESS:	–affect my — didn’t particularly affect my year.  Aware of?  Yes.  Involved?  No.  Not so much.

LAWRENCE:	So, the eighties were when the Study of Women and Gender Department got added–

WESS:	Right.

LAWRENCE:	 –to the curriculum and did you feel like it was — you said it was a conservative space.  Did you feel like there was a feminist consciousness?

WESS:	Among — among some.  Yes.

LAWRENCE:	Among some.

WESS:	Yeah.

LAWRENCE:	But among your peer group?

WESS:	Among my peer group?  Yes.  But not as adamantly as among others on campus I would say.  Like within my peer group I was probably the most, like, having more of an in-your-face kind of attitude about it and having it be at the forefront of what was important to me.  Not that it wasn’t important to my friends, just in terms of maybe having lived it on a daily level.  But there were certainly other people much more passionate about it even than I was, you know, if you were going to put people on a continuum.

LAWRENCE:	Did you feel like you fit in at Smith?

WESS:	Oh, yeah.

LAWRENCE:	Yeah, yeah, yeah.  Totally.

WESS:	I think the best thing that I felt about Smith when I got here, coming from my background, you know, no one in California — I don’t know how it is to this day — but that — like there were not college visits, no one’s parents took them anywhere.  You were just — if you were a good student, you were just going to go to a University of California School like UCLA or, if you were really adventurous, you’d go up to Berkeley.  But no one that I know if in my high school or in my community would leave the state.  So, I got a lot of pushback, like, Why are you even doing that?  That’s just a bizarre thing to do.
And so, I was just worried that it would be really preppy and really, you know, rich and one of the things that was most refreshing to me when I got here was just the diversity of people even then.  So, I would say I was worried about fitting in before I got here, but once I got here I wasn’t worried at all because I just realized there’s a zillion kinds of people here and you can just be who you are.

LAWRENCE:	Mm-hmm.  Would you say — so, there wasn’t, like, a typical Smithie at all?

WESS:	Well, there kind of was.  You know, stereotypes tend to have some kernel of truth in them.  You know, so, people who are still — wore pearls every day even if they were wearing jeans and their Smith sweatshirts of, you know, gold add-a-bead necklaces, which I’d never heard of till I got here, (laughter) you know, and penny-loafers.  I think they — you could say that was the typical Smithie, but, you know, scratch any one of them and she’s going to be a-typical in some way, you know?

LAWRENCE:	Yeah.  Did you feel like there was pressure to live up to a certain image?

WESS:	No.  Not at all.  Not image-wise.  I think there was some pressure to compete academically, but I didn’t and none of my friends did.  Well, one maybe very slightly, but that’s not who we were.  And we — and I don’t — I mean, I think that’s one of the reasons we were friends because we had that in common.

LAWRENCE:	Yeah.  Was there anyone who you felt like was a mentor or someone you really looked up to while you were at Smith?

WESS:	You mean like an older upperclassmen or professor or anyone?

LAWRENCE:	Or a professor or anyone.  Yeah.

WESS:	Through the — through my work in the education department — so, I started babysitting for this one family.  The woman taught at the Campus School and her husband actually taught at the vocational high school.  So, I think I looked up to them.  And then, professionally, another women who taught at the Campus School where I did my first semester of teaching with her.  She was definitely a mentor professionally.  I was just talking about her with my friend the other day — you know — that so much of what I did as a teacher came right out of what I learned from her.

LAWRENCE:	Yeah, yeah, yeah.  Yeah.  Cool.  What led you to major in education?

WESS:	You know, I just always wanted to be a teacher since I was five and I flirted with other things, but when it came time to choose I just knew that’s what I wanted to do.  But then I also was really interested in government and American culture.  So, that’s why I decided to double-major.

LAWRENCE:	Yeah.  Yeah, yeah.  But, so, what did you do when you weren’t studying?  What did you do for fun?

WESS:	(laughs) Sit out in the hall and talk to my friends.

LAWRENCE:	(laughs) Did you — what did you guys do on weekends?  Did you stay on campus?  Did you leave campus?

WESS:	I — no, I mostly stayed on campus.

LAWRENCE:	Was there — did you have, like, a favorite place where — to hang out or to socialize or was it always in your house?

WESS:	For us it was almost always in our house.  I mean, I always loved to go and sit on the swing, you know, if it was empty.  That’s one of my favorite places to be at Smith.  But I also spent a lot of time — especially — all of my friends went away junior year except — and I didn’t because I was a double major.  So, I had so many requirements to fulfill I couldn’t do that.  So, I ended up making a lot of new friends from the class of ’87 and then also spending a lot more time alone that I had before.  So, I just liked to hang out downtown a lot, wander in and out of stores or, you know, just, like, sit on the steps and people watch.

LAWRENCE:	Do you have any memories from your time here that are, like, particularly vivid stories that you tell?

WESS:	Stories that I tell? (laughs)

LAWRENCE:	Mm-hmm.

WESS:	Well, sure, the divestment thing I think especially.  But, you know, there were funny things that happened, you know, in our house.

GEIS:	Could you maybe repeat the story — if you were to explain what was going on around the campus about divestment–

WEST:	Sure.

GEIS:	(overlapping dialogue; inaudible) someone’s who is not familiar.

WESS:	Sure.  So, it wasn’t just in Smith you know.  Apartheid in South Africa, you know, was very much in the news at the time and Marcos was overthrown in the Philippines and people thought that it, you know, was ripe to over — for Mandela to come back and to, you know, have regime cleaning in South Africa.  And students, I think, across America — college students felt very empowered that if our universities would take their money out of funds that we’re investing in South Africa that that would help — you know — that it — all of a sudden that just became a really liable action in people’s minds and we didn’t want money that we were associated with.  You know, it seemed morally repugnant that we were, in any way, helping prop up this regime.  So, it became a huge student movement, again, not just at Smith, but to pressure our trustees to take money out of any portfolios that were investing in South Africa and, so, it was known as divestment.

LAWRENCE:	And then, there — all the student activism came out of that?

WESS:	Yes.

LAWRENCE:	Mm-hmm.  Mm-hmm.

WESS:	So, I can’t even remember exactly the very origin of it.  But I think students when to College Hall to request a meeting with Dunn and she refused and, so, people just sat down and said, “We’re just going to wait until you meet with us.”  And then more and more and more and more and more students came and we took over the building.  Things were really shut down.

LAWRENCE:	Mm-hmm.  Yeah.  It’s been cited as an example of, like, this history of student activism and leadership at Smith.

WESS:	Yeah.

LAWRENCE:	It was a really monumental moment.

WESS:	Yeah.  It was a pretty cool.  Yeah.  I mean, if you’ve looked at any of the photos, there’s — you know it was in late February, early March I think.  Anyway, I know it was right after President’s Day because there had been posters around campus with Mary Maples Dunn as Uncle Sam and, you know, she’s pointing her finger saying, “I want you to attend Rally Day.”  And I changed one of those posters to say, “I want you to divest.”  So, there’s photos that you may have seen of people holding that poster when we were in College Hall.  And I happen to be the one who made that poster.

LAWRENCE:	Oh, nice.

WESS:	I’m not necessarily holding it in any of the photos, but–

LAWRENCE:	But you made it.

WESS:	Yeah.  I have a ton of photos about it at home.  One of my friends came and took a lot of pictures.  She didn’t really participate, but she knew it was important to me and she just knew it was important to the college period and she took a lot of photos that I have.  And I think I have a bunch of notes somewhere too.  I’ve been thinking about that since Kelly contacted me about interviewing me.  I have to dig those out, but I’m pretty sure I did take lot of notes, again, because the process of it was so interesting to me.

LAWRENCE:	So, besides apartheid, you mentioned disarmament.  What other things were students, like, organizing around and concerned with on campus?

WESS:	(sighs) What were students concerned with?  There was a psychology professor who did not get tenure and it was believed it was because she was lesbian.  So, there were a lot of protests about that.  And my sophomore year there was something called “a big love-in.”  That was a big demonstration on campus to promote more tolerance of gay and lesbian people.

LAWRENCE:	Did you feel like there was a lesbian presence on campus?  Were you aware of–

WESS:	Oh, yeah.

LAWRENCE:	Oh, yeah?

WESS:	Oh, yeah.

LAWRENCE:	Did it affect your life in any way?

WESS:	No.

LAWRENCE:	No?  What was the general dating culture like when you were here?  Like did your friends date people?  Did Smithies date?

WESS:	My — I had a boyfriend from California who came east to go to college also.  So, I really wasn’t in the dating pool when I was here.  One of my friends dated — no, I wouldn’t even say dated — she went to a party at West Point and then some guys came back and visited her another weekend, but there was no long-term relationship.  And one of my other close friends had a high school boyfriend that she sort of stayed in a relationship with too.  And then one of my other friends was in a relationship with someone from UMass.  Actually, two of them were.  I almost forgot that.  Yeah.

LAWRENCE:	Yeah, yeah.  Did you–

WESS:	I think — I think — I mean, most of the — not my group — but I would say if you were going to characterize the campus broadly at that time, you know, there was just a lot of polyamorous frat parties.  Or going to parties at, you know, campuses up and down the East Coast.

LAWRENCE:	Did you have a lot of interaction with other campuses?

WESS:	No that much.  I did — I was a little bit on the — with the Speech Team I didn’t compete, but Smith always hosted a big — no, I’m sorry not Speech and Debate — St. Valentine’s Day Massacre they called it — tournament Smith hosted.  And I judged — I was a judge for that.  So, I had — that was probably year in and year out my biggest experience with people from other campuses and, then, [Mel?] and I went to visit my boyfriend at Bard.  So, I got to really see the differences — kind of took three classes at Amherst.  And then, when I was senior, I did College Bowl.

LAWRENCE:	Do you feel like you made the most of your years at Smith?  Is there anything you wish you had done?

WESS:	Oh, we were just talking about this last night at dinner.  Sometimes I wish I’d taken art history just pass/fail.  I don’t think I made the most of my years at Smith academically.  You know, I could have worked a lot harder and had more academic honors, but I don’t think I would do anything differently, you know?  I just loved every minute here.  I became — I was happy with the degree to — you know — the hardness which I worked at my course.  It, you know, wasn’t an embarrassing, you know, slacker kind of attitude that I had, but I wasn’t striving to get straight As either and I’m fine with that.  I was fine with it then and I’m fine with it now.

LAWRENCE:	So, we’re running out of time, but I just want to ask you one question to wrap up.  What has your life been since graduation?

WESS:	Wow.  That’s a hard wrap-up question, isn’t it?

LAWRENCE:	Yeah.  (laughs) I know.  Really.

WESS:	Well, I got a teaching job, was tired to teach at a private school before I graduation.  That was settled, so that was exciting.  The college — the Campus School really prepared us much more to teach in private schools or independent schools than it did for public schools.  It kind of brain-washed us that that was the better way to go.  So, that was where I had my (inaudible) oriented.  So, I taught at a girl’s school for one year and then — but I met the person who would become my husband and he was already applying for jobs.  We moved to Chicago.  I taught in a preschool.  I got my master’s degree and then I taught first grade in public schools for seven years and had my kids and then thought I would go back into teaching and found it extraordinarily difficult.  So, was — has been one of the biggest challenges of my adult life, is that I couldn’t get back into the career that I thought was always going to be there.  And so, I subbed for about seven years trying to make a come-back.  Couldn’t because I was too expensive to be hired.  So, now, I’ve given up on going back to teaching and now I’ve been a realtor for about a year and that’s really fun.

LAWRENCE:	Great.  Well, thank you so much for coming in and talking to me today.

WESS:	Your welcome.  It’s been my pleasure.

LAWRENCE:	I really appreciate it.  Thank you so much.  And thank yo u, [Kate?].  I think that’s all.

WESS:	All right.


