

VASQUEZ: 	Okay so my name is Kirby Vasquez.  I am here on May 25 speaking with Jerry for the Alumnae Project.  So Jerry, would you start by introducing yourself and what year you were here?
LONG:	My name is Jerri, maiden name Pantages, last name Long, and I'm here for the 45th class reunion of the class of 1967.
VASQUEZ:	And why did you decide to come to Smith?
LONG:	For a pretty silly reason actually.  It had to do with an Alfred Hitchcock movie.  I was a Californian and I wanted to go to a college where the buildings were older than I was.  I was interested in tradition and in California, that's not always the case and I saw an Alfred Hitchcock movie called "The Trouble with Harry" that was Shirley MacLaine's first movie and his only comedy, and it was shot in autumn in New England, and I thought wow, that looks really pretty, and in those days the Seven Sister colleges, the ones that were the women's Ivy colleges offered you a deal where you could apply to three for the price of one or something like that, and so I started researching them and Smith really interested me, and I was fortunate enough to not only get accepted, but also to get a scholarship including the one from the class of 1905, they helped me get through Smith College, so yeah, that goes back quite aways.  So I came here like a foreign exchange student, because I had never been west of the Mississippi, hardly past the Rockies and I had never seen it before I arrived to be a student here.
VASQUEZ:	And how would you describe the campus atmosphere.  Like how were your first couple of days here?  How did you feel being here?
LONG:	Well, first of all, I had never experienced humidity, and I arrived with a suitcase of sweaters because the clothing that I had shipped ahead hadn't yet been delivered to the dorm.  So I lived in my Hawaiian Mumu that was a parting gift from a friend until my cooler clothes got here.  So my first experience was that it was extremely hot and sticky, but the people were so nice.  I don't know if they still have upperclassmen here to welcome freshmen at freshmen orientation time.  Do they do that still?
LONG:	Yep, they still do.
VASQUEZ:	And that was very nice, and so that was good.  However, I almost left before my first class.
LONG:	Oh.
VASQUEZ:	There were two things that you had to do.  You had to prove that you could swim.  That was no problem.  I could easily swim, but the other test that you had to pass took place in this very building.  We lived in dormitories that did not have fire escapes, or at least not all of them. I was in Parsons House and where you might have thought you would go out a window to a fire escape, there was a coil of rope that had a label that was like an etching of a gentleman in a three-piece suit calmly lowering himself with one hand on this rope.  And you had to prove that you could go down a rope in case of fire.  I have acrophobia and we had to step off the upper balcony of this gym to go down this rope before we were allowed to proceed with our college education and I almost went home.  I thought, I can't do this.  So that was -- that was the most difficult part of starting.
VASQUEZ:	But you made it.
LONG:	I did.  I did.  I survived and we were looking at the back of Parsons House, my former roommate and I last night and thinking, did we ever uncoil the rope?  I doubt that it was long enough to get us down.  So we never did try it.
VASQUEZ:	So what -- so you lived in Parsons all four years or --
LONG:	No, I started in Parsons and then my college roommate Paula Gardner at that time, and I, investigated the only co-op that was available at that time, Tenney House, and we both moved to the co-op for our three final years of Smith.
VASQUEZ:	Oh, great, and how -- how was it like in the co-op?  Was there still a house community or house traditions?  What --
LONG:	It was interesting because we were still very much in the era of Gracious Living, with great quotation marks around that where you still had linen table cloths and dined by candle light and wore skirts if you went to dinner.  Otherwise you could not be in the dining room and you still were supposed to wait until the housemother left before you left, except in Tenney House, we did all the cooking and cleaning and meal planning and things for ourselves, we had -- we still had linen table cloths and candlelight, and we had an amazing crash course in what, home ec, because suddenly we're cooking for 16 people, and so it was -- I loved the small environment, 16 young women, sophomore through senior year, but I remember the panic -- the team of two that planned the meals were not the ones that cooked the meals for that week.  We would go down -- walk down even in the winter to a local grocery store with a small amount of money.  We were trying to remember, it was only something like 35 or 50 dollars for a week's worth of food, except for a couple of things that we got through the college, but -- and we'd take a taxi back with all the groceries for that week, and then we would post the menu and our recipes, and someone else had to carry them out.  Two people would cook dinner, but one person would cook lunch, and I would come back, if I were the person to cook lunch, look up and see -- oh my gosh, I'm supposed to make eggs benedict for 16 and not have them be late to their afternoon class.  So it was many years before I ever tried eggs benedict again.  So --
VASQUEZ:	Very stressful.
LONG:	Yeah, it was.  We even baked our own bread.  It was quite a -- quite a big production thing that we did.
VASQUEZ:	So you also had a lot of freedom, which is great.
LONG:	Yes, that's very true and I understand now that they're -- that Tenney House has become vegan and that there are many other co-op offerings?
VASQUEZ:	Co-ops?  Yeah.
LONG:	That's wonderful, yeah.
VASQUEZ:	So were you part of any club or organizations while you were here at Smith?
LONG:	I was on the yearbook staff, and my senior year I was the newsletter editor that we sent to the people junior year abroad for that year.  But not -- not particularly -- I did volunteer kinds of things.  I was a guest at the mental hospital that used to be across the river from here, and I also tutored in inner city Springfield for awhile, so those were the kinds of things that I did.  Because I was a scholarship student also, holding down part-time jobs, that was about it.  Studying kept me pretty busy.
VASQUEZ:	Oh, yeah, and what did you do for fun here at Smith College?
LONG:	Well, I'm delighted that because of email I know you still have Mountain Day, and I thought that was such a wonderful idea.  I tell people about that all the time.  Here was -- the brilliance of this college knowing that we really should enjoy being in New England in autumn, and by the way, the movie that caused me to come to see if it was really that pretty, it rained out -- they took the leaves back.  It was shot in Hollywood.  So it was all fake.  But at any rate, it really was that beautiful, so I don't know if they have the same thing where most -- now that they allow cars on campus, which they did not in my era.  It was just past the horse and buggy era -- but at any rate, we would all hop on bicycles.  The dorms were equipped so that we could make our own sack lunches, and we would ride out and devastate the country side in that they used to have stands with pumpkins and all you could drink apple cider for .25 cents.
Well, if you've been bicycling for awhile, you're very thirsty and I think that that must have really damaged the economy.  So I remember that and when we were driving back from Amherst, Paul and I were recalling that there was a May Day tradition where we were supposed to adorn -- I grew up in Washington state in my early childhood where you picked flowers to hang on your neighbors door knob on May Day.  I don't know if either of you were in a place that did that, and there were also maypole dances.  Anyway, it's a regional tradition anyway, and at Smith you were supposed to bring flowers to the seniors in your dorm.  Well, what happened was we would go out like locusts and we would devastate this campus of all the blossoming everything and so I think that they finally said, you know, don't do that anymore.  So I don't think that still happens, does it?

LONG:	Uh-uh (negative).
VASQUEZ:	So that kind of thing and -- just dorm life in general.  I think it's wonderful that at Smith you don't have to go through a sorority rush or anything like that, that you just get to know a wide variety of people and I appreciated that.
VASQUEZ:	And while on campus, did you date anyone here?
LONG:	My social life was extremely limited in terms of dating.  I mean I went to mixers and there -- you know, there were people that I dated, but it wasn't until a month after I had graduated and gone back to get a teaching credential at UC Berkeley California that I met the person that I've now been married to for 43 years.  So that was later.
VASQUEZ:	Okay, and how were the relationships with your professors and mentors here?
LONG:	I -- I did not have as close a relationship as some people did to their college professors, but I do remember that we could invite faculty guests to the dormitory for dinner and I think we did that.  And part of the interesting part of being in a co-op was that we became the supply of babysitters for professors kids, and so I got to know some professors on a very intimate level because I was responsible for their children and at that time Vernon Dotwalls was the chairman of the music department and it was a very coveted babysitting job that got handed down from one Tenney House member to upcoming member.  So when Sally Kalavana who happened to also be from California, when she was graduating, she chose me to be the one that got to do that and so that was really nice because I was a homesick Californian for a lot of this.  I was used to being in multi-generational kinds of things and not simply with my peer group.  So I really enjoyed going over and taking care of their three sons and they became close enough friends that when my parents came back for my graduation, they invited them to stay at their home.  So that was a different kind of relationship entirely, even though I only took music appreciation.  I wasn't otherwise musically inclined to get to know the family of the chairperson, and incidentally his wife, Carol Dotwalls -- he passed away some time ago, she was a Smith graduate too.  So that was kind of a nice -- nice connection.
VASQUEZ:	That’s great. And while you were here did you feel that Smith was an accepting campus for minority groups, whether it was Jewish students, people of color, queer students?
LONG:	Probably less so than today.  I know there was the Hillel Society for Jewish students and I know that we had -- I think that at that time it would be fair to say that the minority students that who were part of my class came from foreign countries rather than from the United States of America.  So when Smith made the historic decision to remain a women's college and not go co-ed like some of the other Seven Sisters did, I felt that it was a breakthrough not only that they had the Ada Comstock Scholars for the non-traditional age students, but they did a terrific outreach, I believe, I hope it's been effective to students who might not otherwise have been able to come to Smith and especially the transitional things that I have read about that they do to make sure that the students will succeed when they get here.  And so I think that that probably has changed the student body for the better, for a much broader spectrum.
VASQUEZ:	Feminists -- Feminine Mystique came out during your school --
LONG:	Mm-hmm.
VASQUEZ:	How did that -- what do you think of that like --
LONG:	Well, it was required reading.  You know, they sent us a reading list for the summer before we came and until that point I didn't know who Betty Friedan was so it was -- it was really interesting to read and I -- I envy those of you who are students now to think of how many things have changed because of Betty Friedan, Gloria Steinem and other people who paved the way for many more options.  I had not intended to go into education when I came to Smith, but it was partly because of my volunteer work that I ended up doing that and then I also did other kinds of career things, but for awhile even college educated women tended to get shunted into either nursing or teaching or you know, the other option of marrying somebody else, you know that was -- it's nice that many, many doors were open. And Betty Friedan certainly had a lot to do with that and --
VASQUEZ:	Yeah.  And also during this time there was a lot of vigils and strikes with the Vietnam War.  Do you remember any of that going on?
LONG:	It's very interesting that you should ask that.  The only demonstration that I can remember participating in on the Smith College campus was a sit in at the library to get them to extend the hours until 11 o'clock at night.  So although I had friends at UC Berkeley and I was reading about the things there and at certainly other universities where I knew people around the country, that did not seem to have as much an impact on this campus as a unified effort.
Certainly individuals of us had strong opinions about it and talked about it and I wonder how I -- I think one of the things that attracted me to Smith and was a benefit to me for Smith was that we had dining halls in every dorm and so you did have people that you talked to on a regular basis of very many different backgrounds and opinions and I thought that was valuable.  I don't know what it's like when you pick among -- I understand it's 13 places that serve meals and so you show up especially freshman year, I don't know what that's like until you find the people that you most like to be with.  So yes, we talked about it a lot, but I don't remember any campus demonstrations.

VASQUEZ:	I think it was a little bit after your time in the 70's we had -- well, I was not there --
LONG:	Yeah.
VASQUEZ:	-- but they had a demonstration in which they had -- they also had -- Amherst had weekly vigils during this time --
LONG:	That's interesting.  And Amherst might have well as been on the moon.  I mean I was an English major and today was the first day that I toured the Emily Dickinson house, because although they were starting the five college cooperative, it was very difficult with the shuttle bus system to be sure that you could get to someplace and back again in a timely fashion.  You had -- only special circumstance students had cars at that time and all the parking lots that I have passed touring again, were lawns, and so it -- for those of us who were here from someplace else and did not have our own transportation, it became difficult to participate in things beyond Northampton, so --
VASQUEZ:	And I've read some newspapers about there being like a new morality wave in which like conversations about sex and sexuality which also could have been helped out with like Betty Friedan and stuff like that, did you notice that happening around campus and it changing into like being more comfortable about talking, or do you think it still wasn't at a time that --
LONG:	I presume that every college dormitory ends up with conversations about sexuality.  It wasn't any different in my era except that probably we were mainly talking about heterosexual relationships because most of us were not as familiar with the broad spectrum of opportunity.
VASQUEZ:	And while here, did you see any regulations or traditions change over the years that you were here?
LONG:	Oh gosh, we had so many different regulations.  As I told you, even about wearing skirts, if you were going to have dinner, and when I arrived and was walking through Northampton in similar attire, if you went downtown, there was a big separation to the town gown (phonetic) -- and town has changed quite a bit.  You had to either wear a skirt, or if you had on slacks or jeans, you had to wear a long coat, and so that's how long ago this was in terms of, you know, acceptance of how you could look and how you could behave.
So that was one kind of tradition.  It was -- I think you still have the deal where it's kind of a when you're on or when you're finally a senior and can flap around like a giant bat in your cap and gown -- or not your cap, but in your gown, riding your bicycle in a commencement gown is kind of a strange thing, in case you could get caught in the spokes, but that was still there.
So I was trying to think of what else might have changed.  I don't know if you still have interim, where you have an independent study time between semesters and that was kind of neat because where I ended up was in the Smith College archives.  I only found out about Smith College archives because one of my many part time jobs was delivering mail to different departments.  And so I stumbled across this place and I thought, this is interesting, and so I spent I think it was two weeks that we got.  I spent time immersing myself in what you are doing, except that instead of oral history interviews, it was people who had turned over theirs or their ancestors letters and accounts of what it was like and -- so that was why I agreed to do this because I know that even to you it must seem quaint about some of the ways that we had to behave.
There are -- before my area there was a thing called grass cops where you got fined if you went across the grass.  Well, in my era, there is a professor who had come up with the idea you can only walk on the grass if you're not going anyplace.  In other words, you can't cut diagonal paths, but if you just want to go out and sit on the grass, it's fine.  I was sort of surprised to see that it's fenced off now, so I don't know if people feel comfortable being out on the grass.  I hope they do.
VASQUEZ:	It's the same rule that if you're going to go sit down there, you can.
LONG:	Yeah.
VASQUEZ:	But if you're crossing across -- I think it's just like internally like -- no, we can't do it.  Don't do it.  There's still that really long sign of "Please don't walk on the grass if you are going across."
LONG:	Okay, I haven't seen the sign yet, but that sounds --
VASQUEZ:	It's just like the acronym, it's so long it's --
LONG:	Yeah, okay.
VASQUEZ:	So why did you choose to attend reunion this year?
LONG:	Mainly to see my former college roommate because she lives on the East coast and I live on the West coast and we used to get together more often prior to her retirement because she was a national speaker and frequently came out to attend conferences in California.  I don't travel as much as she does.  This is only my third time to visit the campus since I graduated and I sort of thought now or never.  I'm not sure I'll come back for my 50th, because I'm not big on travelling and so it's just -- it's really wonderful to be in the company of highly intelligent women again and to remember what that was like, because I did not appreciate when I was doing my stupid picking a college  based on a movie, I really didn't focus on the women's college aspect that we did everything.  We did not defer to male counterparts to be the head of anything.  We did it all and that was very empowering and has affected the rest of my life.
VASQUEZ:	Great.  Have you seen the campus change over the couple of years that you have been back?
LONG:	Yes.  Yes.
VASQUEZ:	Would you like to explain that to me?
LONG:	I'm wondering why they decided not to try to blend old and new a little bit better, because I found -- and of course coming as I did seeking tradition and looking for places -- this is such a beautiful campus.  I understand the need for the student center, but it looks like it landed from a foreign planet just where they plunked it down and the style of architecture and so forth and I'm sure it's a very well utilized facility, but I wish that they had made a little bit more attempt to not be so jarring in the contrast.  They've already redone the art museum.  They had done a new art museum and then they've redone it since and that seems to blend somewhat better.  So those are the kinds of things that you look at, but I think you are so fortunate -- I felt so fortunate to live on a beautiful estate where -- I don't know if they still call them kingsmen, but the people who tended the grounds, it's gorgeous.  You're just in a beautiful, beautiful place, and when I got too homesick for California, I'd go hang out at the greenhouse to get my fix of color and flowers in the middle of the winter.
VASQUEZ:	Do you have some questions?
RIDEOUT:	I would love to hear you talk more about -- you said that, you know, women always being the head of everything really changed how you went into the rest of your life.  Can you talk about that a little more specifically?
LONG:	I believe that it inspires a kind of confidence that you might not otherwise have.  I -- I chose to go into the field of education first as a teacher and then later as an administrator and I -- I was -- I was teaching at the high school level and female students who excelled in elementary school began in middle school and certainly by high school to defer to male classmates to not want to be the brain that they wanted to -- I don't know if it was for social acceptance or just what, but to kind of pull back on their own level of intelligence and capability.
And of course, Smith, you know, that's it.  You are -- you are the entire student body and so you don't defer to males for traditional roles of leadership and when you have completed the degree and I know you are both working very hard if you are both students, that you -- it's just -- you have accomplished a lot and you know it.  The two things that I didn't know to ask when my high school counselor was saying, well, do you want to go to a large university, do you want to go to a small liberal arts college, and I thought, well, who knows, because I've never been to college.  I would say look for a college that has an open stack library and I hope that that's still true here because original source research and distilling you own ideas was the norm here, and even in some of the graduate courses I took, they would -- you would be handed an anthology that was sort of predigested and condensed and so you didn't have that sense of fulfillment.
And of course, the other thing that I would tell any future student is be sure you go to a place that has a career placement where forever they will keep your recommendations and ship them out on short notice when you finally have an interview landed, and apparently it comes as a very impressive packet.  I don't know if they do it electronically now or not.  But the alumnae support system as well, college support system, these are very empowering and I know that many of the times that I changed jobs it was because of that that I had the confidence and I had the college behind me.

VASQUEZ:	I have actually just one last question.  You were kind of touching on it yourself already, but do you have any advice for current -- current and future Smithies?  You gave some advice for high school students, but --
LONG:	Yeah, right.  I do remember what it was like to be a student and to see these starry-eyed alumnae come back and thinking to myself, boy, do they have this romantic notion of what it's like.  Don't they remember term papers?  Don't they remember staying up all night and things like that?  I would say to those who are fortunate enough to be current students, make the most of it, just soak it all in, do the lectures, go to the concerts, you know, take the courses that are offbeat that -- I mean I took art appreciation as a senior which was a terrible thing to do because at that time, before you could study things by computer, you had to go in and study in these little rooms and it was very, very difficult, but art appreciation and music appreciation have been two of the courses that have been so valuable to me in terms of how they opened up my world and continue to enrich my world and so even though there are times when it seems like a real, real struggle for most people who are here academically, just know that for the rest of your life it's going to make it better.
VASQUEZ:	Okay.
LONG:	Thank you for your time.
VASQUEZ:	No, thank you for your time.  I really appreciate that.
