

WILLIAMS:	OK, this is Bethy Williams.  I'm here with Carole DeSanti, class of '81.  Thank you for agreeing to be part of this project.

DESANTI:	Thank you.

WILLIAMS:	So how would you describe the typical Smithie during your time here?

DESANTI:	Well I don't know — I'm not given to broad generalities about Smith.  I think that when I came in '77, here through '81, certainly I would say that my classmates were all very smart, thoughtful women.  And from my point of view, coming from Cleveland, Ohio, suburb of Cleveland, I felt that the preponderance of my classmates were from the East coast and from a bit more of a higher social level than I was familiar with.  So I think at the time, I would've thought they were you know kind of a bunch of rich preppy white girls, and but very smart.  And awesome in the classroom, really.  So I had a lot learning to do and a lot of catching up to do in any number of areas.  And of course, there was a pretty I think distinct division in the campus between the full tuition students and the financial aid students.  I was in the latter category, so it was a little bit of, there were various hierarchies at the time.

WILLIAMS:	Yeah, how did that division play out?  Like how did you see it?

DESANTI:	Well at the time I was, I really had a chip on my shoulder about the whole thing I think.  And I developed quite a Marxist feminist perspective about the whole thing, which was somewhat en vogue at that time.  And I think that we tended to segment off into cohorts of like students.  So a lot of my friends became the other kind of rebel, defiant, feminist types, and not so much the other kind, I don't know what we would've called them, the preppy rich white girls.

WILLIAMS:	The pearls (inaudible) yeah.

DESANTI:	I don't, I think that maybe it was, my impression is that it was a little bit more, the division was a little stronger then than it may be now in what year are we in, 2011.

WILLIAMS:	So how did you choose Smith, going up in Ohio, how did you hear about it?

DESANTI:	Well I really came to Smith because of an active, a hand of the miraculous intervention in my life.  I grew up in a West-side suburb of Cleveland which was pretty working-class area.  And I didn't have access to a lot of high-school counseling, college-bound developmental activities that would've led me into even knowing about a place like Smith.  I knew that there were a lot of places on the East coast with one syllable names that (laughs) people who were not like me ended up going to college.  So it was actually through a friend of my father's, a work friend of my father's, who found out about my existence through my dad.  And he connected me with her.  She was a Smith alum and she worked in the court system in Cleveland where he was also employed.  And she was really my fairy godmother, who met me and took me out to lunch in downtown Cleveland, and I think really played a big role in helping me orient myself towards Smith.  And so I really kind of by an act of grace managed to arrive on campus in a state of stunned disbelief when I got here.

WILLIAMS:	So it was kind of a culture shock.

DESANTI:	Absolutely, yeah, yeah, exactly.

WILLIAMS:	But you eventually kind of got used to it at least.

DESANTI:	Well I don't know.  I think it was a big learning curve in almost every direction.  I had to catch up intellectually in the classroom.  I had to learn an entirely different culture.  We had napkins and napkins compartments in the house that I started out in which was Morrow House.  And I had never really even seen a linen napkin before.  I didn't know that they existed.  So I remember having things like Seafood [Newburg] (laughs) served to us.

WILLIAMS:	I don't know what that is (laughs).

DESANTI:	Yeah I know, it's gone away now, but it was still in force back then.  And so I really had to learn an enormous amount about how to cope with my surroundings.  And so I think I was kind of like throwing off seeds in all directions, sort of figuring out which one would take root.

WILLIAMS:	Yeah.  So once you got here, what was your major when you were here?

DESANTI:	I was an English major.

WILLIAMS:	Did you love the English major?

DESANTI:	I felt like it was the way that I could learn the most deeply, and also capitalize on the strengths that I had.  I mean, I was a great reader.  I've always been a great reader.  And I felt most at home in those classes.  And I felt like I could also learn something about many different things.  I could learn about history, psychology, the world, in a way that appealed for me for its depth.  And I also just had some amazing professors in English and comp lit.  I took a lot of English — I took a lot of courses in other departments, theatre, comp lit, French.  And just fell in love with my studies and what I was doing.  That's where I felt more intellectually and personally at home.  So I did, I had a good time as an English major here, but I think it was because I really picked courses that were going to be with, I figured out who the professors were that were really going to teach me the most and figured out a way to fit that into the major.  And then I did a thesis, an honors thesis my senior year.  And that was also just a great experience.

WILLIAMS:	What was your thesis on?

DESANTI:	My thesis was on Jane Eyre, was on all the reviews and criticism of Jane Eyre from the moment it was published, the earliest reviews, to the contemporary structuralist, Marxist, feminist criticism.  So it was really about what people had said about Jane Eyre in all these different generations of readers and critics.  So, you know, I was plunged into literary theory at the time, which was great.  It was–

WILLIAMS:	So you're talking a lot about this Marxist, feminist thing.  Was that–

DESANTI:	Oh yeah, well (laughs).

WILLIAMS:	Was that just in the classroom or was it happening outside the classroom in sort of informal discussions?

DESANTI:	Oh, I think it was happening in all levels.  And I think that one of my most formative experiences of arriving at Smith and figuring out how to mature here was in coming to grips with the class issues, and these issues are not really much discussed in the United States.  Britain for example you have a class system that everybody makes jokes about and there's all kinds of cultural, this debate and commentary.  But in the U.S. it's not very much discussed at all, so I didn't really even know what it meant.  And so I think that led me into having what I felt at the time was a sophisticated social critique (laughs).

WILLIAMS:	And now you think it's?

DESANTI:	Well I think as life goes on and becomes more complex, some of the ideas you can form as a student don't quite stand the test of time (laughs).  But at that time, it was a way to understand my universe and my environment.

WILLIAMS:	Right.  So how were issues of race and class and sexuality, were they divisive at Smith?

DESANTI:	Well I think there was a lot of sturm and drang about, certainly about sexuality.  I think it surfaced around sexuality in a certain way.  Because we were all young women and we were all very sexual and we were all dealing with that, in addition to many other things, along a spectrum of many different ways.  And I think that the institution didn't, doesn't really, you know have a formal way of channeling all the sexual energy that is around.  So we were making it up as we went along.  And so it became kind of a focal point for a lot of energy, argument, discussion, fear, annoyance, and you know just general acting out.  So we all felt it was very important and pressing and very defining of who we were at the time.  I mean I think coming at it from being 52, it seems a little bit more hormonally (laughs) driven than sort of as all-encompassing as we thought.  You know, but we linked many things together about the world, about our society and the way we'd been raised and how we had been taught to think about our sexuality and how that either fit with who we felt we were or didn't fit and now we had to invent new ways of being and perceiving ourselves in the world.  And we were in a very engaged and exciting moment of figuring all those things out.
And of course it was, we came along in the wake of the great wave of the feminist movement.  So in 1981, we had seen all of these women who were just our sort of immediate predecessors like Gloria Steinem and the Ms. Magazine crowd, those people were all out in the world, Kate Millett, writing books and doing things.  And we saw them as being kind of our immediate predecessors in the world.  And the women who had really changed the world and we were going to then sweep in and doing the next piece of work.  I don't think that any of us remotely anticipated the sort of reactionary forces that were going to come along after us.  I think that we thought that the wave of change would just continue.  And of course things look very different now.  But you have to think about the fact that we had a lot of activity that had radically opened up the world for us in terms of the professions and sexuality and ways of living, ways of breaking out of conventional relationships and ideas.  And we just kind of, we were going to run with it, and we did.

WILLIAMS:	So in all those discussions about feminism, how did lesbianism come up or did it come up or was it taboo or–

DESANTI:	No, I think it came up all the time.  And we, everybody went through different spectrum of phases of dealing with it, from rejecting it and being horrified by whatever was happening with their roommate or in their college house, or falling in love with someone and not really knowing what to make of it, and going through the phases of you know I'm involved with a woman, I'm in love with a woman.  I'm not a lesbian.  And other times people were just embracing a lesbian identity without even having fallen in love with a woman, because it fit their politics and their — so I think everybody was experimenting on all different levels: sexually, intellectually, and we had a vast amount of discussion about it.
There were Lesbian Alliance meetings in the houses and there were those wonderful cards that you guys picked up for the archival project.  Well I was on both ends of it.  I mean as a freshman, I was sitting in the living room at Morrow House when the Lesbian Alliance marched in and handed out cards and said, OK, what are your questions about lesbians?  At that point I basically had never even considered the topic at all (laughs).  I didn't know I was supposed to have questions about it, but now that you've mentioned it, all right, let me think about what they might be, to later on at Smith when I was doing some of those workshops myself with you know really, really trying to calm down some of the tensions and the animosities that were arising.  Now I don't know if you can ask me exactly what they were, because I don't remember what these situations were.  But you know, people became pretty embattled about it, about sexual identity.

WILLIAMS:	Yeah.  How was that transformation for you over the course of your time at Smith, like not even really knowing about this culture to somehow being a part of it?

DESANTI:	Well (pause) you know, it was a part, as I was saying, I can't really separate it out from a lot of different things.  I mean for me, it was a time of enormous expansion, opening up, opening my entire world up from a pretty limited place to something that included a lot of unusual things: ideas, books, ways of thinking about the world, ways of experiencing myself.  And it was, you know, it was certainly a struggle.  I had the usual struggles with the, my family around this topic and it was not easy to navigate some of those things.  So it's not a simple question to answer.  Certainly I felt increasingly at home with the women that I was meeting, and I think the kind of discussions we were having about the world and how we perceived the world and how we felt about the people we were meeting and the ideas that were presented us in class.  And that was the great formative experience of Smith was to be able to have that kind of a holding vessel or an incubation tank, kind of Petri dish of other women who we could share our deepest feelings and struggles with at that time, when everything was so fertile and so ready to be opened up.

WILLIAMS:	So how were like relationships and dating and all of that stuff for you when you were here?

DESANTI:	Well (pause) I think I recall having several pretty emotionally intense love affairs, and really having a hard time balancing all of the emotional stuff that came up around that with what I was supposed to be doing which was being in class and learning (laughs).  So there was a lot of drama, a lot of drama and a lot of extracurricular activities it was possible to be involved in.  But I did feel like I had to keep my eye on the ball and grow intellectually too.  And so you know I think at the time, really getting control of my emotions and reconciling that with what needed to happen in my college education was probably the biggest challenge for me.  And I think in life in general, I'm a person who has to deal a lot with issues of balance, and you know passions that tend to roar in and kind of overtake the rest of the situation.  So I see it as more of a character trait that I'm having to be, my job in my life I think is to try to find the middle road and to be more balanced about those things.  But it was, listen, it was a high-drama era and it was possible I think and some people did get so totally sucked into the lesbian drama of it that other things fell by the wayside.  So I wasn't going to be able to do that, because I knew that I had another job to accomplish.  But you know that said I had some deep, strong, and wonderful relationships with women here.

WILLIAMS:	Yeah.  And then you talked about things, people getting caught up in the drama.  At this time, Smith was really starting to get national attention for–

DESANTI:	Yes, I know.  I was in that interview with Barbara Grizzuti Harrison.

WILLIAMS:	Oh, really.

DESANTI:	Yup, I was sitting in a room in what was then the Davis Student Center, and really watching how she was operating as a journalist and getting this, our group to open up about things.  And it worried me, because I felt like she was able to really get people to — even then, I think perhaps because I was already beginning to study Jane Eyre and (laughs) and I'd gone on to work at publishing, so I see how the media works.  And I was worried that my classmates weren't being protective enough of their personal experience, what was going to happen with that once it–

WILLIAMS:	You're talking to a journalist.

DESANTI:	(laughs) -once it went wide and national.  And I think that in fact — and I didn't say much at that meeting.  But she is a skillful and highly respected journalist and she certainly was pulling things out of her interviewees that she was able to turn into a piece that got a lot of national attention.  So I can't remember what your original question was (laughs).

WILLIAMS:	It was just how was it all the press and attention.  What was the atmosphere like at campus during that time?

DESANTI:	Well, you know we were very interested in being locked in struggle with the administration.

WILLIAMS:	It still happens.

DESANTI:	No I think obviously, in retrospect it seems like we were kind of in struggle with ourselves and with the world.  And Smith, I mean the thing I'm most grateful to Smith for I think is just being able to hold and allow so much you know acting out really, but acting out in a way that was really allowing us to figure out who we were and to be able to contain that.  And I think now my heart goes out to the people of the administration who were trying to hold this institution together in the face of a whole lot of very obstreperous students, and a media that really was getting ready to take off and run with this story because they knew that they could stir up attention for it.
So but at the time, I think we were always looking for conspiracies in the administration and which dean was going to you know being doing which bad thing.  How was the administration taking a stand against us and against the lesbian community and trying to shut us down and not give us visibility and all of those things, which I gather still are somewhat around.  And so we were really up for the battle.  Although now it seems like the battle is really about something else entirely (laughs) than what we felt then (laughs).  And I'm really so grateful to that administration for handling it in whatever way they did that allowed the institution to go on and I think grow from the whole.

WILLIAMS:	Yeah, and you were here at the time of President Conway right.

DESANTI:	Mmm hmm.

WILLIAMS:	And what was it like having a female President?

DESANTI:	Well I hadn't ever experienced a male President at Smith so (laughs) that was before my time.  But we were, you know, we were very respectful of Jill Conway.  I think we all knew that she was a brilliant scholar and a great leader, and I took her class in American Women's History, which was really one of the best classes I'd ever taken at Smith.  We sat in the President's house as she served us tea and biscuits or something, and we had fabulous discussions about history of feminism and women in this country.  So it was marvelous to be in that kind of situation.  I think that we also had a critique of President Conway, because we knew she was involved in corporate boards, which you know for those of us who are - Marxist (laughs).  We you know sort of looked askance at the idea of being involved with corporate America.  Many of us then enjoyed corporate America.  But you know I think by and large, we had a real feeling for the campus that extended from the presidency to what we were doing, and you know but at the same time, the President of Smith was kind of remote to us.  It was a very high office.  So we weren't too involved with her.

WILLIAMS:	Right, and socially what was it like here being a Marxist lesbian feminist?  Where did you all hang out or what did you do?

DESANTI:	Well we you know there was a house that you documented in your archival work, called Hover House, which was kind of an epicenter of feminist agitation and activity, and just living, where those of us who didn't find ourselves at home in campus housing, traditional campus housing with those linen napkins and the Shrimp Newburg and things of that sort, we gravitated to the co-ops where we participated in our own food buying and making and we had job rotations and we you know took care of things.  So we were involved in actual activities of life.  We didn't particularly like being waited on by household staff, that kind of thing.  So but we had parties there and they were great raucous memorable experiences.  So we had Hover House.  We had Davis.

WILLIAMS:	Did you live in Hover House?

DESANTI:	I lived in Hover House for one semester till my parents got wind of how raucous it was over there and yanked me out, with the help of the dean (laughs).  So I only had one semester in the old Hover.

WILLIAMS:	And you had to move to like normal–

DESANTI:	I moved to Cutter.  But I only lasted one semester in Cutter because it was such a shock to my system after the freewheeling life at Hover.  So then I moved into Tenney, which was the other, you still have Tenney right–

WILLIAMS:	Yeah I'm living there.

DESANTI:	You're living in Tenney, the other campus co-op.  And then in my junior year I moved off-campus, which kind of calmed things down.  I think it was good for me to live around fewer people and get a lot more focused on my work.

WILLIAMS:	So you hung out at Hover.  You hung out at Davis.  That's what you were about to say before I–

DESANTI:	I mean we had, I'm trying to remember, you know we had, there were parties all over the place, and we certainly had parties at Tenney.  And well there was a lesbian bar downtown that was known as the Pink.  Have you heard about that?

WILLIAMS:	Mmm hmm.

DESANTI:	It was under the bridge.  So from time-to-time we would, I wasn't actually a big attender of this particular location, but it was a place people went and they had a back room that served I think a lot of women from town and (laughs) Smithies who thought themselves really you know pretty tough would go down there too.  I don't even remember what it was called.  They called it the Pink.  It had a name, it might come to me later in the conversation, so.  There was that.  Gosh, I don't know.  I wasn't a huge party animal.  I myself spent a lot of time in the library (laughs).  When I moved off campus we had some parties going on there.  But there was, it got to be a loose cohort of us who were not the traditional Smith student in that we were either (pause) I don't know, intellectually or politically identifying ourselves in ways that didn't totally fit in with the campus aesthetic or we were African-American or Latina or lesbian or Asian-American or just not even necessarily, I mean we were just not the typical Smith student.
Now you asked me what the typical Smith student was and I kind of hedged on that.  But we perceived ourselves anyway as marginal to the group.  It's on some way or another, some just because they were into music or theatre or traveling abroad and didn't quite fit into the usual sort of house network.  But there became a cohort of us that were loosely affiliated, and there were, some of us were living off-campus, some of us were living in the co-ops.  And then in my senior year I lived in Friedman and we had a pretty good block of people in Friedman House who, it was kind of like a big kind of roving (laughs) studying, living, partying environment in the D, the D rank of Friedman.
So we were, and oh you know the other thing was that there was the project on women in social change that many of us participated in over the summer.  And so there were other researchers and professors, people who were involved in these issues at the, is the Women and Social Change Project still going on or is that a thing of the past?  Still going on.  So you know we all lived in Oak House over the summer then, at least at one point.  And then of course you know there were those of us who didn't have a lot of money even though we weren't on the campus meal plan.  So we would then take to trying to weasel our way into campus housing for food, purposes of food.  And the big draw there was Duckett House, which was the place where a lot of the international students were.  So we would sneak into Duckett and get fed.  We thought it was our right (laughs).

WILLIAMS:	Still happens.  Same thing.

DESANTI:	We thought free meals at Smith were our right.  But I'm not talking about the early kind of tentative explorations of my freshman and sophomore year.  This was more as we grew into the junior and senior sort of entitlement phase of our Smith education (laughs).

WILLIAMS:	So how has your life strayed from your original plan you had probably developed as a senior at Smith or.

DESANTI:	I never had a plan.  You know, I think the one thing that really characterizes our generation, well maybe not our generation but certainly our cohort because I'm sure some of my classmates had plans.  But it was not a time when you had to leave college and have a plan.  It was a time when you were going to launch yourself into the world and throw yourself into the forces of the four winds and destiny, and find the things that spoke to you and that were going to take you to the next chapter of your life.  And I didn't have even one iota of a plan when I left Smith and it was quite a shock to enter the quote-unquote real world and to figure out what I was going to do.  I think I especially, and it took me many years to resolve the loss of an intellectual life and to be kind of thrown into the forces of raw market capitalism.
I was not one of the people who was particularly groomed to go to graduate school, and I was sort of resentful about that.  At the same time, I wasn't sure that I was ready to go to graduate school and indeed it's turned out to be I think a far better thing for me that I didn't end up going into academia.  But I really, I was pained for quite a long time at the loss of the intellectual stimulation, the ideas, the fact that ideas were important here, the fact that ideas and sexuality and what was going on in the world and how the world was constructed was a real topic for chewing over at every level and at every hour of the day and night, and whether you did it over you know bottles of wine at night or cups of coffee in the morning, you were really engaged with all of those things.  And that, when the doors of Smith shut behind me, that really was a loss.  I couldn't figure out how to navigate that for quite some time.
So certainly with great appreciation now for having had that time at all, which is something that most students don't have.  I know many people who are very envious of our life at Smith and what happened at Smith, not even during that time, but as a place to return to and to feel a part of and connected to in some way.  And I certainly have friendships now that some of my closest friends are still my friends from Smith, and we have that in common.  And that is a rare thing I've learned in the world.  It is not common.

WILLIAMS:	What is it like to come back to Smith?

DESANTI:	I didn't come back for a number of years.  And then I came back for an alumnae college, which was fabulous.  I really reengaged with the things about Smith that I loved the most, which was the intellectual climate.  And I think I've come to appreciate much more of what a special place it is, and I'm certainly not alone in that sentiment.  I think a lot of us, most of us feel that way, that it's a rare place on the planet and in the world.  And you know we were in the throes of our sort of defiance here perhaps as young women.  But I think it's kind of a shock to see how really rare and special it is and how lucky we were to have this place to allow us to grow and change and experiment and do things that we might have regretted much more deeply had we done them in a less forgiving environment.  You know, because coming of age is not an easy process.  You can get hurt, and this place cushions from a lot of hurt.  So I think the experience of coming back here is really one of deep respect and appreciation for what it–

WILLIAMS:	Who do you think you've become since Smith in the real world?

DESANTI:	Who do I think I've become since Smith in the real world?  Well you know I think all worlds are real.

WILLIAMS:	It was in quotations (laughs).

DESANTI:	It's not as though one is real and one isn't.  I certainly think that, I had to become quite independent, and that had to do with my choices about who I was going to have the most, the deepest partnerships with in my life.  I think in deciding to go out into the world as a lesbian, a gay person, certainly and as a woman, without depending on the privileges that come with marriage, certainly at the time heterosexual marriage, and the kinds of associations that heterosexual women make with men in order to prosper in all aspects of their lives.  I mean so I had to take a bit of a different point of view about all of that.  And as a result, I became a lot more independent than I probably would've dreamed at the time.
I think that as a young woman, I did feel that I wanted to be taken care of.  And on some level by someone in some way, emotionally, physically, spiritually, economically.  I felt a need for that.  And I think because of the grounding that Smith gave me in myself, in a lot of ways, it allowed me to become much more self-sufficient and self-sustaining, and in turn able to support others than I might've been otherwise.

WILLIAMS:	All right.  Sort of we're almost out of time, but as sort of a final question, what advice would you give to current and future Smithies?

DESANTI:	Well I think you know the experience, I don't know a lot of people in your age group, and it does seem to me from the point of view of now I'm hiring younger people which is the main way I see you guys as coming in and needing a job (laughs).  Kind of coming to grips with that and what those needs are, you know I guess I think that life is just a lot more various and rich than sometimes I feel the cultural forces that are really around today give it credit for, and that it's really possible to be a little bit more relaxed and unscripted and unplanned, and to go with what you love.
Go with where your desire leads you, where your affinities lead you, find the people that really speak to your deepest core values, intellectual interests, to move with a sense that you can find those affinities in the world and you don't have to be plotting it out on a spreadsheet (laughs).  And you don't have to be as, I think I was very anxious, very anxious as a young woman and I think I spent a lot, burned up a lot of energy being worried about things that I probably didn't have to be.  I would say try to move toward what you love, and try to have faith that despite all of the great difficulties that we confront in the world now that things really can work out.

WILLIAMS:	Thank you very much.


