
Wheelock: This is Sarah Wheelock and it is October 13th, 2007, and I am interviewing
as part of the Alumni Stories project at the reunion for the Class of ’57 and today, or this
morning, I am here with…
Ruehl: I’m Sonya Hamburg Ruehl. I am one of the co-chairs for the fiftieth reunion that
we’re having this weekend, and I am happy to be participating in this program, which I
think is just a wonderful idea.
Wheelock: What was your major, if I could start with that, when you were here at
Stanford?
Ruehl: My major at Stanford was political science, but it was—I minimally majored in
political science. It was just kind of a convenient place to put me. But in fact, I really
had what was a social science major before a social science major was actually one of the
areas in which they awarded degrees. I had a professor at Stanford who took a particular
interest in me and he was very intrigued by the idea of having a more inclusive social
science background and not being forced to specialize in one area.
Wheelock: What was his name?
Ruehl: His name was Carl Stover [Carl Frederick Stover, acting instructor in Political
Science 1953/4-1954/5. B.A. Stanford, 1951; M.A. 1954] and he subsequently went—first
he went back to Washington, it was in the fifties, there was a lot—he was in the political
science department but there was a lot more back and forth between universities and the

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIED 2007/SONYA RUEHL

government. He went back and he asked me to go back with him. I was one of the very
first Washington interns in 1956. I think there were just a handful, handful of us in the
whole capital and he asked me to come back to be his intern.
Wheelock: How long were you there?
Ruehl: For the summer.
Wheelock: Oh, gosh.
Ruehl: It was a summer internship between my junior and senior years at Stanford, very
interesting. And then I can’t remember if he came back to Stanford or if he went to
Brookings Institute directly. I think he did come back to Stanford for a little while and
then went to the Brookings Institute. He was on the young side and he just was brilliant
and I felt tremendously fortunate to have come under his tutelage. But ultimately I
decided that no one would know what a social science major was, and that it would be
diminished and that I was better off getting my degree in something that everybody
understood. So I had just the minimum number of units for political science and so that’s
where my degree is.
Wheelock: Was there an option to do sociology or social science as a degree at that point
or did…
Ruehl: The choices were economics, history, sociology, anthropology…
Wheelock: And you didn’t quite fall under sociology, I guess.
Ruehl: Well, sociology—it’s not, I believe, what sociology is now. It was a very limited
kind—or psychology was another one, they were all individual fields, they didn’t have
this overlap.

2

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIED 2007/SONYA RUEHL

Wheelock: Oh, okay.
Ruehl: And this was one of these that Dr. Stover was interested in saying how can we
integrate these related social sciences so that a student can come out with some
understanding and background in them as a general field. I think it has since happened in
some way.
Wheelock: I think so, too, it’s much more of a, you know, as the fields grow, they kind
of realize that they don’t need to care about their own turf quite as much now.
Ruehl: Well, and specialize so much because, I mean, a well-rounded student needs to
know about a lot of things, or certainly be exposed to them. So anyway, that’s the long
answer to what was my major.
Wheelock: Oh, actually, I wanted to go back and ask you, how did you meet Dr. Stover?
Did you have a class with him?
Ruehl: He was teaching one of the sections in a political science course that I took, and
it was a class in which there was some discussion, and I guess he identified me more than
my identifying him. And there was the opportunity at that time, at least in certain
instances—we had it in Western Civ -- I also was on independent study in Western Civ -where you would have section leaders who would teach these sections and then there—at
the end, I think, of the first quarter, the students were identified who were asked to go
into an independent study section. And there were, oh, I think, maybe only about six of
us in these independent study seminars where we did all the reading, all the same
requirements as everybody else in Western Civ, it was a kind of a, it was a much—
Wheelock: It was more like a seminar, it sounds like.
Ruehl: It was a seminar; it was much—much more interaction among the students. It
was a more open and sort of, it was an opportunity to really expand the horizons of the

3

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIED 2007/SONYA RUEHL

class. And so I did that, but I don’t believe that’s where I came to Carl Stover’s attention,
thinking—although there may be some—who knows if there’s something that follows
you. Guess it was in my ju—my sophomore year that that I ran into him. Same kind of
situation in which a group of students came together to exchange ideas, and he apparently
thought he saw something in me that he wanted to work with. So that was—and so I
worked with him for quite a long time and, as I say, went back to Washington with him,
and he was a very formative person in my life at Stanford.
Wheelock: And where are you from originally, if I can ask?
Ruehl: I am from California. My father was a farmer in the San Joaquin Valley and I
had always wanted to come to Stanford.
Wheelock: So where are you from in the San Joaquin Valley? I’m sorry, what town?
Ruehl: Los Banos; our ranch was near Los Banos, although I did not go to high school
there. My parents separated when I was in junior high school and my mother moved to
Berkeley, and so I actually went to high school in Berkeley. But when I can think about
where I’m from, I’m definitely from Los Banos, California.
Wheelock: Okay. That makes sense.
Ruehl: Little, teeny, farming town and now a town—bedroom community for Silicon
Valley, which is just…
Wheelock: Amazing.
Ruehl: Amazing, absolutely amazing.
Wheelock: So the reason I ask is I was wondering how your parents felt about you going
off to Washington, D.C. for a summer?

4

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIED 2007/SONYA RUEHL

Ruehl: That’s such an interesting question because it was such a different world.
Wheelock: Still is.
Ruehl: Yeah. My father did not like it at all, for two reasons. My parents had separated.
I have a twin sister; we spent the summer with our father, and he actually had a packing
shed where we worked in the packing shed in the summer. And he wanted me to be with
him. He wanted me working for him. He didn’t want me in this wild world of
Washington, D.C. all by myself; after all, I was only twenty or whatever. But when I told
Carl this, he said “Is your dad coming to Stanford to visit you anytime soon?” And he
was coming and he said, “Let’s all go out to dinner together.” I said, “Okay, good.”
Well, he managed to totally charm my father, so he, my father agreed to it. So that was
how that was resolved, although my father had not wanted me, for instance, to apply to
an Eastern college because he hadn’t wanted me to go to way—go away and he was
definitely the dominant figure in my life. And so the fact that he signed off on this trip to
Washington was very big, couldn’t have happened without that.
Wheelock: Well, I actually—I’m always interested to hear about people’s experiences
with professors and classes, and there’s so many things that create you at that age, when
you’re nineteen, twenty years old that—well, it’s only later when you look back on it, you
think, you know, that was really—that was a very important piece of my life right there.
Ruehl: It’s really true. And I would say that Stanford didn’t really make the access to
this kind of experience easy. You almost had to find it—or at least, my experience was
that these couple of professors found me, that I didn’t go out with some idea, oh, I want
to have an individualized experience at St—maybe they were here, maybe it was that the
counselor—I ended up with a counselor originally in food—food sciences or some just
really ridiculous major that had absolutely nothing to do with anything I was interested
in. Don’t think they still have it now, but he had no more real interest in directing me
than flying to the moon, it was just part of his administrative responsibility. I think

5

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIED 2007/SONYA RUEHL

there’s probably a better job done in trying to match kids to opportunities now than there
was. But women were very much in the minority at that time and my understanding is
that women had a different admissions process than men at that time, which seems to
make sense since our numbers were so much less.
Wheelock: And then your restrictions, once you were here, were a lot different from…
Ruehl: They were a lot different and exactly. I don’t think anybody questioned that, I
mean, this was the world we were raised in and we understood that there were rules and
we abided by them or got in trouble.
Wheelock: So where did you live when you were here?
Ruehl: I lived in Roble the first year and my roommates and I always drew just horrible
numbers, and I lived in Lagunita for two years and then I lived in Encina for a couple of
months while the new Florence Moore dormitories were being finished. They didn’t get
them finished for the beginning of our senior year, maybe it—a couple of the houses got
finished, but the one I was—my roommate and I were living in wasn’t finished. So we
lived—and that was a surrealistic experience…
Wheelock: I bet.
Ruehl: …to live in Encina for a couple of months.
Wheelock: Especially since the boys had pr—I think pretty much completely destroyed
it before they left.
Ruehl: They had, that’s exactly what had happened. It was just—it was like living in a
deserted warehouse or something. It was really wild. But we knew it wasn’t going to be
—it ended up being longer than we thought, but, it was funny.

6

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIED 2007/SONYA RUEHL

Wheelock: So, is there anything in particular about Stanford that stands out as like one
of the memories that’s really important to you or?
Ruehl: Well, I had very much wanted to go to Stanford, so the whole time I was here,
regardless of what happened, I always kept—I always said—I always knew in my heart
that I was very happy to be here, that I was fortunate, that I was really lucky to be here.
And I think that, personally, I did see it as a great opportunity and I wanted to make the
most of the opportunity. And I know for a lot of the women here, the social opportunities
and all that, I always had a tremendous academic curiosity. For me, the most important
thing was just to get as much academically out of Stanford as I could and to really excel
in that.
Wheelock: Excellent. It sounds like you were—it was clear to your professors that
that’s the kind of person you were. I mean to be singled out to go to do these independent
studies and then go to Washington.
Ruehl: Well, it happened, I mean, certainly it happened to lots of us in different ways,
but it was very good for me the way that it worked out. And I have been a lifelong
learner. I don’t think I can give Stanford all the credit, I think that was just—that’s just
who I am. But to have had the opportunity and it—Stanford was a great place to have
gone to. It was a great place to go to, but it also was a great place to have gone to,
because it’s opened a lot of doors for me since. I’ve been very involved with our local
Stanford Alumni group in the East Bay and I’ve been president of it. It’s one of the very
oldest alumni groups, and we have a very large scholarship endowment fund. I think we
send about three girls to, have been sending about three girls to Stanford for years and we
have formed one of the very largest membersh—and we’re oldest, largest and best
endowed, almost right up there with the top two or three alumni associations in the
country.
Wheelock: Wow.

7

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIED 2007/SONYA RUEHL

Ruehl: And if that has been a very long term, next week, I have a past president’s
council luncheon; I’m the past president’s council of that. So it—and many of my really
good friends are not from my class at Stanford, but are women from other classes who
are in this group, so.
Wheelock: That’s wonderful.
Ruehl: So I don’t know if there’s anything else I…
Wheelock: No, that’s excellent. Thank you so much for coming. I really appreciate it,
especially before the game.
Ruehl: Well, thank you. Yes, Angela still sees over the …
