

Calloway: This is Terri Calloway interviewing Judith Dodge from the Class of 1958 on
Saturday, October 11th, 2008, as part of the 2008 Alumni Stories Project.
Thank you so much for taking the time away from your busy schedule. We’re
just going to start with a few simple questions. What was your major, and
where did you live on campus?

Dodge: Okay. My major was Economics, and I had field of emphasis in math and
statistics as a secondary one. I lived several places. I was a summer quarter
freshman, and I lived in Lagunita. I was a barely-get-in. Then I lived in Branner
the rest of freshman year, and the beginning of sophomore year. Then I moved
to Hawthorne House for the rest of sophomore year, and then I moved to
Jordan House my junior year. Although I could have stayed there, I moved to
Story House my senior year because my two best friends lived at Story House.
By the time you were a senior, you had a say pretty much what was going to
work.

Calloway: That’s great. Now, you said you were a “barely-get-in.” What does that mean?

Dodge: All right. In the class, there were three hundred and fifty women, and seven
hundred men, roughly. They didn’t have enough housing for these three
hundred and fifty women, so they took us who were barely-get-ins, and they
said, alright, you can come back in the winter quarter, and by then, enough
women will have married or done something else, that they’ll have housing for
you. I say barely-get-ins, because I think that’s what we were for all sorts of
different kinds of reasons. I might add we all did fine. But you had to have a C
average. They lost a few people for that reason, and some people in the
summer quarter just decided they didn’t want to come back. They wanted to go
somewhere else. But you had to have a C average. It was just women, and we
all lived in Lagunita. We had a sponsor just like the people in the fall, but that
was it. We had summer quarter. I suspect that maybe I didn’t have enough
activities. I was really shy and that kind of thing. Maybe other people were kind
of marginal. The high school I went to was not known for academics.

Calloway: Oh.

Dodge: It could be any of those reasons.

Calloway: Now, where did you come from?

Dodge: Tracy.

Calloway: Ah, local.

2

Dodge: Local. Tracy at that time had a population of about maybe eight thousand.
There were two boys from my high school, and myself, who got into Stanford,
and we were the first people in at least five years—five or six years. I don’t
think there were any more for a couple more years. We just happened to have
one of those classes, I guess. It was a small town, but it was local.

Calloway: Now, how did you, or why did you, choose Stanford?

Dodge: Well, because it had a great reputation for academics, and it was coed.
Nowadays, people look at schools all over the country, but most everyone I
think, particularly from a small town, looked kind of locally. One of my
advisors or teachers wanted me to go to Mills, and I did not want to go to a
girls’ school. Stanford was better. And it was small, and it was all campus. It
wasn’t quite as threatening as, say, Berkeley was. But I always knew, because at
Berkeley at that time, if you just had a B average, you could go to Cal.

Calloway: Oh.

Dodge: So Berkeley was my backup, but I didn’t even have to apply. Stanford was the
only place I applied to.

Calloway: Ah. Okay. Now, what were some of the activities that you were part of when
you were on campus?

3

Dodge: I wasn’t really an activity person. I joined one of the religious groups for a
while, and then discovered that, for me anyway, it was a personal thing, that I
really didn’t make friends. It was all about the religious part. It was a
nondenominational kind of thing.

Calloway: Hmmm.

Dodge: I really didn’t make any friends, so I quit. I mean, I did things like play bridge,
and hang out at The Cellar, and things like that. But I was not an organization
kind of person.

Calloway: Okay. How did the social activities on campus affect you? Did you attend?

Dodge: Oh, sure. There were things like exchanges, because it was all female or male,
and so there were exchanges between dorms. There were parties and stuff. I
got fixed up with blind dates, and all this kind of thing. I went out some, but I
wasn’t one of the popular ones. I was really shy. I mean, I liked guys. I got
married later on. I enjoyed it. It was fine. I hung out with a couple of different
groups of guys, and it was more like friendship. It wasn’t serious dating,
although there were a great many people I think who came—probably more
women than men—with the idea of getting married, you know, meeting the
right guy and stuff.

4

Calloway: Yes. Now, what about some of your classmates or roommates? What stood
out to you? Did you have any favorites?

Dodge: Well, I had my best friends, I guess. I had some of them that were favorites,
then some that I was roommates with. I never had anybody I didn’t like. We
rotated, like in the Row houses, twice a year, so you had three different sets of
roommates. You had a lot of roommates. But I never had anyone I didn’t like.
I had ones from different classes. That’s one of the bad things about a reunion.
All you see is your own class…

Calloway: Right.

Dodge: …not the ones where there were people from other classes. But, you know,
there was one girl who was from Canada. That was interesting because she was
from Canada and she had lived in—I think it was Lebanon. It was somewhere
in the Middle East because her dad was in oil.

Calloway: Wow.

Dodge:

So that was interesting.

Calloway: Yes.

5

Dodge: Even my two good friends and roommates—one of them was from a wealthy
background in L.A., and the other one’s dad was a carpenter, and she lived in
the Santa Cruz Mountains.

Calloway: Wow.

Dodge: I was the child of an engineer in a valley town.

Calloway: Are there any instructors or professors that stood out to you that you really
liked or disliked?

Dodge: Oh, yes. There was a man—I’m trying to remember. I think his name was like
Blotch or Botch. He taught a class called Geurtay’s Faust. It was in English,
but he was from Germany. He said it was the European style. He never told us
his opinion, and his final question was, “What did you think was the most
significant thing, and why?” Now, that to me was wonderful. He said, “You
make up your own mind.” That didn’t always happen. I had Paul Buran, and
he was interesting because he was very controversial. . He had been to Cuba
and he was a devout communist.

Calloway: Wow.

Dodge: He was interesting. He didn’t try to convert anyone, but everyone kind of knew
that. I’m sure I can think of some others. Oh, the History of French

6

Civilization. I think it was Pierre Lamond. He was so French, and he would
just describe things like the hunt, riding their horses across Hungary. I had
some good economics professors. I think Kenneth Arrow. I believe he won
the Nobel Prize for economics somewhat later. I know he was on the
President’s Advisory Board.

Calloway: Wow.

Dodge: There were some good people.

Calloway: Wow.

Dodge: I think I learned a lot, you know.

Calloway: That’s great. Now, do you remember any social activities, or speakers, or
groups coming to play on campus, or around campus, or anything like that?

Dodge: I can remember two things. Maybe more if I thought about it. But Robert
Frost came to speak. He recited his poetry at Mem Aud. I have no idea which
year, but to a full-packed place. He had a beautiful voice, and he must have
been up in his seventies by then. Someone in one of the front rows went to
sleep. He stopped reading his poetry and he said, “Young man, leave. If you
don’t have enough respect…” Something along those lines.

7

Calloway: Yes.

Dodge: I don’t remember the exact words. If you don’t have any respect for me, out. I
remember that very well. And then Igor Kerensky worked at the Hoover
Institute, and we invited him for dinner at the place where I lived. He was very
interesting and very nice, and, again, just this warm, friendly, man. I think he’d
been here for a while by then. But I still remember it and it was so
embarrassing. There was a girl who had a photographic memory kind of thing.
She was a Political Science major. She asked him why he did not go back to
Russia. Now, this is the 1950s when Stalin was in power. Everyone was just
mortified. He was very gracious and he just said, “Well, you know, I might
have some problems.” We went on and asked him some other questions.
Those are two things I remember.

Calloway: Okay. And where were you living at that time when Kerensky came?

Dodge: I’m trying to remember. I think it was Jordan. Pretty sure it was Jordan,
because I remember the girl.

Calloway: Oh. What was the food like back then?

Dodge: It was probably not nutritious. We always had fish on Fridays, and it was at a
steam table. The food in the Row houses was much better because we actually

8

had a cook, and the house was small. But the other ones were definitely like
that. There was something called Train Wreck.

Calloway: What’s that?

Dodge: It was a piece of baked omelet with a red kind of tomato sauce on top of it, so
it kind of looked like a train wreck. And then there was Eyeball Pudding, which
had marshmallows in it, and they would just kind of sit and stare at you. I
would say it wasn’t really great quality. But, we all ate it, and that was what we
expected, and it was probably a lot like many of us had at home. Nutrition was
not one of the things. I do remember, well, it was at one of the Row houses. In
fact, I think it was senior year, so it was Story. The man who was the chef was
Chinese, and I don’t think he read English very well. He put hot pepper instead
of cinnamon on a dessert. And also a bunch of us got food poisoning from
chicken in the middle of finals week. So in the middle of finals week, there are
about twelve of us sitting in front of the toilets trading places.

Calloway: Oh, no.

Dodge: I guess it was undercooked, obviously. We had no permanent effects. But I
know I had to take a final late.

Calloway: Oh. Can you describe the student body?

9

Dodge: Very Caucasian.

Calloway: Hmmm.

Dodge: I’m sure I’m not the first one to say that.

Calloway: Hmmm.

Dodge: I think that Stanford had a reputation of being rich. Probably still does. But
most people were middle class. I mean, I knew some very wealthy children of
very wealthy people, and also some who were on scholarships. But I’d say it
was mostly just basically middle-class Caucasian. There were a number of
Asians. The number of blacks in our class was very small. I didn’t even know
until yesterday’s student panel that there was at least one Native American.

Calloway: Wow.

Dodge: I mean, I’m sure there was at least one black person, maybe a couple.

Calloway: Hmmm.

Dodge: Al Harrington was Samoan, and he was on the football team. Everybody knew
him. But I don’t think anyone felt prejudiced, it’s just that…

10

Calloway: Hmmm.

Dodge: …there was no one to be prejudiced about.

Calloway: Right. Yes.

Dodge: I like my daughter's class thirty years later. The student body was much better.

Calloway: Yes.

Dodge: I’m glad Stanford’s gone in that direction. Has nothing to do with oral history,
but...

Calloway: Well, that’s good. No.

Dodge: It was middle class, and a lot of it was Middle America, and California wasn’t
as—I don’t think there was such a variation in things.

Calloway: Right. Did you ever have any jobs on campus? Did you ever work on campus?

Dodge: No. Did not. Had no jobs.

Calloway: Okay.

11

Dodge: I worked in the summer, and that paid for all my clothes and books and stuff
like that. My parents just paid for tuition and room and board, which was
fifteen hundred dollars a year. It was two-fifty each, tuition and room and
board, so that’s five hundred times three.

Calloway: Wow. Do you recall any significant impressions that you had of the different
students?

Dodge: Well, just of different students? Or just in general?

Calloway: Both.

Dodge: Both. They were bright, and that was great, because I came from a small
school, and there weren’t that many bright people, and it was so much fun. I
think I learned more in dormitory, just sitting saying, golly, you know, I learned
this in my class today.

Calloway: Yes.

Dodge: I learned a lot just from that, and from just being around bright people. I was
pretty good in math, and I helped a fair number of women get through
economics…

Calloway: Uh-huh.

12

Dodge: …because there’s a lot of math in it. A lot of girls just didn’t take math classes
at all. I mean, they were just lost with things like graphs and charts, and didn’t
understand the relationship. I think I learned from that, because the more
you…

Calloway: Right.

Dodge: … help somebody else, that helps you, too. And there were some air heads. I
mean there are things that are no different.

Calloway: Right.

Dodge: I would think that’s no different really than…

Calloway: Yes.

Dodge: …today. I mean, you have some of everybody.

Calloway: Are there any traditions or things that you did, or required uniforms or
anything that you had back when you were going to school that you
remember?

Dodge: I don’t remember uniforms and stuff. Traditions. Just traditions?

13

Calloway: Hmmm.

Dodge: There was Spring Sing.

Calloway: And what’s that?

Dodge: Okay. Every dormitory, I think almost everyone or every dorm or house…

Calloway: Yes.

Dodge: …sang in Spring Sing. You picked a song, and you all sang it. I’m not good at
singing, so I mouthed the words. But I participated in it. Everybody went. It
was in Frost Amphitheater.

Calloway: Wow.

Dodge: Oh, I remember it was one year—I think it must have been Elvis Presley,
because I think I remember How Much Is That Doggy In the Window.
One year we did The Grandfather Clock—Tick-tock, Tick-tock. That was
the part I could do. We got together, because that was when I lived at
Hawthorne, and there were only thirteen people who lived in Hawthorne. We
got together with Oak, which was a little bit larger…

Calloway: Hmmm.

14

Dodge: …and did one together.

Calloway: Oh, that’s great.

Dodge: But that was kind of a big thing. I think there was also a Big Game Follies?
Something like that. And the Sunday Night Flicks were things that everybody
did. Those are a couple anyway.

Calloway: Oh, that’s great. What did you do for fun in between studying?

Dodge: Oh, let’s see. We played a lot of Bridge.

Calloway: Hmmm.

Dodge: We hung out in The Cellar, my particular group of friends and I, which was the
coffee house.

Calloway: Okay.

Dodge: And we would just sit and shoot the breeze a lot.

Calloway: Hmmm.

15

Dodge: Talked. Exercise wasn’t a big thing. Nobody really did that. I think we just
spent a lot of time talking and reading. Sometimes we’d walk downtown. There
was no Stanford Shopping Center until partway through, at least.

Calloway: Yes.

Dodge: We’d walk down to Palo Alto, and we’d just do a little shopping and stuff. But
I think we were very much campus oriented. Maybe not everyone was.
Sometimes people would go to San Francisco, and that was a big thing because
that was…

Calloway: Yes.

Dodge: … the beatnik era.

Calloway: Ah.

Dodge: That was pretty risqué just to go up and hang out at North Beach for a little
while.

Calloway: Ah.

Dodge: But that was not a common thing.

16

Calloway: Oh. Do you remember any escapades or things that you did?

Dodge: Yes. Story particularly. Sometimes you have a group of people who get
together who seem to get along quite well.

Calloway: Hmmm.

Dodge: One of the things I remember doing was that we pooled all our perfume. One
of the fraternities lived next door, and we got to know them pretty well. We
pooled all our perfume, and on a Friday night right after dark, we snuck around
and we poured this perfume in all their cars. Nobody locked their cars. That
was one thing we did. Then we dressed up. There were no sororities then, and
so we dressed up. It was a fraternity’s pledge time, and we all dressed up like
guys with jeans on and shirts. We went around as though we were pledges
from house to house. Then I think we gave the resident assistant a very bad
time. She was LDS.

Calloway: Hmmm.

Dodge: She was very responsible, but she was pretty young and she was a grad student
in education, and we were not very nice to her. I remember one girl—wasn’t all
of us— but one girl even called and said, oh, there’s a gas leak. Of course, she
was panicked, and everybody ran in and ran out. I think it was shortly after
that, that actually, the—I’m not sure what she was called. I’m not sure it was

17

Dean of Women. But anyway, she came and spoke to us about how we should
behave. We lived between the Sigma Chi fraternity and the Phi Delta Theta
fraternity. In football season, some Sigma Chis who had a bit too much to
drink missed which house it was and they broke down our door. It wasn’t our
fault. But that was added to the list of things that happened. Somebody broke a
mirror by accident. The lady was not real happy with us.

Calloway: And which house was this that you…

Dodge: That was Story.

Calloway: That was Story. Oh. Are there any other?

Dodge: Those are the things I remember the most, anyway. There probably were other
things. I know there were fruit trees in the Quad, and I know we helped
ourselves. We went wading in the fountain. People were always pouring dye in
it. And, you know, little stuff like that.

Calloway: Do you remember how you celebrated graduation?

Dodge: Oh, I went out with my parents. I don’t think my grandparents were around.
That was it. Nobody had a party or anything. We just went out and the next
day I went to work.

18

Calloway: Where did you get a job? Where were you working?

Dodge: There’s a little bit of a story to this. I was an Econ major. I had Departmental
Honors, so I had good grades, and I had a nice recommendation from the
head of the department whose name was Lori Tarshish, if I remember. In fact,
he encouraged me to go to grad school. But in those days women didn’t do
that. I went for an interview. I won’t say the name of the company, but the
man looked at me and he said, “We don’t hire Home Economics majors.” So
I went for another interview with a major oil company, and that man looked at
me and he said, “We don’t hire women.” There were no laws until the Equal
Employment Opportunity Act and that came along in 1964, or something like
that. That was the way things were. I’m thinking, boy, here I am. I got all this
great education, and so on. My aunt knew someone who worked at Lockheed.
His brother was a department manager. I had taken the one computer course
that Stanford had, at least as an undergrad, and done pretty well in it. I had this
kind of minor in Math and Statistics. Lockheed was looking for people and
didn’t care that I was a woman. So I became a computer programmer. This
was 1958. I went to work the next day after I graduated.

Calloway: Wow.

Dodge: It was in Palo Alto.

Calloway: Wow.

19

Dodge: That’s the way things were. .

Calloway: That

Dodge: It had nothing to do with climbing telephone poles or something. There was
no physical thing.

Calloway: What are some of your other favorite memories of being here at Stanford?

Dodge: Oh, the friendships, and just the great people. And the campus. My friends and
I were commenting that even though there’s more building, there isn’t as much
open space. There was more open space then.

Calloway: Hmmm.

Dodge: There were things, impromptu things, like beer parties in the hills, which you
wouldn’t do now. That would just happen. You would just go up in the hills
and drink beer, and sit and talk. I don’t remember people getting totally
soused, although they probably did. But today you wouldn’t. I mean, you’re on
the trail and all that kind of thing. I took horseback riding. That was fun.

Calloway: Wow.

Dodge: You can’t do that on every campus.

20

Calloway: True. That’s true.

Dodge: That was a great thing.. You’re kind of looked after. Maybe we were looked
after too much. It was a good way to grow up. A great kind of campus, and
because almost everyone lived on campus, there was a feeling that you don’t
have with a lot of other places.

Calloway: Now, are there any lessons that you learned here at Stanford that you’ve carried
through your life?

Dodge: Well, I think part of it is just growing up. I mean, I was pretty shy. I learned
that not everyone else is thinking about me.

Calloway: Good lesson.

Dodge: That’s a growing-up thing. But I think it was a good place to do that. I was
comfortable.

Calloway: Hmmm.

Dodge: There are a lot of places I wouldn’t have been, I think.

Calloway: Hmmm.

21

Dodge: I learned what real good friends are. a lot more than in high school where kids
are growing up, and girls especially tend to be, oh, cliquey and snotty and stuff.
You have friends. But when you live with someone, you really…

Calloway: Right.

Dodge: …know them.

Calloway: Yes.

Dodge: I think that’s something that is very special. I learned what a real friend is.

Calloway: Is there anything that you would like students now, or going forward, to know
or to remember while they’re here at Stanford?

Dodge: Just to appreciate what you have. Just be aware that it is different than the real
world. Because pretty soon you’re out there and you’re in the real world, and
you’re working, and you’ve got a job, and you have responsibilities. Here are
four years where you can kind of pick. You can define what kind of person you
want to be. I remember one of these dorm things where I’m sitting around and
I’m talking to people, and it wasn’t my class. It must have been Sociology,
something like that. But someone said that people come to college, any college,
for different reasons. Some come for the pure academics. Some come because
they’re interested in politics in the outside world. It doesn’t have anything really

22

to do with the campus itself. Some come for the activities on campus. I’m
probably forgetting one. But I think some of that defines what kind of a
person you are, too. And here you have an opportunity to try some of these
different things. Are you really interested in academics? Do you care about
your community? Those kinds of things.

Calloway: Along with that, how do you think your time at Stanford has impacted or
played out in your life through the years up until now?

Dodge: You know, one has family and other kinds of influences. But I think just
meeting people and knowing people who were diverse. I think that just being
appreciative of other people who didn’t necessarily think the same way I did,
maybe helped with being able to communicate with people who, again, came
from different backgrounds, maybe didn’t have the same thoughts. But if you
talk long enough, and you listen enough, oftentimes you find that there’s a
common ground.

Calloway: Right.

Dodge: You’re really not that far apart.

Calloway: Do you remember any other escapades or adventures?

Dodge: Oh, we were pretty good kids. I think I told you all of it.

23

Calloway:

Dodge:

What were some of your favorite classes? And how did the professors teach?

Money and Banking. I think that was my favorite Economics class. I really
enjoyed it. I understood it. I don’t remember the professor’s name. I’m sorry.
I just really enjoyed it. If you had certain good grades in Economics, you
could take a Senior Seminar. This was my senior year, so I had a seminar
with it. Instead of five units, it was an extra unit. You had to meet on
Wednesday night. You wrote papers and things like that. I enjoyed it, I
understood it, and it was fun. I think that was my favorite Economics class.
Other classes are the things that you would have never taken that had
nothing to do with your major.

Humburg: Like what?

Dodge: Mythology. Now, that has no practical value, but when you read it, it
sometimes does. But it was interesting. Ancient Cultures of the Near East,
which is the Middle East. Goethe’s Faust, which I mentioned earlier.

Humburg: What was it about these that you’re remembering now that was special?

Dodge: There were things I’d never known anything about, and probably would never
ever learn more about except I did. I mean, I have, because they were just
things I was curious about.

24

Humburg: Yes.

Dodge: They were interesting.

Humburg: Have any of them factored into your life subsequently such that…

Dodge: No.

Humburg: …you have sort of special learning from them, or…

Dodge: No. Just kind what I would call broad education.

Humburg: There you go.

Dodge: I took a whole year of Physics for fun. I wasn’t a Science major, but I liked
science. I took not the one for Physics majors, but I took the one for premed. I
had Joan Baez’s father as a professor. He didn’t make any bones about the fact
that he was a pacifist and a Quaker. He didn’t try to convert anyone, but it
came up in Physics because of things like the atomic bomb. Joan was a student
at Palo Alto High at the time, and it made the front page of the paper because
they had one of these—as was popular then—Civil Defense Drills, and you
were supposed to go down into the basement in case an atomic bomb came.
She refused to participate, and she was sixteen. It’s peripheral.

25

Humburg: But it’s still Stanford family.

Dodge: Along those lines, there was a demonstration of Ban the Bomb. It was in front
of the old library. There’s a fountain there.

Humburg: Was this on campus?

Dodge: On campus. There were maybe fifty people. I have no idea how many of them
were students even, but there were some people with signs. Then it was in
front of the library. People went back and forth between classes. Someone
from the San Francisco Chronicle took a picture in between classes, and it
looks like there are all these people. We had seen, five minutes before, there
were fifty people walking around. Then it looked like there were hundreds
from this picture. They mostly were not participating. But there was a
demonstration.

Humburg: Yes.

Dodge: That was about as high, I think, number of anybody. It certainly wasn’t like the
‘60s. Now I don’t remember what it was you were asking. Oh, favorite classes.

Humburg: Yeah.

Dodge: I really enjoyed Physics.

26

Humburg: Do you remember anything about Professor Baez?

Dodge: Oh, he was just this sweet teddy bear of a man. I mean he was just very nice,
and warm, and friendly. And the Physics Building was—I don’t know whether
it still is, but it was brand new at that time.

Humburg: Physics Tank probably.

Dodge: Maybe it had a big auditorium in it. It was new in the ‘50s. It was unusual
because it was wired for stereo sound. He picked music. When you walked into
class, there would be this lovely music playing. Classical music.

Humburg: Oh.

Dodge: It was just nice. He was just a nice man. I didn’t know him, and I wasn’t a
Physics major, and I never had any personal contact, but he just was a nice
man.

Humburg: Yes. So do you remember any other faculty?

Dodge: There was a Professor Fagan. I think he was an Econ I.

Humburg: Hmmm.

27

Dodge: He got me interested in Econ and said I could be a major. I liked math and
stuff, but I knew I really wasn’t a mathematician. That was one of the reasons I
took Physics, because a lot of the calculus problems had to do with Physics. I
realized that I didn’t know anything about Physics, so when I took calculus,
things like balls and velocity and things, I only had the math to go with. I didn’t
have the background from Physics. Unfortunately, too late for me to take it,
they added some classes in calculus that were based more on business and
other kinds of problems.

Humburg: Yes.

Dodge: Who else? Oh, you know, I’ll probably think of some tomorrow.

Humburg: I should say, actually, this is Judy Humburg, and I am now substituting for
Terri. You can tell my voice has been on the tape for a while here. Do you
have any special memory or a favorite one that is about your whole time at
Stanford?

Dodge: No.

Humburg: Being a woman at Stanford, whatever courses you took, or the people you
knew?

28

Dodge: Yes. I told her some about that because some of these questions kind of repeat
themselves.

Humburg: Yes.

Dodge: …a little bit. I just said the overall experience. I do think that’s true. Not a
specific, just a…

Humburg: So what does overall mean now?

Dodge: Well, I mean, just having four years where you’re…

Humburg: Oh, okay.

Dodge: You’re growing up.

Humburg: Yes.

Dodge: A favorite memory? Well, living with the people at Story House my senior
year, I would say.

Humburg: Oh.

29

Dodge: I mentioned it in the escapades part, but just having a group of people who
randomly kind of come together, and you all really like each other. Sometimes
that happens, and sometimes it doesn’t. The year before, I had lived with a
group of people who were perfectly nice, all women, of course. They were
perfectly nice, but I just didn’t really have that much in common with them. I
mean it just happens with [talking over each other].
Humburg: However, at Story it was different?

Dodge: It was different. We all just got along really well.

Humburg: Yes.

Dodge: And everybody was—looser. I don’t mean morals, but I mean just more
easygoing, funnier…more accepting of people not like them. Sometimes
people just seemed to be…even at places like Stanford, cliquey.

Humburg: Yes.

Dodge: That happens.

Humburg: Yes. Do you have any least favorite memory, if any?

Dodge: In retrospect, the way that women were. That has nothing to do with Stanford;
it’s just the way that society was. You know, there were twice as many guys as

30

women who attended. Women were not allowed to wear pants anywhere
except on Sundays. Then you could walk down on Quad. I mean, you could
wear them in your dorm or something, but you could not go down to Quad,
you couldn’t go to the coffee place, The Cellar, or anything like that in pants
except on Sundays.

Humburg: Do you remember how that worked for you, just in terms of your everyday
life?

Dodge: Well, you wore skirts. It was crinoline skirt time where you had five slips
underneath, and you looked like this, I mean, like a tent kind of. But that was
the style. Everyone wore skirts and blouses mostly, and some dresses. I took
horseback riding, and I had a Spanish class right after it. There was no way I
could change from jeans into a dress. So I got dispensation from the professor.
It was kind of at the edge of campus. It wasn’t in the middle of Quad.

Humburg: From the Spanish professor.

Dodge: Yes, from the Spanish professor.

Humburg: To attend…

Dodge: …to attend in blue jeans. Somebody mentioned it at the class panel we had
yesterday. You know, this is the way life was. I mean, you didn’t question it.

31

Humburg: Yes.

Dodge: You know? I mean I took shorthand and typing in high school because I
never knew whether I might need them or not, and then went off to Stanford.
And the best I’ve done with typing is that since computers, personal computers
came into play, I use the typing.

Humburg: There you go. Sounds like me with my shorthand and…

Dodge: Yes.

Humburg: …and doing research. Do you remember anything else about being a woman
on campus?

Dodge: Yes. Did I mention Late Leaves? I don’t think I did. You couldn’t be out past
ten-thirty if you were a woman. You had to have a Late Leave, and then you
only had so many as a freshman, and then you could stay out until one-thirty,
and then you could stay out until two-thirty just a few times. I believe they
called your parents. Somebody had to check every night. I think that
sometimes it was just some of your fellow students. You had Late Leave duty,
and you had to check and make sure everybody was in. And if people were
really late, they’d call your parents. I had a friend who was out with her
boyfriend. She wasn’t shacked up in a motel or anything, but she—they fell
asleep. They called the police and everything else because they weren’t home

32

by three-thirty. And if you left for a weekend, or night, you had to sign out as
to where you were going. You had to say who you were with, and I believe
where you were going. Definitely if you went to stay at a friend’s house
overnight, or you went home to see your parents, like I did, you had to sign out
for the weekend and say when you were going to be back.

Humburg: And where you were going, and…

Dodge: Where you were going, and all of that. Men didn’t have to do that, but women
did. And so those are social things. But, no, Stanford was no different than
anywhere else, except maybe Reed where I had a friend who went to school,
and I think it was a little more liberal. But most schools were like that.

Humburg: Yes. That’s definitely something to remember, isn’t it?

Dodge: Yes. My friend went to a school where they had a dating parlor, and that’s
where you met young men.

Humburg: Yes. You said something about the coffee house, or the…

Dodge: The Cellar.

Humburg: The Cellar.

33

Dodge: That’s what it was called. It was in the old Union down in the basement. That’s
where we hung out a lot. It was the equivalent of a coffee house. You know,
the coffee and stuff. And big booths, and you could sit and talk, and meet your
friends, and play Bridge, or shoot the breeze.

Humburg: So…

Dodge: Of course, everyone smoked. A lot of people smoked, you know. It was daring
in those days. It meant you were emancipated, that you could smoke, you
know. You were grown up, and debonair, and daring, and all those kinds of
things.

Humburg: Oh, wow.

Dodge: And so…

Humburg: So was that sort of the Student Union at the time?

Dodge: It was called the Union, so yes, it was a Student Union. I think some of the
organizations had offices and stuff there. And maybe it was where ASSU was,
and so on. I was not active in that, but we hung out at The Cellar a lot.

Humburg: Do you remember any other locations on campus that were sort of like that?

34

Dodge: That was pretty much it, you know. Certainly at Story at least, there was after
dinner coffee, and so sometimes the guys, various guys and friends and stuff
would stop by and share coffee, and things like that. You had coffee duty
where you prepared the coffee, you know, might have a week where you did
that.

Humburg: Did everybody have dinner at the same time? And so they could stop by,
because they knew when coffee…

Dodge: At the Row houses—yes. That was the last two years because there were like
thirty-five, forty people, and you had your own cook, and you all sat down to
dinner at the same time. Then they did have things where you announced if
you were engaged. You had to tell somebody. I forget exactly what happened,
but I think they brought a candle to the table. And then everybody sang

“Felicitations to you, Felicitations to you.” Almost like the sorority kind of
thing. But that was the Row houses. I don’t know, because I’d lived in Row
houses the last two years, when those kinds of things, like engagements, were
more likely maybe in the first two. I just don’t remember. In Hawthorne,
where I lived most of sophomore year, there were thirteen people.

Humburg: Yes.

35

Dodge: We went to the dorm. I even forget where we ate. We must have eaten in one
of the large dorms, because, you know, they didn’t have anybody for thirteen
people.

Humburg: Yes.

Dodge: We ate somewhere. I don’t remember where.

Humburg: Oh, okay. So you were in Story for two years?

Dodge: One year. And I was in Jordan the year before.

Humburg: Okay. Were the Row houses, were they pretty much all the same then? In
terms of how they—the dinner—

Dodge: Yes, as far as I know, yes. They certainly were. I don’t remember having after
dinner coffee at Jordan, although there may have been. Maybe somebody else
would remember. There may have been traditions with different houses. I
suppose that’s possible.

Humburg: Yes.

Dodge: As far as I know, you had your own cook.

36

Humburg: Interesting. Is there anything in particular you’d like to mention about
Stanford just in terms of maybe what it’s meant to your life since you’ve been
here?

Dodge: Well…

(misc.)

[End of Judith Dodge – Part 1]

37

Dodge: I think Stanford made me more open-minded. There’s something about
learning how to think, I guess, and that’s a very broad kind of thing. It’s not
even education in a way, but being exposed to education, and having good
professors, and being asked questions that make you think. Like one from
Western Civ was something about, “Augustus Caesar is on trial up in Heaven.”
Somebody was his prosecutor, and someone else was his defense attorney.
How would you pick one side and argue it? Now, that’s a big kind of thing for
a freshman to have to do. But it makes you think. I know this is different than
a lot of other universities, and that is that almost everything was essay
questions. You have to write, you have to think. They weren’t multiple choice.
My husband went to a different school which shall remain anonymous. But he
had a lot of multiple choice exams. Here you’re taking poetry and you get a
multiple choice question about it. That’s not expressing yourself. We were
married when he was still in school because he’d been in the military. I saw his
questions compared to the kinds of things that I had, and there was a huge
difference. I mean, there were even essay questions in Chemistry. I don’t know
whether that’s still the case, but I think that makes you think, and you have to
be able to express yourself.

Humburg: Yes. Definitely. Anything else like that?

Dodge: You know, even though it was very Caucasian, and very, by today’s terms, not
diverse, to me, from a small town in Central California, where I went through
grade school in a town with a population of seven hundred and fifty up in the

mountains in Colorado, it was very diverse and very broad. I learned a lot from
that, from my fellow students, and seeing that people had come from different
backgrounds, and being able to judge people based one-on-one, and not as a
group.

Humburg: Yes.

Dodge: Those kinds of things. Some of which is growing up, I suppose. But it was, you
know, a big thing.

Humburg: Wow. Yes. Anything else?

Dodge: Oh, I’ll think of something later probably. But that’s as good as I can do.

Humburg: Well, we really appreciate you coming and spending time with us.

Dodge: I started thinking about things this morning because I was talking to my
daughter and her friends who graduated twenty years ago. I started talking to
them over the kitchen table this morning.

Humburg: Did that help?

Dodge: Yes, it did.

39

Humburg: Yes [talking over each other].

Dodge: Yes, it did, because it made me think of things, because then they asked me
some things. It was like that? Of course, the Indian, you know. It was all the
Indian. I remember going to the football games and wearing a feather in your
hair. The little boys from around town would try to steal them. You had to
watch that.

Humburg: Do you remember how that tradition started at all?

Dodge: I don’t know. It had been there. Prince Lightfoot danced, and we never
thought anything about it being controversial.

Humburg: Did you wear the feather in your hair?

Dodge: Yes. You wore the feather because people had bobby pins and barrettes and
things that they could stick it in with, and so you wore it in your hair. And then
the kids would come and try to pull them.

Humburg: At the end of the game?

Dodge: Or when you were walking to the game. Everybody went as far as I remember.
I mean, at least me and, well, my friends and I. We went to every football
game.

40

Humburg: Do you remember anything else about football games?

Dodge: Card tricks. They had card stunts, and you did things like create a tree and
stuff. It was segregated. The males had better seats, and then the women sat
down toward the end zone.

Humburg: How did they segregate it?

Dodge: By sex.

Humburg: No, I mean…

Dodge: Oh, the men sat in the student section that was the men’s, and the women sat
next to it in the one that was the women’s.

Humburg: Was it labeled that way?

Dodge: No. But everybody knew. I mean, the guys sat there, and [talking over each
other].

Humburg: Do you remember if anybody ever tried to sit…

Dodge: Those days? No.

41

Humburg: Wow.

Dodge: I do remember also that they used to sell frozen orange juice. They called it
Gremlins. And that people would spike it with vodka. Kids haven’t changed.

Humburg: That’s wonderful. So they’d sell the orange juice at the games…

Dodge: Hmmm. And then people would have something…

Humburg: …and you’d…

Dodge: Somebody who was over twenty-one would have something.

Humburg: Do you remember anything about the card tricks?

Dodge: Oh, just that they were things like trees, or you would flip them, and then
you’d have more than one card. And there was somebody who called out Card
One and Card Two. They made designs out of them and things like that. Go
Stanford, or a tree, or…

Humburg: Yes.

Dodge: …an Indian in those days.

42

Humburg: So then what happened at the end of the game with the cards?

Dodge: They picked them up. Nobody threw them or anything. You had a thing under
your seat, a hook that they hooked on, and you just left them there, and then
they’d pick them up and do something for the next game. The band—I think
they had white uniforms with big hats, if I remember correctly. They marched
just kind of like the USC band does today. They played “Come Join the

Band”, which is still around. And some songs that you don’t hear anymore
because they had Indian in them. “Sons of the Stanford Red.” I don’t think
you still hear that, except it was parodied by Cal to “Sons of the Wealthy

Few.” “Fight for the dame with the social name, and dawn at forge
ahead, checkbook to checkbook, diamond studs, sons of the wealthy
few.” I think oil wells were in there. “Oil wells to get you through.” There
was a parody that Cal used to sing that was on that. That was what they sang
about Stanford.

Humburg: Oh..

Dodge: That’s not quite it. That’s pretty good, though. That was pretty close.

Humburg: What were the words again?

Dodge: It was like “Sons of the wealthy few, far…” Let’s see. “Sons of the

wealth”—instead of—it was “Sons of the Stanford Reds.” But it was “Sons

43

of the wealthy few,” and I don’t remember quite the words. I remember it
had in it, “Checkbook to checkbook, diamond studs, sons of the wealthy

few.” And it had something about, “Fight for the dame with the social
name, and dawn at forge ahead.” And something about “Oil wells to get
you through.”

Humburg: Oh, wow.

Dodge: That was a parody, so we used to laugh at that. There was one about Rossotti’s.
And “The lady on the floor who fell, and her mother never told her the

things that young girls should know about the ways of wicked men, and
how they come and go.” We knew all these songs. That has nothing to do
with the football games, but…

Humburg: You used to go to Rossotti’s?

Dodge: Oh, everybody did. There was a place called Mama Garcia’s that was up in the
hills somewhere. Mama Garcia would serve you if you were under age, but you
had to have a can of 7-up in front of you as well as a beer.

Humburg: So you could have the beer, but you had to have the 7-up.

Dodge: You had to have the 7-up there, too. Yes. So that if the alcoholic beverage
people came in, she could say that the beer belonged to the person next to you

44

if they were over twenty-one, I guess. But, yes, I remember that. And there was
also Rudy’s Alpine Inn that was around. I remember going to the Crack Pot.
Must have been when I was a senior. I think it was nickel beer for girls. It was
in Menlo Park. That’s where the Kingston Trio, one of the places the Kingston
Trio sang when they were pretty young.

Humburg: Yes. A gentleman that I interviewed on Thursday talked about seeing one of
the first—before the Kingston Trio even formed the Kingston Trio, they were
here.

Dodge: Yes. And Dave Guard. One of the people in one of the—I think it was Jordan.
Anyways, they didn’t get married, but she was pinned to Dave Guard for a
while. I remember that.

Humburg: Oh, okay. Wow. Okay. Well, see, you remembered quite a lot there at the end.

Dodge: Yes. I did. Okay.

Humburg: Yes. Wonderful.

Dodge: The football games were fun. Everybody went, and John Brody was the
quarterback for part of that time. But Stanford, I remember, won Big Game
two years and lost Big Game two years. I don’t remember which years they
were.

45

Humburg: Even with Brody as…
Dodge: Yes. And actually, it was our freshman year. Stanford lost to UCLA down
there. And then you took the train and went down to whoever it was you were
playing—USC or UCLA. You took the train from Palo Alto, I think it was. It
was a special train they ran. Our freshman year—Brody would have been a
sophomore, so I’m not sure he was the starting quarterback. But Stanford lost
to UCLA seventy-two to nothing. I imagine that’s the worst one that they’ve
ever had. Shortly after that, it was the old Pacific Coast Conference, and it was
disbanded because there were penalties against Washington, USC, UCLA—I
forget. Anyway, there were a lot of abuses. And two years later, I went down to
L.A. on the train, so it was my junior year, and I had a friend that went to
UCLA, so I stayed with her and saw them. But at halftime at the game, UCLA,
who had been penalized, referred to Stanford as being from Halo Alto, because
we weren’t sanctioned.

Humburg: Halo Alto.

Dodge: Halo Alto. Yes.

Humburg: So that would have been in ’56?

Dodge: Yes. It would have been in’56, the fall of ’56. ’56? Yes, ’56.

46

Humburg: Right.

Dodge: Yes.

Humburg: Because you had graduated in ’58…

Dodge: Yes.

Humburg: …in the spring. Okay.

Dodge: Yes.

Humburg: Wow. Was it just for the UCLA game?

Dodge: Yes. I think it was a special train.

Humburg: …or USC, or…

Dodge: Yes. I think I only went to UCLA. But maybe they did it for USC, too. They
probably did. But it was like a special train. And I remember there were some
alumni who went, too, because I remember we were sitting as students, and
some inebriated alums came through.

Humburg: Interesting.

47

Dodge: And you kind of stayed up. It was all night, so you really stayed up all night and
got totally wired on coffee.

Humburg: No alcohol or anything.

Dodge: You know, we didn’t. But I imagine that there were people who did.

Humburg: Somewhere on the train.

Dodge: Oh, yes. I certainly saw my fair share of people who had too much to drink in
various places.

Humburg: Wonderful. Well, Judy, thank you so much.

Dodge: Okay. You’re welcome.

Humburg: Thank you so much.

Dodge: You know, if you put it all together, which I hope you do, everybody
remembers different things. And they’re not going to think of everything at
one time, so…

Humburg: No. Thank you so much.

48

Dodge: Okay.

Humburg: Are you still comfortable having signed the release?

Dodge: Oh, yes.

Humburg: I mean, everything that we’ve talked about?

Dodge: Yes.

Humburg: Okay. Great.

Dodge: And I’m glad you did it. As I said, well, I went around and around with the
little museum on…

Humburg: Oh. Yes.
