
BROOKS: This is Vickie Brooks. I’m interviewing Jane Fetter, Class of ’58, on October
9, 2008, for the Alumni Stories Project. So, Jane, maybe if you wouldn’t mind starting off
as you’re an incoming freshman, and what it was like, and what were your first memories
of your housing, and your life as a freshman?
FETTER: All right. Well, I actually was dating a boy who was in the class of ’56, so for
the two years prior to my entrance at Stanford, I had come up to attend various parties. So
I was familiar with the campus, familiar somewhat with the social structure, and was very
excited and eager to be here. I was from La Jolla, California, and a number of my friends
were also in my class. My parents and my grandmother drove me up, and I was in Roble
Hall. It was an interesting time, because no men were allowed past the lobby, which
meant that my father couldn’t help carry my very heavy luggage up the stairs. And that
was sort of my first “Oh, my goodness, things are somewhat structured here.”
The other thing that, when I talk to current students, they are amazed to find that we were
expected to check in, there were curfews, we, I believe, had to be in by ten o’clock;
maybe ten thirty but my memory is ten. You had to sign in. And then as freshmen you
were given a certain number of “one thirties” so that we could stay out, go to a play in
San Francisco, go to the theater. And then there were “two thirties,” which meant that
you could attend a party way off campus, which there were a number of them, because
there was no alcohol permitted on campus in those days. So any of the organized
fraternity or club parties were often held an hour, hour and a half, two hours off campus,
which, you know was not … I’m glad that things have changed since then, because our
class and also my husband’s class had a number of alcohol-related tragic accidents.
But it was a lovely time to be a student at Stanford. It was a happy time in our country,
economically and socially. People remembered the Second World War, and as a result,
people were grateful for being healthy, being in a country where there were many of our
freedoms, the fact that finally we had enough food. So the student body in general was
very cohesive, and there was a great deal of camaraderie. And I think that’s been one of
the fun things I’ve been involved in our 45th and now 50th reunion, and it’s been fun to
come back and make some efforts to try to level the playing field again. Fifty years later
people are glad to see each other and glad for many of the same things they were then.
Again, the social structure was there were 350 women and about four times that many
men. The women were all required to live on campus all their four years. There were
restrictions as to the things we could do: we were not permitted to wear shorts or pants on
the inner Quad; we had to wear skirts. And there was of course a great deal of moral

2

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2008/JANE TREVOR FETTER

social structure; in fact one of the funny, very personal stories: my husband, after he
graduated, went to Stanford Business School, and we married between my junior and
senior year, and then we were married of course during my final year before graduation,
and before his second year in business school. And that was most unusual in those days.
We rented a charming apartment above a garage in Atherton, and it cost us fifty dollars a
month, and that included all utilities, plus they heated their swimming pool for me
because I was a swimmer. And he had to mow the lawn on Saturdays, but it was just a
beautiful place to live.
But we married in August and came back to enter school both a month later, and we had
gone to Mexico on our honeymoon, and I had developed a very painful yeast infection.
And so I immediately checked into the health center to get some medication, and they
examined me, and when they came out, they said, “We realize you have this infection,
and we can cure it by giving you sulphur, but we’re going to have to call Miss Brown, the
Dean of Women.” [BROWN, ELVA FAY, Chief Counselor for Women, and Lecturer in
Education. A.B., California, 1924, M.A., 1925. At Stanford since 1946] And I had worked
on a number of committees with Miss Brown and was very fond of her; it didn’t occur to
me why they were calling Miss Brown, and I said, “I’m thrilled to see Miss Brown, but
why are you calling Miss Brown?” And they said, “It has been obvious to us in our
examination that, you know, you have had sexual intercourse, and that is a very serious
offense, and we need to discuss with Miss Brown.” And I said “Oh, I forgot to tell you, I
got married a month ago,” and they made me show my marriage license, which luckily I
had with me for some reason in the car. But, that was the social structure at Stanford in
those days. Being late for curfew, being caught in an immoral condition, could be subject
to expulsion. So things were different.
BROOKS: Really? Oh, my gosh!
FETTER: A couple of other interesting things to look back on: when I was an undeclared
freshman, I really didn’t know exactly what career path I wanted to follow, and so in
examining them, I went to the Engineering Department, and I said, “I’ve always loved
math; I might be interested in being an engineer. Could you tell me what prerequisites
and what it’s about?” And they said, “You know, we really aren’t interested in you; we
only have one bathroom in this corner, so we really aren’t very interested in women.”
And I accepted that; I mean there were certain things that women just didn’t achieve in
those days. The other funny story is I did eventually become an econ major. And my first
class in econ was by, what turned out to be my absolutely favorite professor. Mr. Fagan.
[FAGAN, ELMER DANIEL, Professor of Economics. A.B., Oklahoma, 1920; A.M.,
Harvard, 1921, Ph.D., 1926. At Stanford since 1928] And Mr. Fagan was a dynamic,
inspirational teacher, but he also was sort of short, and he had a funny little crooked
finger. He would kind of point his little crooked finger at you. And I’m a front row
person, and so on the first day of my first class in econ, I sat in the front row, and I can
picture it as clearly as if it was yesterday: he got down off his little podium and his stage,
and he came down and wiggled his little finger at me, and he said, “You know, I really
don’t like women in my class.” And I had attended an all girls’ high school, and I was
really unprepared for something like that, and so I said to him, “But oh, you’re going to

3

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2008/JANE TREVOR FETTER

love me.” And so he walked back up and about … I took every class he gave; I just
found he was a wonderful, wonderful instructor, but about two classes later, he came up
to me – two quarters later, came up to me, looked me in the eye, and said, “You’re right;
I do!” So there were not the opportunities for women then that there are now, but we
certainly had a great deal of respect, and I think often I enjoyed the fact that we were
watched over quite carefully.
BROOKS: In your dorm life, what kind … did you have guest speakers like they do
now? Were there any activities that were centered around the dorm life?
FETTER: Well … the dorm life: we were all women, and most of the activities were
centered around meeting men. So they would plan, I think at least every other week, there
would be a get-together where you had pizza, or you went bowling, or you did some sort
of get-together with some other living group. And occasionally they’d plan something
just for us: I remember a field trip one Friday night up to have sundaes at Blum’s in San
Francisco, and Blum’s, being a person who loved sweets, Blum’s was just my idea of
Heaven. That was fun, but in general, it was aimed at meeting people, because dating,
and meeting your future partner in life while you were at Stanford, was very much a big
portion of women’s goals in those days.
BROOKS: Interesting. What about any significant, or I should say memorable, that was
one professor. Were there any other professors, or speakers who came as guests to
campus that you might remember? You know, controversial?
FETTER: You know I don’t really remember a large emphasis on speakers coming to the
campus. The only person I remember who came to campus that remains in my mind that
was a special memory, was Murray Rose. [Iain Murray Rose, b. 1939] And Murray Rose
was a very famous Australian Olympic swimmer, and he was one of my heroes. And I
was very pleased that I was … we had a synchronized swim team, and there weren’t of
course a lot of sports for women, but one of the things was the synchronized swim team
called The Dolphins. And we were asked if any of us were interested in being the oncampus hostesses and guide for Murray Rose. And I got to do that. So I can’t remember
any other speakers, any other famous people coming, but Murray Rose was here. And it
was fun then – my daughter ended up being in the ’92 Olympics in Australia, and Murray
was featured as one of the honored national heroes in Australia, so it was fun, years later,
to see him on the same field as my daughter.
BROOKS: Oh, my gosh! Oh, synchronized swimming is so beautiful! I mean, I watch it
…
FETTER: It was lovely, and we had a very good time doing it.
BROOKS: That’s nice that it was started quite early on. And your daughter was also …?
FETTER: She was a sailor; no, she was a sailor.

4

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2008/JANE TREVOR FETTER

BROOKS: That’s great, that is wonderful. Were there any types of student clubs, like
drama, or anything that you belonged to, any type of clubs, you know, singing, or …?
FETTER: Well, there were clubs. But there was also a great emphasis, and maybe it’s
just because was my particular interest, on volunteer service. And there were a number of
things like the student-faculty committee, and the Convalescent Home. In my senior year,
I was chairman of the Convalescent Home drive, and we organized students to raise
money and assist in volunteer capacities for the Convalescent Home. So basically, I’m
sure, in fact, it seems to me, from looking through my yearbook, there were clubs; I
didn’t really belong to any of them. There were, of course, no sororities in those days;
they had been banned from campus -- I’m sure you know that story – by Mrs. Stanford’s
Will. And so, you know, you ended up being either a part of your sports team, or being
friends with those who were in the same living groups.
BROOKS: And was the Axe – did that start at that time?
FETTER: Yes, the Axe was sort of a big part of the football game. It was there, but it was
never that big a deal to me, but maybe that’s just me.
BROOKS: What about classmates that were very special to you during that time?
FETTER: Well there were a number of classmates that were special. I actually had bad
luck with my roommates. My first freshman roommate ended up having what I now
recognize was a nervous breakdown and flunking out of school. My second roommate
developed some dreadful health issue where she broke out in boils all over her face and
had to leave school. So my husband has always been very proud that he’s the only
roommate that ever made it through, because I never had another roommate. But I had
many close friends, and many of us have stayed close. Many of us were friends before we
came to Stanford and kept up that relationship.
One of the things that really hit me very hard was that, when we graduated, I had always
figured that we’d stay in touch; you know, there’d be plenty of time to reconnect, and
when I was in charge of our 45th reunion, I really hadn’t seen a number of people, so I
thought, “One of the things I’ll do in gathering a large committee, so that they can then
gather more people and we can have a good turnout,” I called all the people that I
remembered and wanted to see. And it was such fun: I hadn’t talked to Eleanor Ogden or
Alison McBain in forty five years, and it was fun to reconnect, and to talk on the phone
and to plan how we were going to enjoy seeing each other, and they were going to
connect with people in their areas: Eleanor lived in New Orleans, and Alison lived in
New York. And it was a great shock to me that both of them ended up dying within the
month before the reunion, and we never got to be together. So I think that was one of the
life lessons that I’ve taken into our 50th was, you never know. And it’s important to
reconnect, and it’s been fun with the reunion to reconnect, to find that all of us have had
life’s happinesses and life’s sadnesses. And I think all of us feel that Stanford somehow
gave us strength to get through those life’s sadneseses.

5

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2008/JANE TREVOR FETTER

BROOKS: Well, you certainly talked already about some of the challenges, such as in
choosing a major. Were there any other challenges that students faced during those years?
FETTER: Well, it seems to me that students in those years, and maybe I’m speaking
through my rosy-colored glasses, but I don’t think there were as many challenges in that
era as there are now. There weren’t as many choices; there weren’t as many pressures.
Of course, for women, what was really expected of you was that you would marry; that
you would be an outstanding helpmeet and partner to your husband; and that your main
career would be raising your children, and making them responsible, moral citizens of
their world. So the expenses – I mean, tuition was $250, room and board was $250 -there of course were students who were challenged to meet that economic pressure and
therefore worked. But in general it seemed to me that the challenges were much less than
the students of today face.
BROOKS: So you’ve seen the changes that have happened since: what do you think of
the changes?
FETTER: Oh, I think they’re wonderful; I mean, when I applied to Stanford -- Stanford,
Cal, UCLA, USC – all of them were somewhat in the same category. Stanford has grown;
Stanford has achieved. I am much prouder today to be an alumna of Stanford than I was
fifty years ago. It’s one of the finest schools in the world. And so I think the changes are
fabulous. The campus is prettier; the student body doesn’t look like the student body of
my era, but I think it’s wonderful. Two of my three children chose to come here, and I
was delighted with that experience. I have my first grandchild applying this year, so I’m
hoping that some of my grandchildren will also have the opportunity.
BROOKS: Oh, how wonderful. Is there any other thought that you have that we haven’t
talked about or I haven’t asked you about? Anything that you’d like to share?
FETTER: I think … one of my only regrets is that I didn’t recognize the outstanding
professors that I had, while they were still alive, and tell them how much they meant to
me. For some reason, all the professors I had and especially cherished were gone by the
time that occurred to me that I should tell them. So I’m sorry about that. But they did
make a big difference in my life, and I still get great pleasure out of the things that they
taught me.
BROOKS: And one other thing: you mentioned that the campus doesn’t look the way it
did when you went … do you want to elaborate?
FETTER: Well, basically it was a dirty, dry farm [laughs] and now it has beautiful fullgrown trees and lush green spaces, and so many of the new buildings. You know it’s
hard: you kind of have to make a point of finding the old landmarks and going from
there.
BROOKS: What about the diversity on campus? Does it look like it did when you were
going to school?

6

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2008/JANE TREVOR FETTER

FETTER: The diversity in the student body? Oh, Heavens, no! I mean, we had two
people of color in our class: one was a Samoan and one was an African-American. I don’t
believe we had anybody of Asian descent. We learned about three months ago that we
had one person who was an American Indian, and he will be speaking at our class panel,
but it was a very non-diverse group.
BROOKS: Well, let me look over these questions in case I’ve missed anything. I think
we went over most of the things. I just can’t tell you how wonderful it is that you’ve
taken the time out to do this. It’s a really important project that they’re putting together,
to have memories recorded and archived.
FETTER: I think it’s a very important project. I find, and again, because we, my husband
and I, have been involved in a volunteer capacity with Stanford over the years, I find that
the current students really have no idea how things have changed, and in such a short
period of time. So I think it’s a worthwhile project, and I’m happy to help.
BROOKS: Thank you so much!
FETTER: Thank you!
BROOKS: I’m just going to say once again at the end that this is Vickie Brooks, and I’ve
interviewed Jane Fetter, Class of ’58, Jane Trevor Fetter, and this is October 9, 2008, and
it’s for the Alumni Stories Project.
