
Wheelock: All right, today is October 11th, 2007, I am Sarah Wheelock, an interviewer
for the Alumni Stories for the class of 1957 and, would you like to…
Mitchell: My name is Carol Clifford Mitchell, and I was class of ’57.
Wheelock: ’57, yeah.
Mitchell: And Palo Alto High School, class of 1953, and I want to talk about the fact
that I was off-campus; there was not enough dormitory space for women. There was
enough room for the men. So, when I was a freshman, women from Burlingame all the
way down to San Jose had to commute. And I lived in Palo Alto so I didn’t have very far
to commute, which was nice. I grew up on 1611 Stanford Avenue in College Terrace, so I
was really very close and so I didn’t mind it too much. I have the names of a few other
people in the class who were also off-campus, and then I’ll tell you a little bit about what
it was like: Sybil Hoffman, Kay Thomas, Jan Bliss, Mollie May Ahern, Nancy Roselyn
and perhaps some more people, but that’s all I can remember. So, what we did with the
main time that we could get together was lunch. And we would meet at the Women’s
Club for lunch and bring our own lunch. And of all things, we played bridge. You’d
think at Stanford we might think of something a little more academic, but anyway we
enjoyed playing bridge.
Wheelock: You need to take a break, I think, from studying, you know?

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/CAROL MITCHELL

Mitchell: Yeah, so I remember that. And the other thing was that we had trouble
connecting socially with a lot of people because we didn’t live on campus. So, I don’t
know how this came about, but I remember being, sort of, a social chairman and I made
some exchanges or get-togethers with some of the boys’ dormitories, and I remember
Nancy Roselyn lived in Atherton and she had a swimming pool, so I arranged for an
eating club to come over to her house, and we all went swimming and could socialize that
way…
Wheelock: Which one of the eating clubs was it, do you remember?
Mitchell: I’m sorry.
Wheelock: That’s all right.
Mitchell: I don’t remember a lot of details…
Wheelock: No, that’s fine.
Mitchell: …after fifty years, it’s kind of hard to remember, but I think we had several
exchanges, I just didn’t particularly remember that one.
Wheelock: That sounds like fun.
Mitchell: We would also get together for meals at some restaurant and that would be
another type of exchange.
Wheelock: Like here in Palo Alto, or …?
Mitchell: Yes. I think there was one that in Los Altos, I think it was called Des Alpes, or
there was a restaurant in, yes, something in Los Altos, and I don’t know if that’s the right
name or not, but, anyway, so what happened eventually we all moved on campus. But

2

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/CAROL MITCHELL

what happened was that, Stanford chose the women that were furthest away to move onto
campus, because they had the furthest to commute, and so anyway I moved onto campus
in March, which would have been third quarter, and I moved into Roble. And the reason
I was able to move in was that the senior resident assistant moved out and so then I had a
single room at Roble, I think it was One A, and various other openings occurred for other
people but I—that was my experience.
Wheelock: What year were you when you moved into Roble?
Mitchell: That was ’54.
Wheelock: Okay, okay.
Mitchell: Because I graduated from Palo Alto High School in ’53 and I had two quarters
on [i.e., off] campus. Oh another thing is coming back to me! I remember going to a
dance—we had that off-campus go—women go to a dance and it was in Menlo Park.
And I remembered meeting a boy—somebody cut in while I was dancing and I met
somebody that I thought was pretty nice. He turned out to be on the football team and…
Wheelock: Here at Stanford?
Mitchell: Yeah. It was a Stanford off-campus dance.
Wheelock: Okay.
Mitchell: And I believe it was in Menlo Park, I don’t recall what building. So that was
that.
Wheelock: So he cut in? You were dancing with someone else and he cut in?
(Talking at same time)

3

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/CAROL MITCHELL

Mitchell: Yes. Yeah, and then we dated—later, so, that was pretty exciting.
Wheelock: You’ve got a good memory.
Mitchell: Yeah. Ahh. Let’s see, I’m not sure where to go from here.
Wheelock: Do you remember any professors in particular that might have had an impact
on you? Some people, they find that it’s easy just to remember, oh yes, doctor so and so,
did this and that, but other people have more, you know, more memories of just, you
know, being kissed in the Quad, or that kind of a thing, so really, it’s any experience,
which is along a large thing to think about, but there are…
Mitchell: Well I took some classes because of the professors; the word was out that this
was a good class and I remember taking history of the Far East, I believe it was Claude
Buss [BUSS, CLAUDE A., Professor of History. A.B.,Washington Missionary College,
1922; A.M., Susquehanna, 1924; Ph.D. ,Pennsylvania, 1927; LL.D., Southern California,
1945. At Stanford since 1946] was known to be a good teacher, and so I took that class.
Wheelock: Do you remember if you enjoyed it or not?
Mitchell: Oh yes.
Wheelock: Oh, good.
Mitchell: It was very good.
Wheelock: Excellent.
Mitchell: Wonderful.

4

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/CAROL MITCHELL

Wheelock: So the stories were true?
Mitchell: Yes, yes.
Wheelock: Yes.
Mitchell: And then there were some psychology classes that I took, I think there was a
Dr. Sears [SEARS, ROBERT RICHARDSON, Professor of Psychology and Education.
A.B., Stanford, 1929; Ph.D., Yale, 1932; M.A.,Harvard, 1949. At Stanford, 1941 (Summer
Quarter), and since 1953] and, anyway I can’t remember all their names, but…
Wheelock: That’s all right. We have easy access to whoever was teaching it…
Mitchell: Yes.
Wheelock. …the names of whoever was teaching at the time. So …
Mitchell: Well I had a wonderful time, I started to—I thought I’d be a math teacher, but
at the time, I think that it was harder for women taking math, and there were many more
boys than women in the classes and I began—I did fine the first two quarters, but then
when I moved on campus I wasn’t doing so well, and I did hear there were some study
groups, some women did get together to study math, and I think that was very helpful.
Somehow I couldn’t discipline myself to do that, so I switched majors to elementary ed
[education] and then psychology. But I do remember that math was a particularly hard
subject for women to take. I had a wonderful high school teacher in Palo Alto High
School and she taught math, and so I thought well, if she can teach math, then I can teach
high school math. But then we had to take much more difficult math than just regular
high school, we had to take partial differential equations and all kinds of complicated
things that proved to be a little too much.

5

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/CAROL MITCHELL

But, oh, I do have another memory about women on campus and that has to do with
restrictions. There was a dress code and we could not wear slacks on campus and we
could—I know that it was changed—there was some slight change in the regulation when
I was on campus but we could wear slacks to go to the Post Office, that was allowed. But
to go on quad with slacks, that was not allowed. So, we were pretty much kept in our
proper places.
Wheelock: I guess so. I’m trying to figure out why the Post Office? Just because you
might have to pick up something?
Mitchell: I don’t know, it wasn’t the main Quad, it was…
Wheelock: Oh, okay.
Mitchell: …over between the Union and Lagunita, and that wasn’t campus proper.
Wheelock: Okay, so it was more…
Mitchell: It was on the periphery.
Wheelock: Okay, that’s right; you couldn’t expect to be seen over there going to the Post
Office. I think it’s in the same spot, actually, they have a newer Post Office but it seems
to be in the same area anyway. I’ve worn pants there.
Mitchell: Well now, there is no rule like that.
Wheelock: That’s for sure.
Mitchell: Yes. And my mother was class of ’31 at Stanford; she talked about having
sororities, and she was a Chi Omega.

6

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/CAROL MITCHELL

Wheelock: Okay.
Mitchell: And there were no sororities when I went on campus in ’53, so some—I think
my mother recollected that some woman didn’t get into the sorority that she wanted to,
and she took it very seriously, and I’m not sure whether she committed suicide or what,
you know, there was a big to-do about it. And, then subsequently sororities were banned
on campus, somewhere between ’31 and after that. So, I guess women were thought to
be too emotional about this subject. I don’t know.
Wheelock: It had something to do with wearing pants, probably. I imagine. So let’s see,
do you remember—so we’ve talked about some professors and your major and how you
switched from math to early education and psychology. Let’s see, do you remember
going to any parties or anything along those lines? I mean, you talked about the dances
in Menlo Park…
Mitchell: Uh-huh.
Wheelock: …and how met the football player and all that. Do you remember anything
else?
Mitchell: Well, the man I married was class of ’56 and he was oh dear—fraternity man
—Theta Xi—that’s what he was, and so I remember going to the parties at the Theta Xi
house. I guess the other thing that I remember was the problem of drinking. Alcohol was
not allowed on campus, and people would go out to Rossotti’s and drink, and then there
were some difficulties getting back from the hills to on campus, so there was this big
issue.
Wheelock: Where did you go?
Mitchell: Rossotti’s.

7

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/CAROL MITCHELL

Wheelock: Where is that?
Mitchell: It’s on Alpine Road.
Wheelock: Okay. It’s not there still though is it?
Mitchell: Yes.
Wheelock: Oh, it is? Okay.
Mitchell: Yes.
Wheelock: See I’ve grown up here, only I haven’t been drinking in the right places.
But, so they were trying to get back from Rossotti’s and they couldn’t, clearly…
Mitchell: Yes, yes, you could—you could drink out there…
Wheelock: Ahh.
Mitchell: …which is far enough from campus. And I don’t remember the name of the
person, but I remember somebody was drunk and sitting in the driveway of—I don’t
know which fraternity it was—they were actually run over and killed.
Wheelock: Oh, my gosh!
Mitchell: So it was a big issue about driving and drinking and…
Wheelock: So when you were going to things off-campus, you had to be back by a
certain time.

8

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/CAROL MITCHELL

Mitchell: Yes, I didn’t mention it because I assumed somebody else mentioned the hours
that we had to keep. I think we had to be in by ten o’clock, but we had a certain limited
number of two-thirties and a certain limited number of one-thirties. And we always had
to sign out and say where we were going, and we had to be kept within a certain number
of long hours. And then there was there was an overnight where I suppose people
weren’t supervised very much if you checked out overnight. But, ah …
Wheelock: They set you free to do whatever, right.
Mitchell: I went to one fraternity party down in Monterey, and I had an overnight for
that.
Wheelock: Did you—I’m sorry.
Mitchell: We weren’t terrifically supervised in that situation.
Wheelock: Did you have to sort of apply for these—like, “Oh, I’m going to be coming
back at one-thirty or two-thirty,” or did they just mark it off on your record that you had
come in?
Mitchell: Well, I’d sign off at the desk at Lagunita. I’d sign out and I’d say exactly what
time I’d be back, one-thirty or two-thirty.
Wheelock: Okay.
Mitchell: And then I had to say where I would be…
Wheelock: Okay.
Mitchell: …what time, what the address is…

9

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/CAROL MITCHELL

Wheelock: Things like that.
Mitchell: … I think there was some kind of penalty if you didn’t get in at that proper
hour. I don’t think it was called demerits or something, but you got some kind of
negative result if you were late. You weren’t allowed anymore than a certain number per
quarter. So …
Wheelock: Sorry, my phone is buzzing, but that’s alright. Did you use all your allotted
times up?
Mitchell: Uhh…
Wheelock: Sounds like it, going out to dances.
Mitchell: Probably, probably, it was a lot of fun. And of course, I’d looked forward to it
for a long time because my mother had come here and my father was class of ’27.
Wheelock: Really?
Mitchell: Yeah.
Wheelock: Did they meet when they were here?
Mitchell: Afterwards, they met at a playground in Palo Alto.
Wheelock: Oh really.
Mitchell: And he was employed by the Palo Alto Recreation Department and that’s
where they met.
Wheelock: So how long has your family lived in Palo Alto?

10

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/CAROL MITCHELL

Mitchell: Since 1922.
Wheelock: Wow. And before that—were they…
Mitchell: Well my grandparents moved here in ’22 with my mother who was twelve,
and the reason my grandfather retired here was that he was a career Army person—he
went to West Point and he was stationed at in Menlo Park. I’m trying to remember the
name of the—Camp Fremont…
Wheelock: Okay, yeah.
Mitchell: …in Menlo Park during World War I, it was 1917, I think and he enjoyed the
climate and the place and he wanted my mother to go to Stanford. So, when he retired in
’22, he went from Camp Fremont to San Francisco Presidio and then he was in Hawaii
for a couple of years, but then they came back in ’22.
Wheelock: And then several years later your mom went to college here, went to school
here.
Mitchell: Yeah, she went to Palo Alto High School.
Wheelock: …as well, yeah.
Mitchell: Yeah.
Wheelock: What year was she at Paly?
Mitchell: Well she would have graduated in ’27…
Wheelock: Oh.

11

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/CAROL MITCHELL

Mitchell: …and so I don’t know, ’24 or ’25 or…
Wheelock: Yeah, sounds about right.
Mitchell: …’26.
Wheelock: So in talking to her, how different was your experience at Stanford versus
hers? Did you ever really talk about that sort of a thing?
Mitchell: Well she had a good time…
Wheelock: Like you.
Mitchell: …and I had a good time, so we shared that. And she was pretty social too, as I
was. She sub—actually she was one of five hundred. She came to Stanford when
women were restricted to a certain number and it was five hundred. And so there were
many more boys than women—or men than women, and she told me she collected
proposals. And she said she had eight her freshman year and four her sophomore year,
and two her junior year, and one—the one from my father, her senior year. So, she had a
wonderful time I’m sure.
Wheelock: Sounds like it!
Mitchell: And she was a Chi Omega…
Wheelock: Uh huh.
Mitchell: …in the sorority here and—and then she loved to—worked on the paper. And
a friend of hers told me that she was very interested in the women’s gym and at the time
it was called Woodpecker Lodge; it was an old gym and she wrote some articles for the

12

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/CAROL MITCHELL

Stanford—was it Campanile, the paper? [Note: Campanile is the Palo Alto High School
paper] – anyway whatever it’s called, agitating for a new women’s gym. And that was
one of her causes; she thought that it was time to have a new gym. And that’s the present
gym that we have to this day.
Wheelock: Right, okay, yeah.
Mitchell: That was probably the second gym that Stanford ever had.
Wheelock: Umm.
Mitchell: But, so, I guess that’s about it.
Wheelock: Well thank you for coming, this has been fun.
Mitchell: Ah, you’re welcome.
Wheelock: Yeah.
