
TOY: This is Sunny Toy, and I’m interviewing the alum Susan Brady Alfaro, Class of
‘57, and it is October 11, 2007, and it’s part of the Alumni Stories. We want to thank you
for coming.
ALFARO: Well, this is a new experience.
TOY: It’s a new experience for me too. So, we’ll just start out with – what was your
major when you were here?
ALFARO: Well, it was mixed up. They were getting rid of the architectural department;
my BA says in Art, but basically they were beginning to develop a design department,
which is now the Master’s Program, and then now, with the new addition of the business
school thing, but this was way back. And so I was, you know, I was very interested in that
– got some discouragement in high school when I said, “I really want to be an architect”
– so I took all the design classes I could, and there weren’t a lot, but there were enough to
make up a major. But they didn’t designate it as “design” at that point; it was about four
or five years later when they started doing that.
TOY: Are you an architect now?
ALFARO: No. But, you know, from the time I was a kid, I was always – I wasn’t really
interested in dolls; I wanted to make stuff, you know, or design stuff, and I’m just very
excited to see the programs that the schools are doing now. I mean, here and last week’s
Business Week had a two page article of all the best schools in the country that are

1

affiliated with business schools, and how important design – I mean, design, it got to be
the marketers and the salesmen, at first it’s the designers who, you know, come in and
decorate things, and that’s not the way it is, and it took a long, long time before they
realized the value of it. So it was sort of like swimming upstream.
TOY: Where did you live when you were here?
ALFARO: I came as a summer quarter freshman, and I’m not sure there were many years
after that; I think there were one or two years after that, and then they stopped the
program. That summer I came ten days after high school, so I was exhausted by the time
everything was through. I lived in Lagunita, and what would have been Naranja, but we
didn’t have that sort of, you know, we were just all jammed together; most of the women
that were here that summer, whether they were taking summer courses or summer quarter
freshmen or graduates, a lot of us were all in that building together. And then when I
came back in January – that would have been January of ‘54 – I went to Branner and was
there. And then they had this awful drawing system, and I wasn’t very lucky in the
drawing. Gee, if they had over 100 numbers, I’d get 100.
TOY: Well, I think Draw is probably up to six hundred and something now.
ALFARO: So I ended up in a variety of places.
TOY: It’s interesting they still have the same kind of traditions.
ALFARO: I know, it’s terrible. And then, I won’t be humming, so it doesn’t go on the
tape, but
I’m just sort of shaking my head. And if I do something, like I go off on a tangent, are
they going to edit this, I hope?
TOY: Oh yes, they will. Don’t worry about it. So what student traditions do you
remember?

2

ALFARO: I don’t know. I had always wanted to come to Stanford, and I had,
unfortunately, had a very checkered high school: I was in four different high schools in
four different communities. My family were not military; it was a product of a divorce.
And I really had to, you know, jump up and down before my junior year and say to my
dad and my mother, “I’ve got to get out of here,” the school I was in. It’s a fine school but
it’s not college preparatory. My dad lived in Pasadena, had a business down there, so I
moved to Pasadena and lived with him.
And the school I went to was, now has a graduating class; it was a small, girls private
Catholic school, fabulous; and what they’re doing today, what they are doing down there
is incredible. But they literally looked at my transcript and said, “This is a mess; you
can’t go anywhere with this.” And we made a compact, and they saved my hide by
saying, “You’re going to have to do a lot of extra work; are you willing to do it?” So, you
know, I got the regular assignments and then I had a whole bunch of extra stuff to make
up because I was missing – you know, I’d been in a school where there were farm kids,
that were -- the schedule was set so they could do their work in the morning and in the
afternoon, but the level of the work was what I’d done in the seventh grade, in a girls
school in San Francisco. So, you know, I had to catch up. I was very lucky to get in, and
very happy that they had …
TOY: I’m sure it wasn’t that hard.
ALFARO: Well, it was.
TOY: Anyway. So what of the traditions?
ALFARO: Not really too much. You know, we didn’t have sororities. There was a need to
find groups to be with.
TOY: What groups did you find to be with?

3

ALFARO: Well, I think a lot of it centered around activities. We had – now they have a
regular synchronized swimming team. I in fact wrote a letter to the magazine a couple of
years ago: I said, “We had women that did synchronized swimming, but we weren’t
funded,” you know. And we had one woman amongst us who was a year or two ahead of
me, who was a nationally ranked singles. And she won – she couldn’t go to the Olympics
but she won the Pan-Am Games and everything else. So a lot of what we did was make
up things as we went along. And she could not train in the woman’s pool, so we would –
there was a group of us that acted as her lifeguards, and we’d be in the pool at 5:30 or
something in the morning over in the men’s pool. Well, they wouldn’t – the building
wasn’t open and they wouldn’t let us go in. There was a shack on the corner that kind of
held the material for cleaning the pool, and finally some guy came one day and brought
us a heater, because you can imagine, at that hour, changing your clothes, dripping wet,
you know. I did that.
TOY: So you were a swimmer too.
ALFARO: Yeah, but nothing like this; this was star quality, you know, and she taught us a
lot. And I spent a lot of time in the water; I was swimming twice a day then. I did a lot of
art stuff. We had, at that point, only so many times we could sign out, you know, for a …
I don’t even remember what it was. 1:30; well, when you’re a design major, you’re in a
lab at night, trying to make stuff, you know, so I was using up all my stuff in order to get
the work done, and you know … One of our instructors, you know, had a list of stuff that
you got when you first went into whatever class it was. And I’d never been in Shop, I
didn’t know how to use a lathe, but I had to design a table. So I would go over …
somehow I got into Palo Alto High School at night, and learned how to use some of this
stuff, so I could complete my assignments. It wasn’t really a tradition, but there was a lot
of this “cut and paste.”
I don’t know how many people you’ve interviewed, but it’s interesting, today we had a
class panel: there were three smen and three women, and the women talked about the

4

opportunities for women, and there were just not that many as far as the working force.
And, you know, we weren’t interviewed for jobs, we were … but that tuition got paid,
and there was a lot of resentment for a long time, and I think it’s now coming out in a
positive way. These three women had done incredible things: one of them was in the CIA
when they were only hiring secretaries, but she was a really good analyst. And I thought,
you know, that’s something that the school brought us, learning how to approach a
problem.
TOY: Hmm, well, that’s important.
ALFARO: You know, and analyze it and figure out, “How do I get around this, this
terrible rule?” or whatever. So traditions didn’t play that much, it was, um …
TOY: It sounds like you figured out your own …
ALFARO: Well, a lot of us did; well, I mean, we were kind of free-wheeling, you know.
TOY: Independent thinkers.
ALFARO: Well, I don’t know; there was a question of authority. I skied a lot when I
wasn’t in the water, and I was …
