
Rubin: This is Maggie Rubin interviewing Charlotte Wood Severin, Class of ’58,
as part of the 2008 Alumni Stories Project. So let’s start out: when you were at
Stanford, what was your major and where did you live?
Severin: Well I started out as a freshman in Branner. And I was at first, majoring
in education, I thought, because I had either a nursing degree in mind or education. But
people told me all nurses were ‘hard.’ So I decided “Well, I’ll just major in education”
until I visited the Stanford nursing school and was extremely impressed with the quality
of education there, and that nobody was ever a number or bed, you know, “Bed four” or
“the cancer patient in bed four.” You were always “Mrs. Smith” or, you know. So
anyway, I decided that I would switch my major to nursing. And then, of course, I was
immediately taking biology and a lot of the science classes, and anatomy. And it was
quite surprising that we actually had a cadaver, a live cadaver, as an undergraduate
student to—thank you—to…
Man’s voice: Not a live cadaver; a real cadaver.
Severin: No, I didn’t mean a live cadaver; a real cadaver. [laughs] You’re not supposed
to be part of this.
Man’s voice: That’s what you …

Severin: Anyway, medical students had one student to one side and another student
to the other side. But nursing students, together with graduate students for physical
therapy, had four of us on one side. And anyway, it was very, very educational, but when
we got back to the dorm at noon, because this was a morning class, nobody wanted to sit
next to us because we smelled like formaldehyde. That was an unpleasant memory; but it
was fascinating and I learned so much.
But I came from El Cerrito. That’s, you know, across the bay and north of Berkeley. And
Dr. Allyn, Nathaniel Allyn, was one of the administration assistants at the time. [ALLYN,
NATHANIEL CONSTANTINE, Instructor in History, and Assistant Director of
Admissions. B.A., Stanford, 1948, M.A., 1949, Ph.D., 1953. At Stanford since 1951.] And

2

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2008/CHARLOTTE WOOD SEVERIN

he came to our school, and I was extremely impressed with talking to him. And anyway,
I was delighted to be accepted. I was also accepted at Cal. And I chose Stanford and was
never sorry. It was wonderful. I think—well one of the surprises when I first got here,
which was a funny thing that they did: they turned the dorms that were for two people
into dorms for, I mean, a dorm room for three people. So they had a bunk bed and a
single bed. And then they had in that—they had two rooms, the study room and the
sleeping room. Sleeping room had two closets and, you know, a sink and that sort of
thing. But I was the third person to arrive on the day of the, you know, allocations, and
somehow I didn’t have a closet. And I had a dresser in our study room and a metal
closet, I mean, that was in the study room. And I know that my mother had to go down
while we were in orientation and buy another metal closet. And that happened in some of
the other rooms but it was kind of—and I was in the top bunk. I never slept on my back
before I came to Stanford, and it was like sleeping in a coffin because it was kind of a
sunken, you know, little mattress. But I learned and I had to climb up the back of it. And
my roommates offered to switch halfway through the year and I said “Nah, I’m used to it.
It’s all right.”
You know, but anyway, I know that I was a serious student, and I know when we went to
the library, it was almost a meeting place. You know, people would stop by and say
“Don’t you want to go out for coffee?” So you couldn’t get much studying done there.
And I asked for some special approval to study in the law library until somebody
discovered I was an undergraduate student and, you know, I guess objected. But by then
I was ready to go up to the nursing school in San Francisco.
And, at that time, the nursing school and medical school were at Stanford Lane Hospital
on Clay and Webster Streets in San Francisco. And they had a beautiful nurses’
residence. We had a secret tunnel underneath from the hospital to the nurses’ residence,
so if you came in after midnight, you went into the hospital and came into your residence
underneath. So it was very, you know, secret. And it was a wonderful experience being
there. And I think the education that I got lasted me throughout life, both as a mother and
as an educator. I was a school health nurse. The degree that we got—actually it was a
five-year program, so while I identify with the class of ’58, my actual graduation date
was ’59. And I met my husband in the medical school and we married in ’58 so that our
graduation day was exactly on our anniversary; a year after we married on June 14th in
1958, we graduated on June 14th, 1959, he with his medical degree and me with my
Bachelor of Science in Nursing and Public Health and School Health. And Herbert
Hoover was the speaker at our graduation in Frost Amphitheatre. It was really a
memorable occasion. And then we went to my in-laws’ home afterwards and we ate the
frozen top of our wedding cake. That was a tradition that people did in those days. I
mean, of course, it was thawed out by the time we ate it. But that was kind of special.
And I guess you’d like to know other things that happened. Some of the things that were
memorable that we did on campus—I sang in the Stanford Chorus and we had a crazy
building that had bats in the ceiling of it. It’s now long gone. And Harold Schmidt was
our chorus director. [SCHMIDT, HAROLD CARL, Associate Professor of Music. A.B.,
Harvard, 1932, M.A., 1938. At Stanford since 1947.] He was also the director of the choir

3

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2008/CHARLOTTE WOOD SEVERIN

in Memorial Church. But we had the unique experience with Enrique Jordá [1911-1996]
who was a Spanish conductor for the San Francisco Symphony at that time. He came
down in his, you know, limousine to our bat-infested practice hall and, you know, was
practicing with us “The Messiah”. We sang “The Messiah” in San Francisco Opera
House, and they had absolutely magnificent soloists. It’s a lasting memory. It was a real
magnificent experience to sing that.
And I missed that. The things I missed by going up to San Francisco, which in itself, was
a wonderful cultural experience, but what I missed was being on campus and being able
to take art classes, because I started painting when I was twelve years old. And I already
was an oil painter and had studied at the California College of Arts and Crafts before I
came to Stanford. And I took some art classes here, but I didn’t have a lot of electives to
take because I had to do all these scientific, you know, pre-nursing classes. But I have
had a bilateral career. I am a professional artist now as I am a retired nurse. But I have
been a professional artist simultaneously: as well as being a school nurse in Pleasanton, I
taught art in the schools and developed a whole series of lessons called “Art Made Easy
with Charlotte Severin.” And they are now available in public libraries all throughout the
East Bay and in the schools of Castro Valley and Livermore, Pleasanton and Dublin.
And I continue to teach children and adults; it’s about the sixteenth year that I’ve taught
art for the City of Pleasanton. And I lead trips all over the world painting on location;
I’m a plein air artist. [Note: plein air means ‘in the open air’ or outdoor painting.]
And one of the things that was very memorable was that the Dean of the Stanford
Medical School asked me to paint the view through the arches, or at least a view of the
Memorial Church, with that magnificent mosaic façade. And so I did. I came over on a
Saturday, sat in amongst the arches and watched and painted all day while there were like
four weddings that came and went and came and went. And it was beautiful watching the
weddings but also doing this sketching and painting. And when it was all finished, the
wife of the dean cried and she said “It’s more beautiful than I ever thought.” And he said,
“You know, I would—I wonder if you would consider making it into, you know, a
lithograph, a smaller version.” It was this size, you know. And so I made it into a
lithograph of both sizes, the full size, which was probably about 22 by 28 [inches] or
something like that, and the smaller version close to 12 by 16. And those were sold at our
Stanford Bookstore for quite a while. He took a dozen of them immediately, as soon as
they were hot off the press—I matted them and put them in shrink wrap, and he took
them to China and Taiwan and to Singapore. And so now I have these Stanford
Memorial Church limited edition lithographs that are fun for gifts for people. And I did
donate quite a few of them to the alumni one year to give to major donors. And I would
be willing to do that again because I still have some.
Rubin:

That would be great. The archives might…

Severin: Yeah, would you like one? I actually have one in the car. Maybe I’ll give
you one. I was going to show it at my mini reunions, and if we’re still here in time for
the mini reunion, maybe I’ll go and show it and I’ll bring it back to you. It’s the larger
version like this. Yeah, I’d love for you to have it. Why not?

4

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2008/CHARLOTTE WOOD SEVERIN

Rubin: Let’s go back and let’s see. Is there any—were there any kind of campus
camaraderie in the nursing school that’s different or comparable to the kind of stuff that
you have on campus here or…
Severin: Oh yeah. Well, you know, it’s so different. And I guess I should go back
to what the rules were as a freshman, and how rigid our RA made everything be known
that, you know. And yet at that time, apparently they allowed people to smoke in their
rooms, because we had written ‘non-smoking’, you know, and there were three of us.
But the third person had not filled out her own forms. Her mother wrote non-smoking.
And she came in and here my other roommate and I were allergic to smoke, and she was
smoking in the room. So we had to discuss it, and had to ask if we could have another
roommate. And that happened; we did trade, and that worked fine. I felt bad, however,
because the other girls in the other room where this girl went became smokers. So it was
too bad. They—but, you know, I mean, we couldn’t because, you know, my other
roommate had asthma and I had some—not asthma but it caused me to have real
problems breathing smoke.
And but the other thing that was made quite clear was that we were not to drink nor was I
likely to. I came from a teetotaler home. I never once went to Rossotti’s [Alpine Inn]. I
don’t even know what it was like. My husband knows. He was out there. The guys all
know. But I was living the straight and narrow, you know. And we did have—you could
not go past —the dorm was locked—this was Branner—was locked, I believe at ten. I
think it was ten, and if you wanted to have a late leave, you had to sign up; and you had
so many that were twelve o’clocks and a few that were two o’clocks if you had a, you
know, like that had fraternity dances and things like that. But if you got stuck—if you
were out of gas or something like that, and you came in and you had a twelve o’clock but
you were there at twelve-thirty, well you had to go before a board of women: they
weren’t called judges, what were they called? [Note: Women’s Council, a student
government board.] And you had to present your case, and to see whether they believed
you or not as to whether you had really run out of gas, or your watched stopped or
whatever, you know. So it was interesting.
Rubin:

What could the consequences be?

Severin: You know, I think maybe they would have docked you some of your late
leaves. I’m just not sure because I didn’t have that happen, you know. Once I had a
problem but, you know, it was accepted. So I don’t know what they would do, you
know, what the punishment was. But I loved the [Big Game] Gaieties, the musical
activities on campus. Yes, we all were very patriotically attending the football games as
freshmen. We all got our little, red skirts and our, you know, white shirts and we all went
dutifully to the game although it’s not my favorite thing. I’m not really a football fan.
We went today because we were supposed to walk out on the [field] -- at half time; they
honored the class of ’58 and we did that. And then we came here, and here I am telling
you my history.

5

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2008/CHARLOTTE WOOD SEVERIN

Rubin:

Did they have the band back then?

Severin: We had a band but oh, was it different! Our band looked like little toy
soldiers. They had the high, you know, the hats and the red and white uniforms, and they
were a traditional band, more like USC. And then somewhere along the line while I was
up at nursing school, they became the band they are today. But there have been some
very embarrassing things. I mean, we took my in-laws to a game and they were from
Cal. In fact, they used to say it took two Cal graduates to earn enough to send my
husband and his sister to Stanford. And—but they were—I mean, we were all sitting
there with them and out came the band with bad words written in the tubas, you know.
And that was kind of embarrassing. I think the quality of their music is good but some of
their antics. And I know it’s entirely student run because Arthur Barnes who is—was the
director of the band at the time was the musical director, but he did not have power over
their rules. [Note: Arthur P. Barnes began directing the band in 1963 while earning his
DMA (1965). He retired in 2000.] He is the director still of our area, the LivermoreAmador Symphony. And he’s eighty-something now, and Arthur Barnes is the Director
of our Symphony which was founded in 1966, I believe. And as part of an AAUW thing,
the American Association of University Women, put up some money to found, to be able
to pay a director and through adult ed, have a place to meet and practice. And it allowed
people who used to play instruments a chance to continually play their instruments. They
don’t get paid. They’re volunteers. But it gives them an opportunity to play in a
symphony. And the symphony is really quite good. And we have Arthur Barnes as our
director, all these many years.
Rubin:
Severin:
Rubin:
Francisco?

Wonderful, small world.
It is. It is. But anyway, what else would you like to know?
What about graduation? Did you celebrate that here or up in San

Severin: Umm, we celebrated it here. We came to Baccalaureate in Memorial
Church, and we graduated in Frost Amphitheatre. And I graduated Cum Laude. My
parents did not know until they saw it on the thing. But as I mentioned to you, it was our
anniversary, because we were married while we were still in medical and nursing school
in 1958; and we graduated in ’59, and Herbert Hoover was the speaker and so that was
memorable. And the setting in Frost Amphitheatre was gorgeous. I’ll never forget it. I
mean, it’s—we feel very much at home here. We come here often to the various
educational opportunities that are offered, to alumni days, to medical alumni days. And I
know my way around even though the campus has grown tremendously. I did appreciate
it when it was smaller.
Rubin: Do you have a—is there a building that you miss that used to be here,
anything in particular?

6

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2008/CHARLOTTE WOOD SEVERIN

Severin: Well, I would like to have seen where, you know, our chorus practice lab
with the bats—it was an old barn, and it’s even hard for me to imagine where it was. It
was, I think, right over between the Dinkelspiel [and] the Student Tresidder Union,
somewhere over in that area. I would love to have seen it, but I don’t really miss it. I’m
sure the campus doesn’t miss it either. But the old bookstore, you know, that was really - of course, the new bookstore is big and charming. But the old bookstore was -- we all
had to go there and get our books; and standing in line to register and all of that. And I’ll
tell you: today when we were having lunch and the band came and started playing the
songs we all knew, it did a thing. And my heart took a beat and I thought “Oh, my gosh,
this is it. This was freshman year.” You know, these are the songs that we heard, and
this was the band, and we were there and we were yelling. And, you know, it was fun.
This was a fabulous reunion. I have never experienced a better reunion than this. The
panel discussions that were arranged, the wonderful staff cooperation, making all of these
little carts available for people who don’t have the ability to walk that distance, as my
husband has a balance problem and uses a cane. And I am about to have my knee
replaced. So those little carts took us everywhere. We loved the major panel discussions.
But I was extremely impressed with the student panel, where students that are here today
talked. And had things to say like I really feel that—when they said how would you like
to have things change? And this one student said “I would like to have students today
dedicate themselves to community service, at least a part of their time when they
graduate.” And one boy was involved with the Sustainability of the Earth and had gone to
Africa and working out ways that we can sustain life. I have detected this year a real
sincerity among the students wanting to make it a better world for their having been here.
And I feel that that’s what my career in nursing, and my husband’s career in medicine,
did for us. We really did make a difference.
I, unfortunately, had breast cancer twice -- am a survivor and free of cancer. But in the
process, I certainly became a health educator to tell other women how to do breast self
exam and to catch breast cancer early enough so they can cure it. They do now talk about
curing it. If you can find it early enough, it’s localized and you can get rid of it. I share a
story because I think it’s worthwhile from that breast cancer and any metastatic form of
cancer like melanoma, even colon cancer that forms, that sends seeds to other vital organs
of your body, are like a dandelion. That little dandelion comes up in your lawn and while
it’s a bud, you have the chance to pull it out by the roots and it’s gone. You also can still
pull it out by the roots when it’s a little yellow flower because it hasn’t disseminated its
seeds yet. But once it becomes that grandfather head of poof, all it takes is a poof of
wind, and it spreads those seeds all over your lawn. And that’s how cancers that are
metastatic are, but we don’t know when they turn into the grandfather head because it’s
not visible. And it may be sending seeds out to your brain, to your bone and, you know,
colon cancer often goes to your liver or the lung, you get from breast cancer or different
forms. You know, and melanoma. So that it’s wise for people to know about this, that
when they find something different like, for instance, a skin lesion on your hand that has
irregular borders, even if it isn’t a black mole -- because you think of melanomas as being
black -- they are sometimes red or even skin color. If they have an irregular border and
they are growing, they’re dangerous. And you should always seek medical attention from

7

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2008/CHARLOTTE WOOD SEVERIN

the right specialist. A general practitioner will not necessarily know that that lesion that
is pink but irregular borders is really a melanoma. A dermatologist is a better person to
see.
Rubin:
Severin:
Rubin:
Severin:
Rubin:
at…

Good to know.
Yeah.
I’ve learned—I’ve learned a lot just now.
Oh good.
Since you met at Stanford, is there a sort of Stanford story—did you meet

Severin: Oh yes. It’s our whole story. In fact, I have, I brought a book along to
show some of my friends. It’s our fiftieth anniversary this year on June 14th. And the way
we met was that, you know, the medical students came up from campus and they did not
have residence, a residence like we do. I mean, the student nurses had the nurses’
residence. But the medical students had to find apartments, and so they didn’t have any
place, you know, to have a reception or celebration of any sort. So the nurses, the
nursing students always would have a welcoming reception for the new medical students
that had just come up. And we had one of those around Valentine’s Day. And I had been
studying so I came in kind of late to the reception. We had a beautiful living room area
with nice furnishings and walnut paneling and it was very nice. And Jerry had come
there, my husband. [Gerald Severin, MD 1959] And—but I stayed for a little while, had
a cookie or something, and then I was headed out to wait at the elevator because our, my
room anyway, was on the sixth floor. Near the elevator was a ping-pong table. And as I
was waiting for the elevator to come down, I turned, and way down at the end of the
lobby was this handsome, dark-eyed, dark-haired fellow, and his eyes met mine. And he
turned around, as shy as he was, came all the way back and said “Hi, I’m Jerry Severin,
would you like to play ping-pong?” So I said sure, and we did play ping-pong and many
study dates after that. And, you know, we were married in ’58. And so anyway, in this
book that my daughter made for, you know, the story of our love, at the beginning, it has
the story about us—“Do you want to play ping-pong?” At the end, it shows us actually
playing ping-pong at this place where we were celebrating with all the children. We took
them to Drakesbad [Guest Ranch]. It’s a back country kind of place in Mount Lassen
[near Mount Lassen Volcanic Park.] You know, it’s a guest ranch. And so we were
playing—what…
Rubin:

You choked me up with your story. It’s so sweet.

Severin: Oh, how cute. Anyway, so we played ping-pong. And it says “After fifty
years, they’re still playing ping-pong.” [laughs]
Rubin:

That’s really sweet.

8

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2008/CHARLOTTE WOOD SEVERIN

Severin: Yeah. So we really have had a fabulous marriage because we share the
same knowledge, the same profession basically. When he had to work late, I knew why
he was working late. And when he talked about certain things, I knew what they were.
He didn’t have to go into a huge, convoluted explanation because I already understood.
And it made both of us, I think, better parents. Even now, for our grandchildren, the kids
are often asking our medical advice and friends, you know. So it was a wonderful
education. And yet, my soul is in my art. And I knew even when I couldn’t, you know,
major in it—my father said to me, “Please major in something that will support you, like
pay the mortgage” you know. And to do fine art is not—I mean, even though you’re
successful, and I do have one of my paintings in the Oakland Museum’s permanent
collection and one in the Riverside Art Museum. But I could never pay the mortgage
because when you’re selling fine art, it’s sporadic. But I love it and I love the fact that
I’ve been able to change the world for children, so that I tell them, you know, when I was
twelve, I felt as I began to paint live things set up like still life. This older couple: he was
seventy-nine and she was eighty; she was an Italian artist and he was Prussian. They
would set up ‘still lifes’ for us, and I would look and see the shading and the light, and
the roundness of the fruit and the different things. And I felt like suddenly my eyes flew
wide open, and I had been blind and suddenly I could see. And that’s what I tell the kids.
When they go on a trip from their mother’s house to their grandmother’s or something,
and they look out the window; and when they get to the grandmother’s house, they can’t
remember anything they saw, that’s called ‘looking but not really seeing.’ And when you
paint from life as I do on location, plein air, you really have to see. You have to see the
shape of it, the colors, how many different shades of green there are in nature. And I
often ask the kids to count how many shades of green they see on their way home from
school. But you will never be blind again if you paint, because you really have to open
your eyes to see. And plus, it makes your life so joyous. You know, when you see a
beautiful sunset, you just feel like Aaaah! You know, and there’s some people that never
even have that experience, never even see it. I can’t imagine. But the two careers
together have been perfect. I’ve had a wonderful life.
Rubin: That’s beautiful. Is there anything else that you want to share about
Stanford or…
Severin: I love the campus. I love the way it looks. I love walking in the Quad and
looking at that beautiful mosaic. It is just magnificent. And I love going in the church,
and seeing the beautiful stained glass windows and hearing the organ. When I was here
this time, we had a chance for, you know, ‘Classes Without Quizzes’ [a reunion activity],
to have a demonstration of two of the organs, the big German one, and how the difference
of sound is between German and French, and that there’s a more ‘twangy’ sound for the
French organ. And the German sound is full and rich. and all the different stops. And I
discovered that our magnificent organist [Robert Huw Morgan] plays barefoot now,
because you’re playing all of those different pedals on the floor with—it’s much better
with sensitive feet.
Rubin:

Now when you were in the choir, did you ever sing in…

9

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2008/CHARLOTTE WOOD SEVERIN

Severin: I didn’t sing in the choir. I sang in the chorus, the Stanford Chorus, and
that was different than the choir. We did once sing a concert in the church and it was
Carmina Burana.
Rubin:

Where mostly did you perform in the chorus?

Severin: Well, we sang, you know, a concert—My gosh, well we sang at, of course
we were preparing for “The Messiah” and for other places. Do you know that is kind of a
blank to me, where all we sang. We did sing in the church, maybe more than once.
Maybe that’s where we gave our concerts. But it was a class; of course, you were
learning too, to sing better; and anyway. So, what else would you like to know?
Rubin: I think, I mean, you’ve shared plenty. I know you’re tired. I want to give
you a rest. If you’ve got any other—a funny story, what your roommate was like,
anything you want to reflect on, then I think we’re good.
Severin:
I think probably I wouldn’t go into—I had to ask for special privilege to
study in the law library because one of my roommates talked a lot. But I don’t want, you
know, we still are in contact and I don’t want that…
[End of Charlotte Wood Severin – tape 1]
Man’s voice: Did you tell her about the anatomy building?
Severin:
Well, I did partially; I told her we dissected a cadaver. But anyway, in
the nursing school itself, we had a pinning ceremony and you know, a capping ceremony
was first. After you had been there for a certain number of months, maybe six months,
we actually got our caps. And in those days, you wore your cap and you wore it proudly.
It was a big, white cap, very starched, with a red “S” on it. I still have it and I have my
pin. And your pin you got when you were closer to being graduating, you know. But
you had a little sister, you know; some of the nursing students came up from campus,
some came from other campuses. But I had a wonderful big sister who made a pillow:
she said “This is for you to sit on when it seems like you’re sitting in classes
interminably, you know.” And we have been very close; I’m still close with that big
sister. And then I was a big sister to somebody. And I actually served as the student
body president. And that was interesting, because I had been active in student activities
all throughout my life, and was student body vice president of my high school; everybody
at Stanford was something, you know. But that was a rich experience; and being part of
the Student Nurses’ Association when they had a convention in San Francisco, I served
as Parliamentarian. And I think that we had a nice closeness. We traveled with a group
of four of us in our rotation. And we went through all—you know, first we were in
medical nursing, and then surgical nursing, and then OB/GYN and pediatrics and
psychiatry.

10

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2008/CHARLOTTE WOOD SEVERIN

Psychiatry I have all kinds of stories to tell you but I don’t know that I can tell them
because it might be—but we had at Stanford, we had what they called a ‘therapeutic
community.’ And they wanted to have an unlocked ward, but we had some pretty
schizophrenic patients that probably should not have been on that ward. And one
actually attacked me. She was not to smoke more than one pack a day. She was
leaving—it was in the era when you could smoke everyplace, and everybody had the
secondary smoke problem. But she was a fire hazard because she would leave her
cigarettes around on window sills. And in the patient meeting, they talked about this
problem. And she agreed that she would only smoke one pack a day and that would
make her be more careful. Well, by three o’clock when all the staff was in their meeting,
I was the only one at the front desk. The ward is open. This girl who is five foot seven
or eight, and I’m five foot three, came to the desk and she said “I want my cigarettes!”
And I said “Well, have you smoked your whole pack today?” And she said “Yes.” And I
said “Well, you do remember the agreement you made?” -- and by then, I was
standing—“the agreement you made in the patient meeting?” And she said “I want my
cigarettes!” And she grabbed me and threw me on the floor and was tearing out my hair.
And the thing that saved me was the orderly was not in the staff meeting during Report,
and he came from the other end hearing some scuffling. And he got her off me.
There was another one that was an LVN [licensed vocational nurse] student. And she
had—both of these had sisters that were blonde, and that were intelligent, and didn’t have
some of the problems that they did. And so they saw me as, you know, I mean, in fact,
this one came by and she had a break while she was studying for her LVN licensure. And
she came in and she walked by me and she said “You blonde!” and socked me in the
arm. And I said to the staff, “You know, I don’t like this. I don’t want her socking me.”
And the psychiatrist who looked like Freud, with his little goatee and all, said “Well you
just tell her that the next time she does that, you’re going to sock her back.” And I said
“Well I don’t think we can do that. You know, you can’t say you’re going to do
something if you can’t deliver.” This is—and he said “Oh yes you can. This you can
deliver.” He said “This is a therapeutic community, and that’s reality, and you are
empowered.” So I walked out of there empowered. She never socked me again. They
have incredible feelings of, you know, knowing.
There was one person—I don’t know if I should tell this because he was a Stanford
professor. But he was in the psych ward for ‘womanizing’ students. And I was
unmarried at the time; this was before we got married. And he was six feet four, very
handsome, you know. And he said “Miss Wood, would you step into my room?” They
had private rooms and—“for a minute and talk to me.” And I said “Yes” and I came in,
and he said “Aren’t you afraid to be in here with me?” And I said “No, should I be?”
And he said “Oh no, absolutely not.” But see I called him on it; I wasn’t afraid. You
cannot do psychiatric nursing if you’re afraid. And they know it. And kids know it too.
If you’re not comfortable with who you are as a parent, they’ll figure out how to get
around. So I never had a problem because I was not afraid of, you know, the situation.
But it is fascinating, and I think that we have a lot of mental illness today that is not taken
care of because we have closed so many of our mental health facilities. And that’s too

11

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2008/CHARLOTTE WOOD SEVERIN

bad because we have a lot of homeless people and drug addicted people that need help.
But anyway, that’s another story.
Rubin:

Oh so speaking of closing things, do you remember when they…

Severin:

When they closed it?

Rubin:

The nursing school?

Severin: I think it was ‘80—80 something, and I think it was a conflict between the
head of the nursing school and the director of the medical school. It was a case where it
was expensive. But I think that is why. [Note: the School of Nursing was closed in 1974,
part of a budget cutting exercise called Budget Equilibrium Program.] But it was a
shame and ever since then, we have a very active Stanford Nurses’ Alumni Association,
and we get together every April 28th or somewhere in that, in the Stanford Faculty Club
for a luncheon. Of course, because the nursing school closed, we have a diminishing
population, because as people are dying, there are not new members coming. But we
have one of the largest memberships. You know, we had two hundred members; you
know, and we raised money for scholarships and for continuing education in Stanford
Hospital for nurses. We’ve always wanted to reopen the nursing school, or at least have
some sort of a graduate program, and I don’t know what will happen with that. I thought
it was a tragedy, because our quality of education was far better than UC San Francisco.
And even UC San Francisco closed their undergraduate program and they have only
graduate programs now. So I think that is something we should hope to reopen, because
there is a shortage of nurses, and the Stanford nurses were the best.
Rubin:

Sounds like psych wasn’t your favorite. Did you have a favorite?

Severin: No, it was fascinating to me. It was challenging, but it was fascinating.
But I did public health; I love prevention. I believe in preventing problems rather than
having to shut the door after the animals are out of the barn, you know. So I went into
public health, and I was a public health nurse in Minneapolis when my husband did his
internship. And it was both a visiting nurse association, which means you’re caring for
sick patients at home, and it was a case where you would find cases if there was
tuberculosis or, you know, for prevention. So it was both. I had a senior citizen’s section
of Minneapolis, and I had a marvelous experience, because one of my patients was an
eighty-seven year old woman whose niece had written a play for Broadway. She’d
written a book called Greenwillow, and I don’t know if you ever know the name Anthony
Perkins but he played in that Psycho. But here he was playing in a musical on Broadway
in Greenwillow. And she was telling me about it. We were only in Minneapolis for a
year. And she told me “I want—I’m going to get to go to the Broadway opening of this
play” that her niece, B.J. [Beatrice Joy] Chute—this was Mrs. Chute -- and then it came
time, it was almost the end of the year that I was there, and I went to see her every week.
And we would talk. It was an hour visit and we would talk about everything except her
colostomy, which I had to irrigate, and her vitamin B-12 shot I gave her. I brought to her

12

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2008/CHARLOTTE WOOD SEVERIN

another part of life because she wasn’t getting out, you know. And we became great
friends.
And as the time wore on and it was close to the time that she was to go to New York, her
son called me one day and he said, “You know, my wife and I have six children and we
are going to this opening in New York; but we have promised ourselves that we would
never fly. And we’re going by train and it’s going to take much longer, and my mother
cannot come because she’s had the flu.” And I said “Oh what a pity; you can’t not take
her. She, you know, she’s looked forward to this for the whole year.” I said, “You know
that there are public health nurses in New York that could help her if she needs care, you
know,” and all that. And he said “We were hoping that you would go with her and we’ll
pay your expenses.” And I said “Oh my goodness. Well, I must ask my husband and I
must ask my supervisor.” Well, both of them said yes, and I went. So here I was twentytwo, twenty-one, twenty-two, I guess, and this eighty-seven year old woman and it didn’t
matter. There was no age difference because we were spiritually friends, you know. And
it was a wonderful experience. I said “Well, could I go to the opening night of
Greenwillow too?” and they said “Well, we’ll see if we can get you a ticket.” So I had
my mother-in-law’s squirrel fur cape and these people were, you know, big in society.
But here I was with my squirrel cape and my formal sort of dress. And we went to
opening night. Unfortunately, that musical did not last because Toys in the Attic, which
was a sordid story, had just hit Broadway and people, you know, like they said today, that
“Good news is not news. Only bad news is news.” That’s what they are always, you
know, showing on the news. And they were talking about the media always latching onto
negative things. And that was the tragedy of this. This was an upbeat, happy kind of
musical, and it didn’t last more than two weeks. But Toys in the Attic with its sordid plot
was there for quite some time. Anyway, I have talked your ear off. [Note: Greenwillow
opened on March 8, 1960 and ran for 97 performances.]
Rubin:

No, that’s really wonderful.

