DYEN: This is Sara Dyen, interviewing Delphi Ballinger, on October 9 as part of 2008Alumni Stories Project, from the class of 1958. So, what was your major and where didyou live when you were on campus?BALLINGER: Well, when I came to campus as a freshman, I lived at Roble, and I camein as a pre-nursing student and I spent two years getting, doing pre-nursing, and then atthe beginning of my third year, I went up to the Stanford School of Medicine in SanFrancisco and was there for two months, and was very unhappy, and came back to schooland talked to the dean of students, who was also my advisor, and she suggested that I goup to The Knoll, where the speech and language, speech pathology and audiologydepartment was. So I went up there, and talked to the people and looked at the program,and decided that’s what I would major in, and I’ve been doing ever since. I’m a speechpathologist and I’ve been practicing in my field until I retired at the end of December.DYEN: Oh, my goodness. How large was that field when you started?BALLINGER: Oh, very small, very small. There must have been probably five in mygraduating class who majored in speech and hearing; maybe six.DYEN: Wow. Men and women?BALLINGER: I think there was one man. We had mostly male professors because it wasspeech and hearing. But it was small; our classes were up at The Knoll, up in the oldbuilding up there.DYEN: I support that.BALLINGER: So after my freshman year at Roble I drew a very good number, and wasable to go to Storey House. So I was in Storey House my sophomore year, and when Icame back from nursing school, I guess I had priority because I’d been there before, so Iwent back there my spring quarter, and then I was there for my senior year. So I reallyhad only two residences on campus, which were Roble and Storey House.DYEN: How was the student life in Storey?BALLINGER: Good. Yes, we had ... I liked – it was good and bad. Having gone to aRow house really early, I did not get to know a lot of my other classmates, because I wasSTANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2008/DELPHI BALLINGER3in a rather structured program, all just pre-nursing, lots of sciences. And then this schoolof speech pathology and audiology was very small. But I did get to meet people fromother classes, so it was fun in Storey House that I knew people from three years as asophomore and then as a junior. So that was good; I liked that kind of mix. But I missednot knowing a lot more of my classmates.DYEN: Did you get along well with your roommates?BALLINGER: Yes, yes. I had only one who came in every morning, and she had to readher book of something, and she bumped in while I was asleep in the room “bump, bump,bump, bump, bump.” And turned on the light and read her book. [laughs] But other thanthat, there were actually no ... I think we got along quite well as a group, and I liked it: Iliked the small group living. I really enjoyed that. I really have no regrets about being atStorey House. Plus it was close to campus.DYEN: It is a great location. Did you and your friends get off campus much, to explore?BALLINGER: Yes, yes. I had a boyfriend who had a car, so we went to San Franciscoquite a bit. Probably went out to dinner almost every Friday night, when he and myselfwere in senior year.DYEN: Oh, my goodness. Did he go to Stanford?BALLINGER: Yes, yes. So, did lots of going out.DYEN: Was that a common thing for the student body?BALLINGER: Not too, because I don’t think that many people had cars. We had aparking lot at Storey House for probably five women, and maybe less than that had cars.Very few people on campus had cars; students just didn’t have cars in those days, notunlike now.DYEN: Was Storey co-ed?BALLINGER: No; there were no co-ed dorms. We had to be in at ten o’clock; we gottwo late nights a quarter that you could be in at one, I believe it was. I took humananatomy and I had to wear jeans to it, because you were doing cadaver things, and wecould not wear jeans, or I couldn’t walk through the campus in my jeans to get to – it wasover by the Cantor library, were the labs. And I couldn’t walk down through campus inmy jeans. You either had to ride with somebody, or go down there and change yourclothes. We were not allowed to wear jeans past the old Post Office. No pants, period.Just skirts.DYEN: Where was the old Post Office?BALLINGER: Kind of where the fountain is, in front of the new Bookstore.STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2008/DELPHI BALLINGER4DYEN: OK, OK.BALLINGER: It was just above the new Old Union. We couldn’t go down to the Union;maybe on the weekend we could go down in pants, but we could never go past the Union,any time. So – things have changed!DYEN: That they have.BALLINGER: When the fellas would call for you, they would stand at the bottom of thestairs and call your name. And of course if you were in a dorm, they would have to ringup or they would ring you and tell you you had somebody downstairs waiting for you.DYEN: No upstairs access.BALLINGER: None. Maybe moving day, but that was it, when you moved in and out.That was it.DYEN: Wow. How do you feel about how the university has grown and changed sinceyour time here?BALLINGER: Hmm, why, I think it’s very good. I haven’t really talked to that manystudents who have been here, but I think the education ... I went on a tour today with oneyoung lady who is a sophomore, and she was saying the freshmen and sophomoreseminars sound absolutely fantastic. I had one, as a senior, so I was really happy to hearthat they are moving those down to the freshmen level, because I think it’s very importantfor students to get a one-on-one relationship with a professor early on. Because about theonly we had – break-out sessions after Western Civ or ... and with a teaching assistant,but that certainly wasn’t the same as being able to speak to a full professor, and be able toget all of the ideas’ exchange at that level at that point in your education.DYEN: That’s true; it’s valuable. Were you involved in any student clubs ororganizations as a student?BALLINGER: No, not really; I didn’t want to do anything my first two years, because Ihad been very active in high school, and I was tired of it. But then when I got to be asenior, everybody else kind of joined onto the band wagon, so I really didn’t do too muchat that point in time. Anyway, no, not a lot.DYEN: Did you attend sporting events?BALLINGER: Yes, football games.DYEN: If you went with friends, did you have certain traditions that you would do beforeor after the games?STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2008/DELPHI BALLINGER5BALLINGER: Well, sometimes we would have joint parties, pre-game parties, withanother living group, another male living group. So that was frequently on Saturdaymornings, before a game. So I don’t know if they do anything like that now, or not.DYEN: Yes, they do.BALLINGER: OK.DYEN: Tailgate.BALLINGER: Yes.DYEN: Were there other sporting events that were big, besides football?BALLINGER: Not that we attended, that’s what I remember. No.DYEN: Not too much.BALLINGER: I mean, as far as ... I took golf; I’ve been on the Stanford Golf Course, soI got to do that.DYEN: Very cool.BALLINGER: But as far as being an observer at other events, I don’t recall ever going toa baseball game, or – I didn’t go to basketball games, but I’m sure lots of people did. ButI did not; I pretty much just went to football games.DYEN: What is your favorite, or is there an area of Stanford that you have fond or kindof significant memories of?BALLINGER: Oh, I think the Quad; the Quad is still just absolutely gorgeous. It’s a veryspecial place. I was pretty much either in the Quad area for classes or up at The Knoll,that’s about all where I was for all of my classes.DYEN: Did you participate in “full moon on the Quad?”BALLINGER: In what?DYEN: “Full moon on the Quad.”BALLINGER: No, I don’t think we had that. Not in the fifties, I don’t remember that. Wehad lots of ... when people got “pinned,” you had lots of singing, or you had a pinningceremony.DYEN: What did that mean?STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2008/DELPHI BALLINGER6BALLINGER: If a man gave a woman his fraternity pin, then his fraternity brotherswould come and serenade you at your living quarters. So that’s what we did for that. Butno, I don’t remember “full moon on the Quad.” Especially – we were talking about ittoday at the tour – some of the ladies in the class of ’68 said they had – the senior menmet the freshmen women on the Quad, and gave them a flower and gave them a kiss. Butwe did not do that.DYEN: Not in the fifties. Were there other university traditions that you remember?BALLINGER: Oh, the big bonfire before the Big Game.DYEN: OK. Was still big then?BALLINGER: Yes, yes, that was big, and the rally before the football game. And thenwe did “overnights” usually, on Big Game Weekend; fraternities would go out and haveovernights.DYEN: As in ...?BALLINGER: Well, if you went up to Cal, yes, stay overnight. And you were allowedout then; I don’t know why they allowed you to go then, but they did.DYEN: They would even allow the women to go out? Wow.BALLINGER: Yes. That was pretty forward thinking, wasn’t it?DYEN: Yes, considering the curfews [they both laugh]BALLINGER: And Spring Sing was always big. I do remember participating in SpringSing, where the living groups would practice songs, and then you would all go – I thinkwe went down to Frost Amphitheater, and everybody would sing; all the groups wouldindividually sing. I didn’t go to any other big thing on campus, was the drama group andI don’t remember, because I didn’t go to it or participate in it.DYEN: Was there a prize for Spring Sing? Or it was just a demonstration of all thegroups?BALLINGER: I think it was just everybody sang one or two songs; each group sang oneor two songs, and I’m sure there was a prize, but it wasn’t any ... nothing big. Do theystill do that?DYEN: No, they don’t. I don’t know when that stopped, but I don’t know much about it.Were there any other ... do you have any funny memories of Stanford?STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2008/DELPHI BALLINGER7BALLINGER: Yes, my freshman roommate running all the way up the stairs, comingdownstairs to show me she had put too much soap in the washing machine – she’d neverused a washer before.DYEN: Did it overflow?BALLINGER: It overflowed: suds all over. And she said, “You have to see this!” She’dnever operated a washing machine before. [laughs]DYEN: Oh, my gosh.BALLINGER: So that was very funny.DYEN: Were there other undergraduate students who stood out in your time here --memories or impressions of them?BALLINGER: Not necessarily, no.DYEN: Did your husband go to Stanford?BALLINGER: No. No, he didn’t. He went to that rival school down in southernCalifornia called SC, or he graduated from there.DYEN: Big game coming up.BALLINGER: Yes! I have good friends who are very, very active in SC football, and weused to go all the time, and I think only one time did Stanford win. I was a freshman theyear that UCLA beat us 72 to nothing. That was the fall of ’54. And I remember theStanford Daily said, “72 to nothing: what is there to say?”DYEN: No article, nothing?BALLINGER: Well, yes, of course, but I thought it was a great headline.DYEN: Oh my gosh: what was the campus like after that?BALLINGER: Oh, I don’t remember. If you get a football player here, maybe it will helpto ask them.DYEN: Definitely.BALLINGER: Do you have lots of different people from the major various things thatyou’re interviewing?DYEN: Just whoever signs up to do it. It’s from the 50th reunion and earlier.STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2008/DELPHI BALLINGER8BALLINGER: Oh, OK.DYEN: So we’re kind of chronicling Stanford during that time.BALLINGER: Well, Friday we used to go out and drink beer at Rossotti’s, and that wasanother tradition.DYEN: Where is Rossotti’s?BALLINGER: Out past Page Mill Road. You’ve never been to Rossotti’s?DYEN: No.BALLINGER: Oh! That was the big hang out.DYEN: Really?BALLINGER: Um hum. You need to go out there.DYEN: The social interaction of the students?BALLINGER: Yes, yes; just a big beer parlor. And they have lots of picnic tablesoutside, so we all were outside if it was nice. That was a Friday night weekend tradition.You couldn’t do that during the week because we were all studying too much. And thenwe all ... everybody pretty much hit the library at seven or seven thirty.DYEN: In the morning, or at night?BALLINGER: No, at night.DYEN: For the evening?BALLINGER: For the evening, until we had to be in at ten, so until a little bit before ten.And then Dead Week was always ... I learned how to play bridge during Dead Week,because you’d study and then you’d have to take a break for about twenty minutes, soyou’d go play a game of bridge [laughs] and go back to the studying. We wouldfrequently play bridge at Storey House at lunch, because classes, you’d be through withlunch at 12:15 or 2:30, probably 12:30, and classes usually didn’t start until two. Somepeople had one o’clock classes, but we’d just sit and play bridge for an hour before youwent to class. So, I remember the bridge and all those fun things. But you all don’t do itanymore: nobody plays bridge any more.DYEN: No, I don’t know how to play.BALLINGER: It’s a great game.STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2008/DELPHI BALLINGER9DYEN: I’ll learn later. At Rossotti’s. [laughs]BALLINGER: So it was a great four years. Go ahead.DYEN: Were there any ... did you have any regrets about your undergraduateexperience?BALLINGER: No, other than wishing I had known more of my classmates. I learned alot as far as my science classes were concerned, but I would have probably liked morehumanities. I took as much as I could, but my program was pretty well jammed, having todo one prerequisite, having to get everything in to graduate with my class. I went tosummer school one year so I could finish with my class.DYEN: Did you stay at Stanford for summer school?BALLINGER: No, I went to the University of Minnesota.DYEN: That’s good.BALLINGER: Yeah.DYEN: Any other outstanding memories?BALLINGER: Don’t think so, right now. I’ll probably come up with them tonight.DYEN: Is today your first day back on campus?BALLINGER: Yes.DYEN: Kind of figuring out where things are? Where they used to be?BALLINGER: Yes. So many new buildings in the outbound, on either side of the Quad,it’s really hard to figure out exactly where you are. Thank goodness for Hoover Tower,because you can ...DYEN: It’s the one marker, for where things are.BALLINGER: Right. True. OK, anything else?DYEN: Let’s see. OK, this one: what do you enjoy most about coming back to Stanford,for whatever reason, for any occasion?BALLINGER: I think first, just looking at the campus, because it’s so gorgeous; I reallyenjoy doing that. And seeing friends. I keep in touch with two or three of my Stanfordfriends, and that’s about it. They are people I knew well here.STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2008/DELPHI BALLINGER10DYEN: So you’ll see some of them this weekend?BALLINGER: Yes, I think some of them are here. One I haven’t seen since I graduated,so that will be fun. I know she’s coming: another speech and language person, a speechpathology-audiology lady, so that will be fun. We’re kind of a small group, as I said.DYEN: Do you feel that that field has grown?BALLINGER: Oh yes; they are just screaming for us. You have to go to school a longtime to become a speech pathologist any more, and you have one year less than a dentistand you don’t make a million dollars a year [laughs] But it’s great, and people I haveworked with, children I have worked with – I’ve worked with lots of differentpopulations, so I’ve really enjoyed that. I’ve really enjoyed my field. And now you canget a job anywhere, I mean they are just ... the field is like nursing: there was just such aninflux of them for a while and now both fields are getting more schools, because ...Stanford used to have a speech pathology department but they don’t any more. TheMedical School took it all over. The state of California does not have a doctoral programin speech pathology and audiology.DYEN: Is there only a Master’s?BALLINGER: Just a Master’s, so you have to go out of state to get a doctorate. So thatmeans you’ve really cut down the number of people who are available to teach classesand ...DYEN: Yeah. Is there anything that you wished that I had asked you?BALLINGER: No. No. Thank you very much.DYEN: Thank you for sharing and for spending your time with the Oral Histories project.