
CURDY: We’ll start off by—I’ll let you know, I’m Denise Curdy. And I’m interviewing
Sharon…
STINE: Roach…
CURDY: ...Stine.
STINE: Roach-Stine.
CURDY: …class of 1957, on October 12th. And this is part of Alumni Stories. Amd we’ll
start off with the basics. What was your major?
STINE: Elementary Ed.
CURDY: Elementary Ed, I heard lots about education in women back then.
STINE: Yeah.
CURDY: And what was your experience with it?
STINE: Well, the good thing about it was we really didn’t have to do much, in taking
education classes, not the first two years at all, it was all liberal arts. And in fact, that—
when I came that wasn’t going—what I was going to be majoring, I just kind of wanted
to make sure I could get a job. But then this—the last two years, we took some classes.

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ SHARON STINE

And we did some—went to a sixth-grade boys camp for a week and, oh my gosh. But it
was a five-year program which included a master’s, but I couldn’t afford a fifth year. So
I got the degree in it but no masters and no credential, which is fine, because I went on to
a state school and got the credential in a semester. But I don’t remember that the major in
my life was important at all.
CURDY: Oh, it wasn’t?
STINE: No.
CURDY: Well, what had you planned on majoring in?
STINE: I didn’t really know. Women couldn’t be very much in those days, in our own
minds, we could be a nurse, a secretary or a teacher. And I had worked summers in an
emergency clinic, hospital. I thought I’d be a nurse. I hated it. I had worked in an office
in summers in—a couple of summers and Christmases as a secretary, I hated that. And it
seemed like that was all that was left. So I did that, if I had felt free to choose, I would
have chosen design and architecture, which I did when I turned fifty. I went back to
school.
CURDY: Awesome.
STINE: I went back to school three times.
CURDY: Wow.
STINE: So, Stanford taught me how to think, but it didn’t prepare me for a career. And
I never should have expected that, but my parents did, so.
CURDY: Well, that—I think that there’s something to be said for your parents expecting
that, because I don’t think a lot of parents did for their daughters.

2

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ SHARON STINE

STINE: Well, they wanted to make sure that maybe I could earn a living when I
graduated. They expected me to get married, that’s the main thing. Now they didn’t pay
for my tuition, so I didn’t feel beholden to them because they were sending money. It
wasn’t that—as much then, but part of me has always been very independent and I
thought, well, you know, getting a job is really a good idea. So, that’s what I majored in.
CURDY: And you went on to be a teacher though?
STINE: I taught—well, I went to an interview here, you know, when you’re graduating,
and through the Placement Center, I guess it was, and—for teaching jobs. And I would
have had to work towards my teaching credential. But they asked me questions like, well,
do you ever—do plan to get married? And I was so incensed that I finished the interview
and I walked out. And so, um…
CURDY: What other sort of questions?
STINE: That’s the main one I remember, they were asking about my personal life, they
asked me if I had a boyfriend, if it was serious, they asked me how long I’d had a boy—
the—all those kinds of things.
CURDY: Wow.
STINE: Nothing to do with my intellectual ability, or what my philosophy of teaching,
or that type of thing. And, you know, there was no women’s movement and I didn’t
know enough then, to do anything but react emotionally. I was really disappointed. And
Stanford was good in the ‘50s with women, I mean I always felt like I could—once I
could begin to know better how to think, that I could do what I wanted to do. And no one
put any lids on us, and we had a lot of regulations, but they didn’t—well, I ran into a
history, political sciences it was, professor in the mid ‘80s at Channing House in Palo
Alto, he’s very elderly, that’s an elderly retirement home. My aunt was there at the

3

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ SHARON STINE

elevator. And I said, “Oh, Professor Barclay, I remember you really well.” And he said,
“Oh, you were one of my students, and when were you there, and what are you doing?”
as the elevator’s going down. And I told him I was in a small college and I was a dean.
And he looked at me and he said, “Well, my dear, when will you be president?” And that
was the attitude that was here…
CURDY: Oh.
STINE: …which was really, really wonderful. And this was, an older conservative
political science teacher, it wasn’t some…
CURDY: He believed in you.
STINE: They did, the professors did believe in us. That was great. And women were
very close, very—you probably, if you’ve interviewed very many. I mean we all had to
live on campus. We had to live together in the dorms. There were no sororities. There
was nothing to—we were just really close. So you see people we haven’t seen for fifty
years, it doesn’t make any difference.
CURDY: So that’s why everybody loves coming back.
STINE: Yeah, especially, I think, from that era, I don’t know about others. Our daughter
went here, and it was a very different experience for her, good, but still not the closeness
that…
CURDY: Well, you were a minority.
STINE: Oh, gosh, yeah, there weren’t very many of us. Oh, dear. And there weren’t
very many graduate students. I don’t even know where they were. And so the campus
was quite small, and you pretty much knew your class. We knew all the women, you

4

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ SHARON STINE

know, which was different. I go through our class book, you know, that we made, and
there’s not a name in there that I don’t remember. I didn’t know…
CURDY: Oh, really?
STINE: …all of them. Yeah.
CURDY: Wow.
STINE: I mean they’re all a familiar name, not necessarily that I knew them, or knew
their faces, not the men, but the women.
CURDY: Um hmm, but the women. Where did you live?
STINE: We all lived in Roble our freshman year, a few were in Branner, but most all of
us lived in Roble. And then you went into the drawing, and I lived in Branner; there were
some sophomores there, but a really low, not bad number. And I don’t know if they still
have drawings anymore.
CURDY: They do.
STINE: They do? Oh my gosh. And then, my sophomore year we lived in what was
called Mariposa House, it was a little wooden Row house. Probably isn’t even there
anymore.
CURDY: I don’t believe it’s—actually, it might be, actually they just moved a bunch of
old houses, but I’m not supposed to talk of that yet.
STINE: Oh, it was so much fun. It was…
CURDY: Yeah, yeah, I think it is; it’s still there.

5

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ SHARON STINE

STINE: There were only about maybe sixteen of us in the house and…
CURDY: Oh, really?
STINE: Yeah, and we ate at the Union, and it was just really fun. And then Florence
Moore opened our senior year, and so most of my class went—that wasn’t in, you know,
weren’t happy—well, or a lot of them in the Row houses that were—had been there
didn’t want to move out. But a lot of my class, we all drew for Florence Moore and we
all got in. So …
CURDY: Oh, you did?
STINE: …we filled it, I mean we filled Gavilan and we filled lot of the wings, because
seniors had priority even in the drawings. That was fun: that was fun the first year in a
brand new dorm, which is now old—if it’s still being used. I don’t know, I don’t know.
CURDY: I think it is.
STINE: Yeah.
CURDY: What student traditions did they have back then that you can remember?
STINE: Traditions?
CURDY: Umm hm.
STINE: Traditions that were, I want to say, legal? Or traditions…
CURDY: Either one.

6

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ SHARON STINE

STINE: Any kind?
CURDY: Yeah, could be any kind.
STINE: Well, Lake Lagunita—you know, when we’d get the rains we’d always—we’d
have water fights there and throw people in it, and that was fun and have a big bonfire,
you know, before Big Game, this huge bonfire when the lake was dry. And we’d
sunbathe on the roof, which we shouldn’t have done, spraying baby oil. We’d stay up all
night during Dead Week playing bridge. We’d sneak cooking in our rooms, popcorn you
could smell. But I don’t ever remember anybody getting caught. We’d get popcorn
poppers and buy cans of soup and stuff, especially on Friday when they always had fish
and it was awful. We’d order pizza, but, you know, that cost money and people didn’t
have much money. I mean there were some kids I’m sure came from really rich families,
but you didn’t know it. Most of us hashed like I did, had part time jobs, you know, I
worked—there was a place called The Shack on campus, a little store that sold clothes.
Roos Brothers was the store and we had The Shack, um…
CURDY: On campus?
STINE: Yeah.
CURDY: Uh huh.
STINE: I worked there, I worked in the Bookstore. And there were some scholarships
available, but most all my friends, that was the way it was too, we all had campus jobs.
Lot of us hashed for the board.
CURDY: How would you describe the student body as you recall it? Conservative, or…
STINE: We were pretty—we were labeled as apathetic and quiet, but that was not true at
all. My freshman year roommate was, and her family, we were very close, still are—

7

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ SHARON STINE

were extremely political, liberal. And we went to hear [Joseph] McCarthy speak in Palo
Alto, and we were both scared to death of that man. Judy and I were just talking about it
this morning. That was a fearful experience. I would say—you know there were some—
like there was a Republican Club and a Democratic Club, but I didn’t have any friends
that were active that way. We looked more at issues, and in our classes were encouraged
to think. And I think most people, politically, were trying to come down on the side of
what was right or just or fair. I would guess if you surveyed my class right now, they’d
be incredibly opposed to the current government. Now, whether that has roots that go
way back or not…
CURDY: Um hmm.
STINE: I never sensed an attitude that, you know, I’m here because I’ll get a good job
and make a big salary, no one talked about that, men or women. It’s very different now.
No one talked about that.

CURDY: That just wasn’t part of the reason. Yeah.
STINE: No, we came here to learn to think, that was the reason you went to Stanford. I
was the first one in my family to go to college, and I always wanted to go to Stanford.
I’d never seen it. I just always wanted to come here. My mother used to say she didn’t
know what we—I would do if I hadn’t gotten in. But that’s an interesting question,
politically, because it was during the Eisenhower years, but I remember people being
worried about Atoms for Peace. I remember questions—I remember people saying, well,
you know, it’s too bad we didn’t support an intellectual like [Adlai] Stevenson, but on the
whole, being a member of a particular party, I just don’t remember that that was
important.
CURDY: It wasn’t a big difference.

8

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ SHARON STINE

STINE: It was the issues.
CURDY: Um hmm.
STINE: It was the issues. And the Stanford Daily was terribly political. I hope it still
is. I hope the campus is still political.
CURDY: It is; it is.
STINE: You’re facing some big decisions, but that’s another story.
CURDY: Yeah, that is, that is. What about visitors who came to campus? Any that you
recall…
STINE: [Alexander] Kerensky lived here.
CURDY: Oh, really? And did you interact with him?
STINE: Oh, no, he wanted to be alone, you know, from the Russian Revolution. He
lived down the street from Roble and, you know, you’d see him walking, and so it was
just this kind of ghosty gray-haired presence on campus. I guess he was given asylum
here at Stanford. We all knew about Hoover Tower, nobody was very proud of that that I
knew of.
CURDY: What did you hear about Hoover?
STINE: Well, Hoover came to our graduation.
CURDY: Oh, he did?

9

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ SHARON STINE

STINE: I think so, as I remember, he walked down the aisle. Yes. He was very old and
very frail. No, it was what the Hoover Tower stood for in terms of conservative politics,
that’s probably the main thing I heard. But, in general, you’d just have late night bull
sessions about everything, and people didn’t give people labels. And the quote,
“communist scare,” people were scared about the fact that was a scare, that I knew, that I
hung out with.
CURDY: What about a faculty member? Anybody that stands out that…
STINE: Yeah.
CURDY: …maybe changed your life?
STINE: Yeah, two, Professor Salgo [SALGO, SANDOR, Associate Professor of Music.
Allami Muveszi Oklevel, Royal Hungarian Academy of Music, 1928. At Stanford since
1949] in the Music Department, who gave me a love of classical music. I’d never been
to concert, I’d never been to hear classical music in my life until I came to Stanford, and
then we’d go hear him conduct the San Francisco Symphony. And I took every course
that I could from him. And Dan Mendelowitz [MENDELOWITZ, DANIEL MARCUS,
Professor of Art and Education. A.B., Stanford, 1926, A.M., 1927. At Stanford since
1934] in History of Painting, gave me a love of art. I mean I always loved art; I would
have liked to have majored in art, and his class was just outstanding. And then the
Shakespeare class was a wonderful; I loved Western Civ, just the first year of that,
everything about it because I didn’t now any of it.
CURDY: Everyone talks about that class, or about that program. What did…
STINE: It was wonderful.
CURDY: What did they go over in that?

10

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ SHARON STINE

STINE: Well, first of all, our whole class took it together in Memorial Auditorium, we
all…
CURDY: Oh.
STINE: And then, the lectures were in there, and then we were in these small little
discussion groups. So lectures were Monday, Wednesday, Friday—Tuesday, Thursday, it
was five days a week, were the discussion groups. And today someone remembered one
of the essay questions was “Justify, yes or no, that Jesus Christ was a communist.” Yeah,
that was one of—I mean they ask—it was just an amazing class. They took Western
history, and then later on was criticized for, and you read the original works, you know,
Socrates, Plato, whatever, all the way through. And, there was so much and we had—our
library was in an old World War II leftover…
CURDY: … Quonset hut, or something?
STINE: Yes, yeah, it was hot, and—or cold, but you were all in it together. We all went
through it with—the finals and stuff together as a class, and it was sort of a rite of
passage into the intellectual world of Stanford.
CURDY: Mm.
STINE: I was just thinking, too, that there were other instructors that—Comparative
Religion that Spiegelberg [Frederic Spiegelberg, professor emeritus of Indian
civilization and a pioneer in comparative religious studies at Stanford from 1941 to
1962] taught, he brought Aldous Huxley in to call one day in his yellow robes, and he
stood there chanting “Oom,” and we’d all of a sudden realized who this man was; I mean,
we had incidents like that. That was one—I still have that textbook, I still have my
Western Civ textbook, I still have—what’s the other one I have, Comparative Religions,
and my Shakespeare. I never could get rid of those books; that says something.

11

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ SHARON STINE

CURDY: Uh-huh.
STINE: And I still look up stuff in them. And I’m still amazed at what I underlined, you
know.
CURDY: What’s your favorite memory at Stanford?
STINE: My favorite memory? Oh, gosh, that’s so hard, there’s so many of them. I guess
the fun I had with my really, really close friends who were my roommates, and the crazy
things that we would do, like decide to drive to Yosemite for the weekend. Those were
probably—and what I learned from them as women, those are my absolutely most
favorite things. I mean you know, you dated, and you had boyfriends, and I was in some
weddings of my roommates at the end of our last year. But that thread just really goes
through, because you’re with them all the time and you just went to class, but that was
just part of Stanford.
CURDY: So a lot of the social. What do you think of Stanford when you come back to
it now? How do you see its changes?
STINE: Well, once I’m on Quad, it hasn’t changed. I feel grounded once I get there, I
mean, yesterday when we had our women’s gathering there across from History Corner,
and I could see History Corner, I felt, “Okay, I’m really at Stanford.” When I get on the
outskirts it’s—like here, you know, it’s different, but there’s still a spirit here. And, our
daughter went here in the ‘80s, and I could still feel it for her, too, so it’s like no other
place, and I don’t think that has changed. But the times have changed so much,
absolutely changed, especially for women, that, you know, Stanford’s moved with all of
that…
CURDY: Yeah.

12

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ SHARON STINE

STINE: …and struggles with all of that. But I think probably the intellectual quality of
the university has—and it’s still the same, is still excellent. I would really wish our
grandkids could come here, but I think it’s hard to get in.
CURDY: Well, if there’s one thing you’d like to go down in the history books about the
time when you were here, what would that be?
STINE: One thing to go down in the history books at the time I was here. That it was a
time where I could learn, to dream, to be—to struggle with who I am and to be what I felt
I needed to be in my life. And Stanford supported that one hundred percent in every way.
And so, you know, I took a circuitous route in my life.
CURDY: Well, that’s good, that was good that it brought—what did bring you to
Stanford?
STINE: Gosh, I don’t know. I knew it was really fine school. I knew I always wanted
to go to college and to university. And I was born in San Francisco, and I lived in
Southern California, but I had never seen Stanford before I came here. I just kind of—
you know, because I’m a Californian, I kind of heard about it. It just there was never any
other choice, my parents forced me to put other places on my application that I might
consider going to. I mean I didn’t want to.
CURDY: Only Stanford.
STINE: Only Stanford, yeah, that was it. So I was fortunate that…
CURDY: Good, good decision.
STINE: …that I got to come.

13

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ SHARON STINE

CURDY: Well, I think that’s—I mean, unless there’s anything that you can think of,
student body, or…
STINE: Well, you know, I was on Judicial Council, Women’s Council, and so I don’t
know what they do now, but that was a real, that was an incredible experience, too, that’s
right up there. Because we had a lot of power, I mean, students were expelled.
CURDY: They would have to come before you or…
STINE: Yeah, it was a trial.
CURDY: Um hmm.
STINE: And the Fundamental Standard then, covered everything, and there was a…
CURDY: What did it cover back then that it wouldn’t today?
STINE: Drinking, sex, in other words, assumed, loud behavior in some way that’s not—
there was a standard of what a Stanford student should be, and if you weren’t meeting
that standard you were in violation of the fundamental thing that this was. And, a student
could come before Women’s Council, a woman could because we had late leaves, and
because she stayed out all night, or she got in too late and then she’d have to come and
tell her story, whatever it was. And Men’s Council and Women’s Council met together
for honor code violations. And students did —part of the honor code—I’m sure it’s the
same now: you had to turn in someone if you knew they were cheating. And that
happened, and we had to find someone guilty the end of his senior year. And he was—
didn’t graduate. It was really—he was very well-known on campus. And that was very
hard, very hard. But it was obvious he’d cheated, and that was probably a life-changing
thing to be on council.
CURDY: Yeah, with that responsibility.

14

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ SHARON STINE

STINE: Yeah, it was a big responsibility. And this morning the five of us had breakfast
together that were on Women’s Council.
CURDY: Oh, really?
STINE: We have the picture of us from the book, blown up, and so we had someone
take our picture now behind it.
CURDY: Oh, how fun.
STINE:

Yeah.

CURDY: Oh, that’s nice.
STINE: It’s really neat.
CURDY: Yeah, well, you know, the honor code lives on at Stanford, so…
STINE: Good, that’s so, so, so important.
CURDY: Yeah. It really is.
STINE: And it works, big part of Stanford tradition.
CURDY: Yeah.
STINE: It is, and that’s another thing that probably fits in on your questions, was really
important to me, that I was at a place that will—basically says we trust you to be who
you are with integrity and honesty. And that’s important now.

15

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ SHARON STINE

CURDY: Yeah, there is…
STINE: You know, I think it’s hard for women particularly to have a grasp of what it
was like to grow up in the ‘50’s…
CURDY: Oh, absolutely. I think it is very hard, you know.
STINE: …at that time. And yet, I think we all had our ways of finding our own power,
and it was very quiet, the ways were; they’re weren’t really at all.
CURDY: Um hmm. No, they weren’t, not from the women.
STINE: And so, you know, if you’re going to walk by that Post Office, and you’re going
to have your shorts on, you made sure you wore your trench coat so nobody would see
you.
CURDY: Wow. Well, thank you so much.
STINE: You’re welcome.
