
Hite: This is Emily Hite, Class of 2007, interviewing Angela Brovelli Peatman, class of
1957. It’s October 13th, 2007 of Homecoming Weekend. So Angela, I was hearing you
talk before we started this, about your position organizing this reunion. Can you tell me a
little about your position?
Peatman: Oh, yes. It’s called Events Chair, but I read it as being the chair position that
would delegate to other areas and be the coordinator and was able to have two co-chairs
and to divide up some of the work. And as it turned out, we were a perfect trio because
one of the women, Nancy [Roselyn] Jorgensen, lives in the area and she was most
interested in our actual class party, the big one, and Sonya [Hamburg] Ruehl, the other,
was interested in some PR things and she developed a medallion souvenir and had it
designed and she was into taking that area over. And then I was mostly the—they called
me the communicator coordinator and I have to say feather smoother, because when you
have a lot of people of this age group that have had these long lives with much
experience, many have been executives, many have been in very high places, and they all
have their own opinions on how everything should be run. So in coordinating that kind
of group and knowing my peers, that turned out to be my role and then to communicate
memos as we progressed and be in on the conference calls and those sorts of things. And
so far, everything’s been received well.
Hite: Mmm, good.
Peatman: There’ve been a couple of glitches because of human nature, but it’s been fun.

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/PEATMAN

Hite: Great. Was this anything like your social experience at Stanford? Did you have
kind of an active role organizing events or parties?
Peatman: I was, yes, a little bit, but more I was kind of—always pointed a little toward
leadership, even in a small scale, like, you know, president of my living group or member
of the Row council or something like that. And then after I was out and married, I
continued in volunteerism, usually ended up being—because I can’t say no -- president of
the PTA, president of the library, you know, those kinds of things because I’m fairly good
at organizational activities.
Hite: And where on campus were you living when you were living here?
Peatman: Oh, in one of the Row houses that used that were living -- what do you call it?
Live—anyway, were the houses that were no longer sororities, were really what we were
in. And they were smaller groups of maybe thirty or forty women. Women and men, of
course, were separated and the fraternities were on campus, but sororities were not since
sometime in the forties, I believe. But so a few traditions kind of lingered on, like the
way we celebrated an engagement.
Hite: Oh, tell me about that; that sounds great.
Peatman: You haven’t heard about those?
Hite: No.
Peatman: Well, the tradition was usually at either a dinner or more often at a—I think
we had weekly house meetings and at that, whatever business needed to be conducted
was conducted, and then the girl, you’d just kind of always keeping secrets, you know,
and a box of candy was passed around, a box of chocolates and then the announcement in
it.

2

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/PEATMAN

Hite: So the box of chocolates was passed around to everyone in the…
Peatman: In the group.
Hite: In the group.
Peatman: Group, and then…
Hite: And nobody knew who it was for?
Peatman: Well, they did once it was opened and the name was there, like in my case,
Angie Brovelli and Joe Peatman. And that was cute. So you’d wait—that would always
be an exciting thing, is if someone came and had the chocolates.
Hite: So the person who was becoming engaged had…
Peatman: That’s how they announced it. That’s how they announced it.
Hite: You do it for your own engagement. Wow, how fun.
Peatman: Yeah. It was.
Hite: And what was the dating scene like at Stanford?
Peatman: It was very 1950’s. There wasn’t as much as today of group—just big groups
going out often, you know. It was being invited by a man, or you know, if the girls had a
party, they could invite dates. It was in a romant—it was a romantic era, like you see in
the old movies and a little bit. We were a little bit Pollyanna, you know, that this is—the
ideal. It was after the war and the great future, looming for the young people—well,
except, harder for the women than the men. And a lot of, I think, idealism about having a
good marriage and family, that was very important in our day. And often it worked. In

3

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/PEATMAN

my case, we’ve been married fifty years this year, and we have quite a few others. Other
times, it was probably really too soon and hadn’t really had a chance to be out and
experience some of the wonderful things there are about life, and if a person that got
married a little bit too soon, then they found they grew in different ways, or in that—but
it was a popular thing to want to be married.
Hite: Well, how did that work at Stanford, being a woman and having academic focus
and, you know, maybe career goals, but then also the desire to be married probably by the
time you’re out?
Peatman: By the time you’re out, a year at least or two, you know, within the next
couple of years. I think a lot of women—and we’ve seen this in our class panel
discussions -- felt kind of stifled. And that’s another thing they would find, if they gave
up—because you couldn’t easily get into competitive careers with the men at that time;
okay, so you didn’t see many people going into industry and leadership and—many
women into leadership in corporate world or you know, banking, all those things at that
time. The options were usually, you may have heard, be a nurse, a teacher, or a secretary.
And we had many very highly—highly educated and qualified women that were
secretaries, and one of our speakers in our panel was at the CIA for about forty years.
And she said it was quite a while before she was accepted, that she could be an analyst or
a supervisor or anything that—because of being a woman. And so I see—I saw a lot of
our friends felt, well, they better get married, thought they’re—probably were—felt in
love at that time, but then found that all their creative and educational skills had to be put
on the shelf, and they felt frustrated. And, for some reason, I did not because I had other
outlets, where being back in the home community, I was very invested in it and wanting
to make it a better place, and have it grow in ways that would make, enhance the living
experience of all of the citizens in the community. And so I got right into—because I had
children early and got right into school bond issues, local politics and then volunteerism
for nonprofits that address the needs of the underprivileged, tried to make life a better
place.

4

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/PEATMAN

Hite: Well, that’s great. You were saying, though, that the most common pathways for
women were being a nurse, a teacher and a secretary; were there the same restrictions on
which majors you could choose as a woman?
Peatman: No, I don’t think so. I majored in Poli Sci.
Hite: Oh, okay.
Peatman: And did not go on to government, but it was interesting to me and I thought I
might sometime be a teacher because that was one of the options, and that was something
with a language minor, that I could do.
Hite: What was your language minor?
Peatman: French.
Hite: Oh, wow.
Peatman: Yeah, it should’ve been Italian; it probably would’ve been easier. [laughs]
Hite: That’s good. Do you have any particular faculty members or class experiences that
are memorable to you?
Peatman: A couple. One—well, of course, you’ve probably heard this from many of the
people of our era, that Western Civilization, History of Western Civilization, was our
great epiphany. You’d look at the whole history of mankind and see, through the great
writers and thinkers of all eras. And that kind of opened the doors for intellectual growth
and curiosity for me. And then in the Political Science Department, Thomas Watkins
[WATKINS, JAMES THOMAS, IV, Professor of Political Science. A.B., Stanford, 1929,
A.M., 1934, Ph.D., 1941. At Stanford, 1934-35, and since 1946], and there was a
professor that died while we were undergraduates, his name was Leavelle [LEAVELLE,

5

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/PEATMAN

ARNAUD BRUCE, Professor of Political Science. A.B., California at Los Angeles, 1937,
A.M., 1939, Ph.D., 1940. At Stanford since 1946. Died 22 Oct. 1956] who taught political
theory, who impressed me a lot. I learned critical thinking; I still remember a lot of the
material and approaches that he had and they’ve helped me a lot through life.
Hite: Can you remember an approach in particular that was unique in his teaching?
Peatman: Well, like, the final exam in Professor Leavelle’s class was your two hours
with a blue book, and the question was “What trends do you see throughout history in
political thought?” And then, of course, you have to tell why. And a lot of people said,
which you said they might, but come—going from conservative to liberalism, that would
go back and forth, that’s a continuous trend. And I came up with a trend that I had never
had thought of before, and I got like an A plus on the paper and that is because he—
having his—all through the course, he had been taught to—he was showing how to really
think about what’s going on and analyze and let—and I came up with …oh, almost every
—most major movements in history have used the word in the name of, whether it’s a
war or a political maneuver or an economic trend, in the name of Peace and—oh, no, not
peace, I’m sorry, Freedom—liberty and freedom. From Marxism, you know, “Free your
chains” to any sort of thought and then that was going back and seeing what went on in
Greece and only—everything was about the ... I saw that thread and I guess no one else
wrote on that. But that was giving the student a chance to be creative.
Hite: And that pattern …
Peatman: Under that two hour or three hour, whatever, test period, so that just made me
think, and that’s been helpful. I would like to tell you another little tradition that was in
the living dorms when I was there, at least in ours, but I lived at Durand House, towards
the end of the Row. And we had the pattern of every quarter changing roommates. So in
the course of three years or two years that you were in the house, depending when one
came over and drew their lot to get there, you really had a chance to experience living
with—there were many people in the house. And I look back at that, and I think it really

6

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/PEATMAN

was a beneficial thing to learn how to share, get along with many different people, not
just with your very best friend.
Hite: And did that process happen through an in-house draw or did you have a choice
about who your different roommate would be?
Peatman: I believe you could say “Okay, well, next quarter, I would like to room with
Sarah and Mary,” and if they agreed, we could do that. But other times, if it didn’t come
out even, you’d be—because some of the rooms had three people, some of them had two,
so, anyway. A couple had, one was like a sleeping porch, so it had several. But it was
funny because at our reunion now, and I’d, you know, introduce people and say “Oh, this
—here’s Susie, she was my roommate.” And then “Oh, and here’s Emmy, she was my
roommate” and—because we all had a roommate experience during those, uh, years.
Hite: Oh, that’s great.
Peatman: I thought it was very, very democratic in the fact of the true meaning of the
word, that demography was changing all the time, and we could just experience new
people and new opinions and new ideas and plus, how to get along with other people. I
known a lot of people as I’ve grown older that never had any experience of sharing time
and space and considering others’…
Hite: No.
Peatman: …viewpoints or ways of life and I think that was a great growing experience
for all of us.
Hite: Great. Did you have a lot of collective spirit as a house, maybe at Durand? Did
you have any kind of fun? Good, spirited dorm rivalries?

7

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/PEATMAN

Peatman: Well, a little bit. I guess you’ve heard about the Spring Sing; do you still have
that here?
Hite: No.
Peatman: No. Well, that would be when maybe one house would join with—like one of
—we joined with a fraternity and did a song presentation. It was like the Battle of the
Singing Groups at Frost Amphitheatre in the spring. And that got to be quite competitive,
you know, we wanted to be a bit better than the other group. The other thing is we did
have some house parties, that we wanted our house party to be bigger and better than
anybody else’s.
Hite: Mm hmm. Do you remember any themes of parties you had?
Peatman: Oh, yes, we had the luau.
Hite: Okay.
Peatman: And that was at a private home of one of our housemates. It was very funny
and fun. And couple of the fraternities, I know, had a toga party, that was always hot.
And then there were the overnights with the fraternities for their dances and it would be
at some hotel somewhere.
Hite: Overnight? Where would you stay?
Peatman: Yeah. Well, like we went up to Marin County with—my husband was a
Sigma Chi, so they had their Spring Overnight and then they—you know, it’s dinner and
dancing and then put you up in a hotel: naughty for our day.
Hite: Yeah, and who would sponsor that? I just…

8

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/PEATMAN

Peatman: The fraternity.
Hite: Oh, okay.
Peatman: That it was off campus. It was done off campus, so that’s what they were
called. So that, in one such case when I was engag—when we were engaged, we had the
whole group—it wasn’t the Marin County one, up to my parent’s home in Napa for a
barbeque lunch the next day.
Hite: Oh, nice.
Peatman: So that was fun, they enjoyed—people enjoyed that. So there were a lot of
fun activities. We had a Row carnival.
Hite: Oh, really?
Peatman: Yeah. That’s where I actually met my husband, but there were, oh, booths and
games and apples and mostly, it was the fraternities.
Hite: On Mayfield Avenue?
Peatman: And Lawson? [Lasuen]
Hite: Oh, uh huh.
Peatman: Mayfield so—yeah.
Hite: So they just kind of blocked off the street?
Peatman: Yeah, well, it was already blocked, part of that lower part by the Post Office.

9

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/PEATMAN

Hite: Um hmm.
Peatman: Yeah, then they kind of blocked it, you’re right, I guess. I don’t remember
that, I don’t remember any cars going through, so I guess.
Hite: Was that for a fundraiser or just for fun?
Peatman: I think it was probably just for fun, because I don’t think of anything to play a
game, it couldn’t cost more than a quarter or something, so.
Hite: Oh. Did you attend any athletic events or drama productions or…?
Peatman: Oh, yeah, um hmm, I did, all of that. We are still season ticket holders for the
football games. We have followed the basketball team to their playoffs and yeah, we’re
true red.
Hite: Were there any kind of booster traditions or did you have tailgate parties and …?
Peatman: Not undergrad, no. We did not have tailgate parties ‘till we came back as
alums. Of course, we had that wonderful—our wonderful symbol then was the Indian
and we had Prince Lightfoot, who would come in on his charger, his Pinto charger, I
think it was, or was it—well, anyway, in full Indian regalia and that just excited
everybody. You know, and like Tommy Trojan, they have that kind of was the fun thing.
And then we all respected him, I mean, everybody res—this was not a sign of disrespect
to have been the Stanford Indians, and so he was the symbol and very popular with the
band and with the students.
Hite: What was the band like and ma…
Peatman: Oh, it was much more conservative.

10

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/PEATMAN

Hite: Okay.
Peatman: They weren’t high stepping, but I think they were more traditional.
Hite: Uniforms, maybe?
Peatman: They don’t—yeah, the uniforms, I don’t remember when it changed to the
hats and red blazers instead of high hats and epaulettes and things. I don’t really recall
that. I do know that as soon as these—probably—that’d be interesting to look up, when
that did change, but it was probably about the time that—by the time I graduated, or
maybe shortly after. And that we were really looked at as being very dapper because at
that time, they wore the black trousers, or maybe it was even gray flannel and the red
blazers and ties and the little white fedora and looked very spiffy. But then they got more
and more casual as the years went on. I still think their music is great.
Hite: Yeah.
Peatman: Their music’s great in the band, even though they’ve been an embarrassment
from time to time. So, anything else you’d like to know?
Hite: Well, actually, I was just going to ask you, was there anything you’d like to say
that I haven’t asked you?
Peatman: I never dreamed that I’d be in this position fifty years later. But my
connection with Stanford has just been very meaningful for me and it just opened up my
life, and it has been fun sharing, since my husband, the same background. You know, we
met here and so we had the same fidelity toward the university, we’ve both been
volunteers for years and we’re very much invested emotionally in the university. And I
would hope that maybe one of my grandchildren will come, we’ll see.
Hite: Well, what do you think about Stanford today?

11

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/PEATMAN

Peatman: Oh, I’m just so impressed, yeah. I’m just so proud of all the things that are
going on here.
Hite: Any particular change that you see as progress, a positive change since 1957?
Peatman: Yes, the women can wear pants on campus. That was the worst thing because
you couldn’t go past the Post Office except in a skirt. So, you know, you’d go get your
mail, but you could not go on Quad. And so get—like the girls in engineering, we had
the first mechanical engineer graduate, female, from our class and she talks about having
to go to lab with the guys. And so she’d roll up her jeans under her raincoat so that she
could go on Quad and then when she got in there, she could take—you know, they didn’t
care. But she couldn’t—you couldn’t be seen in—isn’t that something?
Hite: Yeah.
Peatman: And the first dollies, which were then, I think we used to call them pom pom
girls, but anyway, they had to have skirts below their knees and, even so, and very modest
movements. And it was—and we were—we were restricted in that way. And we laugh
about it since we got through it. And that’s another thing where I’m proud of my
classmates, is that they’ve grown: everybody’s grown in time and most everyone has
been contributing members of our society, and that makes me more proud, too.
Hite: Oh, that’s great. Well, thanks so for much for taking time from your weekend to
talk today, and I hope you enjoy the rest of the activities with your class.
Peatman: Thank you. It’s my pleasure.
