
WHEELOCK: So, I am Sarah Wheelock and I am interviewing…
GRAY: Sharon Harris Gray.
WHEELOCK: Class of ’57 and today is October 11th, 2007 and this is part of the
alumni stories, interviews for the class of ’57 reunion. So, what was your major when
you were here at school?
GRAY: Not exactly what I had hoped it would be. I came here because in the fifties, it
was very impossible for a girl to get into an engineering school, especially if she wanted
to be EE [electrical engineering]. All right, MIT was not open to girls, Cal Tech, none of
these were open to girls. And yet Stanford had a coeducational school and a very fine
engineering department. So I came here and I wanted to be EE, but when I told Elva Fay
Brown, all right, who was our dean of women, [BROWN, ELVA FAY, Chief Counselor for
Women, and Lecturer in Education. A.B., California, 1924, M.A., 1925. At Stanford since
1946] she agreed that I was fully qualified and my test scores were certainly all high
enough and everything, but she said I would be taking a highly competitive position away
from the head of a family and she could not recommend it, which upset me no end.
WHEELOCK: I’m sure.
GRAY: So I double majored in the theater and English literature and graduated by
Christmas of ’56, so I graduated two quarters early and double-majored on top it, kind of,
not so much to show them, I guess as to show myself.

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/SHARON GRAY

WHEELOCK: Which is more important anyway, you know.
GRAY: Yes.
WHEELOCK: I can’t imagine what that must have been like to do a double major and
then to graduate early. Did you just spend … ?
GRAY: Oh, oh, oh and then—then I taught here.
WHEELOCK: Oh.
GRAY: They let me teach in —my theater major was in the tech side, especially
costuming and set design.
WHEELOCK: Oh, uh huh.
GRAY: And so, as a matter of fact, I’d done the sets and costumes for the previous
Winter One Act, which was in February, three one-act plays. All right, added a great
deal; I started teaching, let’s see, I taught History of Costume. I taught Costume
Construction and Costume Design.
WHEELOCK: Wow, how long did you teach that here?
GRAY: Right up until … let’s see, I was—got married and pregnant, and so I knew that
I was going to have a baby in—and didn’t want to spend time away, so I started a
costume company, right, called Comedia. And I served the small theaters—there were a
lot of little theaters in the area at the time, and so I served them, and I could cart my baby
right along with me. And all the actors and actresses were very happy to baby-sit while I
was doing all my necessary measuring and everything.

2

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/SHARON GRAY

WHEELOCK: It was like, I’m sure, like a draw, like “Here, look a cute baby…”
GRAY: Oh, right, right, I had a cute little baby and the fact that she was very, very small,
she had come early: she was only two and a half pounds.
WHEELOCK: Oh, my gosh!
GRAY: And we took her home when she was three and a half [pounds]. So here was
this cute little thing who could walk at eleven pounds and…
WHEELOCK: Like a doll, almost.
GRAY: She was, she was, yes. And so, up at The Loft and the Outside at the Inside [on
High St. in downtown Palo Alto] and, Hillbarn, and I did a couple there and Palo Alto
Community Theater on Middlefield. So, and—and all the cast just absolutely adored her
and taught her how to cha, cha, cha when she was about maybe a year and a half old.
WHEELOCK: When she was twenty pounds, she just … right, right, right. So that’s
kind of an interesting: your interesting jump, you had intended to go into EE and…
GRAY: Yeah, right, and that—so it’s completely—right, but, I remember I also play the
piano and she had said, “Why in the world don’t you major in piano? You came in, the
first three years in a row in the Midwest” -- it was called Northwest Territory Music
Conference -- and I said “No, I didn’t, I didn’t come in first,” I said “I came in second.”
And she said “Well, still,” and I said, “Well if I wanted to major in piano, I’d have gone
to Julliard.” Stanford is a wonderful school, but it was much better known for its
electrical engineering than it was for piano. Although, Dr. Baller, Adolph Baller, [19091994] did live in Palo Alto and he just one of the just outstanding, and so I did take
private lessons from him.
WHEELOCK: Wow, so you had already had the interest in theater and, you know…

3

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/SHARON GRAY

GRAY: Oh, oh yes.
WHEELOCK: …all that stuff before—clearly, before and, uh…
GRAY: Well, no, actually, there was no interest in theater. I just happened to make all
of, and design all of, my own clothes. So—and so they found out—well, that was the
whole thing, they found out that I could both sew and—and I knew how to develop
patterns for anything, right, which I’d done for myself. And they said, hey, we could use
you.
WHEELOCK: And you needed the set design as well…
GRAY: And so then I got interested in the set design because they coordinate: in other
words, you know, it—yeah. If you’re just doing the costumes, you have to work very
closely with the set designer to make sure that everything works, and it is the visual
image that you want the audience—if it’s a—a drama, that it creates the right mood, if it’s
a musical, right, or you’re very interested in the colors all being harmonious and
everything.
WHEELOCK: And so did you have to do—design the lighting as well or…
GRAY: No, I didn’t do the lighting.
WHEELOCK: Okay.
GRAY: But again, you work with that and you tell the lighting guy how you’d like this,
you know, the lighting to show up these costumes or these colors or…
WHEELOCK: So it seems—to me, it seems like one of those things where, you know,
designing—I don’t think it’s too much of a jump to say, you know, being interested in

4

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/SHARON GRAY

electrical engineering and how things come together, it’s not really that much different
from being able to put colors …
GRAY: Right.
WHEELOCK: Well, so I mean, it’s very…
GRAY: Oh, yeah, it’s a…
WHEELOCK: You know…
GRAY: Your “engineering” is a different kind of engineering.
WHEELOCK: Right, you can actually wear what you’re engineering.
GRAY: Exactly.
WHEELOCK: Just a little ice can be more practical than electrical engineering at times.
So, it sounds like it worked out pretty well even though they, kind of…
GRAY: Oh, I’ve had a very good life, yes.
WHEELOCK: Okay, so, no regrets about the electrical engineering?
GRAY: Not really, I was invited to my class of ‘67’s fortieth reunion last weekend and it
was just a heartwarming, wonderful, positive affirmation of how I spent my life.
WHEELOCK: That’s great. So, looking through these questions, was there anything in
particular that really jumped out at you when I wandered off to get you a … ?
GRAY: As you wandered off to get me some water…

5

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/SHARON GRAY

WHEELOCK: Some water, right…
GRAY: …and I did notice “What faculty member or class had the most impact on you?”
And I find it almost impossible because there were so many that were so wonderful,
right, to narrow it down to one. Alright, I think of Miss O, Virginia Opsall [i.e.,
OPSVIG, VIRGINIA (MRS. JOHN R. KERR), Instructor in Speech and Drama. A.B.,
Washington, 1931. At Stanford since 1946] who had just a great,—and she—because she
was the costumer and she was head of that; and Wendell Cole, [COLE, WENDELL,
Associate Professor of Speech and Drama. A.B., Albion College, 1936; M.A., Michigan,
1937; Ph.D., Stanford, 1951. At Stanford since 1946], whom I just absolutely loved.
WHEELOCK: And what did he teach?
GRAY: All right, Wendell Cole taught theater.
WHEELOCK: Okay.
GRAY: Yeah, right. And then, I think one of the most significant things: I was allowed
by Dr. Virgil Whitaker into his graduate seminar. I believe I was the only person in the
class at the time who was not pursuing a doctorate. It was where I met Thom Gunn
[Thomson William Gunn, 29 August 1929 - 25 April 2004] and I’d independently known
his friend Mike Kitay over in Speech and Drama, but Thom and I remained friends until
his death. He was just a wonderful man, but Dr. Whitaker [WHITAKER, VIRGIL
KEEBLE, Professor of English.A.B., Stanford, 1929, A.M., 1930, Ph.D., 1933. At
Stanford since 1934] was so wonderful in allowing me to participate in this graduate
seminar on Shakespeare, which, fortunately it was one of my strong areas, so I didn’t feel
too embarrassed as still an undergraduate with all these PhD candidates. But, everybody
was so good to me, but Dr. Whitaker was just especially wonderful. And, the depth and
breadth of the knowledge and how to even approach interpreting, in a critical and
responsible way, interpreting Shakespeare, it was whole new approach that I had through

6

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/SHARON GRAY

the years, used with all sorts of—if—in other words, it’s across the board, it’s not
obviously, just for Shakespeare. But Dr. Whitaker was quite a remarkable person, as was
Thom Gunn, who was already a well-known poet, who had come here specifically to
study with Dr. Whitaker from England.
WHEELOCK: Wow.
GRAY: Yeah.
WHEELOCK: It’s interesting that there’s often, you know, I’ve seen this in my
education and also in other people, people say, you know, I may have had this class and
something or other, you know, and in your case, Shakespeare, but the way that you’re
taught to think and taught to analyze certain things is so applicable to almost every …
GRAY: Everything. Exactly. The universality of what would seem like a very specific
discipline, amazing.
WHEELOCK: Yeah, it’s like a life changing event about how you interpret things from
then on, it’s very interesting, yeah. So that’s really neat.
GRAY: Yes, it was. So that just jumped out as I thought of Miss O and how much I
liked her and admired her and Dr. Cole, as well. Oh, gee, after—all of a sudden I’m
thinking of others but I’ll go into far too many people if I do, but…
WHEELOCK: Well, you could always come back.
GRAY: Oh, all right, I just might.
WHEELOCK: And that actually would be good for me because unfortunately they
scheduled someone to come in at two and I have to find my other interviewer, so, if you
wouldn’t—if you have more time later to come back and talk to me just…

7

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/SHARON GRAY

GRAY: I probably will.
WHEELOCK: …a little bit more, I would be…
GRAY: I probably will, my dear.
WHEELOCK: I would be more than happy to have that, because we’ve only talked for
eleven minutes now, and I can tell that we have a bunch more to talk about so…
GRAY: Yeah, more to talk about…
WHEELOCK: That’s right, that’s right.
GRAY: Yes.
WHEELOCK: So would you mind—do—would you mind I just sort of paused this for
now and then we can come back and talk later…
GRAY: Alright.
WHEELOCK: Is there anytime that—today is good for you or…
GRAY: Probably…
