
Keifer: My name is Joyce Keifer and I’m interviewing…
Leonard: Jean McCarter Leonard
Keifer: And she is a member of the class of 1957. Today is October 11th, 2007 and this
interview is part of the Stanford University Alumni stories. So, my first question is:
when you came to Stanford, where was your hometown?
Leonard: Berkeley, California.
Keifer: Oh. And you chose Stanford over Berkeley because?
Leonard: I could walk to Berkeley, who wants to live at home and walk to college? Not
me.
Keifer: Exactly. Okay, so what did you get your degree in?
Leonard: Social science with an emphasis in social welfare, which no longer—I don’t
think they have that program anymore, social welfare.
Keifer: How interesting. Okay, I just wondering, when you went to Stanford, what did
you expect Stanford to be like?
Leonard: Berkeley High but bigger, and it was.

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/JEAN LEONARD

Keifer: Okay, but now that you look back fifty years later how would you describe the
atmosphere, your fellow students, the whole student situation when you were in school?
Leonard: Well, I thoroughly enjoyed Stanford. The transition was not very difficult
because I went to a big high school; there were twelve hundred in my high school class,
so that was not difficult. But I liked being called Miss McCarter instead of Jean Marie
and I liked being responsible for what I did and who I was, an opportunity to meet people
from all over the country, and I was very used to that diversity because Berkeley was a
very interracially mixed community. Stanford was basically a hun—mostly Caucasian,
but there were some Asians, very few African-Americans, there were two of us in my
class, a young man from New York and myself.
Keifer: Heavens! Things have changed, haven’t they?
Leonard: Things have changed a great deal which I am very pleased to see. And I am
enjoying getting to know the young African-American students who are here and
graduates now. They all seem to want to think that I must have had a horrible time being
alone, but I wasn’t alone, I came with a very strong support group from my high school,
so I really didn’t notice any big difference. I had some dates and I had a steady boyfriend
at home who would come down often and as a matter of fact, we got married the week
before graduation and we’ve been married for fifty years, still.
Keifer: Wonderful. When you were Stanford, where did you live? What were the
different dorms …
Leonard: I lived at Roble first. Here’s an interesting story, I really wanted a roommate
and I got a single. The other girls were very jealous because our singles were great to
have. I wanted a roommate. Finally I asked the dorm mother why I didn’t get a
roommate, she said, “Well, Miss McCarter, the parents would not maybe appreciate their
daughter having a Negro for a roommate.” So I didn’t have a roommate. My sophomore

2

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/JEAN LEONARD

year, I lived in Branner with two very wonderful ladies that I’m still very close to. My
junior year, I was a sponsor and then lived in Lagunita. Senior year, I was a sponsor
again and then lived in the Union and actually, I was at senior year I opened—a group of
us opened, Florence Moore Hall. There was a year in 1957, when fall of 1956 when
Florence Moore Hall opened—we opened it, we lived in Gavilan, it was a wonderful
experience because it was small group living with a large dining area, but we had keys
and we didn’t have to sign in and out as we came and went. That was really grown up
stuff.
Keifer: Was Florence Moore for upper classmen?
Leonard: No, we had some lower classmen too. It was a mixed level group, from
sophomores—no freshmen; sophomores, juniors and seniors lived there.
Keifer: Um-hmm. But did you have a housemother at Florence Moore?
Leonard: No.
Keifer: It sounded like you had housemothers in the other dorms.
Leonard: We did. No housemother, no. And we had a senior advisor I think, but no
housemother. That was nice too.
Keifer: Yeah, what was the role of the housemother?
Leonard: To make sure we behaved properly and basically to get in the dorm on time
and not be locked out, because lock out came—time was very critical.
Keifer: Do you remember what time lock out was on the weekdays and the weekend?

3

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/JEAN LEONARD

Leonard: Ten-thirty on the weekdays and I think it was eleven—twelve o’clock on
weekends. But you got so many twelve o’clocks and then two o’clock as you progressed
through the years you got overnights too. So there was a system where you got—first
you got twelve o’clocks, two o’clocks and you got some overnights you could take.
Keifer: Well that sounds almost risqué, overnights.
Leonard: It does sound risqué, but it was interesting. One of my best stories about
Stanford is my son came to Stanford and graduated in 1985. In his junior year, I think or
sophomore year, sophomore year I guess—first part of it, he said, “And mom, I’m in a
new dorm.” I thought, “Oh, what, he said Florence Moore Hall.” I said, “You can’t be,
that’s a women’s dorm.” He said, “Uh-uh, it isn’t anymore; it’s co-ed.” I thought, oh my
gosh, what’s going to happen to our university going co-ed dorms; this’ll never do. And
now I see that Roble is co-ed too, so things have drastically changed.
Keifer: They certainly have. What were some of the activities you were involved in as a
student?
Leonard: Well I was a dorm officer and then my junior year, I guess, started my
sophomore year, I was involved with Orchesis—was our modern dance group, which I
thoroughly enjoyed because I loved dancing. I was in Ram’s Head and I did some of the
productions. I did Gaieties in the spring—spring, uh, show, which was Cole Porter’s Out
of this World in 1956, I guess it was, yeah. I was a senior—I was a Cap and Gown
member.
Keifer: [telephone rings] They’ll call back later.
Leonard: Um-hmm.
Keifer: I think the buzzer’s through now.

4

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/JEAN LEONARD

Leonard: Okay.
Keifer: Well. Okay, continue. Okay, you were mentioning that you were involved in
Cap and Gown.
Leonard: Um hmm.
Keifer: And could you explain what that is?
Leonard: Well it’s a Stanford honorary women’s society. In many schools it’s called
Mortar Board but ours was Cap and Gown. And it has evolved over the years into being
a very active campus community organization. When we were in Cap and Gown back in
1956 and 55, 56, and 57, we really didn’t do very much, but it was just an honor to be
tapped. And tapping was a big thing that one day—one evening, at dinnertime a group of
women marched around campus with a candle and they would come into the dining
room, walk around the tables and stop in front of—stop behind somebody, tap them on
the shoulder and you were tapped, you became a Cap and Gown’er. I’m active again
with the Cap and Gown Alumni board and it’s quite a different situation now. The young
women can apply to be Cap and Gown members and I think that’s marvelous. We get a
better cross-section of the women and they actually have some very active activities that
they do—things that they do—the actives do and get involved in campus activities and
functions.
Keifer: Great. And were there some other things, you mentioned that when you were in
the dorm as a senior that you were, I’m sorry, a sponsor, was that the word?
Leonard: Yes, a sponsor.
Keifer: And what did it—what was that role?

5

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/JEAN LEONARD

Leonard: Well it’s the—these are the junior and senior women on campus who live with
freshmen women and their role is to help them get oriented to the campus life and to be
there at—as sounding boards and to help them if they have any kind problems at
adjusting and to make friends with them. I’ve stayed friends with my undergrads—my
freshmen over the years; it’s been a fun thing to have—to see them. But when they
graduated, I thought they made it. And they have become friends over there years too.
But it’s a nice function because it’s someone who knows what’s going on, how do you get
—how do you—how do you register, what’s a reg line? You can tell somebody and help
them and if they have a real problem that they want to talk about, you’re there to talk
with them and help them if you can.
Keifer: Great. So was there a professor or a couple of them that were really—that you
remember they helped you a great deal or they made a great impression on you in some
way? Could you…
Leonard: Yes, let me just think. Dr. Marge Bailey [BAILEY, MARGERY, Professor of
English. A.B., Stanford, 1914, A.M., 1916; Ph.D., Yale, 1922. At Stanford since 1914], she
was an English professor. She was fantastic and very, very hard but was an excellent
teacher, taught English and Shakespeare, I learned a great deal from her in my
Shakespeare class. And Dr. Wally Sterling [STERLING, J. E. WALLACE, President of
the University. B.A., Toronto, 1927; M.A., Alberta, 1930; Ph.D., Stanford,
1938; LL.D., Pomona, 1949, Occidental, 1949, San Francisco, 1950, Toronto, 1950. At
Stanford, 1932-37, and since 1949], who was president of the university, I got to know
him quite well. Several times I had some problem and I just walked in and said, “I want
to talk to the president.” And I talked to him and I got to know him. He was a very—he
was an outstanding man.
Keifer: Great, did you know his wife too?
Leonard: Yes, I did, yes, uh-huh. Yes.

6

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/JEAN LEONARD

Leonard: Oh, and Mrs. Margaret Duggar [DUGGAR, MARGARET PELTON (MRS.),
Instructor in Physical Education. B.S., Wisconsin, 1938. At Stanford since 1952.],
who was my dance teacher. I remember her very well. She was a tiny little thing with a
really strong will and a big heart. She was—excellent. I liked her a lot.
Keifer: Did you do anything with the dance after graduation?
Leonard: Oh I did some theater—little theater work in Stockton actually. We moved
there—and actually what I really did that I’m proud of, I taught—I thought I never
became a social worker, I was admitted twice to Berkeley, UC Berkeley, in the School of
Social Welfare and never got there, just couldn’t get there. We moved away and this
didn’t work into my life at that point. So I became a teacher with my husband, he taught
—he was a teacher so I started teaching too. I was teaching fifth grade in a small
elementary school in Stockton on the south part of town where the kids had very little
opportunity to do things like ballet and dance and music, so I decided that I would have a
little after-school ballet dance class. Well, I taught this dance class for about three years
and it was wonderful. The girls became very good and they loved it. Two of them went
on to San Francisco to become dancers with the San Francisco ballet.
Keifer: Wonderful.
Leonard: Yes.
Keifer: So, I would say then that the Orchesis class was one of the ones that made a
great impression on you? And what were some other ones that just kind of—the subject
matter, whatever it was, just really impacted you?
Leonard: Sociology was one that I really liked. I enjoyed that a great deal. I learned a
lot and I think I contributed a lot too. One day in the class this professor—I can’t
remember his name right off, but I know how he looks very well -- was talking about
how cities are divided into ghettos. And he said, “Now here’s a ghetto in Berkeley.” I

7

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/JEAN LEONARD

said, “That’s not a ghetto, that’s where I live. That’s no ghetto.” And we were discussing
what ghettos were, I said, if you’re talking about it being a one race little group, that’s no
ghetto where I live, we had a very multiracial group, Filipinos, African-Amer—no, we
were Negroes then, Negroes, Italian, Chinese, Japanese, so it was—might have been a
minority ghetto, but it was not a ghetto of one race as such.
Keifer: Interesting. So, about the campus itself, were there some traditions that you
recall, that was just part of Stanford life?
Leonard: Well big game bonfire was really fun, which we don’t do anymore. I think it’s
gone. I could see why, but that was really fun. And then swimming in Lake Lag was fun
too—Lake Lagunita, which of course is no longer there either, it’s dry bed. That was—
that was a great tradition. Oh, let’s see. I can’t think of any other ones. I just liked being
in school, it was wonderful. I like learning and going to classes. I like Western
Civilization too, that was one of my favorite classes. I wish I could remember the
professor’s name but I can’t. He was outstanding, though.
Keifer: So, Lake Lag had water in it all year round?
Leonard: Yes, it had water—well it dried up often, we didn’t get enough rain, but it
usually had water in it.
Keifer: And so the idea was to swim across it or to dare to swim in it at all?
Leonard: Just to get in, to cool off.
Keifer: Great. So how would you describe dorm food?
Leonard: Adequate. It wasn’t bad. And I lived so close to home that I often went home
on weekends, so I never missed having some good meals. But the dorm food was not
bad. Actually the food at Florence Moore Hall was excellent, very good.

8

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/JEAN LEONARD

Keifer: Oh that’s good to hear. So, you have a son who went to Stanford, correct?
Leonard: Yes.
Keifer: Oh, and he graduated when?
Leonard: 1985. He met his fiancée—his wife here, they were in the same coed dorm.
He—she lived one floor below him, and I think he made lots of noise and she
complained. But they met, and they stayed—they got married in 1988.
Keifer: So do the two of you then stay connected with the university through the Alumni
Association or some other way? The Cap and Gown, yeah, I think you mentioned.
Leonard: Well, I have. I used to work for Alumni and Travel Study Program. I worked
for them for ten years. I did about twenty programs with them, so I’ve been involved and
my last trip was in 1993. I haven’t done anymore recently because I had a stroke in 1993,
in November, so I haven’t come back to work again. But I really enjoyed doing that.
And I served on the Alumni board for about two years in 1971 to ‘73, I think, but I
moved to Michigan and went off the board, because I was quite a ways away and getting
back and forth was not easy for me. But I’ve stayed involved. My son stays very close
to his classmates, I’m not sure they do a lot with the Alumni Association, per se, but they
come. They have family tickets to the football games. They bring their three children,
which we did—my husband and I did that with our two sons when they were youngsters
at home. So they do that a lot. But they are very close to their classmates.
Keifer: Wonderful. Well, is there something else that you would like to mention,
something that, you know, as we’ve been talking and it has occurred to you about your
time here?

9

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/JEAN LEONARD

Leonard: Yeah, well I think the thing—the changes that I think I see, where we have a
much more multiracial campus than we had before. That’s because life has changed that
way. I’ve been involved with the Black Alumni Association over the years too, not
heavily involved because it was not an issue, there were so few of us. And now, it’s good
to see that the minority alums and students of all races are very active in doing things. I
think that Stanford is a leader in this area for many colleges and universities in terms of
the diversity. And it’s very important at all levels, I think of this university, to have
diversity and to recognize the achievements of all their students and alums. I’ve very
proud to be a Stanford Alum.
Keifer: Wonderful. Why thank you very much.
Leonard: You’re welcome. [end of tape 1]
[Tape 2]
Leonard: My experience at Stanford was really good and I really enjoyed being a Phi
Beta Kappa. I was very honored, of course, and surprised too. It was a real honor to be a
Phi Bete.
Keifer: And did you say think you were one of the first black women or black persons to
be in Phi Beta Kappa at Stanford?
Leonard: I think one of the fir—yeah, I think so, I could find out someday but I never
have, but I believe I was one of the first ones.
Keifer: Well that’s good, wonderful. Thank you.
Leonard: I don’t want to tell the whole…
