
Sarah: This is October 13th, is that right, oh dear, I should have checked before I turned
this on. And this is Sarah Wheelock, I am interviewing as part of Alumni Stories for the
class of 1957 and this morning I have with me …
Dotty: Dotty Walters, Dotty Kidd Walters, class of ‘57, and it’s great to be back on
campus and I have many wonderful memories. Number one, the best memory, is meeting
Jim…
Sarah: Excellent.
Dotty: …and marrying him and having two kids and now I’m back at our reunion. And
two things happened to me. I came from very middle class Glendale, and my parents
really saved and kind of struggled to send me to Stanford because I did not—I wasn’t
eligible for scholarships, but I knew it was, oh, a big job for them to send me here. So I
intended to enjoy and learn from every minute. And one of the professors that I was
doing some work with for some reason or other was Dr. Mothershead.
[MOTHERSHEAD, JOHN LELAND, JR., Professor of Philosophy. . A.B., Stanford, 1930,
A.M., 1933; Ph.D., Harvard, 1938. At Stanford since 1941] And I said, “You know, my
parents keep asking if there’s a student-faculty kind of club that every once in a while you
can have a meeting and see what’s going on” and so forth and so on. And he started
thinking about that and he said, “You know,” he said “that’s a good idea” and he said,
“By the way,” he said, “I have a guest and I, why don’t you come out for dinner tonight?”
And I said, “Oh gosh, I can’t come out for dinner because” I said, “there’s a really

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/JIM AND DOTTY WALTERS

important program in Mem Aud and I’ve got to be there for my parents’ sake.” And he
kind of looked at me and he said, “Well you’ll be there: I’ll make sure that you get there.”
And so I went up to his house and who was sitting next to me, but Robert Frost, the poet.
And I just about died because my mother used to read, before I went to bed, poetry and
The Miles to go Before I Sleep and Promises to Keep was one of her favorites. And so
I’m sitting there eating dinner with this poet and trying not to be an idiot, and giving him
my background with my mother which, of course, made him feel very good. So then we
went off to Memorial Auditorium and the place was packed and I went, “Oh my
goodness, I’m not going to be able to get in there.” He said, “No Dotty, you will come
with me,” so he led me up to the stage and with about other—maybe fifteen others, we
sat on the stage in front of him and he was sitting in an easy chair and he recited his
poetry.
And so I got back to the dormitory, and I called my parents and woke them up, and I said,
“Gosh mom, who do you think I had dinner with and sat at the feet of at a special
program?” And you know she’s kind of going, “Well I don’t know, are you all right?”
And I said, “Oh yes,” and so I told her the story, and I heard her crying. And it was just
one of those magical, magical moments in our life, my parents and me, and certainly
magical for me, and being able—coming from this, kind of hokey town, Glendale, to
come up to this wonderful university, and just because I made a casual comment that I
wanted to have more interaction with professors, and they were asking me about that, to
have that wonderful experience. So that is my number one story; and my number two
story is I was a “sponsor” at Roble Hall, and I had an interesting quarter that I was
responsible for inspiring, leading, helping, et cetera. And I had some students—it was all
s—it was two centers, so it the dorm—part of the dormitory that had single rooms. And
some of the girls were in the single rooms because they were extremely unique. And the
university had, I think, picked up on that because it was a very diverse group of young
women. And I would just leave the dorm, and I had an 8 o’clock class at History Corner
with wonderful, wonderful Gordon Wright, “Europe since 1914.” [Wright, Gordon.

2

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/JIM AND DOTTY WALTERS

1912-2000; at Stanford 1957-2000] And so I would walk from Roble and I would go
down and walk past the, was it the fire station was there …?
Jim: …the corner.
Dotty: …the corner and there was always this older gentleman there, and he got to sort
of talking to me; and he had kind of a strange accent, and he asked me what my name
was and who my father and—what my father and mother did and blah, blah, blah. And
so we would walk -- and this had been going on for maybe two, three months -- and so
one morning I was just absolutely like this, just completely frazzled because one of my
sponsorees or sponsees their—her parents had called and told her they were getting a
divorce. They did not have the kindness to come out and see her and explain or anything.
They just called her and said, “You need to know this: we’ll keep you in Stanford” blah,
blah, blah. And this girl was just completely wiped out. So I didn’t study very much for
the test. So I stopped and here this gentleman said, “Dotty, you don’t sound like you are
doing well.” And I explained to him what I had gone through, and this test that I was
going to take from Gordon Wright, and he said “What is it on?” I said “Well, it’s on the
Russian Revolution and leading up to it” and so forth and so on and I said, “You know,
probably Russia would have been in better shape if the temporary government would—
could go on—go on” and so forth and so on. And he said, “Dotty, you listen to
everything I say; I will walk you to class.”
So here I was going down through the corridors, through the archways, and this little man
in this broken accent was telling me the whole thing. And I looked at him as he says,
“Now you can take your test” and I said “How do you know so much?” Oh and, I had
mentioned to him, “Well,” I said “in my studies there was this provisional government,
and if they’d kept it in perhaps Russia would have turned out differently”, and so then
when I said to him, said, “How do you know so much?” He said, “Dotty, I am
Alexander Kerensky, and that is what you have been studying, and I don’t want this to
make any difference in our morning walks.” So then I went in and I took the mid-term,
and I was just in this kind of state of collapse, and so I wrote and I wrote and I wrote, and

3

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/JIM AND DOTTY WALTERS

I filled one and a half bluebooks, and I went up and I turned it in to Gordon Wright. And
I said “After this is graded, et cetera, I would like to have an appointment with you,” and
so I got the best grade you could on this bluebook, and then I went and had a nice little
conference with Gordon Wright, and he said, “Do you realize how lucky you are?” And I
kept writing, I kept walking to campus with him, and it was just great. So those are my
two treasured experiences of a little gal from Glendale who was bright and kind of eager
and kind of chatty, and it was a wonderful time. And those were second only to meeting
Jim.
Sarah: Of course.
Jim: Of course.
Dotty: So that’s it.
Sarah: You certainly made your parents’ scrimping and saving worth while.
Dotty: Yeah.
Sarah: They must have been very proud.
Dotty: Oh, they were thrilled, they were thrilled; and because they were both children
of the Depression. My mother had to drop out of the University of Texas; she was
extremely bright, had majored in Latin and so forth and so on. And she had to drop out
and support her parents; and the way she supported them is she worked for various
doctors and translated the Latin.
Sarah: [Cell phone buzzes] I’m sorry. So we’re back on. It was your responsibility.
Dotty: I felt it was my responsibility because of what my parents, I didn’t—sacrifice is
maybe too strong a word, but I think, after I got my master’s degree in history, after I got

4

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/JIM AND DOTTY WALTERS

out of school, you know, a lot of things that appeared at the house that had never been
there before I—a new car and this or that -- and so I was ever presently hoping that I
could come up to what they wanted, but also what I wanted. And I was—it was a great; it
was just a fabulous experience, and I’ll just never forget those mornings walking with
Alexander Kerensky. And I wasn’t astute or whatever long enough to say, “What are you
doing at Stanford?” because he was just constantly asking me questions about what my
father did, what I did, what kind of books I read, et cetera. And it was just extremely
interesting, and so I really loved my Stanford years. It was hard, it was hard to leave and
—but you know Jim was head yell leader and he worked at—and he went through
Stanford on aid and scholarship, his dad was a Methodist minister and Jim was my best—
one of my best friends before I fell in love with him and, …
Sarah: Good move on your part.
Jim:

Yeah, lucky; I was lucky.

Dotty: Well I’m lucky too, and we’ve gone through some health issues, both of us with
—Jim’s knees were completely crushed in a cab accident and I had to have somewhat
emergency open heart surgery from a horrible infection.
Sarah: Oh, my gosh.
Dotty: We took care of each other and I—you know I think sometimes that as we go
through life, we look back on what made us strong, and I think what made me strong is
number one, very caring parents that encouraged me; but number two, I think the
experiences I had here at Stanford, they made me grow up. They allowed me to be in
contact with completely different kinds of people, different races. I had a very good
African-American friend who I sent down to talk to my father, who was taking me out for
dinner, and I was getting dressed, and I went down and he invited my friend to go to
dinner and she said, “Mr. Kidd,” she said, “Dotty’s so looking forward to having some
time with you, and I really appreciate it, but I’ll take you up on it the next time.” Then I

5

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/JIM AND DOTTY WALTERS

go down to dinner at L’Ommies [L’Omelette Restaurant] with my Dad and my Dad said,
“I like your friend; how many African-Americans are— probably Negroes, were, are in
the school?” And I said “Gosh, you know, Dad, there’s one football player, Tommy …
Jim: Williams
Dotty: Williams…
Sarah: Was he your year?
Dotty: Yes.
Jim: No, he wasn’t.
Dotty: …and I said—“Yes, and I said, there’s no others; I don’t know anybody else.”
And he looked at me across the dinner table and he said, “Dotty,” he said “Isn’t so and so
an African-American?” (or a Negro at that point), and I said, “Oh yeah, I forgot.”
Jim: It was perfect.
Dotty: And he looked at me and he grabbed my hands and he said, “That is the most
wonderful answer I could have expected from you.” And this is a man from Texas. So
these are kind of crazy things that I’m talking about, but…
Sarah: It’s hardly crazy. That must be Jean, huh?
Dotty: Excuse me?
Sarah: That must be Jean.
Dotty: Jean Leonard, yes.

6

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/JIM AND DOTTY WALTERS

Jim: And Jeanie, yes.
Sarah: Yeah, yeah, we interviewed her earlier.
Jim: Oh, she’s wonderful.
Dotty: Oh, well she is an icon.
Sarah: Oh, for sure.
Dotty: Oh, she’s fabulous, and I remember her coming down and staying with us and
going down to the football games and stuff. I grew up in Glendale and oh, she’s great.
Jim: Yeah, she’s very special.
Dotty: And my Dad, you know, tried to talk her into going to dinner with us; and she’s
just wonderful.
Sarah: When you said that I thought, that’s sounds like—I think I only—I didn’t
actually interview her, I think I just spoke to her for a few minutes, but that sounds like
something she would do, not even knowing her.
Dotty: You know, we were all sponsors and so you bond when you’re a sponsor. You
have to.
Jim:

They call them RA’s now don’t they?

Sarah: Yes.
Jim: Residential assistants, yeah.

7

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/JIM AND DOTTY WALTERS

Dotty: Yeah, and it was a big deal to be interviewed to be a sponsor, I mean, that was a
big honor, and you didn’t want to tell anybody that’d you’d gotten the letter or gotten the
phone call because you were afraid your best friend didn’t get it.
Sarah: Oh, yeah.
Dotty: And so it was a very important thing, at least in my experience, and I grew up
fast. I learned about a lot of stuff that went on in families that never went on in mine.
.
Sarah: So when you mentioned earlier that Stanford really helped you grow into an
adult, basically, was that mostly, that you feel that was mostly from being a sponsor or
were there other aspects?
Dotty: No, it’s just the atmosphere being gone, being completely removed from your
home -- and I had strong parents, but I was pretty strong too -- but I was rather, what’s the
word, not compliant it’s—I was a good girl, you know, and I got good grades. And I
didn’t mess around, and I didn’t smoke: all those weird things, and didn’t drink. I mean,
all those things that are a little more common place now, maybe not.
Sarah: Well you know, because I actually work with undergraduates and you’d be
surprised they’re pretty good kids. Sometimes it seems like things are different now, but
I honestly don’t—they can wear pants on Quad, but pretty much, they’re good kids.
Dotty: Well, the core values.
Sarah: Yes.
Dotty: I think the core values …

8

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/JIM AND DOTTY WALTERS

Jim: Yeah, I’m sure they are.
Dotty: ...are staying with people that are intent on bettering themselves and to making a
difference. And I’ve always told my kids: you have to make a difference or you have to
make life better for somebody. I don’t care whether it’s the stray dog or preferably a
human and I don’t know: it was just a magical, magical time. And so it’s nice to share it.
Sarah: I’m glad. And let me ask you about your parents. Your parents were both from
Texas?
Dotty: They were both from Texas, they knew each other from the time they were seven
and nine. My Dad was nine and he was delivering papers.
Sarah: Whereabouts in Texas?
Dotty: Sherman, Texas.
Sarah: Oh, my gosh: I have relatives that live in Sadler, which is just down the road.
Jim: Yeah, north of Dallas.
Sarah: I’m actually going back there in a few weeks cause my family lives out there, so
anyway…
Jim: Great, great.
Dotty: Small world.
Sarah: Yes, that’s for sure.
Dotty: Oh, that’s great.

9

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/JIM AND DOTTY WALTERS

Sarah: So they were from Sherman.
Dotty: They were from Sherman.
Sarah: Has a lovely little downtown.
Dotty: Right, and my mother went to a girls’ school called Kid Key, and my dad met her
when he was delivering papers to her as I think I said…
Jim: On a horse.
Dotty: …on a horse, a pony or a horse. And so my grandfather, who was a scholar, lost
the family business, which was feed, seed, implements, during the Depression, and my
mother had to drop out of the University of Texas, and she was very, very, very bright,
but very charming. And they came to Southern California where her older sister had
married and had some money.
Sarah: When was this?
Dotty: This was what, in 1930?
Jim: ’31, ’32.
Dotty: …’30—’32.
Sarah: So a little bit earlier than most people came from Texas out here.
Jim: Yeah, yeah, yeah.

10

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/JIM AND DOTTY WALTERS

Dotty: And my mother got a job working for doctors using her Latin background and she
supported the family.
Jim: That’s the only time I’ve ever heard that five years of Latin pays off.
Dotty: Right, exactly, and she just got her paycheck, gave it to her mother, they bought
food for the week, et cetera. And her sister knew how much my dad and mother were in
love with each other, and she said “I can start helping support your mom,” the mother and
dad. And so my parents were able to get married in 1932, was it, ‘32, ‘33.
Jim: Something like that.
Sarah: And had they moved out to Glendale or…
Dotty: No, they had moved to, they were …
Jim: Long Beach.
Dotty: …living in Long Beach at that point. A lot of people that moved from the
Midwest and the Southwest went into Long Beach; it was kind of good weather and so
forth and so on.
Sarah: Still is, yeah.
Dotty: And so it was, and my dad worked at night at a Standard gas station and finished
UCLA.
Sarah: Oh, very good. What was his major?
Dotty: Gosh, you know … I don’t know, no, but I heard those days. Sometimes it was
just reminiscence, and sometimes when I was wasteful -- I lost one shoe once as a child

11

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/JIM AND DOTTY WALTERS

and my dad had to tell me how many hours he had to work to buy a pair of shoes for me.
I never lost any more shoes, ones or twos, never lost any more shoes. And it, the
generation—our kids have no idea, we really have no idea except from the so-called
amateur oral histories.
Sarah: Well, I actually am a professional oral historian so…
Jim: Oh, really?
Sarah: …yeah, we’ll talk about that later. I’ll toot my own horn off, since I’m sure
people in two hundred years will not like to hear me talking about myself right now, but I
have plenty to talk about, about my own stuff, so. … [to Jim] And you, where are you
from?
Jim: You’re about through though, aren’t you?
Sarah: Well, you know, we scheduled you at 10:00 didn’t we, or do we schedule you at
9:30?
Jim: No, no, did schedule…
Sarah: ...because I have you on my schedule at 10:00.
Jim: Oh, did you, okay…he put …
Sarah: Because I must have accidentally entered it in wrong, so you know what, now we
have extra time. Ha ha ha, now you’re trapped.
Dotty: Oh, he’s ready.
Jim: Well I’ll tell you of—a sort of fun…

12

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/JIM AND DOTTY WALTERS

Sarah: Okay.
Jim: …thing about Stanford is that Dotty’s dad was a sales manager at Proctor and
Gamble, and they didn’t have company cars and so they had to go out and buy their own
car. And he’d always wanted a convertible, so he bought a ‘52 Chevy or ‘51 Chevy
convertible and sure enough, six months after he bought it, the company gave the sales
managers company cars. So here sits this convertible, so he told Dotty that she could
drive it to Stanford if she maintained a B average and of course that was easiest part of
the thing because she never got a B.
Dotty: Oh, I did too, four or five maybe.
Jim: And so she kept it at Stanford all those years, and then she had to wash it once a
week, she had to wax it once a month and keep it under cover in Lagunita there. And
when we got married, I was in debt because of going to the business school. I went right
out of undergraduate, I was going to go Air Force ROTC, but my knees were so bad—
they dropped me out, so I decided to take that time and go to business school.
Sarah: Where’d you go to business school?
Jim: Here, Stanford…
Sarah: Okay, it doesn’t say it on your thing, it should.
Jim: Sure, so we got in a rut—well it does here…
Sarah: Okay.
Jim: Oh, I see, yeah…

13

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/JIM AND DOTTY WALTERS

Sarah: Yeah, your tag.
Jim: …Yeah, but anyway, he…
Dotty: Identity for the day, week.
Jim: … I’d gone on athletic, not athletic, but academic and leaderships scholarships in
undergraduate; didn’t have anything like that in graduate school, so I had to borrow
money and so we were in debt, and so we sold the convertible. And, you know, really
rued the day that we did. And twenty years later I decided: wouldn’t it be great if I could
track that car down, find it, buy it back and give it to Dotty as a 25 th wedding anniversary
present? Well, it took me four years to find it, and it had gone up through Oregon, come
back down through Sonora, been restored in Sonora, sold to a car collector in Modesto
and I spent a good three to —almost four to five months convincing the car collector in
Modesto to sell me the car. He finally sold it to me about a month or so before the party
that I planned, surprise party and so at the surprise 25 th anniversary party we drive in with
Dotty’s car with our, my daughter the front seat, here, our daughter, and Dotty’s parents
in the backseat who had given her the car in the beginning.
Dotty: Because somebody had taken me under the ruse that it was somebody’s [else’s]
other party or something.
Jim: Yeah, but that was that was pretty good because after having done that I could do
no wrong for about a year, but like any good things they don’t last.
Dotty: Brilliant man.
Jim: So, anyway, we’ve had fun with that, and we have it today and we use it for taking
our friends’ children from the church to the reception and that type of thing, and just a lot
of fun.

14

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/JIM AND DOTTY WALTERS

Sarah: Can you guys send me a picture of that car?
Jim: Sure, sure.
Sarah: I just want to have it because we’ve talked about, and just to be fun.
Jim: Ok—okay, remind me to do that.
Sarah: I’ll write down your information or my information later.
Jim: Yeah, I’ll give you a card too.
Sarah: Ah, that’s nice.
Jim: But that was a fun thing and of course we had—it’s got the Stanford Indian plates
on it.
Sarah: Oh, yeah, of course.
Jim: And all kinds of old fun stuff like that, and we just have a great time with that. But
we had a marvelous time here at Stanford, and as Dotty mentioned: a year earlier, after
the senior year and that year we did beat Cal 19 to 7 and Gord—Gord, um, Goodie
Knight [Goodwin Knight, Governor of California 1953-59] handed the axe over to us and
so we got some great pictures with the axe. And then they’d ask me and the head yell
leader from SC, Don Arranaut, to be in charge of what they call “spontaneous
demonstrations” at the Republican Convention at the Cow Palace. And so we had a great
time.
Dotty: Of course, he came from deep Democratic, Democrat background. Your parents
were from Georgia.

15

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/JIM AND DOTTY WALTERS

Jim: Yeah, yeah, yeah, which was when Georgia was a Democratic state, now it’s…
Sarah: Completely switched pretty much, but yeah.
Jim: Yes switched, yeah, but anyway that was great fun and that—one of the nice things
about it too, it was the last convention that Herbert Hoover, our great President and
Stanford alum, went to the convention, had actually attended the convention. And I was
there when, you know, he was introduced and went down the aisle with him, and that was
a great thrill, but we had a lot of fun.
Sarah: Did you get to talk to him at all or?
Jim: Yeah, a little bit, sure, sure and Eisenhower both.
Sarah: Oh, yeah, that’s right.
Jim: So it was terrific.
Sarah: I bet…
Dotty: I think Jim and I have been very lucky in many ways to be at the right place at
the right time, but yet we’ve always been very open people and kind of eager to do
things. Not push in front of a line, but we like new experiences, but here again, I’m not
the gutsiest person in the world. But we’re really open …
Jim: Yeah.
Dotty: … to interpersonal relationships and maintaining them, and fortunately we found
each other, because if one of us was like that and the other one was more reserved, I don’t
think our relationship would have lasted. He’s great at nicely working a room as far as
just to see who’s there, and to talk and make people …

16

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/JIM AND DOTTY WALTERS

Jim: We learned all that at Stanford.
Dotty: Yeah, so, um…
Sarah: How did you get to be a yell leader? Yeah, you didn’t…
Jim: Well, I came from Monrovia as, where I’d been student body president and done a
lot of really neat things in the town, getting the town to—in fact there’s a big M up on the
hills behind Monrovia, M-A-D and we totally volunteered and got the city to bring the
power in and all of the kids, we all built it and a couple of the young guys that were going
to be engineers, you know, figured it out and then we did the hard work. And it’s still
there today and we hooked up where if when the team wins, just the V lights up and the
legs go off the M and so it’s a V for victory. And so having done all that kind of stuff I
had a scholarship to Southern Meth—S-M-U -- and an attorney in town who was a
Stanford grad said, “Jim, if I can get you the same scholarship at Stanford would you
go?” And I said, “Gosh yeah, that’d be great, but I don’t think you can do that” and he
said “Well let me work on it.” And I was sure he couldn’t do it. And I’d taken the SAT’s
because I’d already been accepted at SMU and I—and it was out at UCLA and there was
a band marching by and stuff, and it was totally confusing and I knew I blew it—and I’m
terrible at tests anyway, and so he gets the scholarship.
Dotty: Thank God.
Jim: So I have to live up to my word, so I came to Stanford. It was late, I’d lived in
Stanford Village, but for the first two years at Stanford I was not that great a student, but I
worked hard at it. So I studied very, very hard, I hashed, I held down two other jobs, one
doing guidance [guide service] at Hoover Tower and another one; ate one meal a day and
studied probably close to midnight and then I’d get up at five or six in the morning and
study more. So I—after two years of that, no dates, didn’t go to any—not even any of the

17

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/JIM AND DOTTY WALTERS

movies at Mem Aud; and so I went to Winbigler, [WINBIGLER, H. DONALD, Dean of
Students, and Professor of Speech Education. A.B., Monmouth, 1931; A.M.,
Iowa, 1934, Ph.D., 1938. At Stanford since 1940] Dean Winbigler and I said, “Dean, I tell
you what the— it’s a great privilege to come to Stanford, but I am not up to this for
another two years. I cannot do it. I haven’t had any time to do anything fun. I can’t even
have date, I’m maintaining a B average, but I’m not going to—I either get some other
kind of scholarship to replace this or I’m out of here.” And so he got me a leadership
scholarship, but he said “You’ve got to do something to be a leader” and so at that point
in time Dianne Feinstein was the vice president of the student body.
Sarah: Dianne Goldman?
Jim: Goldman, yeah, Dianne Goldman and I went to Dianne and talked to her and she
said “Well Jim, why don’t you run for yell— I mean, you got a lot of enthusiasm and
good personality: why don’t you run for head cheerleader?” And I said geez that—I’d
been on rally com and so it was natural thing. So I said “Gee, that’s a great idea, Dianne:
I’ll do that,” and so she helped with the campaign and by God, it’s amazing I won. And
so then I—so for the last two years, I did things in leadership capacities in the school and,
of course, ending up being the head yell leader, and my grades actually improved. Which
is amazing, and I started dating and that’s how I met Foo Foo over here. So anyway it
was a nice way to get into being the head yell leader. It was great fun.
Sarah: And it’s one of those things where you know you probably—I imagine that the
scholarship must have been—it obviously must have been a little bit more than the one
that you had gotten coming in, or else you would have to keep working those…
Jim: No, it was the same. I just said “I want the same and I’ll continue work” —I
continued doing other jobs, but…
Sarah: Um hmm, you were hashing the whole time.

18

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/JIM AND DOTTY WALTERS

Jim: …and then I was working the oil fields in Long Beach in the summer and so that
helped, so…
Sarah: Yeah, that paid for your tuition probably, yeah.
Jim: Yeah, yeah.
Sarah: And then hashing to pay room and board, yeah.
Jim: Yeah, yeah. I loved hashing ‘cause you met a lot of really great people.
Sarah: Where did you hash?
Jim: Hashed out at the Village and then at Branner for a while, yeah, so, great memories.
Sarah: So I don’t think I asked you where you lived, did I?
Dotty: I lived in Roble…
Sarah: No, you did: Roble, yeah, that’s right.
Dotty: …then I went to Lagunita, back to Roble as a sponsor and then to Durand.
Sarah: Okay.
Jim: We came up early for the reunion, which was a great idea, and so on Thursday we
took off, and when it was sort of down time before registration and all of that, and we
went to see each one of the places where Dotty had lived. And it was fabulous.
Dotty: Each room.

19

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/JIM AND DOTTY WALTERS

Jim: I had never in all my years here at Stanford, I had never been in to see, you know,
in Lagunita, where the dining room—that’s a magnificent dining room, my God, with its
big beam ceiling and those great lighting fixtures, I mean, that is really a knock out. You
think you’re in the Ahwanee Hotel.
Dotty: Oh, it’s great.
Sarah: It’s amazing isn’t it?
Jim: Yeah, yeah, it is, so beautiful.
Sarah: And it’s funny, because somebody had told me earlier that they were a woman in
your class, I can’t remember who it was exactly, but she said, if I’m getting this right,
that she was heartbroken that she didn’t get into Roble, I guess, so she had to go live in
Lag instead. Poor, poor me and all that.
Jim: Oh man, oh—oh man.
Sarah: And now she thinks, what on earth was I thinking?
Jim: Yeah, in a heartbeat I’d take Lagunita, that is ju—the whole beautiful—the
entryway…
Dotty: Yeah, it’s beautiful.
Jim: … and then the, oh, big open court, this big old oak trees.
Dotty: And it was also great because you were far enough from the campus that you got
good walking exercise, you know, you just weren’t hanging out close to campus.

20

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/JIM AND DOTTY WALTERS

Sarah: And you were one of the, you weren’t one of the girls that had a bicycle. I know
there weren’t very many.
Jim: There any…
Sarah: There were like, two or three.
Dotty: No, I didn’t have a bicycle and I was thinking about that later in the last
whatever…
Jim: Well, you had the car.
Dotty: …fifty years. I had the car, but, you know…
Jim: And she always walked to—everybody always walked to campus.
Dotty: …but I always walked to campus. I collected quarters; everybody would want me
to take them to town and I didn’t have the money for gas, so everybody would pay, you
know, fifty cents or so…
Jim: That’s when gas was a quarter.
Dotty: Yeah, we’d go into town and I remember…
Sarah: Into Palo Alto?
Dotty: Yes, oh yeah, and one time we went—I took a bunch of gals in the convertible to
San Francisco…
Jim: I know, she almost…

21

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/JIM AND DOTTY WALTERS

Dotty: …and never driven to San Francisco and we—this is so funny, I’m looking back
on this. You’re sparking my brain. We all had gloves on, white gloves on and we wore
skirts and we went to San Francisco. And we parked in Union Square…
Jim: They looked like little old ladies from Pasadena.
Dotty: I don’t know, and the big deal was to use the wonderful powder room at I.
Magnin’s. Oh my God, I just can’t remember this.
Sarah: And did you get to?
Dotty: Oh, yeah…
Jim: And she was…
Sarah: All trooped in there and…
Dotty: Oh, yeah, and we had gloves on.
Jim: That’s the reason I. Magnin’s has not gone out of business.
Dotty: Exactly.
Jim: Too many people used the powder room.
Dotty: Just—and I can’t even remember the names of the girls that I took, and they all
chipped in for gas. It’s a whole different, you know, it’s not like a whole different world
like my parents’ world, but it’s such a whole different world for me, and of course that’s
good because we made progress in some ways -- some changes are negative, but the
world turns. And unless we really majorly make the biggest mistake of the universe, it’ll
keep turning and keep changing.

22

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/JIM AND DOTTY WALTERS

Sarah: And then, like I keep saying, in 250 years when somebody is either reading or
you know listening to this recording they’ll think…
Jim: Yeah, yeah, they’ll say, my gosh, that’s amazing I didn’t realize…
Dotty: And…
Sarah: We’ll have the archives, as long as Stanford is here, the archives will be here
also.
Jim: Yeah.
Dotty: And for you, with your profession, I would have loved to have done that.
Jim: Are you an archivist is that what, is that how you…
Sarah: I’m a historian, but …
Jim: Okay.
Sarah: But, actually we’re almost out of time, so let me just end the recording now by
saying thank you both for coming, and I don’t think I mentioned in the beginning that
Jim, the wonderful Jim Walters, is also here from the class of ’56, and what was your
major, since you’re here?
Jim: Political science.
Sarah: Political science all right, excellent; now I have both of you. Thank you very
much.

23

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/JIM AND DOTTY WALTERS

Dotty: It’s great. Thank you.
