

Schofield: This is Susan Schofield interviewing Martha “Markey” Nordling (married
name Eakland) for the Stanford Historical Society's Oral History Program.
It is December 9th, 2010. We are in Markey's home in Los Altos. Markey,
we're very interested in your history and wonderful stories about Stanford.
Nordling: [00:00:34] I am in a writing class at Pilgrim Haven in Los Altos, where I live.
I found out that I was going to be interviewed, and [I started writing about
my Stanford experiences because] I want to know what I'm going to say.
And this is my story. I have organized this into seven things I'm going to
talk about—Chronology, Personal History, History at Stanford, Importance of the Class
of '41 (which I feel is one of the most important classes ever at Stanford),
Friendships at Stanford, Escapades at Stanford (I was a devil), and Growth at
Stanford.

8

Nordling: [00:01:27] This is the first one I'm handing to Susan right now, and it tells all
of the stories and has a few pictures and musings by me. I was quite an
athlete, believe it not. It's all in here. That's the first one.
Schofield: Are you going to now tell me some of these stories?
Nordling: [00:01:49] Yes, I'm going to tell you. I talk about my history of how I got to
Stanford. It was the head of the English department at Los Angeles High
School and my father who connived and got me to Stanford. I wanted to go
to UCLA with my friends. My father had worked his way through college at
the University of Oregon, and law school in Portland where the university
had its law school. He always wanted to go to Princeton, but he never had
the money. So, therefore, he wanted me to go east to school, which I would
never do. Then all of a sudden, here I am at Stanford.
Schofield: So what was the conniving?
Nordling: [00:02:54] The English teacher said, "Your daughter ought to go to
Stanford." And I came to Stanford. And I'm glad. You'll find out about
what I say when I talk about how I grew with Stanford. And Stanford was
growing, too.
Schofield: Absolutely.
Nordling: [00:03:09] Here’s a lovely story about my history. I had lived in San
Francisco for a while. And then when I came to Stanford, I met people that
I had gone to grammar school with. Of all the good things, and playing
musical chairs at a party one time, the first kiss I ever had was in a closet –
and here was that guy at Stanford. We laughed so hard.
[Laughter]

9

Schofield: At that time were the majority of students at Stanford coming from parts of
California?
Nordling: [00:03:52] We were the Class of '41. It was wartime. People were either
drafted—or they were enlisting. The women were here. I was in a class that
entered with 3,000 people at Stanford [in 1938]. And I had graduated from a
high school in Los Angeles, a very important high school, that had 4,000 in a
three-year school. My history is in there, and what I think of coming, and all
of that. I was excited. But I was young. I graduated from high school when
I was sixteen. By the time I got up here after the summer, I was seventeen.
And I didn't know beans. I had an older sister, though, so I knew some
things. [Laughter]
Schofield: Had your older sister gone to college?
Nordling: [00:04:57] Yes. She went to USC of all places. [Laughter] She loved it. She
was in arts. She didn't like other things. I only had the one sister.
[00:05:23] This is the history that I'm telling you about – the wartimes, and
how important it was, what we were trying to do, and what it was like in Palo
Alto, what it was like at Stanford. And it has changed. It really has.
Schofield: For the tape, so that we have it orally, would you be willing to talk a little bit
about that, as well as give me these notes?
Nordling: [00:05:59] Well, let's see what I've got here.
Schofield: Maybe talk about the memories that stand out the most for you. It might be
friends who were classmates, or faculty, or classes you took.
Nordling: [00:06:35] I was naïve, and I was in awe of everything. I really was in awe of
everything. It was beyond me. This was a time that Stanford was

10

progressing, until the war happened. They built buildings. They fixed the
church. They did so many things. They planned ahead. Ray Lyman Wilbur
was the president then. I remember sitting at his home in front of his
fireplace and listening to him talk. What privileges we had.
Schofield: Certainly all the undergraduates wouldn't have the opportunity to go to the
president's house, would they?
Nordling: [00:07:38] Well, it was given as the president's house by Herbert Hoover,
who nobody liked. But he was a famous man in my book.
Schofield: [Laughter]
Nordling: [00:07:46] He did so much for Belgium, you will never know. And he
married a woman who I just loved—Lou Henry. She was the first woman to
graduate in Geology at Stanford. She was a brilliant woman.
Schofield: But just to go back for a sec – what would cause you to get an invitation to
go to Ray Lyman Wilbur's house?
Nordling: [00:08:15] I was the president of Women's Council. And otherwise, I don't
know, somebody chose me, I got there. And I'll never forget, he said that
the reason they were so careful about admissions was because they never
wanted any of their graduates to end up at Alcatraz. [Laughter]
Schofield: He actually said that?
Nordling: [00:08:46] Yes—he didn't say it quite that way, but it was important to him
that we had the Honor Code. I don't think people realize that we had the
Honor Code even then.

11

Schofield: Now, in those days—I should know my history a little better, but I can't
exactly remember—were we still under the limit of only five hundred women
when you came? Or had that been expanded by then?
Nordling: [00:09:22] Well, there were very few women because the class was small. But
they were anxious to get the women. I was young at heart. I made friends
easily. I talk a lot. And I made friends. I made the most wonderful friends
when I lived in Roble. And then I did join a sorority. You didn't join the
first year, you lived in Roble.
Schofield: All women lived in Roble?
Nordling: [00:09:54] All of the freshman women lived there. If other women came in
as transfers their first year, they went into Lagunita.
Schofield: What sorority did you join?
Nordling: [00:10:05] I joined Delta Gamma. That was the most wonderful thing I ever
did.
Schofield: Talk about that a little, please, because, of course, Stanford did not have
active sororities for a long time. Now it has some sororities again, but it's
not the same.
Nordling: [00:10:23] I have a daughter who went to Williams because they didn't have
any fraternities. [Laughter]
Schofield: But you did like your sorority experience?
Nordling: [00:10:34] My sister was a Theta [at USC]. So I went up to Stanford as a
legacy of Theta. It came down to the wire and I told the student who was in
charge of my area that I couldn't be a Theta, and I wasn't going to go to their
dinner.

12

Schofield: What was it about the Thetas you didn't like?
Nordling: [00:11:07] They were uppity.
Schofield: Uppity, ah-hah.
Nordling: [00:11:09] So I didn't go. But she was the nicest person to me. [Laughter]
And she said, "Now, I'm going to tell the Delta Gammas I think that's where
you should go." And, you know, they did invite me on her word. And I
became a Delta Gamma. Then my last year I lived in Union, which I had the
privilege of doing. The Delta Gammas had plenty of pledges. But of 11
sororities, only 5 were getting enough pledges. So they all voted down
sororities. It was the depression. You have to realize, this was a different
world we lived in. That's enough about that. But I enjoyed the escapades.
Wait until you get to that one.
Schofield: Oh, good. I can't wait to hear. And I want you to actually tell us some of
these escapades, Markey.
Nordling: [00:12:03] I'll tell you—yes, I could read that one. Now this is all about the
important people. And it also includes how I got to Stanford. My father
gave me money for the whole year. That was teaching me to keep care of
money. It was five hundred dollars. That covered tuition and everything
else. As a senior, I was so grateful when—[laughter]—friends of my family
sent me ten dollars for graduation.
Schofield: That was a lot of money then, yes.
Nordling: [00:12:49] [I had a friend] Tish Flemming – she was really Leticia – who was
from the Islands [Hawaii]. There were quite a few students from the Islands.
They had all gone to private school over there, Punahou, which is now not

13

just for Caucasians, it’s for anybody who lives there. But any student coming
from the Islands was at Stanford for the whole year.
Schofield: Oh, because they couldn’t go home easily?
Nordling: [00:13:28] It was only by ship. Well, anyway, she became a very, very
interesting person to me. Her father was a banker. And the whole family
was just wonderful people. The people in this class of ’41 were outstanding.
We had Walt Stoessel in my class, who was a favorite of the most popular
professor who was teaching Latin American history. He knew everything
about everything, that professor—I’ve forgotten his name, I think it was
Samuel Morris. Walt Stoessel ended up as the ambassador to Belgium. He
was very important because that was the only embassy relaying war news at
the time.
Schofield: He would have been quite young.
Nordling: [00:14:27] Yes. But he was that good. There's a clipping in there about him, I
think. And then Tish Flemming was a hula dancer, which was something
you couldn’t do at Punahou. And she was quite an addition to the Delta
Gammas, I tell you. That's how I met her. Roy Vitousek. I don't know if
you ever saw the movie about the young man taking a pilot's lesson over in
Honolulu. He was the one who sighted the Japanese planes coming in. He
reported them to a lookout station and they didn't believe him. They said,
"Oh, they're just practicing."
Schofield: Oh, my goodness. And he had actually seen them?
Nordling: [00:15:19] That was Roy Vitousek. He was quite a man. The people in my
class are all listed here for you.

14

Schofield: By joining a sorority, did it turn out that your closest friends were, generally
speaking, in the sorority?
Nordling: [00:15:41] No, not necessarily. I had friends all over the place. I really did. I
just heard from the husband of one last year, she was the daughter of the
head of the Economics department. They were Canadians. Her name was
Muriel Boggs and I did many, many things with her. When my husband and
I traveled, we'd visit them. Her husband went to the University of Chicago,
and that's where she met him. She was fascinating to me because she was a
freshman too, and here I was, naïve thing up there, but she could do
anything, because she knew that her father would take care of her. Her
husband called me when she died. I thought that was kind—we visited them
up in Mercer Island where they retired.
Schofield: Did you meet your husband as a Stanford student?
Nordling: [00:16:49] Oh, yes. That's in my History. And in Escapades.
Schofield: You're going to talk about some of these escapades for me, right?
Nordling: [00:17:00] I'll do it. But … the importance of this class … not just two or
three. Sherman Mellinkoff was the head of the UCLA Department of
Medicine after graduation. Classmates went to war, and then they came back
and did all these things. It's amazing. I can't get over how wonderful they
are. John Warnecke was one. And Martha Nell Plopper. She married the
man who was editor of The Daily, which we called the Dippy, and he was
going to write “the great American novel.” Well, they were divorced.
Plopper wasn't a very good name for her because she came to Stanford with
a very expensive car, which nobody had at that time. This mentions all of the

15

people that I knew – my family and people or friendships when I was a
freshman. I re-met [some of] them with my husband in Rye, New York.
There were five of us in Rye, New York, who I mention being very
important people from our class. And there we were, five of us with strange
and wondrous backgrounds. Three of our children went to Stanford, but the
local newspaper said they were going to “Stamford.” [Laughter]
Schofield: Was there a Stanford club there? How did you reconnect with each other?
Nordling: [00:27:43] No. We knew each other. My husband went ahead of the family
to find a place for us to live. Annie, our fourth child, was tiny. So I stayed
home and he went back to look for where we were going to live. He wanted
us to move to Chappaqua but I really dug in my heels. I talked to Paul
Hallingby, who lived in Rye, New York, and he loved Rye. So we moved to
Rye, New York.
Schofield: Who was Paul Hallingby?
Nordling: [00:28:24] I was in high school with him. And my family knew him, but I
didn't really know him well. He married five times. Widney Watson was
there, whose grandfather founded USC; he was a Methodist minister and
lived in Salt Lake City. She ran away with a painter, the tile man. [Laughter]
[00:28:52] I'm not kidding. And then there was Ned Pugh, who had a
terrible name; he had a very nice wife. They didn't live in Rye city, they lived
outside.
Schofield: So all of you Stanford couples would get together?
Nordling: [00:29:09] Not really. But I fell in love with Paul Hallingby's first wife. She
was charming. And then when she got cancer, he just put her away

16

someplace. It's sad what they became. But anyway, my story about these
people and what they did is strange. And this is my end of it. The five from
the Class of '41 sent three sons to Stanford. Ned Pugh, the only remaining
Class of '41 alum in Rye, is the only one of us to remain married, of all five
of us. Isn't that something?
Schofield: Were they all divorces?
Nordling: [00:30:00] Yes, they were divorces. [Laughter] Well, Widney ran off and
everybody ran off.
Nordling: [00:30:15] Escapades are really funny. And I will go fast.
Schofield: Sometimes we take short audio clips and use them separately. So I'd love to
have you tell your escapades.
Nordling: [00:30:29] I really want you to know that I have done this, in a way, for
myself because I love to write. But I write too fast. I used to be a good
speller. I'm not anymore. I did it for my children too, to know all the things
that happened to us.
Schofield: When I talked to [your son] Pete, he said, "I can't believe some of my
mother's stories. They're really wonderful." I told him we are recording
alumni stories from those times and hoped to talk to you.
Nordling: [00:30:55] Well, talking about Roble, there was one girl—she wasn't
unattractive, and she was very, very bright, from the Midwest—and, boy, she
was dating all of these fancy football players and [laughter] presidents of the
student body types. I couldn’t quite understand it, so I asked somebody one
time. And they said, "Markey, don't you really know?" [Laughter] So I
learned in a hurry.

17

Schofield: And the answer was … “she sleeps with them?”
Nordling: [00:31:25] [Laughter] Yes. She did—but the sad thing is she was sent home.
Unannounced, she just went home. And that guy who got her into trouble,
he became a big shot. And he stayed, of course.
Schofield: You're not giving any names?
Nordling: [00:31:40] No. I almost did, but I didn't.
Schofield: That's okay.
Nordling: [00:31:45] Now, to Escapades. We weren't flower children or belligerent
activists, but we had fun, lots of it, with fervor and enthusiasm. First story:
What inspired the freshmen in Encina to engage the fire hose to flood the
stairway to the top floor? Was it the dislike of the resident proctor?
[Laughter]

[00:32:21] Why the parade to downtown Paly [Palo Alto] in cars to toss eggs
at the police station? Was it the many tickets given right before graduation
weekend? Were the eggs thrown in jest? Not really.
[Laughter]

[00:32:41] Five of us from Roble climbed the fence surrounding the women's
gym and outdoor pool. Summer weather, the reason for this swim? It was
sheer exuberance. We'd climb that fence and go swimming all the time. It
was always locked.

18

The spring evening barbecues near Searsville Lake, three couples—I guess
we went out there as often as possible to enjoy the beauty of the early
evening at Searsville.

The jolly-ups, such fun in the Old Union.

The romantic custom of being kissed at midnight under a full moon in the
palm garden. A wonderment. [Laughter] It was hard to do at midnight.
Schofield: When you say palm garden, where was that? Now they have “Full Moon on
the Quad.”
Nordling: [00:33:54] It was where they have the cactus garden now. We women were
under strict rules about coming in and out of our dorms. But we got “two
o'clocks” if we were going to the city. The most strange and wonderful
escapade of all was the “intrepid crawl of the steam tunnels.” We Roble
women were under the direction of Muriel Boggs, with our flashlights and
new batteries just in case. This was the most stupid thing we ever did. It’s a
wonder we made it. We entered the manhole outside Memorial Church and
we crawled on our bellies through the large ducts all of the way to the
manhole just outside the undergraduate library.
Schofield: Oh, my goodness. [Laugher]
Nordling: [00:35:02] That was a mile or so I think. It seemed forever.
Schofield: Why did you do this? [Laughter]
Nordling: [00:35:07] We were exhausted as we emerged. And we were under the San
Andreas Fault, or almost. It didn’t quake, but boy, we did.

19

Schofield: [Laughter]
Nordling: [00:35:26] There was an article in the Stanford Review, or Alumni Review,
saying that some students had gone from the church over to the new Dippy
office, and they thought that was wonderful—but hey, that was just under
one street.
Schofield: [Laughter] But you'd gone all the way to the library.
Nordling: [00:35:45] Yes. There were four of us who did this.
Schofield: [Laughter]
Nordling: [00:35:48] I am certain class members will remember other capers, but these
are the ones I remember fondly. Here’s one I forgot [to write about]. How
could I have forgotten? This is very important. It was one of the most
exciting, unusual, and well-orchestrated escapades, one which involved many
important people and careful planning. This was not as dangerous as the
crawl through the Stanford ducts, but it was as notorious. This escapade
began with the celebrated Stanford axe, which the Axe Committee was in
charge of. Bill Kimball, Axe Committee chairman, knew that Cal was lurking
and wanted to steal it. My future in-laws were up here for senior week and
the Big Game, staying at the St. Francis. Mr. Eakland, a representative for
Cavanaugh Hats, stored his trunks in the so-called trunk room of the hotel,
providing safe storage. This unlikely scheme was hatched at a casual meeting
of the Eaklands and Bill Kimball. The four Eaklands would drive to the St.
Francis the night before the game, deliver the precious axe to the doorman,
who was instructed to deposit the suitcase holding the axe in the guarded
trunk room where it would remain until the next morning. When Mr.

20

Eakland and the doorman delivered it back to Bill Kimball, who had stayed
in the city overnight, complex teamwork and innovation had succeeded.
Voila. [Laughter] Can you believe that story?
Schofield: Bill Kimball was in your class? Who later became president of the Board of
Trustees?
Nordling: [00:38:21] Yes. Now—one more [section] I want to read.
Schofield: Your last set of notes is called Growth.
Nordling: [00:38:35] This is one of my favorites. This isn't just about the great growth
of Stanford and Palo Alto; it is about how I grew in stature from the young
freshman in awe on my arrival. We both grew for the best. We entered and
enjoyed the beloved Creamery, Lake Lagunita, friendships and unique
qualities of the farm and its beauty. We left with the realization that our
changes had been unusual. Palo Alto also realized changes, became a city
with an important railroad stop, as well as one of importance on El Camino
Real.
[00:39:31] My four years at the Farm were important to my personal growth
and my life-long friendships. The excellence of the staff, professors, and
administration, and Ray Lyman Wilbur, president, personified Stanford’s
integrity with its honor code and the founders' dreams. With such support,
and with my family's, I became a stronger person seeking truth and
understanding. I have found strength in many ways. I ran for a school office
and was elected Women's Council president. As such, I spoke at the '41
Board of Trustees meeting at the Fairmont, as did L.B. Harbor, president of

21

the student body. I studied personnel on a one-year grant at Claremont
College.
[00:40:47] More importantly, I met and married my classmate, Ned Eakland,
an exploration mining geologist. With his mining background and my
personnel background, we met many interesting, important people who
became close and enduring friends. Visiting the campus today, I am still in
awe of its beauty. The new buildings, the restoration of the old, and the
remarkable development envisioned by the Stanfords—enabling this lovely
campus to reach international importance. My life has been very exciting and
fulfilling, and I attribute it a great deal to lessons learned at the Farm.
Schofield: One thing you haven't mentioned is sports, and women’s basketball.
Nordling: [00:41:50] There are pictures in that first section I gave you. We played the
first intramural women’s basketball game, Stanford against Cal. Phil Prescott,
who lives here at Pilgrim Haven and whose mother went to Stanford, has a
picture of women playing basketball many years earlier in long wool skirts,
but by the time I was at Stanford they had no women’s varsity basketball
team. A Mrs. Barr took my friends and me—Muriel Boggs and Helen Ford
and June Murphy and others—in a station wagon over to Cal, and we played
at the Harmon Gym. The fellow who invented the one-handed shot—Hank
Luisetti—had played there. In high school, we played half-court basketball.
But when we got to college, I think we played 3 courts. I was short, but I
was fast, and I had good peripheral vision. So therefore, I could pass to
those tall people. They knew where I was, and I knew where they were.
Anyway, we played an intercollegiate game, against Cal.

22

Schofield: And you've written about it? Good. I think [your son] Pete said that many
years later Stanford called you all back and awarded you a varsity Block S
letter?
Nordling: [00:43:39] They did—I got a letter from the team. And I got to know Tara
[Vandeveer] when she came. I've always been a ticketholder for women's
basketball. And I’ve followed the team. I also knew Pam Strathairn very
well.
Schofield: She ran women's sports for years, I believe?
Nordling: [00:44:04] She worked her tail off for that. She died too young. Her
nephews came for her service over on the 18th hole, it was very nice.
Schofield: What did you end up majoring in?
Nordling: [00:44:24] You didn't major at Stanford.
Schofield: You didn't major?
Nordling: [00:44:27] No. I was going to major in economics. And I did pretty well but
in the end I figured, hey, all those men were going to go to business school.
And the last thing in the world I wanted was to compete with them. They
did too, they went to business school.
Schofield: But you could graduate with just a general degree of some sort?
Nordling: [00:45:05] Yes. I did very well on open-book things. My first year I was in
independent study. You’d just work with one professor. And I had the
nicest professor. I just loved him. You reported to the professor once a
week.
Schofield: Was that your entire freshman year academic experience? or just one class?

23

Nordling: [00:45:39] Pete had it too; you can ask him about it. He said it was the worst
thing that ever happened. People should be taking classes with their friends
and not doing independent study. It was for one required class.
Schofield: The equivalent of Western Civilization maybe?
Nordling: [00:46:11] That's right.
Schofield: Do you remember the faculty member’s name?
Nordling: [00:46:15] I did. Someplace I have it.
Schofield: It sounds to me like you were more influenced, as you think back on it, by
the people you met, the way you grew as a person, and not so much by the
faculty or the classes.
Nordling: [00:46:31] Well, I was impressed with that professor. I really was. And I
took a lot of other classes that I enjoyed. And I got really straight A's in
philosophy. The Dean of Women put me in touch with this personnel course
I did for a year in southern California. And let me tell you, it was fascinating.
I met some brilliant women who showed me more of life than you can
believe. I also met Juan Trippe when he was the chairman of Pan Am. I’ve
led a very interesting life.
Schofield: Indeed, and it sounds like your Stanford experience was very exciting,
informative, and is still very alive in your memory.
Nordling: [00:47:37] Well, I like Stanford for what it did for me. And I like it because it
had foresight. Out of the depression, they did very well. And I liked that I
got to know people.
Schofield: Do you think the students who went to Stanford then were generally—
Nordling: [00:48:21] Appreciative.

24

Schofield: Appreciative, yes. But I was thinking of socio-economic status. Were they
generally upper middle class?
Nordling: [00:48:28] That was the norm, but some of them were not. Dwight
Hutchinson who Nell Plopper married, he wasn't anything. Stanford has
always tried to get students to fit into the pot, and they filled their classes
pretty well.
Schofield: In those times I believe it was almost exclusively white, whereas now,
Stanford is very racially and ethnically diverse.
Nordling: [00:49:32] Well, California was devoid of people at that time. The war took
all of the men. One thing I may not have written about was that I was
chosen by the Navy for a class to train pilots. I got a pilot's license while I
was at Stanford.
Schofield: How fabulous.
Nordling: [00:50:12] And my first passenger was my father.
Schofield: Was there a little airport in Palo Alto like there is now?
Nordling: [00:50:25] Oh yes, and it was dangerous. You went right over those wires.
Schofield: After that, did you fly planes?
Nordling: [00:50:33] I got married. And flying is expensive. We didn't have any money.
Another thing, Helen Ford Myer, who was in Delta Gamma, was an only
child. When we called our parents to ask permission to take this pilot’s
course, we had to have it in writing. I called my father, not my mother,
because I knew he would have done this—he was that kind of a person.
And for his daughter to have a pilot's license was very exciting. So I got his
permission. Helen Ford called her mother because she knew that her father

25

wouldn't let her do it. She just said, "Well, Markey's family is letting her do
it.” So her mother said, "Well, that's fine. I'll sign it." Helen went into the
Navy, because she didn't get married from Stanford. She had somebody all
the time, but they didn't get married. She was a very attractive woman, very
tall and lanky and graceful, all those good things. But she went into the Navy
and ended up down in Nogales, New Mexico, near the Mexico border. Our
class was outstanding. We had a German in school then. He was a Nazi.
He went back to Germany before the war was declared. [Laughter]
Schofield: My, my.
Nordling: [00:52:22] Ned knew him. We had all kinds of people at Stanford.
Schofield: It sounds like you had a wonderful experience, and I think it's fabulous that
you’ve written it all down for us. I thank you very, very much.
