

Smith:

…getting a liner. Since it was speech and drama, we didn’t think that was going
to get us a job. So we decided we needed something really nice on the
interview form. We all thought of a business minor. We didn’t know how to
accomplish that because there were no courses called “business.” Finally, we
petitioned the university, and we were able to take courses in the business
school in accounting and in the law school for business law. That gave us our
twenty units for a business minor.

Hayes:

Nice.

Smith:

That was the first time, as far as we were aware, that this had been done. Now
I understand people can kind of put together their own schedules and what
they want to do. I think that’s wonderful. But it just depends on what you need
to know. She was saying something like, “Why did you come to Stanford?” and
all that. Well, I lived in San Francisco. My parents tootled me on down to the
campus and took me around and all that. I kind of liked what I saw. So when it
came time to decide if I wanted to go to college or not, they suggested that I
might like to apply to Stanford. I said okay. So I did. I got my teachers’

recommendations and outside activities and all this stuff. And off it [college
application] went. All my teachers said, “Where else are you applying?” And I
said, “Well, I’m not.” They said, “Why not? You may not get there.” I said,
“Well, if I don’t get into Stanford, I’ll work for a year.” That probably would
have been the better thing for me to do because I’d already skipped some
grades, and I was a little young. Maturity-wise, it would have been the thing for
me to do. But I was accepted at Stanford. I went without that extra year. Now
I was informed from some of the things I’ve heard today around the campus
that they’re recommending that people spend a year after high school before
they come. That’s not a bad idea. I knew it wasn’t a bad idea after about the
second year at Stanford. I knew it would have been better for me to have a job
and be off for a year. But I didn’t and then later after I graduated, I worked in
San Francisco for KGO television and radio. They were together at the time in
downtown San Francisco. Later, I worked in the President’s office for the vice
president of finance and then a few years later, I ended up working for David
Jacobs in the general secretary’s office which was the fundraising department.
And then I married, you know, I had children. I worked for many, many, many
years for Children’s Home Society of California. We raised a ton of money for
that adoption agency. Now I think they’ve changed direction. But I worked for
them for about thirty-five years as a volunteer. It’s been a rewarding life. I
really had fun at Stanford. I loved every minute of it. It was great. We didn’t
take anything too seriously. As I was telling one of the gals there, there are so
many more opportunities now for women, and I think I would have liked to
have been a lawyer. I didn’t really think, at that time, that that was all that

2

possible for me to do. When I started off here, it was in 1949. You were
probably not around, and at that time, I felt that perhaps the thing for me to
do would be to become a teacher. There’s nothing wrong with being a teacher.
It’s just that I didn’t want to be a teacher. That really wasn’t for me. I didn’t
feel I had the patience. So I ended up working after college with secretarial
skills. Actually, they were giving shorthand at Stanford at the time. I don’t
know if they do now.

Hayes:

As a class or…

Smith:

Yes.

Hayes:

Wow.

Smith:

Oh yes. Because obviously at that time, they felt women may have to use the
shorthand for a job. Otherwise, why would they give it? There was really no
need unless that was there. It was interesting. It was fun. My first year, I took a
class in just about everything. I took a class in education. I took a logic class. I
took this and that somewhere to find out where I should go. I ended up in
speech and drama and business. The business minor actually helped me more
throughout my life than I thought it would. It really did. And while I was here,
I went to a summer school and took the radio and television classes. We were
at Lagunita for summer school for that particular course. I was head of the
student body then and then was the vice president in charge of the social

3

structure of what was going on, you know, during that time. It was fun. It was
an interesting time. I met some wonderful people. Unfortunately, not that
many of them that I was really good friends with are left. One of my friends,
she and her mother, contracted polio the same day. The Salk vaccine came out
the next day and she died a few years later after being in an iron lung. Those
were the times. It doesn’t sound like the old days because it wasn’t the old
days. The old days were when my mother was living. But there were still a lot
of things that you couldn’t do because of polio. And it was prevalent. I guess
the Salk vaccine came out in the fifties sometime, maybe early sixties. That
changed a whole lot. Being in San Francisco, I never learned to swim. I finally
got a little bit of that at the YWCA. That’s it. But you really didn’t go to a
public pool. That was around the time that I was starting my supposed career
in high school and college, you know, and that sort of thing. That’s really about
it. Now I live up beyond Sacramento. My husband died a year or two ago, so
we now have a whole new situation.

Hayes:

Oh, but you’re going to that singles’ thing.

Smith:

Yes, uh huh. I don’t know exactly why, but it’s something to do. So I will go. I
think that’s probably all I have to say.

Hayes:

Okay.
