
Calloway: This is Terri Calloway interviewing Carol Whitney from the Class of 1958
on October 11th, 2008, as part of the 2008 Alumni Stories Project. Okay. So Carol,
what was your major and where did you live on campus?
Whitney: Well, I changed my major about twice a year because there were so many
interesting options. But I ended up in history because after I, by the time I got to my
senior year, it was pretty clear that was the best one to finish, because I always had taken
a lot of history courses. So I enjoyed, you know, I enjoyed everything. But that was
what I did. And I was from Portland, Oregon, and I lived in Roble, Stillman. Then we
had to draw again after our sophomore year, and we drew a bad number, so ended up in
Florence Moore junior year. And then back in Durand my senior year. So, moved
around a lot.
Calloway:
senior year?

Now, did you stay with your same roommates from freshman year through

Whitney: No. My freshman year—it was really kind of interesting; I don’t know if
it exists anymore. But in Roble, there were a couple of different living arrangements on
the second and third floor. When I was accepted and everything, I got this note saying
that you are, your room is in the Bible Suite. And I thought, do they think I’m religious
or something? What is this? I just really was concerned. Well, long story short, but they
apparently had looked through my high school stuff, and decided that I must be the kind
of person who liked a lot of time alone. And the Bible Suite was Mathew, Mark, Luke
and John. There were three individual rooms and the bathroom. It was really lovely.
But anyway, they thought I would like privacy, because they read that I written some
poetry, and they thought, “Oh, she wants to sit in her room and write poetry.” Not true.
But anyway, that’s where I lived on campus.
Calloway:
Whitney:
Calloway:

Wow. That’s great. And you said you came from Portland.
Hm-mmm.
How did you choose Stanford?

Whitney:
It was sort [of] almost chosen for me. I was at a private high school
on a full scholarship. Obviously, my parents weren’t going to send me to Stanford, but
they wanted me to go to college. And I got a scholarship to Cal. And the principal was a
woman who had been Dean of Women or something at Mills [College] at one time. And

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORES 2008/CAROL SALQUIST WHITNEY

one of her closest friends was Rixford Snyder who was the Dean of Admissions or
whatever at Stanford. [SNYDER, RIXFORD K., Director of Admissions, and Associate
Professor of History. A.B., Stanford, 1930, A.M.,1934, Ph.D., 1940. At Stanford, 193443, and since 1946.] And she talked to him and she said, “You know, I want this girl to
go to Stanford.” You know, here I am innocently going along, and I’m going to go to
Stanford because she said so. And I mean it was a great idea, but I hadn’t thought about
it. I applied for a scholarship. But in those days, they knew girls would not really—it
would be a waste because they always got married. So I didn’t get a scholarship, I got
Honors at Entrance, which is basically a scholarship without money. So the principal
talked to the Portland Stanford Club, which was very active and had a scholarship that
they gave every year. So I went and interviewed with them. And I shouldn’t tell this
because it’s really not very nice, but it’s true. They, in those days, you know, it was all
the boys. And so I interviewed. And they told the principal that I was by far the best
applicant, but I was a girl, and they had to give it to a boy. But because I was so good—
the scholarship was seven hundred and fifty, which was enough for tuition—because I
was so good, they’d raise five hundred more and give me five hundred dollars. And the
irony is that I thought that was lovely. We never thought about the fact that there was
something wrong. But I was delighted. I got here, and I worked, and I was sort of
pushed here, as I say, and I was glad I was; never regretted it.
Calloway: Now, you said that also besides—because you obviously got less than the
tuition, so you had to—there had to be that difference.
Whitney:
Calloway:

Hm-mmm.
So you said you worked. Did you work on campus?

Whitney: Well—yeah. My parents gave me some money, and I’d earned some
during the summer. And then I worked in a variety of places, wherever I could find a
job. I worked in the library. I remember working in the Western Civ library that was in
an old Quonset hut. That was fun. But most of the time, I worked in the Stacks, as a
page in the Stacks, running up and down seven flights of stairs. I always stayed in shape,
and it was fun. And I worked at other jobs through the years. I did -- some of them
didn’t work out. They hired me for something in the Math Department, and I discovered
you had to know higher math, and I left, because I didn’t. I was a liberal arts type. And I
was hired for a project as a test subject in the Psychology Department. But on that one,
they had this interesting game that you played -- it had to do with investing and deciding
how to, when to invest, when not, and stuff. And it was this—it was fun. I was doing it.
And all of a sudden—it was this Ph.D. candidate working on his dissertation. And all of
a sudden he stopped and he said, “What are you doing?” And I said, “Well, I’m doing
what I’m supposed to do.” He said, “How are you making your decisions?” I said,
“Well, I can see there’s a pattern here, and I’m following that pattern.” He said, “Damn,
you’ve ruined my whole study.” So they didn’t want me either. But for a while there
was, in the print shop place: things were a little backward in those days. We had
Xerox—we didn’t have Xerox, we had Ditto and, you know…

3

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORES 2008/CAROL SALQUIST WHITNEY

Calloway:

Right.

Whitney: …mimeograph. Well, they also had this thing called a collating table. And it
was this big wood thing that you’d push around and stack up the papers. And I’d sit there
for hours, you know, stacking papers on this table: a lot of real intellectual stimulation.
But those are the kinds of jobs I had. And it was fun. And I was a hasher one year.
Calloway:
Whitney:
Calloway:
Whitney:

And what is a hasher?
Oh, a hasher is the food servers in the dorms.
Okay.
I was a hasher at FloMo—Florence Moore.

Calloway: Okay. And what kind of—do you remember what kind of food you guys
had back then?
Whitney: It was generally bad food, but, I mean, freshman year was the worst. They
had this stuff that they called orange juice. But I swear it was orange pulp in water. That
was great stuff. But we ate a lot of it because we were hungry. And in the Row houses
we had good food. We had good cooks. FloMo was sort of in between, you know.
Dorm food.
Calloway:

Now, in your years at Stanford, were you part of any clubs or activities?

Whitney: Yeah. Hm-mmm. I was—I wasn’t a Red Hot, as they called them. You
know, the little cheerleaders. The cute little people in the—you know.
Calloway:
Whitney:
Calloway:

Okay.
We called them Red Hots because they were so enthusiastic.
Okay.

Whitney: And—but I always enjoyed the idea of doing something for the class. And
so, I guess it was my junior year I tried out and was on Executive Committee for the
class—‘Class ExCom’. And my senior class, I was vice president. I ran—this is
probably not a good story to tell, but it’s—we’ll see if we want to use this one. There
was a girl who was one of the—the ‘Red Hot’ crowd, and—and very nice person, but all
of her friends in this little group decided she should be the vice president for the class.
So they had her—when they gave out the ballots, listed the ballots, they only put her
name on, with nobody running against her. And we all thought, “Well, that’s not right.
That’s not a nice thing to do. She at least should have competition.” And everybody
pointed to me and said, “Why don’t you run against her?” So I said, “Okay.” Anyway, I
did and I won. And it was a little awkward because there were people who really never

4

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORES 2008/CAROL SALQUIST WHITNEY

got over that. And I enjoyed being vice; had a good time. Jerry Bays [Gerald Forbes
Bays] and Bill Wineberg [William Alvin Wineberg] and I were the class officers. And we
had—we did some good things. Our best event -- junior year the class had done the
traditional Stan Kenton at Mem Aud. And the Kenton at Mem Aud was a long tradition,
and it flopped miserably. [Note: Stanley Newcomb Kenton (December 15, 1911 – August
25, 1979) was a pianist who led a highly innovative, influential, and often controversial
American jazz orchestra.]
Calloway:

And—and what is that? Can you…

Whitney: Stan Kenton Concert at Memorial Auditorium; flopped miserably. We
lost a lot of money. So senior year Jerry, Bill and I said, “Okay, what can we do to
guarantee to make money?” We put on ‘Magoo at Mem Aud’ -- cartoon festival. [Note:
Quincy Magoo (or simply Mr. Magoo) is a cartoon character created at the UPA
animation studio in 1949.] And it was a huge success. We had Roadrunner and Magoo
and all of these—it was hilarious. And we had it, I think, two nights, and it was full both
nights. But just had a great evening. That was our best event our senior year.
Calloway:

Oh, that—that sounds wonderful.

Whitney:

Oh, it was nice. It was great fun.

Calloway: Now, are there any other people, like, that you went to school with that—
that stand out to you that you remember for any reason?
Whitney:
Calloway:

Oh, I remember most of them, actually. [laughs]
That’s a good thing.

Whitney: I knew a lot of people. I mean, it was not that big a class. There—I guess
when we started there were around a thousand, and then it was down to seven hundred
when we graduated, I think. But it—there were just a lot of good people, and made a lot
of friends. And just saw them. Last night was wonderful, when I saw so many of them
again, and I even recognized a lot of them.
Calloway:

Great.

Whitney: But—there were a lot of outstanding people in the class, but they—some
of them have gone on and done a lot more since then. You know, they’ve really had
successful lives, really wonderful. But in those days, we admired people for different
reasons. You know, if they were attractive. [laughs]
Calloway:

True.

Whitney: And, you know, because even though we were getting a good education,
we didn’t focus as much as people later did. And I kind of regretted that. You know,

5

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORES 2008/CAROL SALQUIST WHITNEY

after going to a girls’ school, I really was kind of interested in the social life. I did well.
I did well. But it was sort of—I thought, “Gosh, I missed opportunities. I really did.”
And I would have loved to—of course, now there are more opportunities.
Calloway:

Right.

Whitney: It’s just to the point that I—you know, I didn’t get any graduate degrees. I
couldn’t stay in school after that. And three years ago I decided—I teach part-time at
American University -- and I decided I wanted to have a Master’s degree, too. I thought
it’d be fun to go back to school, because I always loved school. So I did go to George
Mason University, and I got a Master’s in Public Policy. And I did much better than I did
as an undergraduate. And I thought “This is amazing. I thought I’d do worse.” But, you
know, Stanford taught me how to learn.
Calloway:

Hm-mmm.

Whitney: And I didn’t have the distractions that I had here on campus. So I did
extremely well. I had almost straight A’s for my Master’s. But I still give Stanford
credit for that, because it really taught me.
Calloway: That’s great. So what were some of your—the social activities that you
liked the best?
Whitney:

Hmmm… [laughs]

Calloway:

The ones you can put on tape.

Whitney:
And…

Oh. Well, the beer at Rossotti’s and Rudy’s; Friday afternoon at Rudy’s.

Calloway:

Was Rudy’s on campus, or off campus.

Whitney:
Calloway:
Whitney:
Calloway:

No, no, no. We couldn’t—you didn’t drink on campus. No.
It was a dry campus…
Yes.
…at that point.

Whitney: Oh, no, we couldn’t drink, although there were—there were exceptions,
but we would have been kicked out if we drank. But the things that were really fun were
the things they called reunions. And I thought, when I first heard about them, I thought,
“Why are we having a reunion? We’re here, you know.” But they were little events with
well-known bands and artists and so on, and that you’d pay so much, not very much, and
go and usually sit around on the floor. And I can remember: beer on a Friday afternoon.

6

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORES 2008/CAROL SALQUIST WHITNEY

And I can remember sitting on the floor in some building in front of the stage watching
George Shearing [Sir George Shearing OBE (born August 13, 1919, Battersea, London)
is an Anglo-American jazz pianist] and his group and just—I mean that was the kind of
thing that we did and it was so much fun. Or sometimes, like Pete Seeger [Peter "Pete"
Seeger (born May 3, 1919) is an American folk singer]: people liked folk music and
sometimes they’d show people like Pete Seeger and someone would show up at
Rossotti’s or Rudy’s on a Friday afternoon, and we’d all sit around and sing. And then of
course, Dave Guard was a year ahead of me, and so the Kingston Trio were—well, when
I was a junior, I guess, Dave Guard and Nick [Reynolds] and—oh, it wasn’t the Kingston
Trio, it was called the Calypsonians. Dave and Nick and some other people would play
at the Cracked Pot for beer, and we’d go and help them drink the beer. And then they
became the Kingston Trio, and they were a little above that. But still, they were around.
So we had a nice social life. We had fun. Parties. I mean the parties were always good.
And there were three times as many men as women, so—I mean you never had to go
without a date.
Calloway:

Now, where would you guys go on dates?

Whitney: Well, I don’t know. Movies, or the—hmmm, what did we do? Well, we
drank under age. That was probably not a good thing, but we did. And we often went
out drinking beer, or we’d go to L’Omelette or someplace like that, and listen to music
and dance and drink illegally. Nowadays, we don’t do that anymore—ever. Young
people should not drink. But we were—we didn’t know any better.
Calloway: That’s true. Were there any faculty members that really stuck out to you,
or that you remember?
Whitney:
Yes. I regret that in those days, we didn’t get to know the faculty as
well as we would have liked. But there were some that I just—I remember the one who
scared me, and I just loved his course. Wayne Vucinich [VUCINICH, WAYNE S.,
Associate Professor of History. A.B., California, 1936, M.A., 1937, Ph.D., 1941. At
Stanford since 1946] taught Russian History, Byzantine. And a friend and I signed up for
his course in Byzantine History our sophomore year. And he stands up in front of the
room -- I realize now he wasn’t even that old, but he just looked fierce. And he’d stand -he stood up in front of the room, and he looked at this list and he said, “There are two
sophomores in this class.” [laughs] Yes. He said, “And this is an upper division course,
you know.” Yes. And he said, “Who are the sophomores?” you know. And here we are:
deer in the headlights. So he sort of went like this, and he said, “Do you realize what
you’re getting into?” I was so scared of him. I just—it was a wonderful course. It was
just great. And we worked hard, but it was a really good course. And I really liked that.
And the other one I liked a lot was Professor Miller [MILLER, ALEXANDER, Lecturer in
Religion. M.A., University of New Zealand, 1932. At Stanford since 1950] who taught
religion. Taught fascinating courses in Christianity and history, and I just really liked his
courses. And—oh, there were others. There was one: I don’t remember his name, but
freshman year, freshman English: I think he was, he was young. I think he maybe was

7

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORES 2008/CAROL SALQUIST WHITNEY

still working on his Ph.D. It was the basic English class that we had to take. And was
really, he was kind of boring. He really was. And not, you know. But Jill Schary and I
were in the class. Jill was the daughter of Dore Schary, the Hollywood producer.
[Isadore ‘Dore’ Schary, 1905-1980] She was a character; real character. And she and I
were talking -- we all had to do a paper for this class, and he was very sort of threatening
about it. It had to be something good. And she said, “You know, I’ve heard that he
really is biased on, when he gives grades to, you know, people who write about things he
likes, and that sort of thing.” And she found out by checking with people before that one
of the subjects he really liked was Huey Long. So I wrote this wonderful paper on Huey
Long. And he loved it. I got an A. I felt a little guilty, but not really. Not really. So
anyway, I remember them. And there were others, I guess, but those are—they stand out.
Calloway: So you had talked a little bit about, you know, the student body, or the
people that you admired; different qualities now than then. Do you recall like how the
student body—the makeup of the student body -- you know, men, women, ethnic -- how
people jelled and stuff?
Whitney:
Calloway:

There was no such thing as ethnic, unfortunately.
Hm-mmm.

Whitney: It was really a shame. There was—I think there was some, a few Asian
students. As far as I know, we had one African American man in our class. He was
just—I love him. I was so mad he didn’t come to the reunion this time. He’s just a great
person. And I always liked him, you know, we were friends. But it was so—I thought,
you know, it must be so odd for him because there was a girl who was a year older, but it
just seemed so funny. It just wasn’t natural. But it was a shame.
Calloway:
Whitney:
Calloway:

Yeah.
The one thing about—of professors again, and it isn’t exactly a professor.
Hm-mmm. That’s okay.

Whitney:
But that I told this to my students now, and they’re just in awe; they
just can’t believe it. It was a course in Russian History. I think it was Russian
Revolution. And I can’t remember if it was Vucinich or Mazour [MAZOUR, ANATOLE
G., Professor of History. A.B., Nebraska, 1929; M.A., Yale, 1931; Ph.D., California,
1934. At Stanford since 1947]
who taught it. But when we got to the part—the First Revolution, and then the Bolshevik
Revolution: at that time Alexander Kerensky was at the Hoover Institution still.
[[Alexander Fyodorovich Kerensky, 1881-1970, Prime Minister of the Russian
Provisional Government, 1917] He was still alive. And he came and taught that one
session on the two revolutions and what happened, and how it happened that the
Bolsheviks took over. I mean this was … everything else could have gone. That was the

8

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORES 2008/CAROL SALQUIST WHITNEY

highlight of my education, I swear. Kerensky, right here in front of us. It was just
amazing.
Calloway:
Whitney:
Calloway:
Whitney:
Calloway:

Wow.
I mean that was just an experience that I will never forget.
Now were there any other—like speakers or…
Oh, yeah.
…people that came that you remember?

Whitney: Yes. My mind is going. Hmmm. Actually, after I graduated, I worked
for a couple of years as Department Secretary for Speech Pathology and Audiology in the
Medical Center. And Charles de Gaulle [General, statesman and President of France.
1890-1970] was here and toured—Medical Center was new then. And he came to tour it,
and I was one of the people who got to take him around on the tour.
Calloway:

Amazing.

Whitney: And that was nice. I enjoyed that. But other than that, we had most—you
know, a lot of well-known musicians were in the area because of San Francisco. And
we’d go up to the city and see them, and they’d sometimes come down to campus. But
we were kind of the apathetic generation, so we didn’t get all excited about major
political figures and things. I hate to say it, but we just didn’t. So we probably missed
opportunities. I know I did, but can’t do it all.
Calloway: True. Now, was there anything that you didn’t like about Stanford?
About coming here?
Whitney: Well, no, I can’t think off hand. But one thing that was startling to me that
was kind of a disappointment, because, you know, in those days we’d grow up going to
movies. And in the movies, the football games, everybody’s all bundled up and, you
know, they wear these big chrysanthemums and everything, you know. And they’d go
out and cheer, and they’d wear hats, and all this stuff. And you know, to me, that was
what football was. And I couldn’t believe it when I got here. And football, and it’s hot,
and it just wasn’t right. And everybody’s drinking these little frozen orange things.
Well, that isn’t, that wasn’t football. It was just such a letdown. I thought, oh, no. But,
of course, I got used to it. But it was such a shock, just getting too warm on football
game days. Then we all had to wear, you know, the red skirt, the white blouse, and the
red feather…
Calloway:

For the games?

9

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORES 2008/CAROL SALQUIST WHITNEY

Whitney: …for the Indians. Yes, for the games. We all had to wear the red feather in
our hair. And generally, the feather would be, it would fall sideways unless you had a lot
of hair. But, oh, it was required.
Calloway:
Whitney:
Calloway:
Whitney:
Calloway:

Wow.
Hm-mmm. It was really…
Were there any other kinds of things that were required, like the way…
Oh, yes.
…you dressed? Oh.

Whitney: Well, in those days, you could not wear any pants, you know, instead of a
skirt, past the Post Office. Never anywhere near the Quad: no pants, always skirts.
And—what was the other thing I was just thinking? Oh, well, of course, then, you know,
there’s the business of ‘late leaves’ and all of that. We had—curfew was ten o’clock, you
know, and we had a certain number of ‘late leaves’ each term. But there weren’t that
many. There were—I think freshman and sophomore year, there were certain number of
one o’clocks, and—three our freshman year, two o’clocks or something like—but we
had, it was very strict. We didn’t ever have men above the first floor anywhere. It was
not done.
Calloway:

So were you always in on curfew?

Whitney: Yeah. I was, actually. Oh, once I was fifteen minutes late, or something,
or within the fifteen minute margin; and my date sent me flowers because he felt bad
about it that I was slightly late. But no, we were pretty careful, most of us.
Calloway:

So what would happen if you were, if you didn’t make curfew?

Whitney: I don’t know how many times it took to get in real trouble, and you’d go
before the Social Coordinating Board or whatever it was. Yeah. If you were really late,
or were sneaking out, or something, then you really were in trouble. You had to -- some
people—I think there were cases where people were suspended or expelled for staying
out all night, things like that.
Calloway: Yeah. Now, when you graduated, were there any special ways that you
celebrated? Or anything that the class did in regards to graduation?
Whitney:
Calloway:

Can’t think of anything special; it’s the usual traditional stuff, I guess.
Now, do you remember how you celebrated graduation?

10

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORES 2008/CAROL SALQUIST WHITNEY

Whitney: Well, I was engaged at the time, and I think—yeah, my parents came, his
parents came. We didn’t do—I don’t remember what we did, really. This was my exhusband [laughs]
Calloway:
Whitney:
Calloway:
Whitney:
Calloway:
Whitney:
Calloway:

Oh, okay. Okay. I…
I really don’t remember what we did.
That fine. You don’t have to…
Long ago.
So you did make it all the way through the four years.
Oh, yeah.
So they should have given you the seven-fifty to begin with.

Whitney:
Well, the fourth year: the problem was that at the end of my third
year, I—as senior class vice president, I knew I was going to be busy, and I really didn’t
want to work as many hours, and so I asked my parents if I could get a little more money.
And my mother said “No, absolutely not. In fact, we have to cut it this year because your
sister’s going to go to college next year, and so we can’t give you enough money.” And I
didn’t know what I was going to do. So I went and talked to, I think her name was Mrs.
Brown [BROWN, ELVA FAY, Chief Counselor for Women, and Lecturer in Education.
A.B., California, 1924, M.A., 1925. At Stanford since 1946], the Dean of Women. And I
said “I don’t—you know I don’t know what to do because I just don’t have enough now.”
And she managed to find an obscure scholarship, I think a couple of small ones; a total of
five hundred dollars to keep me going my senior year. One of them was a Standard Oil
Leaders for Tomorrow Scholarship: very small, but very demanding. They showed up. I
was living in Durand House on the Row. And they took pictures of me and interviewed
me for a little article in their employee paper, and all of that. And it was sort of a joke,
and then they sent these pictures and things and the stories to me. And my friends in
Durand thought it would be really funny. They got hold of this stuff. And I came home
from class one day and I saw people out in front of Durand laughing. There was this big
banner “Home of the Leader for Tomorrow.” And on the porch was this easel with my
pictures and all this stuff, the famous Leader for Tomorrow. I was so embarrassed. For
five hundred dollars, I had to go through that. It was just awful. It was really bad.
Calloway:

Wow.

Whitney: So—but I made it. So we had, we kind of had, maybe a little too much of
a sense of humor sometimes. We all, we did some very crazy things. So—nothing
dangerous, but some fairly…
Calloway:

Well, what were some of those other crazy things?

11

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORES 2008/CAROL SALQUIST WHITNEY

Whitney:
Calloway:

I guess I can’t get in trouble now.
Nope.

Whitney: Well, it was really not nice. Florence Moore, when it was new -- we
resented living there anyway, because we only were there because we’d drawn a bad
number and we got stuck there. But there was an easy way to get in from above. There
was a drive down and in to the area, and it was the most logical. But they wanted to use
that as a fire road and have everybody go all the way around and come in another way.
And we didn’t like that. So they had these posts with chains in the holes in the ground
there. And we went and bought quick drying cement. And one night we took out the
poles and filled them.
Calloway:

Resourceful.

Whitney: No one ever knew who did it. But we did. But they had to come and take
care of it, but we were just so determined. But it didn’t work. So—yeah, we did things
like that; not very nice.
Calloway:
you…

Were there other escapades or adventures that you had at Stanford that

Whitney: Well, the fun one—I mean they were just little harmless things. Again,
Florence Moore was new, and everybody, the directors and everything were very serious
about this wonderful new space. And we thought it was horrible because we wanted to
live in the old Row houses. And each house in Florence Moore had a little living area,
sort of, and they had a fireplace and these shelves. And the director came and talked to
us and said, “You know, we are going to let you decide how you want to decorate that,
and what you want to put on those shelves to make it look really nice.” Well, we
gathered up an enormous number of—what kind of beer?—Hamms beer cans. I think it
was Hamms. They were sort of gold and pretty. And we filled the shelves top to bottom,
just solid. Yeah, and we went during the night and we did this. And—oh, there was a
real stink about that, but they didn’t know who did it. They never caught us. I mean that
was awful, but it wasn’t awful, it was—we loved it. We thought it was great. But it kind
of represented our spirit. But anyway; so we did a lot of silly things like that: nothing
damaging ever, but just kind of fun.
Calloway:

What’s a lesson that you think you learned from coming to Stanford?

Whitney: Hmmm. I don’t know. What did I learn? Well, I always had the—it’s a
silly lesson, but it’s a good one to know. I always had the idea, because school wasn’t
very hard for me in the past, I had the idea I could do any, take any course and do well if
I just studied. You know, it’s not a problem; any course. Well, I took, the fall quarter of
my senior year, there was this course called Logic. And I thought, well, that sounds kind
of interesting. I thought it was like philosophy logic. It was mathematical logic. I was

12

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORES 2008/CAROL SALQUIST WHITNEY

totally unprepared for it. There wasn’t a requirement or anything, but I remember sitting
down and I took the book, first assignment, and I read it. And I kind of stopped and—
what is this? And I read it again. I couldn’t understand it. And this went on every
[assignment] and I’d go see the professor and I’d say, “I’m not getting this. I don’t
understand it.” He’d say, “Which problem don’t you understand?” I said, “Which
problem? It’s the whole course.” And I was going through this course with a solid ‘F’
all the way into the final and I couldn’t do it. I couldn’t get it. And I was just panicking.
And I’d never gotten below a B in a course in my life. And I thought, “My God, what am
I going to do.?” And so in Dead Week, there was some PhD candidate [who] was doing
an all-day session review on Logic. And I was there at eight in the morning. And we sat
there. And around noon, this light went on in my head. I thought, “Oh, my God. That’s
it.” And I did fine on the final. But that was, the lesson to me was, “Don’t count on it.
You know, there are things that are difficult, and if they are, you should ask for help.”
And you can get—and that was something, you know, three years ago, I decided for fun
to get a Master’s in Public Policy. It was a very quantitative Master’s program, which
was not exactly my usual thing. There was one course, the first course I took I got a tutor
because it was so—the professor was, he was new and he was sort of scattered, and it was
hard to follow him, and he was doing things that were much more advanced than they
expected in that course. So I got a tutor. And I was not, I didn’t mind. I was—you
know, I was not proud, I got a tutor. And then when I took Microeconomics, which was
required, they said “You don’t need calculus.” But they kind of assumed you had it. I
didn’t have anything past Algebra II in high school. And the first set of assignments, he
said “Everything will be fine as long as you can take a derivative.” What’s a derivative?
So I called my son, who is an engineer. I said, “Ross, I need help.” He taught me basic
calculus, partly over the phone, and then I went out to Colorado to stay with them for a
week, and he’d give me problems every night. “And here’s your assignment for tonight,”
and he taught me enough calculus to make it through Microeconomics with an A-minus.
So because I knew—you know, before when I was an undergraduate and in high school, I
would never have asked for help, ever, because I figured I knew too much. But at
Stanford I learned, finally, that nobody knows that much, and that you can’t always count
on making it through just because you’re intelligent, because everybody else was
intelligent. And that was the story of the curve, you know, grading on the curve.
Calloway:

Yeah.

Whitney: So it’s a lesson that people do need to learn. And I could see younger
people in this Master’s program who didn’t get that. And I’d say, “Why don’t you get a
tutor? A lot of good students are tutors.” “Oh, well, no, I’m not going to get a tutor.”
Well, heck, why not? So, that’s a big part of learning…
Calloway:

That’s a great lesson.

Whitney: …is knowing what you don’t know and what you have to have help on.
But I learned a lot here. I learned how to learn, and it was a lifelong habit now that I
really feel good about. And we all kind of—you came out of here: the whole point then

13

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORES 2008/CAROL SALQUIST WHITNEY

with the Liberal Arts education wasn’t to prepare you for a career, but to teach you how
to learn, and how to continue learning. And I think that’s the most valuable thing that has
been forgotten in a lot of schools today. I teach at American University as an adjunct
[professor], and I teach in the Government Department. And there’s so much
specialization in the schools, and I think, “Gosh, what people are missing so much.” My
son, who’s an engineer, is very much an engineer. But he originally started at Cornell in
their program, and just hated it and left after two years, because it was a four-year
engineering program that -- he got in trouble for sneaking and taking an English course,
because you don’t have time for that sort of thing.
Calloway:

Oh, yeah.

Whitney: So he left and went somewhere else where he could take all sorts of things
and be a better rounded engineer. And see, that’s—engineers may not have been very
well-rounded when I was here either.
Calloway:

Hm-mmm.

Whitney: But in Liberal Arts, you really had a basis for everything. It was the
traditional classical kind of education. And it was great. I think they should do it now.
Calloway:
years…
Whitney:

Well, that’s great. When you were an undergraduate back just a few

Yes. One or two years ago.

Calloway: …did you have any—any dreams? Did you want to aspire to do anything?
Whitney: No, we weren’t taught to aspire to do anything; we were taught to aspire to
get married and be intelligent and well-educated enough to have cocktail party
conversation, and be good wives to our husbands. We were brainwashed.
Calloway:

Hm-mmm.

Whitney: It never would have occurred to me to think about graduate school, even if
I could afford it. Now, there were people in my class who did. Most of them, though,
started later, the girls. But I was not—I was the first woman in my family to finish an
undergraduate degree.
Calloway:

Oh, wow.

Whitney: My father had a graduate, had an undergraduate degree, but none of the
women in the family had ever had a college degree. And so I was supposed to be the
first, and I had to sort of hold up my end. And so it never—my parents would never have
encouraged me to do graduate work. That would just be silly. So that’s—you know,

14

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORES 2008/CAROL SALQUIST WHITNEY

what kind of aspirations can you have when you’re—took me a while to get out of that
mindset. But I did.
Calloway:

Yeah.

Whitney:

I did.

Calloway: Is there anything that you would like people like, in generations in years to
come, to know about your time at Stanford, or to help enrich their time at Stanford?
Whitney: I don’t know. The students nowadays are so far ahead of where we were.
I mean, it’s frightening and just fascinating talking to them, because they do so much.
They are doing things that we never even approached as undergraduates. And it’s
wonderful. I don’t know how they do it all. I feel a little guilty that we—one of the big
parts of college was social, but in a sense, I think it was a healthy thing, too. And I think
there’s still that social kind of atmosphere. It’s just—there were just some things that
were different then that maybe I think are a little easier for kids to deal with. And a lot of
us have talked about this business of the curfews. They don’t have that anywhere now.
And we felt as eighteen-year-olds that that was a good thing, because we had an excuse
to say, “No, I want to, I need to go home. We have a curfew.” Because eighteen-yearolds are young, and I just felt that was such a, sort of a comfort zone to be in. I kind of
worry about some young people now, who aren’t prepared for that kind of social life.
But I mean students now should know that what we learned, we’re still using. You
know, our brains still work. And we really—our bodies generally do, too.
Calloway:

Yeah.

Whitney: But—and maybe they should know that when you had the Stanford
education, it’s going to last. It’s an investment that is going to keep you going. Fifty
years later, you’re going to still be benefitting from that education. It’s that valuable.
Calloway: That’s great. Are there any other things that you can remember? Any,
again, escapades, or…
Whitney: No more. No, no. I wasn’t even going to tell those. No. No. I don’t
know; it’s hard. I just, I feel good about coming back. I don’t come back that often
because I live in Virginia. But I enjoyed it, and I see these people, and I still feel we have
a bond. And it’s really nice. And I—you know, there are some people in the class who
didn’t know as many people, especially girls would get involved with a relationship
early, and some of them got married early, and never really knew as many people. And
they come back now, and a couple of them have said, “Gee, you know, I don’t really
know that many people.” And I thought, oh, my gosh. I know, you know, all the
hundreds of people because they were there, and it was interesting to meet them. And it’s
really nice even now. If I talk to somebody I don’t know that was in my class, and it’s so
interesting. But I’m glad I had that opportunity. But I -- sort of a network everywhere.

15

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORES 2008/CAROL SALQUIST WHITNEY

Calloway:
Whitney:

That’s good. Now, obviously the campus has changed…
Oh, God, yes.

Calloway: … since you’ve been here. What do you think about the changes, and…
Whitney: Oh, it’s just so crowded. I mean, there’s so many buildings, it’s just—oh,
it’s just really is a different place. And I know it has to be done, but it was just so
much—I mean, now I can’t find my way around half the—I can now, but the first couple
days, I: where am I? And I was here five years ago. But there’s buildings going up
everywhere. And it was a lot more, you know, ‘The Farm’ when I was here. And we’d
go up to Lake Lag and sit by the Boathouse and oh, we had—I bet you’ve heard already,
maybe, about the Battle of Lake Lagunita?
Calloway:
Whitney:
Calloway:

No.
Of course, you haven’t done these.
No.

Whitney: The Battle of Lake Lagunita: I put something in my—no; someone else
put something in their class book thing. I did a question on the trivia quiz. What was it?
The Phi Kaps [Phi Kappa Sigma] had a, got this boat for some reason, this old fishing
boat or something that they were fixing up and fooling with to put on Lake Lag. And
they got, somebody rented from the Navy Base or something, this huge fire hose type
thing. It was a big thing. And they put that over the back to use for propulsion, you
know, and then go roaring across the lake. Well, I guess it was Sigma Chi’s, and
somebody else, decided that they were going get them. So they had this Battle of Lake
Lagunita. And here we are on a nice day, sitting on the Boathouse dock, and the music
from Victory at Sea is playing behind us. And this boat suddenly comes leaping across
the lake, you know, with the spraying water and a pirate flag, and they come roaring.
And out from under the dock comes Robin [Robert Whitney] Moore, who was a
swimmer—biggest shoulders I’ve ever seen—on this battering ram thing. And they’re
coming out. And somebody else—I don’t know what else; they had another craft of
some kind. And the Phi Kaps’ boat was called the Aqua Wazoo. Well, they sank the
Aqua Wazoo. It was very sad. But it was just—with Victory at Sea playing the entire
time, and I’m like, what a classic. You know, it was just wonderful.
Calloway:
Whitney:
Calloway:
Whitney:

And what year was that?
1958.
So it was your senior year.
Yeah.

16

STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORES 2008/CAROL SALQUIST WHITNEY

Calloway:

Yeah.

Whitney: It was amazing. But I think it was Bob [Robert Shaeffer] Gast who was
the captain of the Aqua Wazoo, as I recall, who put it in his class page in the class book,
the Battle of Lake Lagunita.
Calloway:
Whitney:

Well, that’s great.
But—so it was more casual then. It was fun.

Calloway: That’s great. Now, is there anything else you want to add, or anything we
haven’t talked about, that maybe from talking to your classmates, like over the last couple
days you’d like to…
Whitney: No, I don’t think so. I just, I could--I talk too much anyway, so I’m sure
you’ve got enough. I love to talk.
Calloway:
Whitney:
Calloway:

This is great.
Because I—you know, I teach, and I speak, and I do all that so. So…
Well, this is…

Whitney: …I enjoy it. But I—you know, when I came in I thought, “Gee, I don’t know
what I’m going to say. Couldn’t think of—gee, I don’t know what I could think of.” But
you know, when you start -- when you start, you just—it just comes. So…
Calloway: Well, we thank you so much for taking time because I know it’s a busy
weekend. But thank you so much.
