
Earl: This is Marie Earl with the Stanford Historical Society’s Oral History
Program. Today is April 7, 2016. I’m here with Stanford University alumna,
volunteer leader, and benefactor, Linda Meier. We’re conducting this
interview at the Frances C. Arrillaga Alumni Center. I’d like to begin by
asking you to tell us a bit about where you were born and where you grew
up.
Meier: [00:00:22] [laughter] I was born in Denver, Colorado. I moved to Los
Angeles when I was two, so I have no memory of Denver at all. My father
was a doctor and my mother was from Los Angeles. I grew up in Southern
California and went to school at El Rodeo Grammar School [El Rodeo
School], then Beverly Hills High School. I came to Stanford and I never went
back. [laughter] Once one was up here, [one] really didn’t have to return.
Earl: Were either of your parents involved in community service?
Meier: [00:01:05] My father was. He was very involved in community activities,
chaired the--I think it was called the Community Chest at the time. He
chaired various boards. He raised my sister and me to focus on that. During
summers, we would volunteer at a camp in the Los Angeles city area, which

13

was more of an underprivileged children’s camp. We tended to do quite a
few volunteer kinds of things. In high school, we were both very involved in
community activities, and I was involved in student government and the
honor society. It was sort of part of my activity, part of my culture, part of
my focus, and I continued it as an adult.
Earl: I’m curious, what was Beverly Hills High like at that time?
Meier: [00:02:16] Beverly Hills High was a very good academic school. It was
interesting because it was very Beverly Hills and you had a Hollywood
influence, which was very prevalent. The story on that was my parents had
insisted that my sister and I go away to college, when that time came, and not
to the same college. My sister went to Wellesley [Wellesley College]. We’re
two years apart, born on the same day. I skipped a grade so we were just a
year apart in school. My sister came back at Thanksgiving and was pointing
to the attire and a variety of people that she would see on the street. “Look at
that, look at that,” she’d say to my mother and to me. You sort of become
quite used to it, a little flashy and a different way.
I came to Stanford the following year [laughter] and at Thanksgiving,
same thing happened. That was one of the reasons they wanted us to go
away, I think.
Earl: Are you close to this day, you and your sister?
Meier: [00:03:32] We are extraordinarily close. We’re very, very lucky.
Earl: Where does she live?
Meier: [00:03:38] She lives in Los Angeles. She’s involved in community activities
and in education. She’s really my mentor and my best friend. She is very close

14

to her children and vice versa with her. We’re very fortunate.
Earl:

That’s very nice. You ended up at Stanford. Did you think of other places?

Meier: [00:04:09] I did. The Seven Colleges Conference [now called Seven Sisters]
and Stanford were the only schools I looked at. Wellesley was out because
Brenda was there. I was thinking of Smith [Smith College]. I didn’t like
Radcliffe [Radcliffe College]. Vassar [Vassar College] was too remote. As I
looked at the other ones, I came up to visit Stanford. I stayed, actually, with a
friend of my sister and liked it very much.
Earl: What were your impressions?
Meier: [00:04:44] I liked the feel of the campus. I liked the students--and [it had] a
lot of energy, very pretty campus. I almost had a foot-in-the-mouth disease
because I went for an interview while I was up that year and I spoke with a
freshman admissions officer. I was planning on being a math major and I
was going to go on to business.
I said to him, “I’m not coming to college for my MRS.” I thought I
was being very smart that way.
He said, “I don’t know what’s wrong with that because my wife and I
were married as juniors.” I thought, well, I can cross that school off my list.
Lo and behold, guess who did get married as a sophomore. So, you never
know. Things happen.
Earl: What about student life? What was student life like then?
Meier: [00:05:50] I was a freshman in Roble Hall and Two Center. It was all singles.
You ended up becoming friendly with certain girls. I had actually a very
unusual situation. They had a bus tour and I was sitting on a seat and a boy

15

came in. He sat down next to me. I said, “Where are you from?” He was
from here. His father was a law professor at Stanford. Then he asked where I
was from, and I said I was from Southern California. I never volunteered
Beverly Hills to begin with. I would sort of get to that.
He said, “Well where?”
I said, “Beverly Hills.”
He said, “Well, my aunt teaches at Beverly Hills High School.”
His aunt was Miss Hurlbut. When he said the last name, I said,
“You’re Johnny, [laughter] because she used to talk about Johnny all the
time.” That was Professor Hurlbut at the Law School’s son. It was amazing.
Earl: What was the student body then [at Stanford]? I’m trying to [think] how big
it was-Meier: [00:07:23] I don’t know what the numbers were, but it was not equal men
and women at that time. It was just a very positive experience. I had a
different experience. I had met Tony [Tony Meier], my husband, the summer
before coming to Stanford. I hadn’t wanted to meet any boys or know
anybody. Somebody had suggested that I meet him. He was getting out. I
was coming in. I went out with him and he just was great, a real gentleman.
He [Tony] was president of his fraternity, and he had made a ruling that you
could not date freshman because some freshman girl had turned in his house
for liquor or something. He was violating his own rules. I dated other people.
I dated him and one thing led to another. I was not anticipating it at all.
It was a very unique place--the classes were excellent.
Earl: They were different from high school?

16

Meier: [00:08:46] Very. Very stimulating. It was interesting because we were able to
coast as graduates of Beverly High. We had already had some of the
programs--English and so forth. You felt very well prepared, very
comfortable, and willing to try some different classes. As a sophomore, I had
taken a sociology class. I believe the professor was Professor Cord or
McCord. That was just very stimulating and very engaging.
I took a class from a Professor Volkart [Edmund H. Volkart], which
was sociology of health and illness. I was very impressed with that and really
focused on that throughout. I had changed to a major in sociology, and I was
doing research for him on a book he was writing. Then he moved to the
University of Oregon to become head of the Sociology Department up there.
It was at a time when Stanford Hospital was moving down here, in 1959. I
did some research and interviewed patients to look at their familial
relationships and how those impacted their health. It was at a time when
psychosomatic illness became a very popular focus, but that was psychology.
The sociological causes had not been researched and that was what Volkart
was engaged in--I was fascinated with it.
Earl: Was that unusual to have that kind of experience as an undergrad?
Meier: [00:10:44] It may have been. I was lucky. Yes, I was very excited. It’s very
interesting because, to me, sociology is very commonsensical. It really is
logical, the way one looks at things. It hadn’t been studied. You could predict
health and illness in different kinds of social groups and cultural groups.
Things that we all take for granted, but it hadn’t been researched at that time.
Earl: So there really was no hospital?

17

Meier: [00:11:18] The hospital came in 1959. That’s when I was doing the research-when it came down.
Earl: Right at the beginning, you met Tony. It was somebody who suggested that
you would be a good person to talk to?
Meier: [00:11:33] Right, exactly.
Earl: Was it typical/atypical to be engaged and/or married during--?
Meier: [00:11:41] Very atypical. I was the first one. It was the last thing I anticipated.
I had not planned on doing that at all. It wasn’t going to change what I was
going to do. Tony was out of school. We were going to move to Portland,
which is where he’s from. I was going to transfer to Reed [Reed College], but
Reed didn’t have a lot of the classes that I wanted. Tony said, “If it’s that
important, we’ll stay here and I’ll work and then, when you finish, we’ll go.”
That’s exactly what we didn’t do because we never left. [laughter] We became
engaged.
Earl: Was that because he became so--?
Meier: [00:12:20] We became engaged in my program. We were married in 1959. I
was eighteen and it was January of my sophomore year. I took off winter
quarter and then I went for a year straight so that I wasn’t behind my
experience class. I graduated on time. I was going to go for my master’s and
then I became pregnant with our first child. I had a thing--I didn’t want to be
on campus pregnant. I always [laughter] had a mental block on that, so I
wasn’t. Stanford was part and parcel of our lifestyle. It was different being
married, but it didn’t impact my experience. I had very good friends, but I
never studied past 5 p.m.

18

That was the deal that I made with Tony. If we stayed here and if I
went to school, that I would be very programmed in my scheduling--I took a
very heavy schedule and was able to do that, but I closed the books at five.
Earl: Did they have married student housing?
Meier: [00:13:32] No, we lived off campus. We lived in Menlo Park. The apartment
building still exists. [laughter] I drive by every once in awhile. We got an
apartment where children were not allowed because I wanted to study during
the day. I didn’t want any noise. We were there for three years.
Earl: What did your parents think about you getting married?
Meier: [00:13:57] I think they were a little surprised, but they also knew I wasn’t
someone who would do something in a haphazard way. I wrote them a letter.
They had met Tony and had liked him, but hadn’t anticipated that I would be
getting married at that point. It wasn’t changing anything I did. It’s funny
because our boys are swimmers and have great time management skills,
which athletes do. I think when you have a challenging program--the busier
your schedule, the better your time management skills are. I was able to do
that. I cooked and enjoyed it. We entertained quite a bit because Tony’s
friends were all out of school and in San Francisco. We had a very normal
married situation, but quite different from what I had anticipated.
Earl: So interesting. What was it like to be raising children in this area? Were you
close to mothers’ groups? Were you so busy with school-Meier: [00:15:16] You didn’t have play groups like they do now. We built a house in
Stanford Hills, which was all young families practically. I became involved--I
wasn’t going to be sitting home. I became involved in the Junior League and

19

became very active in that. I was involved with other mothers, but it wasn’t
the same type of thing they do now. It’s much more programmed. I think we
were a little bit more casual in that. We eventually had three children. Once I
got into the sort of young mode, I was determined to have all my children by
the time I was twenty-five. Don’t ask me why, but that was sort of it.
Our children were all early. Our oldest was four weeks early, our
second was six weeks early, and our daughter was seven weeks early. I just
made it before--she’s on the twenty-second of May and I’m on the thirtyfirst. [laughter] I had all the children by the time I was twenty-five. I was
involved in the children’s activities, just community activities--school things,
the normal kinds of things.
Earl: What about the things going on in the world around, like Vietnam? Were
they felt here in this area?
Meier: [00:17:03] No--we were just a window on that. We were very lucky because
Tony wasn’t in Vietnam. I had some friends from college who were in
Vietnam, but it wasn’t really a focus. We were sort of the complacent
generation and so there weren’t major issues. Older generations were in the
Korean War. I didn’t really know anybody who was that. My father was in
World War II and almost got called back when Korea occurred. I remember
the concern that he might have to go. We were a window on that time. We
talk about it now because it’s quite different. The ones who went to Vietnam,
that I’ve seen in reunions, were never the same. I don’t know whether any of
your friends had that experience-Earl: My husband had a draft number, but didn’t get called up.

20

Meier: [00:18:05] It just was horrible, you know. Anyway, it’s not dissimilar to what
we have now with the Middle East.
Earl: What about the women’s movement? Was that something you felt here?
Meier: [00:18:21] It was interesting. I’m not a feminist. I always tended to go in
directions that were not typically female directions or interests academically-you know, math was my passion and that was very unusual. That was just my
interest. My father was very interested in that. It was quite natural. My sister
was very much into the humanities more, very fluent in French and so forth.
Jing Lyman [Elizabeth “Jing” Lyman] tried to get me involved in CROW
[Center for Research On Women].
Jing had suggested that I become involved. It was interesting because
I will never forget there was a luncheon at Phyllis Draper’s home. Jing was
doing a presentation on CROW, trying to engage these women as donors.
Jing called me afterwards to see how I felt she had done.
I said, “Well, you did a wonderful job, but, you have to realize
women of today do not see themselves as donors. That’s really been a role
that has been a man’s role. So, what you were asking them to do was not
something they were comfortable with.”
She said, “You know, I hadn’t thought of that.”
It was sort of Jing’s feminist side. This is the Bay [Area] way. They
had a difficult time. It was interesting because little did I realize that I would
become so involved in women’s athletics. That was really just happenstance,
I would say.
There was a woman whose vision was to have women’s athletic

21

scholarship support. Her name was Peg Phelps. Peg was quite a bit older
than I, probably twenty years or so, and was interested in starting a program.
There had been a couple of coffees. I had been invited, but had refused
because I wasn’t really interested. Peg was interested because she had heard
that I had done a lot of organizational work and that I might be helpful in
fashioning it that way. I had lunch one day with Abbie von Schlegell [Abbie
J. von Schlegell] and I--don’t know if that name rings a bell with you--she
used to work here. Peg Phelps popped up. I thought anybody who is that
passionate about this, I need to listen to. That’s how I became involved.
Earl: Was that the first really Stanford engagement then?
Meier:

[00:21:29] Yes, that--well, no. I had been involved with PACE [Plan of
Action for a Challenging Era]. Yes, but it wasn’t really a meaningful kind of
participation. You were just one of the volunteers.

Earl: Remind me the acronym.
Meier: [00:21:44] I can’t even remember what it was.
Earl: It was a fundraising--.
Meier: [00:21:49] It was a fundraising activity. I liked to do things that were
meaningful, that challenged you. I’m big on challenges. Tell me why I can’t
do it and then I’ll go. PACE didn’t give me much satisfaction, but the fact
that one could create an organization, a board, a structure that could be
effective was really intriguing to me. Of course, you had the challenges with
the Buck Club [now called the Buck/Cardinal Club] and the men’s [athletic
scholarship] support group, which had been very successful.
Earl: Did they view this [the Cardinal Club] as competition?

22

Meier: [00:22:43] A threat, a major threat.
Earl: How did you work through that?
Meier: [00:22:51] I did a presentation for their board one day. We had quite a bit of
objection--you know, “You’re going to take money from the Buck Club.” I
was explaining, “Quite the contrary. I think it probably will enhance
everybody’s fundraising.” I said, “Many of you have daughters, too.” There
was just silence. I think that got through to them more than anything. I said,
“Don’t you want them to have the same opportunities that your sons have?”
There were some people who were quite difficult to work with and others
who really sort of came around. I still credit Jim Plunkett [James William
Plunkett] with much of our success.
I asked him [Jim] to be on the board maybe the second or third year.
He gave us credibility. He was admired by so many, such an incredible star,
humble, and a wonderful human being. He had a golf tournament, the
Plunkett Golf Tournament [Cardinal Club Celebrity/Amateur Golf
Tournament]. Another one who had great vision and was involved, before I
ever became involved, was Frank Lodato [Frank J. Lodato]. Frank was very
interested in seeing this and he was a friend of Peg’s. I think they may have
even gone to school together. Dick Madigan [Richard B. Madigan] was
another one who was interested in this. Dick was an athlete himself.
I’ll never forget that I had the first board meeting at my home and
had drafted a structure with committees and various things. [laughter] Frank
came up to me afterwards, and he said, “Now, who did this?”
I looked at him and said, “I did.”

23

“Oh really?”
I said, “Are you trying to tell me that you don’t think a woman can
do this?” [laughter] I teased him unmercifully. “Who did this?” I love that.
Earl: Do you think it was something that was bubbling up here at Stanford or was
it in a national context?
Meier: [00:25:27] It had to be. It was mandated with Title IX. Andy Geiger
[Ferdinand “Andy” Geiger] is the one who made it happen. He was athletic
director at the time. Andy had the guts to take on the Buck Club. That’s
exactly what it took. It took guts and he was willing to. He ended up with
some arguments with them and he was willing to do that [because] he felt so
strongly about it. Andy is to receive a tremendous amount of credit. Donna
Garton [Donna T. Garton] came to work with us in 1979.
Earl: I was thinking that was maybe where you met Donna.
Meier: [00:26:02] That’s where I met her.
Earl: Started working together?
Meier: [00:26:03] And we’ve been together ever since. She was a gift and so that was
an important one. She has a lot of the historical perspective of what went on.
There was competition because the Buck Club really felt the competition. We
decided our best way to go about fundraising was to do event fundraising.
You really wouldn’t have the constituency if you just did the normal Buck
Club style of annual giving type of thing. Our first auction was in 1980 and, I
think, Coming Up Winners was what we titled it. We’d pulled together a group.
The beauty of event fundraising is that you can coalesce a group that
isn’t a natural constituency. They don’t have to be Stanford alums. They want

24

to be interested in working on something that’s going to be successful,
something that they believe in, and they like the camaraderie that one has in
working with others. We were able to build a much broader base than just
our board.
Earl: Some of those prizes were amazing. Tickets for the Oscars. How did you get
that?
Meier: [00:27:35] We scrounged. We had a wonderful group. We did an auction in
1982 in Los Angeles that Cally Stenger--who was one of that older group, a
friend of Peg Phelps, and had been an athlete--she helped manage that. In
1984, it was getting to a point where auctions were sort of the norm and, so,
you needed to do something a little bit different. Our auctioneers that we had
used were car auctioneers and so they were a little rough around the edges
and quite vocal, to say the least. I wondered if we couldn’t do a national
auction in different locations. They’re the ones who said to me, “No.”
I said, “Why?”
“Well, it’s never been done.”
I said, “Okay, well, we have constituents in various cities around the
country and it would really make us different. It also would enable us to get
prizes because we would be--”
I would go through the AAA [American Automobile Association]
travel book and travel magazines and pick out certain trips or things that I
thought it would be wonderful to have. We got statistics from the Alumni
Association about our alumni base and the numbers who would be covered
by exposure from this group. There’s that travel group that is in Seattle and

25

he does the private plane. Anyway, I called him cold. He was doing trains at
that time. I said, “We’ve got a wonderful opportunity for you. We’re going to
do this and the auction will be in New York, Denver, San Francisco, and
Washington, DC.”
We had four sites and you have the alumni base, and so forth.
Anyway, he gave us a trip for a family. I read about a wagon train in Idaho,
or somewhere. Anyway, [I] called them. We got that. Then we got the one
that was really intriguing to me--the dog races in Alaska.
Earl: Iditarod.
Meier: [00:30:19] Actually, a friend of ours from Chicago bought that for herself and
her son. These items were just amazing. We were able to do that.
Then we did our final auction, which was not for the Cardinal Club.
It was the one for the 100th Big Game, when we did it with Cal [University of
California, Berkeley], and that gave us the biggest leverage ever. We had
2,500 people attend at the Cow Palace. We netted 2.4 million, so each school
got 1.2. The only way I would do it is if we split it fifty-fifty because I knew
we would be doing most of the work. I didn’t want to get into anything as far
as judging who should get this or that. We had a very large committee, men
and women.
I started as the chair. When we had the 100th Big Game, Ted Leland
was the athletic director at the time. Ted called me in and wanted my advice.
He and the athletic director at Cal had talked about doing something for the
100th Big Game, which certainly was logical. So we met. John Kasser was the
athletic director at Cal at the time. We had lunch one day. They were telling

26

me about the dinner dance they were going to do. I looked at the two of
them. I said, “You’ve got to be kidding. No one’s going to go to a dinner
dance and certainly not going to give you lots of money. You’ve got a
fundraising opportunity of a lifetime. You know, we’ve done auctions. We
know how to do them well. This one would be unlike anything we’ve ever
done, if we did it for both schools.”
It was an interesting process because Cal had never done fundraising,
as we had at Stanford. I was the chair and I approached my friends at Cal and
said, “Who’s the woman that you think--and I want a woman--should be the
co-chair from Cal because we’ve got to have two. It can’t be just Stanford.
It’s not going to work right.” They gave me the name of a woman. I invited
her to lunch. We met in the city. She had never really done a lot of
fundraising events, but she was on their foundation board and she was highly
respected, a lovely gal. That’s how we proceeded.
Earl: Why did you think it was important to have a woman?
Meier: [00:33:13] To do events, there’s a lot of grunt work. There’s a lot of planning.
The men don’t have that kind of experience as much, and they aren’t as able
to be magnets for the variety of people. Women can, more than men, with
events. You very rarely see men as actual chairs of events--working chairs.
This was not [in] name only. This was twenty-four hours, seven days.
Earl: I was thinking it may sound really fun and likely a lot of work.
Meier: [00:33:51] A ton of work. I was closing the Athletic Department almost daily.
We had two girls that we hired as staff. We centered it all down here. We had
issues. You had to sort of navigate the whole path carefully. You could end

27

up with problems and issues when you have two different schools and two
different cultures. Cal had never really done fundraising events--they didn’t
have the kind of structure, have the kind of volunteers who knew what to do,
how to do it, and just sort of roll their sleeves up. We had a big deal on the
list because neither school wanted the other school to see their list.
I was trying to figure out how to make that work--and what we did is,
we each addressed our own groups [letters] and the envelopes. Then we
merged them, so that we didn’t have duplicate envelopes. We got the
envelopes from Cal. We were in the football dressing room, down at the
stadium, which is where we had all of our stuff like that. These envelopes
came back from Cal and Cal had paid people. They didn’t have any
volunteers. There was no real quality control or people who sort of knew.
The envelopes--some of them said Mr. Anthony Smith and then Linda
Smith--didn’t have Mr. and Mrs.
We had to redo them all. I called the athletic director because our
group was just seething. They were not going to redo these people’s
envelopes that were incorrectly addressed. I called John Kasser and I said,
“We have a problem here [laughter] and I think we may end up exploding.
Let me explain.”
He said, “You’ve got to be kidding.”
I said, “No.”
He said, “I’ll send somebody down to pick those up immediately,”
which he did. They redid them all and we averted what could have been a
real crisis.

28

Earl: I think that’s one of the things I really admired in working with you, the
attention both at the big picture level and then the detail piece.
Meier: [00:36:34] Yes, if you don’t do it--if it’s not a quality product, it’s not going to
work. John Kasser, when I told him, he said, “Do you think we’ll make two
hundred thousand dollars?”
I said, “John, we don’t do this for two hundred thousand dollars.
[laughter] I guarantee you it’s going to be a lot higher.”
When we were getting the numbers in, and we realized where we
were going to be--we had kept the expenses down quite well--he [John
Kasser] kept calling. He had budgeted for this. I said to him afterwards, “You
never, ever put a fundraising event in a budget.” He would call me almost
weekly. I said, “Nobody’s getting any money until we’ve paid all the
expenses. I promise you, you’re going to--” When it ended up being 1.2
[million], he just was a hero. [laughter] I really enjoyed working with him. We
had auction items that were one of a kind. Everybody who worked on it
loved working on it. It was a lot of fun. It was huge.
Earl: How big of a group did you have, through these auctions, built up of
committed volunteers that you could count on?
Meier: [00:37:52] We probably had at least sixty that came back and wanted to do it
again, ones that I’d worked with on other events, like the opening for
Children’s Hospital [Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital Stanford] or the
Bloomingdale’s opening. You have somebody who’s really proficient at
reservations and you have somebody who’s really good at marketing, then
you get the whole group. A lot of those were Cal people, as well. They were

29

friends of mine that I like to work with. People want to work on a successful
venture. I think they sort of let some of those divisions go away.
Earl: Speaking of divisions--having worked on a Big Game auction, did that also
sort of shift the relationship with the Buck Club and the Cardinal Club?
Meier: [00:38:48] They were already merged.
Earl: Oh, they were already there, okay. When did that merger happen and how
did that come about?
Meier: [00:38:53] I was not around then. When the Buck Club became aware that we
were going to be successful and that people were gravitating to us, they
offered to take us over and we refused. As we said, “You are not taking us
over. We will go in as equal partners.” It was when we were really stable that
they became the Buck/Cardinal Club.
Earl: Where did the name Cardinal come from? Whose inspiration was that? Was
that from the start you were the Cardinal Club?
Meier: [00:39:34] Yes, the very beginning. I’m trying to think when we came up with
that name because we didn’t have a name when we started. Joe Ruetz was
athletic director before Andy Geiger. I think Joe had agreed that we needed
to tackle--I was not involved at the time--Title IX, but Andy’s the one who
implemented it.
Earl: It sounds like a series of good relationships with athletic directors.
Meier: [00:40:04] Absolutely.
Earl: Which is really nice.
Meier: [00:40:07] They have to be committed to it because they’re really sticking
their necks out. It was interesting because when we were founding the group,

30

we met with various people in the development office whom I didn’t really
know. Bruce Hinchcliffe, does that name ring a bell?
Earl: Yes.
Meier: [00:40:32] Actually, I think Bruce was in Tony’s class. We had to meet with
Iris [Iris Brest]--Paul [Paul Brest], the dean of the Law School’s wife.
Earl: Brest.
Meier: [00:40:54] Iris Brest was not at all fond of event fundraising. When you think
back on it, I can understand because we were going to be highly visible. If we
failed, we’d be doubly visible and it would be Stanford who would have egg
on its face, not us. It really was giving us a tremendous sense of
responsibility.
Earl: The Alumni Association, were they similarly worried?
Meier: [00:41:24] Yes, development was not something that they were getting near.
The university was concerned. Once we showed that you can do it, and do it
in a quality way, and we had--that first auction was at Maples [Maples
Pavillion]--John Brodie [John Riley Brodie] as the auctioneer and Master of
Ceremonies. We tried to include known athletes, so that that would involve
the whole group.
Earl: You said you didn’t initially have a passion for women’s athletics.
Meier:

[00:42:12] I mean, I did. I swam competitively. I ended up doing
synchronized swimming--in high school, I switched to that. I played tennis. It
wasn’t women’s athletics versus men’s athletics. It wasn’t that. It was just sort
of part of the normal lifestyle.

Earl: As a student, did people go to football games?

31

Meier: [00:42:40] Oh yes, I was a cheerleader in high school, too. I was a big
enthusiast as far as football and basketball.
Earl: Was that part of your family culture?
Meier: [00:42:52] Yes.
Earl:

Fly fishing and sailing, did those--?

Meier: [00:42:57] No, sailing I never did. I don’t know how that got in there. Fly
fishing is only because of Tony.
Earl: Because he’s from Portland.
Meier: [00:43:08] Oh yes, he’s a big fly fisherman. That’s part of my responsibility as
a wife [laughter] is to learn how to do that.
Earl: I’ve seen you at Stanford women’s basketball games.
Meier: [00:43:19] Yes, we love it.
Earl: Do you have a passion for particular Stanford sports?
Meier: [00:43:25] We have supported tennis, a female tennis player. We’ve had a
scholarship for many years. We love women’s basketball just because. In
football, we are avid fans. But women’s basketball, I just think Tara [Tara
VanDerveer] has done such an extraordinary job--the coaching on that team
and the finesse that they exhibit. We now host a party for Tara and her team
to start the season. We do a swim barbecue at our house for them. We’ve
been doing that for about four years. Prior to that, for fifteen years, we had
hosted a party for the men’s football coaches and their families. Finally, after
fifteen years, Tony and I looked at each other and thought somebody else
should be doing this. At one point, we had ninety-five people.
When it got to younger coaches, we had younger families and all. We

32

started it with Tyrone [Tyrone Willingham], so it goes all the way back then
and we loved it. Then we realized nobody did anything for Tara, so that’s
how we offered to do that and do the team. Of course, it’s so small that you
can do it. We do that and we look forward to it each year.
Earl: Do you have favorite Stanford sports moments?
Meier: [00:45:03] Not really. Each year there’s one or another. I think what I really
take such pride in at Stanford is the quality of the student athlete. They are
unbelievably academic. I think my proudest moment is when I hear them
announce what their majors are, what they’re doing, and they’re going on for
graduate degrees. It’s worth supporting because there’s nothing quite like it
anywhere in the world.
Earl: There’s a lot of talk now about how much it’s escalated, the competition
across the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] and the
programs.
Meier: [00:45:49] And paying athletes and all that.
Earl: Is that the kind of issue you would have dealt with on the athletic board?
When did you join the athletic board? Do you remember?
Meier: [00:45:56] Gosh, I don’t. I was on it twice because I chaired it twice. I think
you’ve got a better record there than I. I was the first woman chair. The
athletic board is really a visiting board. It isn’t a governing board. It’s always
sort of had a little problem finding its role. I’m not sure it still has. At one
point, fairly recently, they increased the number to seventy something, which
was just ridiculous. It really doesn’t have much impact, as an individual
participating on that. We just met with Kim Eber [Kimberley Eber], who is

33

fairly new in the Athletic Department, a very impressive young woman.
We were just talking about some of the programs that they might do
because one thing we haven’t been successful in implementing, or really
carrying out, is having the donors host the student athlete at their home for
dinner. Some do it, but it’s very few. It’s something I think they need to
encourage. It’s like having any of the students over. It’s wonderful. We try to
do that. We were talking about how they could sort of do a better job of
getting more people involved.
Earl: Do you want to take a little break?
Meier: [00:47:36] I’m fine, thank you.
Earl: You mentioned Packard. When did you become involved with Packard and
how did that unfold?
Meier: [00:47:46] Lu Packard [Lucile Packard] had invited me to be on that board. It
was when it was Children’s Hospital at Stanford. It was before we changed
the name to Packard [Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital]. I was vice
president, and they asked if I would try to get the Ronald McDonald House
at Stanford. In order to do that, you competed with other Children’s
Hospitals in the Bay Area because the franchisees were the ones who
determine who the recipient will be. We went down to Carmel and did a
presentation against Children’s Hospital in San Francisco [UCSF Benioff
Children’s Hospital San Francisco] and Oakland [UCSF Benioff Children’s
Hospital Oakland]. We were chosen. Trying to get it through Stanford was
one of the more difficult things. They thought the golden arches were going
to appear, or something commercial.

34

I had to go through the real estate office, the dean’s office, and the
head of the hospital trying to explain how this would be such an incredible
service and would not be commercialized at all. We had gone back to
Chicago to look at the Ronald McDonald House back there. It was a group
of us and then we formed a board, once we were appointed. I want to say it
was Clayton Rich--that’s who the dean was--and he was very stern. He was
on Children’s Hospital [board] as dean of the School of Medicine. I had gone
to him, discussed it with him and his assistant, and I came back and reported
it to the next hospital board meeting. That’s when he corrected me, and I
corrected him. [laughter]
This was sort of the masculine side. Tony’s friends calling him- you
know, congratulating him that “your wife took on the dean” and so forth. I
wasn’t trying to be difficult. He was just incorrect. That was all. A month
later, I was appointed to the hospital board. At that time, Stanford Hospital
Board was an advisory board. I was the only woman. It was a time of huge
friction between the community physicians and the faculty. Huge. You have
no idea. Because I was the junior member of the board, I got the ridiculous
role of representing the hospital board for a group meeting that the
community physicians and faculty would have monthly. I came back from
my first one appalled because they literally yelled at each other. I was so
shocked--I couldn’t believe it--that this was the way they would be behaving
in such an immature fashion.
[00:51:16] Then we changed the board, so it was a governing board.
Don Kennedy [Donald Kennedy] became president of the board, as he was

35

president of the university. We were going to be building some additions to
the hospital. I suggested that we have an art program and so I became chair
of that art program--that was twenty-six years ago. Peter Bing said, “My wife
might be interested in that.” That’s how Helen was volunteered for that. I
eventually became chair of the hospital board and I was on it for twenty
years. I think they grandmothered me and I chaired it for five of those years.
Those were difficult times.
The hospital is in an extraordinary position right now, financially, and
every way possible. It’s really strong. It’s got an outstanding board, a great
mission, and a great commitment. We’re in a good place.
Earl: I think you said to me that one of the things you were most proud of was
having been associated with the evolution of the hospital board.
Meier: [00:52:50] Yes, it was. It was a tough time, took a lot of time, a lot of effort,
and a lot of people skills.
Earl: I’m thinking of your sociology degree.
Meier: [00:53:04] Right. I have said that so often--little did I ever think I would be
using that and I ended up using it. It’s an incredible institution. They were
recruiting chairs of departments. We had some friction between the dean and
the CEO of the hospital, which was very unpleasant. You have times that are
not so smooth.
Earl: Structurally, a lot of things have changed. Now it’s Stanford Health Care,
right?
Meier: [00:53:45] Exactly, right.
Earl: Are there some things that have stayed the same? You’ve talked about the

36

board.
Meier: [00:53:53] Yes. You’ve got a trio at the Medical Center, which is different
from other places around the country. You’ve got the Medical School, the
Stanford Hospital, and the Children’s Hospital. I think they are working
extremely well together. We will see when a new CEO is appointed. The
intention is that that will be a very strong thrust. The dean is very much a
collaborator. I think he’s done an excellent job. This is Lloyd Minor [Lloyd
B. Minor MD] and then Chris Dawes [Christopher G. Dawes] who is at
Children’s Hospital. Chris will be retiring, maybe in another year or two. He’s
been there for a long time and I worked with him years ago when I was
involved. He’s done an excellent job.
There’s always a lot of change, but it’s such a large portion of the
budget for the university and the medical center. Stanford Health Care was
felt to be a stronger name, to connote patient care because patient care hasn’t
always been the focus for the medical center. Research and teaching has
been, so this is really a strong third leg.
Earl: Now you’re back involved with--?
Meier: [00:55:29] I’m with the hospital. I’m back on the hospital board. It’s been
about two and a half years, I think. They asked if I would come back.
Earl:

How did they convince you? What was the sell?

Meier: [00:55:42] I think it was because there were some new challenges and a more
positive view. I had gone onto their campaign council. It was, I think, after
that that they wanted to know if I would be involved. I chair the nominating
committee, which ends up being a little bit more than I thought it was going

37

to be, which is good. It’s a very good group. It’s a balanced group and I really
enjoy it. We’re getting some excellent people on the board.
Earl: Do you see your contributions as different now, having been involved with
the organization over a span of decades?
Meier: [00:56:44] Yes, you do. I mean, you’ve got your historical side of it. It’s funny
because I now see that--as we’re doing oral history and all--I do have a lot of
history around here. I don’t really think about it and then when I go back
and, my goodness, it’s been a long time. I know a lot of the players and have
enjoyed it. I’ve seen growth. I think probably one of the most satisfying
experiences that I’ve had has been chairing the Leading Matters program that
we did with the Stanford Challenge. Also, being one of the co-chairs for the
Stanford Challenge--traveling the globe, not just the United States, but
traveling the globe and meeting people.
I visited each site three times, on my own nickel--I want you to
know, as Tony keeps reminding me. The first time was to explain to them
what we wanted to do and to get input from them as to what they wanted for
their community. At first we thought we could do a cookie cutter program-not the case, as you well know. You know better than many. We personalized
the program for each spot. I would come back and explain to the executive
committee what a particular city wanted or what subject might be of interest
to them. Invariably, John Hennessy would say, “You should look into Joe
Smith. He’s really a good lecturer on that subject and he’s a promising or
accomplished faculty member and Mary Smith” or whatever.
After this happening many times, I said to him, “John, how in the

38

devil do you know the number of faculty in such a wide array of disciplines?”
His knowledge was just extraordinary. That was the process. The second
meeting was to go--at that point, people we’d identified as chairs in those
cities had identified committees. I would go and present what we would be
doing for their event. The third time was the actual event. I think one of the
funny experiences I had--we had determined that London was going to be
our European center. Of course, you had Berlin and Paris who thought they
should be, as well. I said, “Well, what we’ll do is we’ll go visit those three in
one trip and explain why we’re doing that.” So, that’s how we would start it.
[laughter]
I arrived in Berlin and we were having a program at the campus that
night. They had about forty people, which was more than we had thought.
No one was smiling. I was standing there, and I didn’t know whether they
were wavering or whether I was wavering. We had to go for dinner with a
major donor that night for goose. Martin [Martin Shell] was there.
Earl: This was Martin Shell.
Meier: [01:00:24] Martin Shell--subsequently, Martin has said that he would never
travel with me again. He said I did the Bataan Death March because we did
[all of] Berlin that night. We had dinner with this man, a goose dinner
because it was goose season. The next day, we flew to Paris. We had an event
that night with a group. They argued that we should be coming to Paris--we
shouldn’t be going to London. The next day, we were at the London
ambassador’s home because he was a Stanford alum and had a large event
there. I left. I was there two and a half days and Martin went on. He’s never

39

forgotten, but when I was traveling, it was business and I just wanted to do it
as quickly as possible.
It wasn’t a luxury trip, or any kind of a trip. It was effective. Meeting
the people that I met was just incredibly satisfying. I enjoy that part of it. I
really enjoy engaging with people and learning from them.
Earl: Do you think about the legacy of that, which as I recall, was not blowing that
fundraising goal out of the water, but engaging all those legion of volunteers?
Meier: [01:01:47] Yes, we did. We called it “friend raising” and that’s what it was. It
was not fundraising. We did it during one of the most difficult economic
times, 2007 to 2008. We decided to continue with the Challenge and with
these events. People appreciated the fact that we were doing this for them-to engage them and to tell them about what was going on at Stanford. It had
a great impact on the fundraising, which we knew eventually it would, but
that was not the intent. People became so positive about what was going on
and excited, that we were successful in a variety of ways. I think engaging
with people is such a wonderful opportunity. It’s so satisfying and rewarding
because you end up with a lot of friends all over the world.
Earl: Another outcome of the work, that I wonder how deliberate it was on your
part, the president’s part, was having--the Alumni Association had merged
into the university--an opportunity for the friend raisers and the fundraisers
to be working on a project together.
Meier: [01:03:11] That’s right.
Earl: Really important. How conscious was that in your--?
Meier: [01:03:15] I think we were very conscious, but I think you need to credit

40

Donna Garton with much of that success. You need somebody who is
extremely open, trusted, doesn’t have an agenda, and has people skills. She
embodies all of those. She, as an individual, had a huge impact. As you know,
we had meetings with the Alumni Association and the development people
from each department. That had never been done before. Once everybody
became comfortable with that, it was even more successful moving forward.
They’re a part of one big family. I think people really got that sense, and that
hadn’t been the case before. You were at the center of that.
Earl: And very happy to have the opportunity. When I hear you talking about a lot
of this, I’m conscious not only of putting sociology to work but also the
business skills set. Was that something that you had an intuitive sense for?
Did you have any kind of formal training? Were you and Tony confidants?
Meier: [01:04:42] I’d always been interested in business and had planned to go to
business school. I changed paths. I used to, when I would do training for the
Junior League, explain to the members that they needed to have financial
skills if they were ever going to be effective in an organization--whether it’s a
nonprofit or for profit. That business side was something that always
interested me. I’ve sort of morphed into it. Budgets were something that
were very comfortable to me. When you did fundraising events, you really
had to be very careful because sometimes some women were not--with
whom I had worked--so you had to explain that that’s not acceptable. It’s a
business.
Fundraising is a business, either you succeed or you fail. I credit
Stanford. I had done fundraising in a variety of roles, but they had never

41

allowed a volunteer group to step into the role in which we did.
Earl: You’re talking here about the big campaigns?
Meier: [01:06:19] Not the campaigns, but more the fundraising events. Yes.
Earl: The fundraising events, okay.
Meier: [01:06:27] I’m grateful to Stanford for having given me an opportunity to do
something more bold. I like to do bold things. [laughter]
Earl: In a sort of related note, banking. How did you get involved with the
establishment of University National Bank and Trust?
Meier: [01:06:45] I had been on a nonprofit board with one of the men who was
going to be on the founding board. He suggested me to Carl Schmitt, who
was the founder for University Bank. They were looking for a woman. I met
with Carl. Carl had been the state superintendent of banking and then he’d
been at Wells Fargo. I had not known him before. It was in that process that
I became involved. It’s interesting to be the only woman. I’ve done that with
California Water Service Company. I was the first woman and the only
woman for, probably, ten years. I’m going to be going off that board in May.
I always feel that a woman has an advantage, but she needs to take advantage
of that advantage.
I think being feminine is something that gives you a huge advantage.
A lot of times women don’t do that because they come in with sort of their
muscles flexed, thinking they’re going to battle. You don’t need to battle.
You prove yourself by your capability, or whatever you may be able to offer,
but you don’t need to become a man to do it.
Earl: What would be an example of bringing the feminine to a boardroom?

42

Meier: [01:08:35] Just the way you deal with people. I had one situation--I can’t
really describe it because it’s a confidential thing--where we had a change in
management. They asked if I would meet with an individual who was having
some problems and I did. Matter of fact, I did that in another situation where
there had been some accusations that were incorrect against somebody, but I
was the one that they asked. I think you’re not threatening and, sometimes,
they may think you listen more.
Earl: It’s not by the fact of you being on the Human Resource Committee or
something? Just Linda has the skills to have this conversation?
Meier: [01:09:37] I think it’s sort of style. Again, if you’re not real aggressive--I think
that’s part of it. The head of one of the companies that I’ve been on the
board with came up to me after a meeting and said--I actually chaired the
Compensation Committee for that at that time, too—that, “You have an
instinct for being able to tell who’s going to make it or not make it at the
company.” I was very flattered. You just sit and listen. You don’t always have
to be the one talking.
Earl: I’m curious, going back to the hospital board group of the community
physicians and the clinical folks--yelling at each other. Your solution was to
restructure, but what did you do in the in-between times?
Meier: [01:10:45] You try to have them build relationships. When I first came on
board, the real issue was resources. When you had labs, it was access to those
labs and who had priority. When you had radiology, it was equipment. You
also had a situation where the community physicians were softer and nicer to
patients. You could see some nurses at the hospital who were just

43

inexcusable with patients. That wasn’t a culture. Now there’s a C-I-CARE
program at the hospital and everyone is supposed to be part and parcel of
that--the patient comes first. There’s just a whole culture that has been
internalized that’s really, really essential.
Earl: As I was reading about University National Bank and Trust, I was trying to
think why would Linda be engaged and interested. There was the customer
service piece, as well.
Meier: [01:11:55] That’s exactly it.
Earl: And relationships.
Meier: [01:11:59] That was Carl’s whole theme. It’s funny because the men would
talk about--I think they must have spent a lot of time at a bank or something.
I’d go in, do a transaction, and leave. I’m not going to sit down and have a
conversation. That was Carl’s thrust, that people really value that. He was
right. I learned a lot from him and he was quite a character. I chaired the
Marketing Committee for that board and Carl wanted a popcorn machine in
the lobby. He was a little kooky, and a little corny, and he had this big thing.
I was going to be darned if we were going to have a popcorn
machine because I could imagine the popcorn all over the floor. I said,
“Who’s going to sweep it?” You know, the practical side. We never did, but
he said [laughter] it was my fault. I said, “Unless you’re going to be down
there sweeping up those kernels, we’re not going to have it.” You just end up
meeting really interesting people and you grow with that.
Earl: Have there been many lasting relationships? You’ve talked about Donna
Garton and how, for such a long time, the two of you have worked together.

44

Peter Bing [Peter S. Bing], you mentioned, have overlapped.
Meier: [01:13:33] Peter’s been a mentor. Peter and I overlapped on the Board of
Trustees. He was chair of nominating when I became vice president for the
board. He was on the Hospital Board. He’s extraordinary. When I did the
strategic plan for the Bing Concert Hall, Peter was the one who got me
involved in that. Yes, he’s one of a kind. The university has been so
enhanced by his involvement, his leadership, and everything he does.
Earl: Other relationships that have really been critical through your Stanford
engagement? University presidents?
Meier: [01:14:24] Yes, I worked with Don [Kennedy] and John Ford very closely.
Ken Bloem, who was head of the hospital, and John Hennessy [John L.
Hennessy]. John and Andrea [Andrea Hennessy] are both very good friends.
Jeanne Kennedy. There are just so many. I think one who’s been a real
privilege for us to be involved with is Abraham Verghese. He holds our chair
that we share with Joan Lane [Joan F. Lane]. But, I mean they’re faculty.
Norman Naimark [Norman M. Naimark].
Earl: So faculty you get to know because of service on committees or they’re
coming--speaking events and--?
Meier: [01:15:29] Norman was one of our speakers and so we became engaged with
that. Tara VanDerveer is a good friend. David and Kori Shaw are good
friends. It’s all over the map. We’re very lucky, very blessed in that way.
Sheldon King [Sheldon S. King], who used to be head of the hospital, he and
Xenia [Xenia Tonesk King] have stayed with us of late. They were out here.
Xenia had papers that she wanted to see if Hoover would want--they were

45

her father’s [William Tonesk]. We were able to help her arrange that.
Earl: Checking time and seeing how we’re--.
Meier: [01:16:18] We’re fine.
Earl: There were a couple of other organizations. You mentioned Junior League,
but I saw that you were also engaged with the Peninsula Center for the Blind
and Visually Impaired [now called Vista Center for the Blind and Visually
Impaired], PTA [Parent Teacher Association], Social Advocates for Youth.
That was that period of time when you were raising your family. How did
you decide how much capacity you had and where to invest that?
Meier: [01:16:44] And driving kids to swim practices and stuff?
Earl: Yes, because that’s really where you were building some of your skill and
expertise.
Meier: [01:16:50] It was interesting. The Peninsula Center for the Blind and Visually
Impaired, which is now Vista--when I became chair of the board, we had
very little in the way of funds. We were not going to make it for another two
years max. I’ll never forget Lu Packard called to congratulate me. I said,
“Now tell me, would you congratulate the captain of a sinking ship?”
[laughter] I was trying to figure out how we could give ourselves some
permanence.
We owned a duplex on the corner of Addison and Cowper in Palo
Alto. It had been a residence before my involvement, years before. This was
a holdover from that. That was sort of part of the tradition and part of the
feeling of the place. I talked to Tony about it.
I said, “I think we need to sell these.”

46

He said, “You’re not in the real estate business, so that’s probably a
good plan.”
I asked him who might be somebody I should contact. He suggested
someone whom I didn’t really know, who’s in the community, and Tony
said, “He’s very community-minded.” I called him and he said he’d be glad to
handle it.
We ended up selling to Miramonte Health because one of their board
members was willing to purchase the buildings. From that point forward, we
turned around. We had an endowment. We had permanence. The vice
president, the treasurer, and I went up to meet with LightHouse for the Blind
[LightHouse for the Blind and Visually Impaired]. They wanted to see if we
would be interested in merging. We went up--this was where having some
business background was helpful. Turned out we went up to a full board
meeting, which we didn’t know was going to be the case. The man who had
invited us had really misrepresented the whole situation. He said that they
would be willing to take us over. We weren’t willing to be taken over. We had
just gotten ourselves into a steady position.
I turned to the two men on either side of me and I said, “Are you
ready to go? I think it’s time.” We got up in the middle of the meeting,
thanked them very much, and we walked right out. [laughter] Sometimes
being a woman--you handle it, but it’s sort of a surprise when you do that.
That’s now going very strongly. It’s Vista and it’s a wonderful--it’s the only
agency of its kind on the Peninsula.
Earl: They just got that new building on El Camino Real.

47

Meier: [01:20:45] They’re going to be in that new building, which is wonderful. It’s
just ironic because we have had two friends in the last year who have lost
their sight and, it’s just--when it goes back, it’s just remarkable. At the other
organization, Social Advocates for Youth, one of the men that I’d been on
another board with had suggested me. It was an interesting program. It
wasn’t really a well-structured organization and I didn’t really--I didn’t stay
around. I think I left after two years.
The Parent Teacher Association. My involvement with that was with
the school district, actually. I chaired the Early Childhood Education
program. I don’t know if you remember when that was a big thing in
California. Each district had one.
Again, my job was to pull together the different schools. We had
three grammar schools at the time. One was Fremont, one was Laurel, one
was Oak Knoll--no, and then we had Hillview and Encinal. We had some of
the parents who resented the fact that the program was going to be at Oak
Knoll, so we had to sort of pull together the group. I enjoyed doing that and
so we were very successful with the program and the budget. We were
exemplary in the state.
Earl: Have your children gone on to be active in communities as well?
Meier: [01:22:38] Very or extremely. Our daughter, who’s our youngest, has four
children, the youngest of whom is a freshman at Stanford. She has two girls
and two boys. The girls both went to Stanford. Her third child is at
Princeton, graduating this year, and her fourth is here at Stanford. Her oldest
daughter, Claire, has done Teach for America in New Orleans.

48

Laura has been very involved in educational activities. She just went
back to school, for the last two years, to get her clinical counseling degree.
She is working at a clinic, a grammar school, and a high school with
emotionally- and mentally-challenged [students] in inner city programs. She’s
done peer counseling, and she’s been national chair for that program. She’s
been very involved and very effective. Our second one, Eric, was very
involved at Duke when he was in school and organized nonprofit activities
with the university leadership. Terry Sanford [James Terry Sanford] was
president at the time.
Our son, Tony, is our oldest. He was a swimmer at Harvard and
ended up with some shoulder issues. He managed the Fogg Museum print
department when he was an undergraduate student. He’s an art dealer that
lives in San Francisco. He’s president of the American Art Dealers
Association [Art Dealers Association of America] in New York. He’s on the
Chinati [Foundation] board, which is in New Mexico--in Texas--and he does
lecturing at graduate schools on art and business. They’re all very involved.
Tony’s very involved, too. Always has been. He’s on the SIEPR [Stanford
Institute for Economic Policy Research] board here and DAPER Investment
Fund, was president of the Children’s Health Council, and Menlo School
Board. All of us have seen it as a responsibility to give back to the
community.
Earl: How do you and Tony decide? Do people ever come to you as a couple and
say, “Will you help with--?” And sometimes you do and sometimes-Meier: [01:25:52] Sometimes you don’t. Right, exactly. It’s hard. We tend to have

49

similar interests. He chaired the Athletic Board, as well. I think we’re the only
couple that has done that. It is hard. I do a lot of counseling people in
nonprofit roles. I often meet with boards and discuss boardsmanship and
that kind of thing. You only have so much to be able to distribute and so you
sort of change-Earl: Do you have to say no a lot?
Meier: [01:26:49] You have to say no a lot. There are so many needy things--only
you could do them all. I was just asked to meet with a young woman who is
involved with a program--she has a special ops husband in the armed
services. They have started a program to provide resources for families of
men--usually men, but sometimes women--who are returning from overseas.
It’s counseling. I would love to be able to--at least I can counsel her and
advise her as to how to do it. You know, you don’t have a bottomless
resource. You just do what you can.
Earl: I’m imagining the counseling that goes on just in the family,
multigenerational comparing notes and strategizing--that kind of thing. Does
that happen?
Meier: [01:27:51] It does all the time. It’s funny. Somebody sent me a YouTube
video of--I’m a big dog lover as is our whole family--dogs trying to navigate
stairs. It shows puppies and different kinds of things. It’s hilarious because
some of the dogs do very strange maneuvers. I sent it on to our kids this
morning and Laura responded. She said she does a South City school today
and she was going to show it to her students. [laughter] We shared that.
Earl: That’s fun. I think that we’re at a pretty natural breaking point, if that is

50

comfortable with you.
Meier: [01:28:41] Sure.

Earl: This is Marie Earl with the Stanford Historical Society’s Oral History
Program. Today is April 12, 2016. I’m here with Stanford University alumna,
Linda Meier, who’s a volunteer leader and benefactor for the university.
We’re conducting the second of two interviews at the Frances C. Arrillaga
Alumni Center. I’d like to begin by picking up from our last interview. [I]
read over our notes and had a few questions for you. One of the things we
left off talking about was the Stanford University Hospital Board. Knowing
that you’re back on the board, and so your leadership experience spans a long
period of time, could you share a few of the key challenges you grappled with
during your years of service? You mentioned one, which was strained towngown relationships. I wonder if there were other sticky issues that, as you
look back on it, were important?
Meier: [00:01:00] Probably one of the key issues was the governance regarding
clinical care physicians. When I first went onto the board, the Medical School
had control over the clinical aspect of the practice. It became clear that it was
very important that the hospital be involved in that. The hospital took over
that particular aspect. There were growing pains and issues, as far as

53

understanding who really had the governance. It was extremely important
because the hospital had been criticized for an insensitive approach to patient
care. We thought it was extremely important that the training for the
physicians, as well as the actual implementation, focus on patient care and
sensitivity. That’s really been a thrust. If you were to look at the hospital
today, there is a program called C-I-CARE and it internalizes patient care and
sensitivity.
Abraham Verghese is very involved in the training of the physicians
and the sensitivity. The hospital has really turned a corner. That’s very
exciting for me to see because that was one of the areas that I was really
anxious to see us improve upon and to really put as a focal point.
Earl: Did the hospital also experience periods of financial stress?
Meier: [00:02:42] Yes. It was not until after I was off the board that it was quite as
stressful. That was post the “de-merger with UCSF [University of California,
San Francisco] and Stanford. We were involved in laying the groundwork for
it. It seemed to make a lot of sense. We were concerned about duplication.
We thought that we could really compliment one another. I don’t think we
anticipated the incredible difference in focal points and style, when you were
looking at a state and a private. The two were cultures that were really
different-there had been a lot of finger-pointing prior to that and it was hard
to erase a lot of that. I went off the board and there was a question as to who
was going to be the singular head of that program. That changed.
It was a very rocky beginning and it just got worse. Fortunately, they
were able to extricate both sides without too much damage, but it did have

54

impacts.
Earl: As you see now, the growth for the two institutions--UCSF attracted so
much more funding and attention, serving San Francisco. Stanford, likewise,
has really blossomed. Although, I did see in the paper today, they were
embarking on a cancer care collaborative--?
Meier: [00:04:42] The Parker [Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy]. Isn’t it
wonderful to see?
Earl:

Six institutions? It feels like the right decision.

Meier: [00:04:46] It feels good, yes. It really does. There’s room for both. We’re all
growing when you look at the healthcare systems. We’re all expanding and
need to. There will always be that competition, but also, collaboration.
Earl: A second topic I wanted to be sure to touch on was the process, mechanics,
and strategy of charitable fundraising and promotional event, or community
engagement, organizing. You’ve had a long and storied success record there.
Are there certain keys to that success? Are there certain things when you say,
okay, I’ll take on this opening, I’ll take on this big fundraising project--are
there a couple factors that you really pay attention to and think are hallmarks
of success when you go into it?
Meier: [00:05:53] I think what I’ve enjoyed in that particular aspect of my volunteer
activity has been opportunity to be creative. I enjoy doing something that’s a
little bit different or that I think may work that hasn’t been tried. I love
challenges. [laughter] Sometimes fundraising gives you that opportunity to try
those challenges and to see if they work. I like working with people. I like
working with very strong people. There are others who don’t, and so that

55

doesn’t always work, but I like seeing if together we can bring out the best.
I always have very strong people with me and we’re a team. I think
that’s probably part of it. You don’t want a lot of followers, frankly. It’s great
to work with a bunch of leaders and hopefully have the best result that way.
It does give you a chance to do something a little different. It’s not
bureaucratic. It’s opportunistic.
Earl: Thank you. The last thing that I thought, as I was looking back at the notes,
I’d like to hear a little bit more about is Lu Packard [Lucile Packard]. How
many people got to have the relationship that you had with Lu?
Meier: [00:07:42] I was very blessed. She was absolutely remarkable, incredibly
committed, and incredibly sincere. She was very modest and sort of grew in
her confidence. She didn’t like to speak at the beginning and then, she did.
David [David Packard] would be sort of standing at the back of the room
cheering her on and encouraging her.
Earl:

She was really the driver for the Children’s Hospital?

Meier: [00:08:17] Very much so. The big question was the naming of the hospital.
When she agreed to have it named for her, Lucile Packard with one “L”--she
made sure everybody spelled it correctly as far as the Lucile--but she became
incredibly involved in a lot of the minutia that really made that hospital
different. There was some friction with Stanford at the beginning and, I
think, if we hadn’t had the strength of the Packards behind that, it might
have been more difficult. Lu and I actually traveled around the country and
looked at children’s hospitals because I chaired the Design Committee for
five years.

56

We were looking at what we wanted to emulate, what we didn’t want
to, and which colors we thought would be effective. We even got down to
the details of picking out the threads for the carpets, with the color stripes we
did for the signals for various departments. Lu was right there, with the
sleeves rolled up, and she loved it. She really did. The sad thing was that she
didn’t get to see it.
Earl: Oh, I remember.
Meier: [00:09:45] She was in the hospital and I was going to go off the board. I think
my term was up or something. I was just--it was time. She asked me to come
to the hospital to see her and if I would stay to see the hospital open. I did--I
promised her I would do that. We tried to make the opening, as she would
have loved. Even though it was quite elaborate, it was quite simple in various
ways. Barbara Bush was our guest of honor because she’d been friends with
the Packards. We had some very funny little situations because you had the
Secret Service [United States Secret Service] everywhere.
The children at Hillview School [Hillview Middle School] had
collected pennies for Barbara Bush. I approached Gleim Jewelers to see if
they would make a necklace for us and donate it, which they did. They
wrapped it beautifully and we were going to present it to her. The head of the
Secret Service, who was traveling with her, had to check everything--where
she was sitting, what she was doing. I had the package. He and I had become
rather friendly by this point because we’d been through a lot of situations
and I’d learned a whole lot. He said, “I’m afraid that you’re going to have to
unwrap it.” I said, “Well, I’ll tell you what, that’s perfectly fine if you unwrap

57

it as long as you can rewrap it.”
It was never unwrapped. [laughter] We even had a situation where
the Secret Servicemen had to sit at her place at the table. We had a very large
tent. We had about seventeen hundred people. We tented the parking lot
next to the Children’s Hospital. Where we had bumpers for the cars, we had
to put risers over them to level the floor off. When we did that, it turned out
that she [Barbara]--when she would have sat down, her chin would have
been on the table because the table [laughter] had been raised. We had to
change it. We had some of these situations, but she was delightful. She had
some children come to the hospital and tour it the day of. Beverly Sills, the
opera singer, was the Mistress of Ceremonies. We had the 49ers model with
their children. It was fun, it was different, and it worked out very well.
Earl: I think that would be a word that I would add to your keys to success. From
a staff perspective, we worked hard, but had fun.
Meier: [00:13:14] Yes, it should be fun because I think you should all have a sense of
satisfaction when you’re done. It has to be fun. You have to have a good
sense of humor otherwise you’d never survive. That was a good example
because we had to rearrange the entire area. You just have to laugh.
Fortunately, we discovered it before that evening because she [Barbara Bush]
would have looked quite strange with her chin on the table. The other thing
was we had to get a trailer for her outside the tent, where she could be
sequestered beforehand. It had to be totally secure. We tried to find
somebody who had a trailer that we could borrow.
I remembered that John Lilly had been a neighbor of John Madden

58

[John E. Madden] and John Madden, you know, never flew. I don’t know if
you knew that, but that was a thing about him. He drove in this trailer all
around the country. We asked John [Lilly] if he would ask John [Madden].
We used John Madden’s trailer [laughter]. I was supposed to introduce her at
the opening of the evening and she didn’t appear. That was one’s worst
nightmare--that you’re opening something and the person doesn’t come out.
That was what happened. She was late. We had all sorts of things that didn’t
quite go as smoothly, but it worked out.
Earl: I’m sure people don’t remember those pieces.
Meier: [00:14:50] People don’t remember those, but I do. [laughter]
Earl: I’d like to turn our attention to the Board of Trustees. You were elected, not
an alumni.
Meier: [00:15:01] No, I was elected.
Earl: Elected in 1984. I wanted to get your general reflections on being a trustee.
What do you remember about being elected and acclimating to the group?
Meier: [00:15:15] It was an interesting beginning for me because 1984 was when my
daughter was applying to Stanford. I was called in April and invited--Bill
Kimball [William R. Kimball] was chair of the board at the time and he
invited me to join the board. I had concerns about it. I thanked him very
much and said I would love to think about it. I was concerned because my
daughter had her application in and had not been accepted yet. I was worried
that either she would think that she got in because I was a trustee or, if she
didn’t get in and I was a trustee, would that be very embarrassing. I almost
didn’t accept. I was talking to Tony about it, to my husband, and he said,

59

“You need to talk to Laura about this.”
He said, “Don’t throw that opportunity away.”
We talked and Laura said, “Mom, don’t [laughter] possibly refuse
that.”
She said, “If I don’t get in on my own, I know it’s my own because you
haven’t been a trustee. And if I don’t, then it isn’t the right place for me.”
She did get in and she now has three of her children who are
Stanford alums or students. It was really an interesting time because we had
difficult times toward the end of my tenure. It’s two five-year terms. I chaired
the Development Subcommittee. Jim Rosse [James N. Rosse] was provost
when I first came on board--and I enjoyed having an opportunity to work
with him and to see how important that position is. I don’t think there’s any
way, unless you’re really intimately involved with the university
administration, that you understand that role. I think we’ve seen it today with
the two Johns [John Hennessy and John Etchemendy]. It’s extraordinary.
Etch [John Etchemendy] has been really vital to the whole progress
that we’ve had at the university. I think the chance to work with others in the
administration was a real privilege. To meet people from around the country,
to see how sincerely and importantly they acted as trustees, and we’re still
friends. It was sad--one of the trustees who was an alumni trustee from
Southern California passed away. He was hit in a crosswalk.
It [being a trustee] was a great opportunity. It was right after we had
been involved with the 1984 auction, which was the telecommunicated
auction that we did for the Cardinal Club. Some people knew me from that

60

activity and I had a chance to meet them. Tom Ford [Thomas W. Ford] was
on the board at the time and Bill Ayer [William Emerson Ayer], so a lot of
wonderful role models for me. I enjoyed that interaction immensely.
Earl: How would you characterize the role of the trustees? How much is it a
working board, an advisory board, a problem-solving board? What’s it like?
Meier: [00:19:29] It’s a working board. It’s a problem-solving board. It’s much more
than advisory. Everybody feels that responsibility.
Earl: Does that happen in committees because it’s a fairly large group?
Meier: [00:19:43] It’s thirty-two [committees]. It does happen in committees, but
people do speak up at the board meetings. It’s a bunch of very powerful
people. You have leaders in industry--Roy Anderson [Roy A. Anderson] who
was head of Lockheed was on the board. He and I were co-chairs for the
Centennial Campaign, with Peter [Bing] and Bill Kimball [William R.
Kimball]. We had meetings at the Hoover building and those were times
when we were having some stressful relationships with Hoover. As I
remember, people were concerned whether somebody was going to be
listening around the corner. It was really an interesting time that way. There
were some rough roads. The indirect cost was very, very difficult and that
was later in my tenure.
It’s a real privilege to be a trustee. You’ve got a lot of homework to
do between meetings and before your meetings. I think that every single one
of those people did it. It was very rare that someone would not be up to
speed.
You have little fiefdoms within the university and so you learn about

61

those. I think there’s less of that today. It was a real education. At that time, I
was on quite a few other boards, so it was interesting to see the contrast
between them.
Earl: You were chairing the Development Subcommittee?
Meier: [00:21:45] Yes.
Earl: During that time, that was the Centennial Fundraising Campaign [Centennial
Campaign]? Is that right?
Meier: [00:21:51] No, it was after the Centennial.
Earl: But you had been involved in the Centennial fundraising?
Meier: [00:21:59] I was one of the co-chairs for the Centennial Campaign. That was
interesting to watch, stylistically, how different people are. You have a
convening chair when you’ve got a group of individuals. Roy Anderson was
our convening chair. Roy literally was a taskmaster for the development staff.
He would want to know how much was raised in this area and you’d have a
chart up on the wall. It was really fascinating to watch and it was very
effective. That was a time when Hank Riggs [Henry E. Riggs] had been vice
president. Prior to that was--oh goodness, I can’t remember his name. He
preceded Hank as vice president for development and then, Hank was there
for a very short amount of time because he went down to become president
of Harvey Mudd.
John Ford [John B. Ford] was quite young at the time--I think in his
early forties. Hank recommended that he become vice president for
development. I remember there was great discussion about it and Hank said,
“He’s incredibly capable and will be a wonderful choice.” Of course, Hank

62

was right [laughter] on target. John took over and just did a fantastic job.
Earl: What was your role then in the Centennial Campaign?
Meier: [00:23:39] I suggested that we do an outreach program, surprise, surprise.
[laughter] Matter of fact, there was a fundraising consultant who interviewed
us and he asked what I thought. This was before I’d been named one of the
co-chairs. I said, “We should be taking Stanford to our constituents and not
asking them to come to Stanford.” He was fascinated with that. Anyway, as it
turned out, we did what we called Centennial Celebrations. We traveled with
those, and we had a paid production company.
We had a curtain that we had painted--a scene of the quad and the
church. We had a church backdrop for a stage and we had the quad walls
that would surround whatever room we would be in. By the time we
finished--I think we maybe did this over two years--that curtain was very sad
[laughter]. I remember Peter Bing checking to see if the creases were
showing. It was really cute because he was very much a detail person, as I
am.
Irv Deal [Irving Carlton Deal] was a trustee and very involved with
athletics, as well. He also had a band when he was in college. When we did
the Dallas event, he was up there playing. It was a real celebration. We did
musical performances with students and they sang. It was a very different
kind of thing from what we did with the subsequent outreach programs.
That was my little baby. We did it and it worked well. People loved it.
Earl: It sounds like the impulse was to be present in places where alumni were?
Meier: [00:26:14] We had the numbers that would justify traveling to a city

63

Earl: I was thinking about Stanford moving from being regarded as a provincial
institution to a national powerhouse. I wondered whether you were trying to
underscore that?
Meier: [00:26:33] We were. We needed to have people take ownership of Stanford
away from campus. We really were able to develop constituencies in that way.
It was wonderful because it’s effective and people really resonate to that kind
of engagement. When it’s name only, it doesn’t really sustain itself and people
don’t feel they’ve really done anything. They’re not going to come back and
do it again. You really have to give them a sense of empowerment,
responsibility, and productivity.
Earl: Was that the biggest campaign that Stanford had done?
Meier: [00:27:21] Yes. It was a billion-dollar campaign. I remember, when I was
talking at various places, to get that “B” to roll off my tongue was really,
[laughter] really hard. By the end of it, I was very fluid, but billion sort of-million came off your tongue much more easily than billion. Nobody had
ever tried a billion dollars. We were the first.
Earl: That was audacious.
Meier: [00:27:50] Very audacious.
Earl: Did the hundred part resonate with people? Did you find them supportive?
Meier: [00:27:55] That was, yes. It was a celebration.
Earl: What fun. During your tenure, I remember a news article about South
African divestiture and the protests.
Meier: [00:28:14] We had that. As a parent of a student, that was difficult for me. I
was trying to remain anonymous and not impact my daughter’s experience

64

here, or life here, or have anybody know that I was a trustee. There was a
discussion on the inner quad, I remember, and a stage, but I did not go up on
the stage. Then, I saw a list of trustees on some of the pillars. I was most
concerned. There was a tremendous amount of unrest, though not as much
as had been in previous years, I think. I was vice president of the board
toward the end of my term and Pete Wilson [Peter Barton Wilson] come for
a program that we had.
We had police around, and students, and a lot of antagonistic kinds
of behavior. More so than we’d ever anticipated. I happened to be on the
stage, because I was vice president at the time, and they threw oranges at
Pete Wilson. I was close behind him [laughter] and I wasn’t sure whether I
was going to be targeted or not. He caught one, threw it right back at the
thrower, and I thought, “That really is good” because he had enough
confidence to be able to catch it and to do it. All in all, you had these sorts of
incidents, but it was not a tumultuous time. I think Stanford just continues to
grow and I think the university tries to turn to the positive side, rather than
the negative side. It was an interesting time. There was a lot of criticism.
The indirect cost [controversy] was probably most impactful for the
trustees. We were questioned time and time again and targeted by many
people in the community and outside the community. It was definitely a
national issue. I think that was hard for the university.
Earl: What approach did you take to dealing with it?
Meier: [00:31:23] Honesty, but also understanding of what’s public information and
what was not. I think confidentiality is extremely important. I think we all

65

tried to take the high road. There were questions, good questions and rightful
questions.
Earl: Were those days when you went home from your board meetings and said
this is stressful.
Meier: [00:32:02] Yes. I’m exhausted. [laughter] Too long days and those were
difficult times.
Earl: As you look back, are you glad you had that leadership role and glad you
were able to be part of, weathering that?
Meier: [00:32:23] Very much. The thing that I don’t think I realized, when I first
accepted the appointment as a trustee, was that it was a lifelong involvement.
You’re on for whatever your term may be, but your connection is permanent.
You’re always still considered a past trustee. There aren’t other situations and
boards that one is on where you are referred to in that same way, thought of
in the same way, and included in the same way. That involvement and
engagement is something that you treasure and it’s always there.
Earl: The next campaigns you were involved with were the Campaign for
Undergraduate Education and Stanford Challenge. Can you tell me a little bit
about that campaign]?
Meier: [00:33:23] The Campaign for Undergraduate Education was a different
campaign. I was the vice chair and my responsibility was outreach. We did
Think Again. When Gerhard [Casper] stepped down as president and [John]
Hennessy took over, Hennessy participated in the Think Again programs.
Gerhard still participated in some, so that transition was quite smooth. Of
course, they were very close being president and provost.

66

I like to do double entendre titles. I love figuring out what those titles
might be and being involved in that [laughter] part of creating the program.
It was interesting working with Gerhard. When we came up with the title,
Think Again, Gerhard thought we were insulting our alumni. [laughter] I
said, “Gerhard, that’s not an insult, I promise you.”
We had some funny situations with Gerhard because he--and he can
laugh at himself, as well. We were always looking for something that was
clever and different for our giveaway for the attendees. We came up with
what we thought was very clever, which was a flipbook. A flipbook is one of
those where you flip the pages and it becomes a movie. We had a contest for
[the role of] “The Thinker” and we called Tyrone Willingham [Lionel Tyrone
Willingham], who was coach of the football team at the time. He suggested
three of his players. Donna Garton was part of the selection process.
Susan Wilson was our graphic designer, who’s incredibly talented,
and we had the privilege of working with her and a couple of others. We
selected a young football player and we photographed him in various
situations. At the end of the book, we had coming out as a cloud, as one did
in comics, the “Think Again” title from his head, posing him as sitting with
his hand under his chin. We printed these and thought it was an inexpensive,
but clever, thing to do. We took it to show Gerhard--I don’t know if you’ve
ever heard this story, but it’s an infamous story, not just famous but
infamous--and Gerhard took this teeny book, which was probably one inch
by four inches and took it page by page by page. I knew we were dead. He
did not approve those books. We still have some around.

67

Earl: I do remember that.
Meier: [00:37:19] For Gerhard’s seventieth birthday, we were at a party--I gave him
one of those books. [laughter] He remembered and laughed. You have some
funny situations as you go through life.
Earl: Did it end up with the cube instead?
Meier: [00:37:36] We did the cube instead.
Earl: Because I still have the cube on my desk.
Meier: [00:37:38] Yes. It was so funny because Tim Portwood and Bob Pringle and
I--three of us--went to present the flipbook to Gerhard. We didn’t have to go
anywhere else. I just knew exactly that page-by-page was not going to work,
and the flipbook was no longer an option. So you have some funny situations
with that.
We had another situation where we were trying to decide on cities for
Think Again--no, this was for the Centennial.
I said, “We could just do one city in Texas.”
Everybody said, “Oh, that’s going to be hard because Houston will
expect to be included along with Dallas.”
I said, “Oh, that won’t be a problem. We’ll do wonderful programs
and they’ll have a greater opportunity when Houston goes to Dallas.”
We went to Houston to present our plan. We had arranged in Dallas
for a tour of the symphony that was new at the time and a special tour of
people’s homes--art tours. I just thought we had this wonderful package. We
had probably only about fifteen people at the meeting in Houston, one of
whom was the lead individual. He was quite vocal. We talked about what we

68

were going to be planning and what we were going to be bringing to Dallas.
We explained that we had a hotel where we would have rooms available at a
special rate for people traveling to Dallas and the programs that we had. This
man turned to me and said, “Why would I want to go to Dallas?” [laughter]
My naïveté as far as that relationship between those two cities
absolutely was changed at that point. From that time on, we took programs
to both Dallas and Houston when I was involved. We did Think Again in
Dallas and Houston and we did that for Leading Matters, too. You learn a
lot. Turns out, this man’s sister was one of our leaders in Dallas. We had a
little friction going there. You learn a lot.
Earl: Now the Campaign for Undergraduate Education was also a first of its kind,
focusing on a renaissance in undergraduate education.
Meier: [00:40:27] Exactly and just focus on undergraduate.
Earl: How did you feel about that, especially being a parent of a Stanford student?
Did you feel it was important-?
Meier: [00:40:35] I thought it was wonderful. Absolutely. Really appropriate. We had
a very interesting situation in that. When we were looking at our outreach
plan, the Think Again program, we tended to use Seattle as a target city
because we have a wonderful base there and we know we have wonderful
volunteers. We had done that for the Centennial Campaign, too, and we did
that with Think Again as well. We had a big question on the invitees. I felt
we should invite all Stanford alums. Some of the individuals said no, it’s only
an undergraduate campaign, so we should only invite undergraduate alums.
We sent the invitations to just undergraduate alums and we had a

69

huge reaction. The graduate alums feel they’re part of Stanford. They’re not
looking at whether they were just undergraduate or graduate [students]
because they have a strong Business School alumni base in Seattle. They were
upset because we were implying that they were not part of the Stanford
community. We learned--from that point forward--to include the entire base.
Remember that?
Earl: Yes.
Meier: [00:41:56] We had a big discussion on that. I think that’s a good testimonial
to how the Stanford alumni feel about the institution. They’re not looking
just at their school. They’re looking at the institution as a whole and feeling
part of it. I think you want that to continue, so that that grows and it’s
strengthened.
Earl: Of course, the legacy of the Campaign for Undergraduate Education has
been amazing, in terms of the enrichment of the experience of
undergraduates now. I think maybe we’re jealous, but also proud.
Meier:

[00:42:34] Exactly. We were born too soon. That’s the thing, and much too
early [laughter]. It has enhanced the whole--the depth of the programs and
the quality--because we used to be criticized for that. If you looked at the
Ivies, they were much stronger--and I think the campaign strengthened the
humanities because we were looked at as a techie [university]. I think that’s
not the case anymore, even though humanities still are not the largest
contingent as far as the undergrads. There’s still a huge thrust and, I think,
appreciation of the importance of humanities.

Earl: I think one thing that people who aren’t intimate with university campaigns

70

might be surprised about--there’s the very visible achievement of dollars
raised that can reinforce, strategically, parts of the institution. You had such a
big role in the outreach part, building public understanding, support, and
champions all around the globe. There’s also the element of institutionally-I’ve heard John Hennessy talk about presidents not having much power, but
they do lead. One of the things that was always a part of the campaigns that
you were a part of was bringing the academic experience into it and getting
faculty on the road. I remember having to convince them. Getting them [the
faculty] to buy into the themes and goals had a lasting influence on the
institution.
Meier: [00:44:24] On every aspect. I think there was a lot of mutual respect that was
developed. I think the faculty really understood the importance of the alumni
base and the interaction. Some of those faculty that we had to convince to
travel, asked to come back again. They enjoyed it. They realized that they
were appreciated and they got to showcase their programs and [see] how
important people felt those programs were. I think it’s really important for
faculty to know that the alumni base and the support base values them and
understands their role. I think it’s interesting--you can see a change today
because the silos are really broken down. I think there’s an institutional base
that we didn’t have before, that’s so broad that it--.
Earl: Of course, that was a theme of the Stanford Challenge.
Meier: [00:45:28] Exactly. That’s what it was all about and it worked.
Earl: Can you talk a little bit more about that campaign?
Meier: [00:45:35] That campaign was fascinating because you watched John

71

Hennessy really work with the deans, have them collaborate, and have them
really take a role that was not just looking at their own school. It was looking
at university-wide initiatives and programs, their importance, and that
interaction that they had within the schools. It was interesting because, after
that campaign, we were asked to meet with people from other schools. They
had heard about our campaign and wanted to know how we did it. One was
Harvard. Isaac [Isaac Stein] and Martin [Martin W. Shell] and I met with their
head of development.
Earl: Isaac was the chair of the board?
Meier: [00:46:43] No, Isaac was one of the four co-chairs with me. He was the
convener.
Earl: And Martin Shell.
Meier: [00:46:50] Martin Shell. Harvard was going to have four co-chairs. They had
identified two of them, so those two men came out. They were asking about
our Leading Matters program and how we had structured it. I said, “We had
leadership in each community that we had identified, and then they had
helped us identify the committees for each community. We had universitywide support and we had identified what the subjects would be for those
communities. They varied from each place to one another. The other thing
that we were so fortunate about was that John Hennessy had been able to
break down the silos.” Their head of development was describing their
structure. I said, “It sounds to me as though you have very, very entrenched
silos.”
She looked at me and said, “You’re absolutely right.”

72

I said, “That’s going to be a really big challenge because John
Hennessy was able to break down those silos and that was so conducive to
our success, both financially, and as far as being able to integrate people.”
Earl: The Stanford Challenge was framed as working together, across boundaries,
on intractable world issues.
Meier: [00:48:29] Right. Internally, it was interesting because we worked with--as
you probably know--we worked with the different schools and the
constituents within those schools. There had sometimes been some
competition. We had the alumni base as the Alumni Association and we had
the Development Office. That had not always been a collaboration that had
been as strong as it was with that. I think everybody became a team and
you’re so much more successful when you can achieve that. It takes the
leadership of a president who’s going to make that happen, and he did.
Earl: Did you have a favorite of all those campaigns that you worked on?
Meier: [00:49:21] Probably Leading Matters, just because it was so innovative and
very sophisticated. It was really a road show. The quality of the program was
extraordinary. Technically, we had a fabulous film featuring students,
programs, faculty, iconic images on a huge screen encircling the room. I saw
it at least a hundred times as we developed it, but when I saw it in the
nineteen different cities, you couldn’t help but get emotional each time you
saw it. You saw those students. It gave you so much pride in the institution,
in the people that make it run, the faculty that are inspiring these young
students, and these students who just pick up and run with it. You’re creating
the leaders of the future, and you can see that.

73

Earl: For both of those campaigns, the Campaign for Undergraduate Education
and the Stanford Challenge, Think Again was the stream of outreach and
then, Leading Matters. In both instances, there were certainly mentions of
the campaign that was tied thematically to the fundraising part, but they were
rather seeding ideas than fundraising events per se.
Meier: [00:50:47] Very much so. I called them “friend raising.” They were not
fundraising. We charged for the dinner, a nominal amount. Didn’t cover our
costs at all, but I don’t believe in not charging because you don’t have a
commitment as far as attending. Recent grads had a reduced rate. We never
had any complaints about that. They were elegant, wonderful dinners.
Everybody was quite aware that this was not being covered by their payment
but there was a commitment. There was never any discussion of fundraising.
It was “friend raising.” You could link successful fundraising to various
people who had learned about certain things in various cities and responded.
You could tell exactly, and many times they would say, “I was just so inspired
by this.” It was definitely not a fundraising event.
Earl: I think we had explicit engagement goals, as well, through the course of
Think Again--I believe our goal was to double the number of volunteers and
we ended up quadrupling the number of Stanford volunteers.
Meier: [00:52:10] Right. They came back for more. They had fun. They enjoyed it.
They interacted with people with whom they enjoyed that participation. As
long as you give them [the volunteers] a sense of success and
accomplishment, they will come back. Again, it wasn’t in name only, but in
action.

74

Earl: I want to just make sure we touch on--there are so many areas of
engagement for you--Stanford in the arts and humanities. You were on the
committee--on art--1972 maybe--this was one of your earlier engagements.
The Cantor Center [Iris and B. Gerald Cantor Center for Visual Arts]
reopening and Humanities Center--what prompted all of that for you?
Meier: [00:52:58] I have a great interest in art. When I chaired the Strategic Planning
Committee for the Bing Concert Hall, one of the biggest thrills I had was
when I first toured the Bing Concert Hall. I came out the front door and
looked across Museum Way. You saw the Cantor Museum and it just took
my breath away. I came home and I called Peter. I said, “Peter, I just had the
thrill of a lifetime. I saw the connection in the Arts Corridor that you have
created.” I’ve always been interested in art--and humanities.
We were intrigued--Tony and I were both intrigued--with the
Humanities Center. We went to see the one in North Carolina, when we
went back to visit our son who was at Duke. You saw the engagement and
the inspirational environment that was created by that kind of setting for the
humanists. It was exciting to see that Stanford could. My first sort of deep
engagement with the humanities was through Frank Lodato [Frank J.
Lodato] who was a friend, colleague, and a fellow trustee. Frank had been on
a committee with faculty, before I had come onto the board. They had some
type of committee where you interacted with faculty and had discussions--I
don’t know how often, or whatever--but he became really interested in the
fact that the humanities were underplayed and didn’t have a sense of being
very important. The faculty had that kind of reaction. He asked me if I would

75

help him create something, to do something about it, to raise awareness.
We created a program called the Humanities Forum. We interviewed
humanists, probably about fourteen or fifteen. We started with the dean of
H&S [Stanford University School of Humanities and Sciences] and went
down the ladder. It was just amazing. There was a downtrodden kind of
mindset, and the fact that they like to be lonely and [laughter]--just the whole
thing. It was very interesting. We created a program where people were
invited. We would select faculty and the faculty would do a presentation. You
would have people seated at tables and you would have support people from
that program--other faculty members. We would have a presentation, then
dinner, and we would present questions for each of the tables to discuss.
There was a lot of interaction.
[00:56:29] The people really enjoyed the fact that they got to
participate and had a faculty member resource person at each table. At the
end, there was a Q&A session. It was not a fundraising. It was really an
awareness raising. People looked forward to it. We had the luxury of
choosing subjects. That is really an incredible opportunity and, of course,
that sort of led me down the path as we did the outreach for other
fundraising activities. That really raised my awareness and appreciation of the
humanists, and what they were achieving. We had Gerhard [Casper]. We
were very tight on time. It was very structured. If they went over, we cut
them off. We said they’d be out of there by nine and they were always out of
there. It was at the Faculty Club.
Earl: That was the seeding of something important?

76

Meier: [00:57:34] Yes, it was. That was how I got involved in supporting the
Humanities Center and all. The arts are just an important part of life and
enrichment.
Earl: Can you tell me a little bit about Miriam Schapiro? It’s so wonderful.
Meier: [00:57:52] Oh, yes. I had started an Art Commission for the hospital when
we were adding to the hospital--what they called the “hospital modernization
plan.” I looked at those plans and realized we were going to have these walls
and halls and vacant spaces, and some things never change because we’re
looking at that right now [laughter] with the new hospital. It was a very small
group that I had invited to be part of it. Helen Bing was part of it. Ruth
Halperin, Jill Freidenrich, Moo Anderson [Mary Margaret Anderson]. There
was a woman by the name of Barbara Rees who was an artist. She used to
conduct tours of studios, and so forth, in San Francisco. She was a good
friend of mine. I asked her because of her knowledge and depth of
experience.
She said, “I hate committees.”
I said, “I do too, believe it or not. Don’t worry, these will be
productive.”
Anyway, she became very engaged in the whole process and she
contacted Al Elsen [Albert E. Elsen] who was then head of the museum. Al
suggested Miriam Schapiro as an artist that we should look at for the hospital
because we wanted something uplifting and different. Barbara came up with
this. Tony and I decided to purchase those and donate them to the hospital.
That’s how we were able to be engaged with the artist. We’ve used

77

everybody’s intellect, talent, and knowledge and been able to take advantage
of it. Again, when you have really good people, you end up with wonderful
results.
Earl: I wanted to ask a bit about leadership and some bigger picture reflections on
Stanford. How would you describe your leadership style? Who’s a model or a
mentor or someone you may have--?
Meier: [01:00:21] It hasn’t been a studied--I think you sort of evolve. I was involved
in high school, you know, as an officer and in various programs and have
always enjoyed being engaged. If I’m going to do something, I want to do it.
I’m not someone who enjoys being listed, unless I really am involved. I like
rolling my sleeves up. I like having a chance to impact. I think it’s just that
kind of thing. It’s not anything that I plan. I don’t really think of it in that
kind of sense.
Earl: Did you plan to have basically a career that’s about volunteer leadership?
Meier: [01:01:27] No, I actually planned to major in math and I wanted to go into
business. I was thinking that I would probably go to business school. One
thing led to another and [laughter] I met Tony and everything sort of
changed. Business has always been of interest to me and, in a way,
volunteerism is business. That’s the kind of volunteerism I’ve enjoyed, when
it’s had a purpose, when it’s fairly structured. The social part of it comes, but
that hasn’t been what I’ve been looking for. I’m really interested in
something that has a purpose, something I believe, and that can be sort of a
passion.
Earl: Do you see a next generation of Linda Meiers? We used to say, “Who’s the

78

next Linda Meier?”
Meier: [01:02:43] If you look at young people of today, and they’re not all so young,
but I think the women are quite focused. We sort of just gave our time
without thinking or counting it because it was like a job--I remember,
sometimes, I would close down the Athletic Department when we were
doing the 100th Big Game. It was a huge job. I don’t think any of us realized
what a big job it was going to be. You just sort of do it. You don’t even think
of it. It was my job. I would have gone to work if I hadn’t gotten as involved
as I did in volunteerism. I wasn’t one to sit home.
Earl: No regrets?
Meier: [01:03:49] No regrets at all. I think I’ve had the most incredible opportunity
that anybody could have--meeting wonderful people, working with
wonderful people, working for great causes, seeing them come to fruition.
What more could you ask?
Earl: How about motivating others? On several occasions, you have talked about
building great teams. How were you able to do that and get the others to stay
with you into the wee hours?
Meier: [01:04:29] I think success is really important to get people to come back. A
lot of the people that I worked with have enjoyed the fact that we’ve been
successful. They have said, “When you’re doing something else, let me
know” and that it is fun. It’s always interesting. Sometimes, there will be one
individual who may not get along with people as well as others. I love that
challenge of bringing that person around. [laughter] I’ve learned some people
skills in that.

79

People really are an important element. If you enjoy people, it’s just
the best opportunity. I mean, you know, just in the people that you have
worked with and met--that is so fulfilling. I think your children see you do
that, they do it, and enjoy it. Our second son is in Portland. He’s on the
Children’s Hospital Board up there--he’s come back and said some of the
issues that they’ve had and, you know, they see because you see things with a
different pair of eyes.
Earl: So you’re directly seeding the next generation. [laughter] Any most satisfying
moments, as you look back at your career of engagement as a Stanford
volunteer leader?
Meier: [01:06:14] Oh goodness, there are so many. As far as impact--and it’s
something that I personally would not take credit for, but was very involved
in--was the Cardinal Club. We probably had a much more global impact than
we ever anticipated as far as women’s athletics and equality of opportunities.
Stanford really took the lead in that. I think that probably wasn’t a singular
accomplishment at all, but it was--I don’t think I ever understood the impact
of that until we were sitting at a Rose Bowl game, when we played
Wisconsin, that long ago.
A gal I had met from Southern California was seated behind us. I
introduced her to Tony. She had her children with her and her husband. She
introduced me to her daughters, as I was one of the ones who helped them
have the opportunity to play sports that they were playing at college. That
was just sort of--I thought, oh my goodness. It’s very humbling. When you
realize you’re involved in something that can have that kind of impact--and I

80

never thought of it that way--it was just, we had a job and we were going to
do it and we were going to make it happen.
Earl: One of the bits of validation is, year after year, the Sears Cup [now called
Directors’ Cup] is Stanford winning, which really only happens because of
the strength of the women’s sports.
Meier: [01:08:19] It’s the totality of it, right.
Earl: And being the winner, year after year, people can’t help but ask how did
Stanford do that?
Meier: [01:08:32] If you were to look at that, it was an interesting byproduct in terms
of that--it wasn’t really a byproduct--but it was just not something I’d ever
anticipated. I think some of the hospital programs when I first took over as
chair of the board, when we were trying to push the patient care aspect. That
was very difficult, but we did because that was just essential.
Earl: Again, now it’s being institutionalized.
Meier: [01:09:21] It is, totally. It’s wonderful.
Earl: How about the flipside--the most frustrating, gut-wrenching Stanford
moments for you?
Meier: [01:09:36] Oh goodness. That’s a tough one because I think we were--well,
probably when we were starting the Cardinal Club, when we had the
resistance from the Buck Club members. You don’t really focus on those
issues because, when you have those issues, you become stronger because of
it. The program that you developed becomes stronger. I haven’t had anything
that’s been so disturbing or difficult. I love challenges, as I said, and so
sometimes those problems become opportunities.

81

Earl: You’re incurably the glass is half full, aren’t you?
Meier: [01:10:29] You’ve got to, otherwise, you would moan and groan all day long.
Earl: You’ve had the opportunity to work with a whole range of Stanford leaders,
from presidents and provosts to development and alumni professionals. Any
sort of striking differences or similarities that if you looked at university
presidents you worked with-Meier: [01:10:57] They’re all different. If you go back--when you were talking about
challenging--probably the most difficult one was when I first was appointed
to the hospital board, I think I mentioned the role of being liaison to the
town-gown committee. That was disappointing, as well as challenging and
difficult.
Earl:

How so?

Meier: [01:11:34] I saw a really bad side of people--the relationships, the lack of
respect, the antagonism--and you don’t see that now. You have competition,
but that’s not the same. That was real animosity and arrogance, just all of the
things that you don’t like to see in people. That was difficult. Presidents-they’re all different. I worked most closely with John Hennessy, but I worked
very closely with Don [Kennedy], not so much Gerhard [Casper] because I
was on my way out--although, we worked together with Think Again. He
became a very close friend, as well.
Dick Lyman [Richard W. Lyman], I knew but not as a trustee. I think,
of them all, John Hennessy is probably the most extraordinary one. He is an
extraordinary leader and very bright, which they all are or have been. He has
an intuitive way to him that is really quite extraordinary, down-to-earth, and

82

he’s very blessed. He has a wife who is an incredible compliment to him, a
gracious, warm individual who sets the stage, as well. We’ve been very lucky
at Stanford to have him, to benefit from his leadership, and to watch him
grow in that leadership role. It’s been a privilege to get to work with people
of that ilk.
Earl: Peter Bing--has that been one of your--?
Meier: [01:13:56] Peter’s been wonderful.
Earl: I just was looking at campaign cabinets and the two of you--.
Meier: [01:14:07] He’s amazing, one of a kind, just such a wonderful human being
and brilliant, generous, and gracious. Very encouraging--he really is.
Earl: Do you play complementary roles with him?
Meier: [01:14:36] When we’re together, I think we probably do. Yes, I think we do. I
still get to work with him on the concert hall, the Stanford Live program.
When I said I would take that on, I said I would do that for just a year. Well,
I did it for two years. Peter and I turned around and asked Leslie [Leslie P.
Hume]--Leslie had asked me and so I said turnaround is fair game and fair
play. Leslie and George [George H. Hume] are doing it and doing a fabulous
job. I’ve stayed on the committee because when Peter asks you to do
something, you can’t not do it and you’ve [laughter] got to stay.
Earl: Have you, in turn, asked him to do some things?
Meier: [01:15:33] Over the years, yes. Yes, always. He was on the Hospital Board
and chaired the Audit Committee. If I’ve had questions regarding issues, I
call Peter.
Earl: It’s nice to have that person be available?

83

Meier: [01:15:55] It’s wonderful. He’s a very wise and very sensitive individual. He’s
extraordinary. Stanford would not be the same without Peter Bing, as far as
his--it’s not just his philanthropy. He gives so much more than money. He
gives of himself, his wisdom, and his leadership.
Earl: Stanford is a place much transformed. It’s been a fairly rapid transformation-maybe accelerating, if you look at the pace. Here we are in our 125th year,
and the centennial we were talking about earlier wasn’t all that long ago, and
there’s been a lot that’s gone on there. Do you see missed opportunities or
risks in the pace of change at all?
Meier: [01:16:58] No, because I think that’s the way the world is. I think if you don’t
keep up with that pace, you’re going to lose the opportunities and you’re
going to lose your position. Stanford should always take advantage of its
entrepreneurial spirit. I think that’s one of the things that really sets us apart
from the other institutions, ones I’ve seen where our children have gone or
that I’ve interacted with. I met with the people from Duke, from Wisconsin,
and with people from Berkeley when it was trying to develop its volunteer
program.
This goes back quite a few years. I’m a big believer in helping one’s
neighbors and colleagues. They haven’t had the benefit of the constituents
and the culture that we have here. I think, for instance, the way we handled
the New York situation was incredible and that was John Hennessy. Other
institutions would have described it in different ways, apologized, or been
aggressive or whatever.It was not right. This was why. And we just moved
on. It could have been much more of a blip than it was. I thought that was

84

an incredible example. I think we need to be careful. I think our new
president has great challenges, but incredible opportunities and it’ll be
interesting to see where he takes us.
Earl: Do you have a sense of the next frontier?
Meier: [01:19:04] I don’t. I haven’t even met him. I just hear wonderful things about
him, but it’s going to be very interesting. He has big shoes to fill. It sounds to
me as though he has that capacity.
Earl: In your experience, do university presidents really have a strong, shaping
influence?
Meier: [01:19:26] I think they do. I think they really do--not just internally, but
externally, too. They are the voice--also, the way they interact with the
trustees, their approachability. I think that’s really an important element.
Stanford’s presidents have been much more accessible than other
institutions’--at least, it’s my understanding when you see them. There’s a
lack of rigidity here and that’s part of our entrepreneurial spirit and style. It
allows you to grow in ways that other institutions don’t. It was so interesting.
Our oldest son went to Harvard. Harvard was just so rigid. Even just
in the students. I mean, there’s just a different kind of style. Eric went to
Duke for undergrad study and then came here for business school. Duke was
sort of partway. It didn’t have the same kind of sense that Harvard does.
There is a different style and there is a different style when different
presidents take over.
Earl: Yet, the place has entrepreneurialism from the outside. It’s part of the
culture.

85

Meier: [01:21:11] Exactly. It is part of the culture and it encourages it. You look at
what the students do, what they do on their own--it’s remarkable. We’ve had
people like John Bravman--I think [John] had a huge impact on this place
with undergraduate programs. We’ve got a lot of people to thank over the
years. He was another one that we became friendly with, mainly through our
travels around the world. When we were in Japan, John was there and was
just incredible interacting with some of the alums. It’s fun to watch them in
action.
Earl: Silicon Valley. Many of your important commitments have been to Stanford,
but how about networks beyond Stanford? We talked a little bit about the
University National Bank and Trust, but your sense of how the region has
changed and how Stanford’s relationship in the region has changed. Do you
have any thoughts about that?
Meier: [01:22:33] It’s interesting. I was on the Peninsula Community Foundation
Board [now called Silicon Valley Foundation] and was on the Academy of
Science Board [California Academy of Science]. The Peninsula Community
Foundation Board is no longer. It’s now the Silicon Valley Foundation. We
merged. I’m not sure bigger is better in all situations, in the foundation
situation, in particular. It’s now the largest community foundation but it
hasn’t had the impact. I’m waiting to see it really take on a community role.
That’s what I loved about the Peninsula Community Foundation.
I had the sense this was the direction it was going in. I said I was not
interested in being on the new board because all they were talking about was
how big they were going to be. Whereas the Peninsula Community

86

Foundation was interested in what it was going to accomplish, who was
going to be benefitting, and what the needs in the community were. The
board was really educated on those community needs. Our staff was
outstanding as far as knowing the resources. I’m not sure Silicon Valley
[Foundation] has the value system that I’d like to see it have. I’m waiting to
see me be proven wrong--I hope. It worries me.
When you look at this extraordinary wealth that’s being created, a
couple of individuals are doing remarkable things with that wealth. You were
talking about the Parker donations for cancer--it needs to be more than just
those singular donations. It needs to be engagement. I’m not sure I’ve seen
that and it worries me. It worries me with the young people. If they don’t
have role models and values, we are in for a really difficult time. You look at
what’s happening with the extreme wealth and the extreme poverty. It’s
concerning.
Earl: Is that something that’s shifted in Silicon Valley?
Meier: [01:25:31] I think it has, but my knowledge is--you know, I’m on the
California Water Service Company Board, so I’m familiar with the San Jose
area and all.
Earl: How did you get involved there?
Meier: [01:25:47] I had been on a board with someone who was on that board.
They’d never had a woman on the board before. He asked and I knew a
couple of people on the board--it’s a small board. There are nine. Bob
Brown, do you remember? Bob Brown--I think he was chair of the board of
trustees way before my time, but he was head of a law firm in San Francisco.

87

Doug Brown is his son. Anyway, Bob was on the board and was chair of it.
Bill Ayer was the one who suggested me. When I interviewed with him, I
said, “I really don’t know anything about water. I certainly can do my best as
far as learning.” It’s been one of my favorite boards.
The people, and talk about a value system--that company has a value
system that is extraordinary, a value of people and retention of employees.
I’ve been very proud to be part of that. I’m going off of that because, as far
as age, I’m now the senior one. I’ve actually been on the board the longest.
We have two other women now. I chaired the Compensation Committee for
that board and enjoyed it immensely. I learned a lot. It’s a wonderful group
of people. Then, I was on Comerica’s Board, as well, because they bought
University Bank. I was one of the two people that stayed on the board. It’s
interesting. San Francisco--the Academy of Science--I was on that board for
a while and then resigned. They were very meeting heavy in their activities.
One year, they had a committee meeting two weeks before Christmas that
was really not essential at all.
After that, I sent in my resignation. [laughter] I thought if they don’t
really understand the importance of time--personal time and family time and
all--that that wasn’t okay. It’s a great program.
Earl: Gender does come up in various spots throughout your career, the
University Bank and the California Water Service Board had never had a
woman. It’s in the press as an issue in Silicon Valley, that they’re a
technology dominant economy. At the outset, I think you said I’m not a
feminist. How do you--?

88

Meier: [01:29:15] Balance it?
Earl: Yes. How do you balance it? What are your observations and feelings?
Meier: [01:29:21] Hopefully, you’re chosen for your abilities and not for your sex. I
know that sex will tip it over, if you have two candidates. We are always
women and looking for diversity. I chair the Nominating Committee for the
Stanford Hospital. In that role, we’re doing that, as well. I just don’t think it’s
a banner I carry. I think that’s probably it. I don’t think it’s “in spite of” type
of attitude or whatever. In ways, it’s probably enabled me to be in roles. For
instance, California Water, they obviously were looking for a woman and
somebody had been on a board with me.
I think probably with the University Bank, because I didn’t know
Carl Schmitt from Adam, but I’d been on a board with somebody for that. I
think if you are participatory and contribute, it gives you opportunities. It’s
interesting because the two other women who are on Cal Water are not at all
feminists, but very accomplished. One heads human resources for a company
in Southern California. Another one does board training and programs and is
on other corporate boards. They’ve achieved on their own merits. That’s
what I would hope would be the case.
Earl: You talked a bit about your family. How have you been able to juggle what’s
been a job and a half sometimes?
Meier: [01:31:54] Time management. I know it’s funny because our boys swam
competitively. I was the driver, as well. When you have a child turning
sixteen and you are a parent of a swimmer, you’re very happy when they do
that. I never did carpools because I don’t mind driving my own kids, but if

89

my kids aren’t going to go, I don’t want to have to get up at four thirty in the
morning to drive somebody else’s children. They had five o’clock practice
from five to seven every morning. You just sort of get in the routine. I don’t
need a lot of sleep, so it worked well. I prided myself on being there for the
kids and always being home with homework and all of that.
I

had a situation--Eric had a back condition and ended up being

home for fifth grade. I homeschooled him for that year. I dropped out of
everything and was able to step back in when he was ready to go back to
school. That was a challenge. It’s interesting when you have that with a child
because it impacts the whole family. When Eric would see our older son go
off to swim practice, he would be really down. Our older son almost quit
swimming that year. I said no, you’re not going to change your life in that
for--but it does have an impact.
Earl: It’s a big clan now with grandchildren. How many do you-Meier: [01:34:11] There are eight of us altogether. Eight grandchildren, I mean.
Earl: Eight grandchildren. Do you have occasions when everyone can get
together?
Meier: [01:34:17] The older they get, the harder it is. We have done that. It’s turned
out that one child’s been there for one day, but we try to. Yes, we do get
together. We’re lucky two of the families are in San Francisco. That makes a
big difference. We used to be able to do it when they were younger because
the two oldest are Laura’s. They’re both working. One’s doing the Teach for
America in New Orleans and the other one’s in New York working for
Michael Kors. Her third is graduating this year from Princeton and then is

90

going to be going into the Marines. He majored in architecture at Princeton
and he wants to go into the officer-training program. Her youngest is at
Stanford.
Our son, Tony’s two--the older one of the two is at Emory [Emory
University]. She’s just learned that the head of the Sociology Department is
nominating her for a Fulbright, which is really very exciting. She just doesn’t
know what to make of it all. The second one is at SMU, his son. We have
two granddaughters in Portland--one is a junior in high school and the other
one’s in eighth grade. They grow, which is great. It’s fun. When they have
turned ten, we’ve had sort of a tradition that I started with the oldest one of
taking her to Washington, DC by myself. I’ve done that with each of the
girls. Tony has taken them on a fishing trip for the boys because Tony’s a big
fisherman.
It’s fun when you have that chance, or when you’re with them and
they say, “Gee, this is more fun than I thought it was going to be.” [laughter]
They’re a gift. We’re very blessed.
Earl: 2001, Uncommon Woman Honor. I re-watched the video. It’s really quite
lovely. I know you professed to be a little embarrassed by the fuss, but what
do you see as your legacy? When you think about it--sit back and say okay,
what’s my legacy in terms of my Stanford engagement?
Meier: [01:37:09] Oh goodness. That’s a tough one. Matter of fact, I was talking to
someone about it the other day with this new Lead program. I think having
volunteers understand how fortunate they are to work with the outstanding
staff at Stanford and, I say that with all sincerity. In all my volunteer activities

91

with lots of different volunteer or non-profit programs, there is nothing that
duplicates or even comes close to the quality of the people that you interact
with. You are a team when you’re working. I don’t know whether the staff
understands that, how much we value that. It’s a privilege and it is the kind
of thing that makes us all look better.
I think we get credit for things that we really shouldn’t get credit for,
as volunteers at Stanford. I mean that sincerely. I think that the staff really
makes the effort to have the volunteer look good. That’s extraordinary. I
think maybe letting people know that volunteers are valued at Stanford and
they’re used. I go back to the “name only” kind of thing. There’s so many
opportunities that people have to do that and what a waste of any time or
effort that’s put into that. As I said earlier, I love to do sort of creative things
or a little bit different, a little outside the box. Stanford will gamble with you
and let you do that. That helps you come back for more.
Earl: Is there anything we didn’t cover that you think-Meier: [01:39:30] No, I think you’ve done an amazing job. You’ve uncovered things
I didn’t even know about. [laughter] No, it’s a wonderful institution. It really
is. I mean, you could have just decided on that other school, you know, how
that-Earl: What would it have been for you?
Meier: [01:39:54] It would have been Smith [Smith College].
Earl: Smith, okay. Our gain.
Meier: [01:40:00] You realize that kind of thing is just sort of luck of the draw, I
think. Little did I ever know I would become as engaged as I have. It was

92

nothing that I planned. I had no intention of that kind of thing, except I
knew I’d be involved, just because that’s my nature.
Earl: Have you slowed down at all?
Meier: [01:40:24] Not really. [laughter] No. I enjoy being busy and it’s great. Again, I
mean, you talk about meeting people or different situations that Stanford has
sort of played a part in. When we were doing the Stanford Challenge
program in Europe, we had gone for the initial program when I had gone to
Berlin, Paris, and London. I came back again, for the committee that we had
formed, to London and then I was going to Paris. Paris had a strike. Donna
and I canceled the meeting with our representative in London.
We canceled the meeting for Paris because there was no way anybody
could get there or get around. I got a call--I was at the Red Carpet Club in
Paris coming home and Donna called. She said, “You won’t believe this, but
we hadn’t reached one of the people who was going to Paris from London
and so she didn’t hear about the meeting being canceled.” I called her from
there and there’s no way I could possibly apologize enough. I just felt
horrible about it. Anyway, she’s become a very good friend of mine.
[laughter] I had her stay with us when she was out here. So, you never know.
Earl: Wonderful. Thank you so much for taking the time.
Meier: [01:42:36] Oh listen, thank you Marie.
Earl: I really appreciate it, as will generations to come.
Meier: [01:42:40] Thank you. You’ve been great to invite me to do it and it’s been
fun to reminisce.
