
Samra: This is Sukhi Samra with the Stanford Historical Society’s Oral History
Program and its Pioneering Women Project. Today is May 11, 2016, and I
am here with Stanford University’s Eve Clark who is a professor of
linguistics. We’re conducting this interview at Margaret Jacks Hall. I’d like to
begin by asking you to tell us a little bit about where you were born and
where you grew up, and what it was like growing up in Europe after World
War II during the 1950s.
Clark: Okay. Well, let me start. I was born near London during the war, and, in
fact, towards the end of the war, we actually went and lived with my
grandparents for a bit because my mother went out to Italy to join my father
who was in the Royal Artillery and was stationed near Naples at that point.
This was probably in late 1944. And when the war ended, we moved to the
States for a year because my father was posted first to Washington, DC, and
then to Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, at the big army school there.
[00:01:10] Then soon after we went back to Britain, he was posted to
France. So I lived in France for several years and went to school there while

13

my father was at Saint-Germaine-en-Laye. We lived in or near
Fontainebleau, various places. I ended up speaking French from school,
loving the language, and, in fact, ended up keeping it. So I count myself as
being bilingual from about age five. And that determined in a way what I
ended up doing at university and why I went to university partly in France
and partly in the UK.
[00:01:57] When we did go back to Britain, it was I think just before
rationing ended--well, in France, too, there was rationing, unlike in the
States. There was rationing in Europe till 1952 or 1953, depending where
you were. As children, my sister and I weren’t particularly conscious of it,
but there were lots of things that people couldn’t get which suddenly
became available after rationing ended.
So I don’t think as children we were particularly aware of--well,
certainly not of the war, I was too young--but of what things were like there.
Partly because as soon as the war ended, we came to the States and there
was no rationing in the States. And when we moved to France, it was just
different. We didn’t think about it as rationing, but it was. [laughs]
I have one younger sister who is eighteen months younger, though
she also married an American and she lived in Kentucky, just outside
Cincinnati for a long time, and now lives in Vermont. [00:03:07] Our family
is actually pretty scattered because one of her sons is in Virginia, one in
Sweden. We have one son who is on the East Coast. He’s at Yale teaching
there now. And I have cousins in London, but no other relatives from my
parents’ generation left.

14

Samra: So you said that you went to school a little bit in France and that is where
you picked up the second language.
Clark: Yes.
Samra: Can you sort of speak more about your time in France and what it was like?
Clark: Oh, yes. We lived first in a small village called Samois-sur-Seine, which is
just outside Fontainebleau. What I remember very vividly was that my sister
and I both had pet goats. [00:04:00] Mine was dark brown and white, called
Nanette. My sister’s was called Goldie, but it was gray and white. And we
were not allowed to bring them into the house, so when we’d been playing
outside with them, we would leave the front door open, loop their “reins”
very loosely over the front door handle, and run upstairs. And, of course,
the goats would easily get free and follow us [laughs].
When we moved into town, we had to leave the goats behind. We
moved into Fontainebleau itself, which is a lovely city, south of Paris, with a
big chateau and a park where I learned to ride a bike. Our school, it must
have been in walking distance. It’s interesting. You forget details like that.
But I do remember things like we didn’t write on paper. We had slates and a
little sponge in a tin for washing them off. And then it wasn’t chalk. It was a
special kind of very hard little stick--I don’t know quite what it was made of-that you could write on these slates with. [00:05:02] And so we used that
for doing all of our writing and arithmetic. And we had pinafores that were
meant to keep our clothes clean [laughs] while we were at school.
It’s interesting. I could read in English before I started school there,
and I don’t remember what the transfer was except that I started reading in

15

French instead. These things seem so seamless when you’re that age.
I actually really did fall in love with the language. I always liked it, and
so when we moved back to Britain, my mother decided that we should try
and keep up our French. My sister didn’t want to and didn’t, but I did.
[00:06:00] In fact, my mother used to send me back for the Easter
holidays which was a four-week period, and I would stay with family friends
in Fontainebleau who gave me all sorts of problems to solve, like, “Can you
go and send this telegram over the telephone for me?” Once you have sent
telegrams over the French telephone system, you have no hesitation about
picking up the telephone anywhere you are and trying to figure out how to
do whatever you need to do. So in some ways, that was very useful training
for independence.
As children, my sister and I travelled a lot. We would visit my
grandparents in Scotland frequently, and we also would go to France or to
Switzerland or to Italy in the summer holidays/school holidays. And so we
also got to Austria. So we traveled a lot as children and just took it for
granted. I think that also was useful in lots of ways.
Samra: [00:07:09] Yes, can you tell me more about how that traveling was useful
and what impact it had?
Clark: Well, I got to know different areas of France, I got to know Paris a bit. We
would stay with friends in Paris and we also would go down south to a place
called Biscarosse, just north of Bordeaux on the Bay of Biscay, a lovely area.
It’s in a district called les Landes, which is rather flat land, pine forests, very
sandy soil, and these shallow little lakes in the woods where the water gets

16

incredibly warm during the summer because it just gets heated up.
Swimming there was always lovely compared to swimming in the ocean,
which was freezing cold. [laughs]
[00:08:00] And so we used to go for usually four weeks or so to these
places, and that was our summer holiday away. And often we’d stay with
friends. Sometimes we traveled with friends of my mother’s who also had
children. And so the kids would get to play together always.
As long as we were in France or in a French-speaking area, it was just
taken for granted that we would speak French, and the friends we traveled
with were French-English bilingual, too. So that was probably also a good
way to keep our languages.
Samara: Good. Can you just speak a little bit more about your relationship with your
sister?
Clark: Yes.
Samara: It seems like you guys were together a lot.
Clark: Yes. I think we’ve always been very close. She’s 18 months younger than
me. She ended up going to the same university, but did a degree in English
and then went on to specialize in psychiatric social work.
[00:09:08] Then she married an American, as I did. In fact, we
married in the same year. She had to retrain when she came to the States.
She did some social work for a bit, but then had children earlier than I did.
And later on, she trained as a nurse. She did intensive care nursing for a
long time. She actually retired a few years ago and moved to Vermont where
she still works for a nursing agency, I think maybe three days a week. I’m

17

not sure--that is, when she’s not traveling to visit her kids.
But we’ve stayed close, although there’s been a big physical distance.
Often, we talk on the phone. We e-mail.
Samara: [00:10:04] So can you just tell me a little bit more about your parents, your
relationship with your parents, your parents’ occupations?
Clark: Yes. That was a bit complicated. My parents got divorced when I was about
nine or ten. And my mother never remarried. My father did remarry. We
lived in this big house near Salisbury when we came back from France; my
grandparents lived in the lower part of it, and we lived in the upper part of
it.
My mother was complicated, quite difficult to get on with, very
smart, never went to school. She never went to school because my
grandmother grew up in the West Indies where her father was the Lord
Chief Justice, and my grandmother was sent back to Europe to go to school,
first to Dresden since she was a pianist--this was a good place for music-then to Brussels, then to London.
[00:11:11] And so for something like--I don’t know--seven, eight
years, [my grandmother] didn’t see her parents, and she stayed with relatives
that she didn’t like in the UK on holidays. [laughs] So she vowed that when
she got married she would not send her children to school, and she didn’t,
which was something that my mother I think bitterly regretted all her life
because she felt she’d been denied an education. After my sister and I went
to university, in fact, my mother went back and took the qualifying exams to
go to university and ended up doing a degree in Celtic studies and history at

18

the University of Aberdeen, which she loved. But then, of course, she felt
she was too old to do anything with it, but she did go to Calgary to do an
MA in comparative literature, and then she went back to Scotland and really
didn’t do much with her degrees.
[00:12:05] She died relatively young. She had bone cancer. But I think
she liked having that sort of education and felt that this was a way of getting
an intellectual life that she thought she had lacked.
My father moved often and spent several years in the Far East when
I was teenager. He was in the army and ended his career with a stint in the
War Office in London. Then when he retired, he moved to Jersey which is
one of the Channel Islands, and lived there until he died. We used to visit
him there. I got on quite well with my stepmother, but not with my
stepsister. [laughs] So visiting family was complicated for both my sister and
I once we were in the States because my mother lived up on the West Coast
of Scotland in a very inaccessible but beautiful little village, and my father
lived on the island of Jersey, which was a little bit easier to get to than the
West Coast of Scotland, but not much.
[00:13:13] There were things about my family which were not terribly
functional and my parents did not get on well together. They were never in
contact, basically, if they could avoid it.
Samara: Did your mother’s lack of education and then desire to get an education
later on in her life impact you as you were growing up and your educational
goals?

19

Clark: Well, it’s actually very hard to gauge because she was extremely well read.
She read everything under the sun and so she knew a lot about literature,
was pretty well informed on politics. Didn’t have a clue about anything
mathematical.
[00:14:06] I don’t really know what her attitude was about us going to
university. We just took it for granted, but we went to a fairly academic
school. It was an all-girls’ school. And they encouraged people who were in
the top divisions in the classes to apply to university. And so she certainly
encouraged that, but I don’t think she particularly thought about what a
university education meant. Whereas, my father didn’t see any point in our
going to university and said that he would pay for a secretarial course, but
not for university.
But that was fine because what my sister and I did was get him to put
that in writing and then we both of us got county scholarships, which at the
time paid all our university fees and some maintenance. And so that way we
both managed to go to university, and we both did pretty well.
Samra: [00:15:05] So can you speak a little bit more about your time at the all-girl
school?
Clark: Oh, yes. It’s a school called the Godolphin School, which is in Salisbury,
and it was founded I think in the--it’s a very old school, I’m trying to
remember exactly when--I think it was sometime in the 1700s, earlier rather
than later. It was founded to educate young women. It was a very good
school academically. It was not very big, there were about 300-350 pupils
there. And most of the pupils were boarders, so they stayed there the whole

20

time. There were two houses with day girls, had about seventy in each, and
we were day girls. We caught a bus in from where we lived at about 8:00
AM every day. We got into Salisbury about 8:30. Walked up the hill to
school. It was about a mile from the bus station, I guess.
[00:16:08] And then we would be there all day. We had lessons till
3:30. Then we had games, which was lacrosse in the winter or cross country
runs. In the summer it was tennis, cricket, or swimming every day for at
least an hour. And then you cleaned up and you went home--with all your
homework. [laughs]
I enjoyed school. What was interesting was my mother would chafe
about the regulations at school and about the fact that we had to have
school uniforms of a particular kind. So I think my sister and I every now
and again felt that we would love if we could get new school uniforms
instead of secondhand or hand-me-downs. [laughs] When I look back on it,
I think I didn’t really care about that.
[00:16:57] But my mother sort of did the minimum amount that she
could do in terms of making sure we had the right things for school and
everything. And I think it’s that she just--although she idealized the notion
of going to school--she hadn’t realized quite what it always entailed. But,
yes, it’s interesting because every now and again when I’ve been back in
London, I have met old school friends from my class who I hadn’t seen in
twenty years, thirty years, whatever, and they have much the same attitude
about the school that I do, that it was very good in general for academic

21

purposes, but otherwise you could say, “Was it any better than anywhere
else? Who knows?”
Samra: Were there any sort of individuals, like maybe a teacher from the school that
had a big influence on you?
Clark: [00:17:59] I had a very good Latin teacher, and I had a very good history
teacher, and one very good English teacher. The French teacher was not
terribly good. All the teachers there were really very dedicated. The Latin
teacher was probably the most challenging. She would make us translate
Latin verse into English verse. [laughs]
I did a lot of Latin, probably seven years of it. That was one thing
that really got me extremely interested in language because clearly there were
connections to French, but it was also very different from French. That
intrigued me. And then when I did Greek, I discovered that you had all
these nice constructions and you could do interesting things with them.
[00:19:05] For example, if you wanted to make a noun in Greek, you
could just take the neuter article and combine it with the infinitive of a verb.
So you say “the to-fall” and it meant “the event of falling” or “the fall.” And
that seemed to be such a very useful device and it didn’t exist in English. It’s
not far from what you can do in English, though, because you can take
verbs sometimes and make them into nouns, but it’s not terribly productive.
And it looked very different from French, and so just having that on top of
French I think got me really very interested in language. Then I discovered
various books in my grandparents’ house about the history of languages and
language change, which I read when I was--I don’t know--fifteen, sixteen

22

and that also made me very interested in language generally. [00:20:01] But I
didn’t get to explore that really until much, much later.
Samra: Yes. So can you talk a little bit more about your decision to go to
undergraduate school and you alluded earlier to some sort of conflict with
your father, but-Clark: Well, he simply said that he wouldn’t pay university fees, and so then we
talked to the school and they said, “Well, get a letter saying that he won’t
pay it.” Then what they do for county scholarships at the time--I don’t
know whether the system still works like this--each county in Britain would
use a means test to decide how much they would contribute. If you got a
university place, then they would pay your tuition fees and a certain amount
of maintenance, and the amount would depend on your parents’ income.
And since my mother had a minute income, my sister and I both got full
scholarships, whereas my cousin whose father was a doctor, was always very
cross because she got very much less than we did.
[00:21:03] But I think actually means tests for things like that which
Stanford, of course, does in giving financial aid, is actually the fairest way to
deal with that.
Samra: So how did you decide on the university that you did?
Clark: Well, now they have this general application where you just list what your
choices are for so many choices, [but] at that time you had to apply to each
one separately. And I applied to Oxford, Dublin, and Edinburgh, I think. I
had interviews at Oxford, but they were accepting like one woman for
several hundred men because there were so few women’s colleges, and I

23

didn’t get in, partly because I hadn’t had the right subjects at school. But,
also, they kept asking me about German literature, and I had never done any
German or read any German. [00:21:59] And I said, “I just don’t know.”
They didn’t seem very happy with that because they wanted modern
languages. I was applying for French, but they didn’t like people who just
did French. And so that probably wouldn’t have been a good match.
With Edinburgh, they let me do just French, but I had to learn at
least one other modern language while I was there, which is why I ended up
in Barcelona. I went to learn more Spanish. And I got in at Dublin, and I
thought, “Well, Dublin, and Edinburgh. I prefer Edinburgh,” so that’s
where I went.
Samra: So can you speak a little bit more about your undergraduate experience?
Clark: Well, I don’t know whether you know what the system is like in the UK. It
actually is different in England and Scotland. In Scotland what they have is a
three-year degree, which is called an ordinary degree, where you get a BA.
And they have a four-year degree where you get an MA Honours at the end
of it. So I don’t have a BA, I have an MA.
[00:22:57] And with the four-year degree what you do for each of the
first two years, you have to pass all the exams at the end of your first year to
get on to second year, all the exams at the end of second year to get on to
third year. There aren’t any exams third year, but end of the fourth year you
have exams on the whole four years of courses. So it’s a cumulative system.
And you have year-long courses. So in the first year I did French and
introductory Spanish. I also sat in on a lot of philosophy, and I did a year-

24

long course on phonetics, which I really enjoyed, that was totally new stuff.
Totally different. For French, I had read all our set books beforehand, and
so I think I was very idle in that first year in French because I didn’t have to
exert myself at all, and I could write French pretty well. For four years, I
wrote all my essays in French. I didn’t write any English, which was a little
bit of a disaster I discovered later on.
[00:24:01] And let me see. What else? I did various things that had
nothing to do with French. I was on the fencing team, which I enjoyed. I
was on the fencing team for my first two years there. And, yes, in second
year, I did Spanish and French, mainly. All this time I was doing a lot of Old
French as well, and Medieval French. But those were the various parts of
the French courses. So it was just separate sets of lectures and tutorials. And
I failed my Spanish exams at the end of the year. [laughs]
[00:24:57] That was why I went to Barcelona, to upgrade my Spanish.
I didn’t do very well in that because I discovered that the students in
Barcelona spoke Catalan, and this was very much like Provençal, which I
had been studying. And so I could understand Catalan pretty well. I had an
Italian roommate, and we were taking intensive Spanish for the whole
summer. But I did pass my exams when I retook them in September, so it
did work after a fashion.
And then for the third year, I moved to France and decided that
since I’d lived in the north quite a bit, I would like to spend time in the
south. So I went to Aix-en-Provence. I was what was called an étudiante
libre, which means a free student, so it meant I didn’t have to take exams

25

there. I could just register as a student, take all the courses, write whatever
papers I wanted. But Edinburgh required that I do two things. I had to write
one memoire, which was sort of a sixty to eighty-page paper on something
connected with the area I was living in.
[00:26:07] And I had to write one memoire on a French writer, and I
could choose. So I wrote about Camus, and when I think back, I think I
must have been far too immature to do this, but I wrote on his ideas about
justice. But for the other one, for the local interest one, what I did was start
looking at the kinds of traditional pottery shapes you find in Provence. You
have all these casseroles and pots and clay tripods that you can sit in the
ashes and then cook by setting something on top of the tripod. I started
looking at these shapes, and I thought they looked very Greek to me. And,
of course, Marseilles had been a Greek colony.
[00:26:58] That summer I went to Greece and I spent a lot of time in
the museums in Athens, drawing and picking up the catalogues of the
different pottery shapes, and I wrote a comparison of what the classic
pottery shapes were in Greece from two thousand years earlier and what the
traditional pottery shapes were that you found in everyday markets in
Provence in the 1960s. Basically, they’re still using exactly the same pottery
shapes that the Greeks brought there two thousand years ago. That was
really fun to do. I spent probably a lot more time on that than on Camus.
Both these memoirs had to be in French, of course. And then I went back
and finished up my last year. And it was at that point that I really had to

26

think about what I wanted to do.
[00:28:03] You’re probably in the throes of doing that yourself.
When I talked to the Careers people they said, “Oh, well, you can
easily get a job in the Foreign Office. You’re a fluent speaker of French. I
did apply for that, and I was offered a job on the West Africa desk. It
basically would have meant reading all sorts of publications from West
Africa, writing up précis of them, and so on. And I decided that it wasn’t
clear to me where this kind of job would ever go.
Having been offered it, I thought, “No, I’m not sure I want to do
that. Maybe I can think about some alternative at least in a temporary way
before I decide. So I contacted one of my professors from the French
Department and said, “What would happen if I tried to do the Diploma
course on Theoretical Linguistics, to follow up on the phonetics I had done
in my first year, and find out more about linguistics for the year?” [00:29:05]
And I said, “The problem is I have no money.” He said, “Well, let me see. I
think I can get you some.” And he got me a Carnegie fellowship. So the
same Andrew Carnegie who founded the public libraries in the US also left a
foundation which gave fellowships for graduate work in the Scottish
universities. So I had a Carnegie fellowship for a year that paid my way for
that year.
I became very intrigued with linguistics, and towards the end of the
year, talked to the professor of linguistics, who was called John Lyons, and
asked him whether he would take me as a graduate student, and he agreed.
He also recommended that I go to the Linguistics Institute at UCLA that

27

summer because that would give me a further foundation before I started.
[00:30:07] So that was how I ended up going to UCLA. There I lived
in a dormitory for the first time. When I was an undergraduate at Edinburgh
and Aix-en-Provence, there were no such things as university dormitories.
You always lived in rooms or always shared an apartment with friends.
So the dormitories on the UCLA campus were a revelation to me: (a)
They held a lot of people. (b) They were hedged about with all sorts of
regulations about who could go onto what floor because it had men in one
wing and women in the other. I had a very nice roommate, an Indian
woman, in fact, and we got on well, so that worked out because the room
was minute. And I thought, “You live in this for four years. This is awful.”
[00:30:57] I had eight hours of lectures from Noam Chomsky a week.
I sat in on two of his courses, which was extremely interesting. And I met
my husband there. In fact, my advisor John Lyons said that the worst
decision he made that summer was to introduce me to Herb because then I
got married and left Edinburgh. [laughs]
Samra: So I guess we will piece through all of that and make sure.
Clark: Right, yes.
Samra: You spoke a lot about your academic experience at your university. Can you
say speak a little about the social experience or what was going on on
campuses?
Clark: In Britain, it was very quiet, and on French campuses it was not quiet at all
because there were starting to be demonstrations. So this was in--let’s see-1963 through 1964. Basically, 1963 and 1964 I was on the campus at Aix-en-

28

Provence.
[00:32:03] There were several things going on. First of all, there was a
certain amount of student unrest, and demonstrations are easy to come by
in French universities. I remember going to have lunch at the university
restaurant on campus one day and walking to the main hall, and there was a
sort of whole group of police with machine guns. And I thought, “Okay,
this is not the place to stay around.” So I left. But every now and again,
there would be right-wing students versus left-wing students having fights.
And so generally, I just tried to avoid those.
But the other thing that was happening was that Algeria was arguing
for independence from France in that era, and there was a big movement of
Algerians who decided that one way to make France give up Algeria as a
colony was to set off bombs everywhere.
[00:33:01] So they used a lot of plastique and set off bombs all over
the place. Including one night right outside the main post office in
Marseilles, and unfortunately the car belonging to a friend of ours that we
were about to drive to Greece in was parked outside the post office that
night, so all its windows were blown out. And we had to wait till they could
get car repaired before we could [laughs] leave.
We didn’t see so much of the bombing aspect, but certainly the sort
of churning among students was quite prevalent during that year. There
were many aspects of university in France I really enjoyed because people
were very involved politically, very active in considering different views,
arguing for particular positions, and I really liked that because there was

29

much less direct interest in politics in the UK.
[00:34:05] I found the same atmosphere of real interest and
commitment to politics the first time I went to Israel. I saw the same sort of
intellectual engagement. But it’s relatively rare to have that, I have come to
the conclusion. Of course, politics also gets very depressing at times.
Samra: So did you participate in any of the protests or did you stay away?
Clark: No, I didn’t because I wasn’t directly involved in any of the political
movements, and I thought, “You know, I’m only here on a short-term.” If I
was staying in France, yes, I probably would have become involved. But I
didn’t at the time.
Samra: Okay. So can you speak a little bit more about your experience in Barcelona
and some of the time you spent there?
Clark: [00:34:59] I got very intrigued with it as a city. When I went there, it was
very run down, actually, and apparently it’s been greatly refurbished. I
haven’t been back since. I keep thinking this is somewhere I need to go
back to. And I enjoyed the classes. I was meant to be learning Spanish, but I
didn’t really practice Spanish enough because I had this Italian roommate
and so what we would do is sort of negotiate on what language did we really
have in common, and mostly it was French. [laughs]
But I did spend quite a bit of time with the student groups--the
Catalan student groups--because at the time, you couldn’t teach Catalan in
the schools. You were not meant to speak Catalan. Spain was still under
Franco, and it was fairly regressive. But there were singing groups; they were
a bit like some of the a cappella groups on campus. [00:36:01] And they

30

were called estudiantinas which means student groups, basically, and they all
spoke Catalan. They sang. So I spent quite a bit of time sort of hanging out
with them. And what else? I visited all the sights in Barcelona, including
Gaudí’s La Familia Sagrada, this big church. And there was a lot of
interesting architecture then, lovely art deco buildings from the 1870s-1880s.
Those apparently now have been refurbished a lot, but at the time, they
were a little bit run down, but still beautiful.
And then there’s a very nice, very wide walk, which you get in a lot of
Spanish cities, called El Paseo, which went down towards the port and they
have lots of restaurants along each side. [00:37:01] So we used to go there
after class, we would all sit out there and drink coffee or if it was later, then
wine. [laughs] So it was a very relaxed summer, although I was meant to be
working hard. And for me, it was a change because most summers I had
always had a summer job, which took up at least two-thirds of the summer,
and then I would use whatever I’d earned to go traveling.
Samra: What types of jobs did you typically have?
Clark: Oh, I had a couple of jobs which were quite interesting. For at least two
years, I think, I worked for an agency in London that supplied instant home
help on an emergency basis. And I had a wild set of jobs. I had one job for a
painter and his wife who was a psychiatrist in South London. [00:38:00]
They had a new baby, and she was back at work full-time and so I was
looking after the baby for six weeks until they got a full-time nanny. I had
never looked after a small baby in my life. But I had a nice time and I liked
the painter. He was a member of the Royal Academy of Arts in London,

31

and he was a good painter. I’ve seen his paintings often since, at the annual
exhibit at Burlington House.
And so I would wheel this baby around in a pram, and I learned how
you change babies. It was being bottle fed, so I could give formula. So I did
that. And that was not an onerous job at all. The next stint I did was, I think
--oh, yes--it was a family in Essex, not very far from Cambridge, but in a
tiny village. They had a very nice house. And a garden with tons of fruit
trees--which is relevant. I’ll tell you in a minute.
[00:38:58] And they had a two-year-old, and [the mother] had just
had a miscarriage, sadly, and needed someone to come and help with the
two-year-old while she was recovering. Her husband worked for the BBC
and was abroad. And so I came in, looked after the two-year-old and did the
cooking, and realized I was expected to pick all the fruit and take it into the
local market that normally bought it. So I did a whole lot of fruit picking. It
was fun. It was a different kind of job.
What else did I do? Oh, yes, I worked [laughs] in Harrow for an
Orthodox Jewish family, so I had to actually really think and learn how to
cook kosher, never having kept any sort of kosher kitchen ever. And that
was fun.
[00:40:03] Again, they were a very nice family and I was sort of
helping out for a month or six weeks, something like that. So these were
interesting jobs because the people were really interesting, and I was wellpaid. I lived in, so I had very few expenses. And I enjoyed it. There were
things that I could do. I had learned how to cook well when I was in my

32

teens and so this was generally easy. Every now and again, I’d be asked to
cook something I had no idea of. And, of course, there was no Internet or
anything to look things up. So I would have to scramble to figure something
out.
Samra: So I guess we can talk more about your fourth year and your decision to
sort of keep pursuing your education, if you just want to tell me a little bit
more about that.
Clark: [00:40:56] I think one of the things I started realizing was that I didn’t feel
ready to take a job in London, and in particular I wasn’t sure that I wanted
to just sit and read newspapers and sort of condense them and look at what
kind of propaganda was being issued by different political groups in the
West African countries that spoke French--and there are a lot of them,
actually.
And so I think that it was more that I really just wasn’t sure what I
wanted to do, and going back doing this diploma for a year gave me a year
longer to think about it. It was a sort of putting me in a holding pattern in a
sense. By the end of that year, I was pretty sure that part of the problem was
that if I had gone on in French, I would have been doing literary criticism,
and I didn’t like the work in literary criticism.
[00:42:04] It wasn’t clear what else you did with a French degree. I
had got to know a number of the people in Paris who did literary criticism,
including people like Julia Kristeva. There was a whole group that was called
Tel Quel in that era, and I had met a number of them. They were smart,
intelligent, and all their literary criticisms were totally subjective, and so they

33

could say, “I feel this. I feel that. This makes me feel this.” And this was
viewed as literary criticism. I said, “But, you know, where are the criteria?
Because you have no bounds. You can say anything you like about this. And
if you have a big enough voice, it counts. But it’s not actually telling you
anything.” I wanted something that was more structured, where there was
some discipline where you could propose hypotheses, and perhaps test them
in some way.
[00:43:08] I just couldn’t see that in any of the French fields. So that
was really why I got out of that area. Much as I loved French and loved
spending time in France, I just couldn’t see [myself] doing that intellectually.
Whereas linguistics just had so much more form and structure, and you
could ask questions about different languages, about language universals,
about language change, and about language acquisition. As I did more
linguistics, it just seemed more and more appealing.
Samra: Yes. Can you talk more about your Carnegie fellowship and….
Clark: Yes. Well. I’m not sure I can say too much. [00:44:00] The system in
Edinburgh for these diploma courses--they were graduate courses and what
you had was intensive lecturing on a particular topic for four weeks or six
weeks and then you went on to another topic. So it was a very intense
theoretical course. I got to know the people in linguistics there as well as my
fellow students, and a number of those students are still friends today. I
have a good friend who now lives in Brussels, and we met on that course
and have stayed in touch.
Her name is Nicole Exertier; I know her kids. Her son works at the

34

Institute Pasteur in Paris now, so I see him when I go to Paris. For a long
time, she lived in Paris, so I would always stay with her when I was there.
But others I sort of lost touch with over the years, although I know where
many of them are still.
Samra: So can you talk more about how you got into linguistics?
Clark: Yes.
Samra: You’ve mentioned this in several different places.
Clark: Right. So I really got into linguistics originally from doing this yearlong
course on phonetics where we had to do a number of different things.
Phonetics really is the study of the physical sound structure of languages,
and various people from the 1880s on devised what’s called the
International Phonetic Alphabet or IPA. What’s very nice is once you learn
that you can sit down and listen to anyone and transcribe what they say in
such a way as--if you’re really good at this--you can reproduce it. We all
learned to do this kind of transcription.
[00:46:03] And some of our exams would consist of them going
around, finding out what language everyone knew, and then finding an
informant who spoke some other language who would come in and then read
out a passage to us and we had to transcribe it. They were very careful to
pick languages that no one knew.
We also had a tutorial which ran all year so they divided us up into
small groups. I was in a group with a speaker of Georgian from the
Caucasus, a New Zealander who had never learned how to transcribe his
vowels, myself, a Frenchman, and I think there was a German in there, too.

35

Maybe one other person because there were six of us, but I don’t remember
who the sixth was.
[00:46:55] And in that tutorial, we had to learn how to transcribe our
own speech in what’s called a narrow transcription. That is putting in every
detail you can. Learning to do that was actually very, very informative. You
really learned how to listen to people, to distinctions they make and what
the set of contrasts is and how far these might be from various standard
versions of English.
We also did comparisons of different varieties of British English,
including RP, which is Received Pronunciation, which is more or less what I
speak. It is called that because in Victorian times it meant you could be
received at court if you spoke that way. [laughs] But there are all sorts of
regional dialects all over Britain. In England, at least, what you find is upper
class is usually RP speakers; middle class is aspiring to that; lower class is
always quite a heavy regional accent. [00:48:04]
And one of the things that happens in Britain--I think it’s less
common here--is that you grow up learning to recognize all sorts of
different regional varieties of language. But in Scotland, however welleducated, you often spoke with a Scots accent anyway. And so you may end
up having almost RP and Scots and, depending on who you’re talking to,
you switch between them.
I think with my sister and I, we really didn’t spend enough time in
Scotland for that, but we were extremely conversant with northwest Scots
dialects and understand them perfectly.

36

[00:49:01] I had friends who came from England who came also to
Edinburgh as students, and they would get off in the station and they would
say they couldn’t understand a word that the porters were saying. And I was
very puzzled and then I realized, well, I’ve been hearing this since I was two
or three years old. That obviously makes a difference. But you grow up with
this sense of there being a dialect map of the whole country and knowing a
lot about different dialects so that when I hear someone on the radio now, I
know more or less where they come from.
The same in France, actually, you have a very extensive dialect map. I
only know bits and pieces in France, my knowledge there is much patchier,
but some I recognize instantly. There are certain keywords you hear and you
know if you hear someone saying “bieng, bieng” then that’s from Provence,
whereas, “bien” without that extra nasal is from the north. [00:50:03] So
there are all sorts of little diagnostics like that.
In the phonetics class, the other thing we did was what was called
articulatory phonetics. And so this is where you do experimental work to
really look at how is it that you are producing a particular sound. You can
look at the acoustic records, so you can have a record of exactly what sound
frequencies are produced when you say, “tah” versus “dah” versus “gah.”
Then you look at what are called spectrograms to look at what the
display is for different sounds. You can look at what happens if you’re
trying to distinguish between “nitrate,” the chemical, and “night rate,” the
pay scale for night work. And there it turns out that it’s very much in the
amount of time you spend on particular consonants and vowels that give

37

you the right segmentation of those words.
[00:51:08] One other thing you can do is study very directly where
your tongue is touching the hard palate in the top of your mouth when you
make particular sounds. You used to do this in a very simple way. I don’t
know what they do today. But we had a little spray with cocoa powder in it,
sweetened preferably. You spray it on the inside of your mouth, and then
you say this one word and then you take a photograph of the inside of your
mouth, and you look to see where your tongue touched the hard palate.
So I had this big argument at one point with my tutor because he
said, “Oh, well. Ts in RP are always on the ridge behind your teeth, which
you can feel. You’ll make the T by touching that.” And I said, “Well,
actually, no. I think I’m touching the back of my teeth when I make Ts.” He
said, “You can’t be. You’re an RP speaker.” [00:51:58] So I said, “Well, let’s
see.” So we did, and I was touching the back of my teeth. He looked very
puzzled, and I said, “Well, but I’m also a native speaker of French.” He said,
“Oh, well, then that explains it.” [laughs]
So we did a lot of what was called articulatory phonetics, which I
really enjoyed because that was the first time I’d seen the kinds of questions
you might ask and how one could do experimental work to decide what the
answer was.
And so articulatory phonetics, acoustic phonetics, learning
transcription, and learning also a lot about the physics of the air flow from
your lungs through the throat and out of your mouth when you are
speaking. We also had some classes on that in the department of what was

38

then still called Natural Philosophy in Edinburgh, which is physics.
[00:52:55] That course I took in my first year and really enjoyed it.
That was just completely new material to me and I loved doing it. At the
time, I didn’t think about whether this was somewhere I’d go on to, but in
my fourth year I started thinking about what else I might do if I were in
linguistics, because aside from phonetics, I knew there was a lot of other
stuff which got brought up when we looked at the history of French and
how it evolved from Latin--the history of the other Romance languages. We
had to learn quite a bit about how you got from Latin to Italian, to
Portuguese, to Spanish, to French, to Romanian. You could see when you
made comparisons that they were just slightly different changes in each of
these areas, which produced then a very different set of patterns in each
language.
[00:53:57] But I never learned anything about the history of English
until years later when I learned Dutch. [laughs] And let me see. So when I
started wondering what else I might do besides French literary criticism,
linguistics was a pretty obvious choice to explore further, which was why I
did this diploma in Theoretic Linguistics.
Samra: So can you speak just a little bit more about your time at UCLA?
Clark: Yes. Okay. I went there for the summer and it was really, “This will be fun
to spend a summer in the States.” I was totally unprepared for the size of
Los Angeles. Not appearance. It wasn’t just the dormitory living and being
on a US campus, but the sheer size of it.
[00:54:54] I had money. I got a fellowship from the Linguistics

39

Society of America to pay my expenses for the summer. I thought, “Well, I
can’t walk around with all this money. I need to just get a temporary
account that I can draw on while I’m there.” So I thought, “Well, the
sensible thing is to put it into downtown LA because that’ll be reachable
from anywhere.” Little did I know the first time I started trying to check on
this. Luckily, I had a friend and the people I knew there said, “Oh, well,
no.” I said, “How do I get down to the centre of LA? They said, “Oh, you
drive down.” I said, “I don’t have a car.” “Oh, well, I think there are buses.”
So I went to find out about buses and I got a bus that stopped on
every single block and it took something like an hour to get from UCLA to
downtown. And so the first thing I did in the bank was say, “Can you
transfer this to the Westwood branch,” which is right beside UCLA. I said,
“so I don’t have to take a bus every time,” which they did. They were very
nice.
[00:55:56] And then I took a bus back, but I must say, getting around
in LA was quite something. I had one really interesting trip while I was
there. This was in summer of 1966. I went to Watts one day with a couple
of friends from UCLA. There is a fantastic building they had in Watts. I
think it’s still there, called Watts Towers. But the other thing that struck me
most at the time--which had not occurred to me as being an issue because I
just didn’t know anything about this in the US--it was that I realized that I
was with one other white person and one Hispanic, and there was just this
immense sense of hostility on the street.
[00:56:55] And I thought this is really strange. I just had no

40

knowledge of what the history of this was at all. I got to know, of course, a
lot more about it once I moved to the States, but that I found very striking.
And I was also struck by the fact that Watts was so isolated and cut off
from the rest of Los Angeles.
And then I found out, well, there were other areas, too, which were
also enclaves of different subgroups. And this just seems so very different
from what you heard about the States from outside, that is that everything
was so well integrated with a diverse population. I actually think [that] is
more true today than it was in the 1960s.
But I also got to see the various museums in Los Angeles. I had an
old friend from when I was in France who lived in Beverly Hills, and that
was another interesting experience. [00:58:03] She got married that summer,
so I went to her wedding, and it was a thoroughly Orthodox wedding in
Beverly Hills. And that--well, it was fun. It was interesting, too, to go to that
and nice to see her later. We kept in touch for a long time. They later were
working in New York so we would see them there.
But I still remember what happened when I landed in Los Angeles.
Sarah [Feinstein] picked me up, this was the old friend, and she said, “Oh, I
thought that we’d drop your suitcase off at the door and then we’ll do
something that’s really relaxing today.” So we dropped off my suitcase, and
she took me to Disneyland. Talk about a cultural shock. [laughs] I just did
not know what to make of this.
[00:59:04] I didn’t know anything about it ahead of time. I was just
stunned by it. I kept on thinking, “This is the most extraordinary thing to

41

do. Why am I here?” [laughs] Well, the summer itself was fun. I got to know
a lot of people at the Linguistics Summer Institute, people who I kept
crossing paths with professionally throughout my career in a sense because
these linguistics institutes are for graduate students or people who have just
finished their PhDs. I met there one person, Ruth Berman--she was Ruth
Aronson then--who had been living in South America, came to the institute,
went back to Israel afterward. [01:00:05] Many years later we started a tenyear-long collaboration where we worked together collecting data on
English and Hebrew, which is why I made many trips at that point to Israel.
I realize that our starting point had actually been at UCLA, although we
hadn’t seen each other for years, where we began this collaboration--there
had been a twenty-year gap. But a lot of other linguists who became pretty
well-known in the field I first got to know at UCLA.
Samra: So you mentioned that you had eight hours’ worth of Noam Chomsky?
Clark: Yes. Two courses. One on “Aspects of the Theory of Syntax”, based on his
book that had just been published in 1965, and one on The Sound Pattern of
English, a book that got published later in 1968, which was on phonology.
[01:01:00] And Chomsky was--probably still is, I don’t know that he’s
stopped teaching now--but he gave really brilliant lectures, he was a fantastic
teacher. Basically, no one in the class could stop him in his tracks except for
one of his old students who had just started teaching at UCLA, a woman
called Barbara [Hall] Partee. She would sit in the front row and every now
and again, she would ask him a question. And he nearly always had to say,
“Barbara, I’ll have to think about that.” And then next morning, he would

42

start off by answering her question for the first twenty minutes of the class,
and then go on to his lecture. [laughs]
Chomsky is a really brilliant man. At the time, he was teaching two
courses in this institute and, in his spare time, running political rallies in
downtown LA. I never got to any of those. I did hear about them quite a
bit. [01:02:00] And I didn’t really know anything about his politics at that
point. Later on, I learned a lot more.
But that was really important for me getting to understand what the
Chomskian agenda was and where he was going. But I also heard a lot of
other very good linguists, and I was sort of free to sit in on bits of courses,
go to particular lectures, and in the institute they would also have what they
called institute lectures where everyone could attend. They would usually
have at least one of these a week. So I went to all of those. And, of course, it
was Los Angeles. It was fine weather. We would go swimming every day.
[01:02:58] That was a very restful summer. Then at the end of it--my
sister had been in San Francisco for part of the summer--I got a ride up to
San Francisco and the person giving me a ride is someone who taught
linguistics for many years at Berkeley after that. A man called John [J.]
Ohala, and he said, “Well, we’re driving, so we’ll drive around Stanford
campus and then we’ll go on up to San Francisco and I’ll drop you off.” So
that was my very first sight of Stanford. I had not the remotest idea I would
ever end up here at that time.
Samra: So you also said that you met your husband while you were at UCLA?

43

Clark: Yes. Actually, so we spent a fair amount of time together, I guess during
that summer. And then he went off to Taos, I think, in New Mexico for a
couple of weeks at the end of the institute, and I was staying up here in the
city with my sister’s fiancé’s family and then we went up to the Sierras just
to stay up there for a week.
[01:04:09] Then we were meant to be going our various ways. And
Herb [Herbert H. Clark] drove back from New Mexico and actually came
and picked me up and said we had talked about whether he would drive me
back East instead of my going by bus or flying back, and so he came to pick
me up.
My sister’s parents-in-law were very doubtful about this. [laughs] And
I said, “No, no. It’s perfectly all right. This is all arranged. Don’t worry
about it.” And I just went off. So we drove back across the country, which
was great. We went through Yellowstone. We stopped to visit Herb’s family
in South Dakota. We went on to Pittsburgh where he was about to start
teaching at Carnegie Mellon. It wasn’t Carnegie Mellon then, but it became
Carnegie Mellon.
[01:05:02] Then he drove me to Washington, D.C., and then to New
York and dropped me off at Kennedy to fly back to London. Then for the
next year, whenever we had enough money, one of us would travel one way
or the other so we could spend time together. We decided at the end of the
next year that we would get married. So it was at that point that I moved to
the States.
But, I was in the middle of working on my PhD at that point.

44

Samra: Can you speak a little bit more about your PhD work?
Clark: Yes. So after talking to John Lyons [at the University of Edinburgh] quite a
bit, I ended up working with a little nursery school project that two
psychologists were starting in Edinburgh with the intention of tracking
some aspects of the children’s development. Since I was interested in
language, I would go in every day and just record everything that was going
on, go back to my flat and transcribe everything I had recorded, and I soon
realized that one of the things I was really interested in was how they talked
about any sort of series of events in time.
[01:06:12] My advisor agreed that this was a potentially interesting
topic, and so that’s what I started focusing on specifically. This involved
recording little kids who were between three and four and a half, about
twenty-five of them running and jumping all over the place. I was just in
there every day and I got to know them all well. It was in Edinburgh, and
the two psychologists were interested in cognitive development so they were
looking at all sorts of cognitive tests.
[01:06:55] What they did was, say, “Well, if you will record all their
language and give us copies of the recording so we have a record of the
language, you can use anything you want for your dissertation.”
[01:07:01] That was a great arrangement because I wasn’t being paid,
but I had got a PhD grant from the Department of Education and Science
in London, which basically paid my expenses for three years for a PhD. I
spent that whole year collecting data and then when I moved to the States
after we got married, someone else made recordings for me for a further

45

year so I had an additional set of data, but I also then started working on
doing all the analyses at that point.
And, yes, Herb and I were living in Pittsburgh, very polluted, very
sooty. All the steel mills had reopened because of the Vietnam War, and so
they were spewing out pollution, and they had something like five years
before they had to do anything about it. [01:08:02] They were gambling on
the fact that the war would end before they needed to install any pollution
controls.
While I was there, I thought, “Well, I’m not going to be able to work
on my dissertation full time. I need some sort of distraction.” So I asked the
French Department at the University of Pittsburgh whether I could teach
medieval French. And they said, “No, because you don’t have a PhD in
medieval French.” And I said, “Well, I’ve done four years of it, and I know
an awful lot about it.”
They weren’t persuaded, but they said, “But we do want someone to
teach French.” And so I said, “Okay. That sounds good.” So that I did for
two years. It was a very curious job because an awful lot of students at Pitt
had done three or four years of French in high school, and they couldn’t
understand a word I said because they had never heard anyone with a
French accent say anything.
[01:09:01] They had never listened to recordings or gone to a
language lab. I mean language labs were not around at that point. A French
friend of mine was teaching at one of the high schools in Pittsburgh, and
she was tearing her hair. She was trying to get them to set up a language lab

46

because she said, “This is just utterly impossible. They don’t understand and
they need to practice. They can read and write, but they can’t speak.” We
would complain to each other every week or so.
But I think by the end of the year, they had learnt a bit and I enjoyed
teaching. It was the first time I had really--well, I had actually taught for a
year before I went to the university, but those were twelve-year-olds. That’s
a very different matter. Most of the students I had wanted to learn some
French. The exception was members of the football team who had to do a
language requirement. [01:09:59] I did not know anything about football or
football teams or keeping their grade point average up. So when these kids
did not come to class and, therefore, failed the midterm, I gave them Fs.
And the next night I got a phone call at home from someone who said, “I
want to talk to you about two of my kids.”
And I said, “So, who?” And he named the students, And I said, “Oh,
yes, they haven’t been coming to class. And so they didn’t pass the exam.”
He said, “Well, what do I have to do?”
And I said, “Well, who are you?” He was the head football coach.
[laughs] So I had this. He said, “What do I have to do for them to get a
grade?”
I said, “You have to send them to class, and they have to do the
work.” And there was just sort of silence.
He said, “If I get them a tutor?”
I said, “I still want to see them in class.”
[01:10:56] And so we left it at that. And one of them did get a C, I

47

think, and I’m not sure the other one did. I can’t remember. But I
remember telling this to someone a couple days later and they said, “Oh, my
God. So the coach himself called you?” And I said, “Well, yes.” And then
they explained to me about American football, which I didn’t know
anything about. And so, “Okay. I’m learning something.”
Samra: Yes. So I guess transitioning a little if you want to start talking about sort of
what brought you to Stanford.
Clark: Okay. What brought me to Stanford was my husband’s being offered a job
at Stanford. He was offered a job in the Psychology Department, which was
the top psychology department in the country. He had been a Stanford
undergraduate so he wasn’t sure whether he could step back into that
department.
[01:11:56] But I said, “Look, it won’t be polluted in California. The
climate’s going to be more like Provence. And maybe there will be some
linguistics jobs around California near Stanford at least.” Because I had been
starting to look for jobs in western Pennsylvania, and there was nothing.
So we flew out for Herb to look at the department and some friends
of ours had mentioned to Joseph Greenberg, who was in Anthropology and
was running a big project on Language Universals--it was funded by NSF at
the time--that I might be someone who he might be interested in for the
project. So I talked to him when we came out here and he was just great. I
said, “Well, I’m just getting my PhD this coming summer with John Lyons,”
and he knew John Lyons quite well.
[01:12:57] So he offered me a job as a research associate. So that sort

48

of clinched it because we would both have jobs. Then we had the agreement
that once we had worked out what more permanent jobs might be for both
of us, then we would either stay here or if I couldn’t get a job more
permanently here, then we would move somewhere else where we could
both get jobs.
So I said, “Look, this place just seems so much nicer than western
Pennsylvania. It’s not polluted. Yours is a great department and although
there’s no linguistics department here, this Universals project sounds really
interesting and this would be something I would happily work on for a few
years.” So that was how we came to move.
Samra: Yes. So what has driven your decision to stay and-Clark: Well, getting tenure helps. [laughs]
[01:14:01] We did have offers from other places at various times, but
we never really played this game of using offers to up your salaries and stuff.
And I think we just liked it here. I think the one decision we had to make-but this was much later--was that we were offered jobs with the Max-Planck
Institute. I would have been, I think, fairly open to going, but my husband
really wanted our son to be educated in the US. So we didn’t do it. Of
course, what we did along the way was have him spend at least two years in
Dutch schools, so he grew up speaking French and Dutch [laughs] as well as
English. [01:14:55] But that’s another story.
Samra: Can you describe your progress towards tenure and how it was amongst
other female colleagues at the time?

49

Clark: Okay. When I look back on it, I see that linguistics was in a curious
position. There was no linguistics department. There was something called
the Committee on Linguistics, which ran a graduate program for students
who wanted to do a PhD in linguistics. There weren’t any undergraduate
courses.
The faculty who formed this committee were from Anthropology like
Joseph Greenberg; from Speech and Hearing (which I think was attached to
the Medical School at the time), Dorothy Huntingdon and Clara Bush. And
then there was Alphonse Juilland, from the French Department who had
graduation robes from the Sorbonne, very impressive. [01:15:57] And then
there was, let’s see, who else? Oh, Charles Ferguson, who was actually
appointed in linguistics. He also helped run the Universals project. He was a
really excellent linguist who had studied all sorts of African languages--I
guess that was probably his main area, but he also did sociolinguistics, and
he was interested in language acquisition, so he worked on a whole lot of
areas.
And who else? There’s one other person. I’m trying to think who it
was. Well, those were the core of this Committee on Linguistics. And in
1970, they were given permission to hire some assistant professors. And
they proceeded to hire one man as an assistant professor, who otherwise
might have been drafted. This was still in the Vietnam era. This was in 1970,
I guess.
[01:16:58] And I said I wanted to apply for a job in linguistics, too.
And Ferguson, I do remember saying to me, “Well, we could make you a

50

lecturer for next year so you can teach.” And I sort of said, “Well, okay, but
why is so-and-so being made an assistant professor?” He said, “Well, you
get paid the same.” I said, “Well, then I’d like to be an assistant professor if
that’s the only difference.” But, anyway, that didn’t go through for that year,
so I was a lecturer of one year. And then I did apply formally and they did
appoint me as an assistant professor in linguistics.
You had asked whether I had any female colleagues, and I did. There
was one woman who I think was already an associate professor, called
Elizabeth Traugott, who had been hired a couple of years before. She was
also on the Committee in Linguistics.
[01:18:01] And her story is a really interesting one in that she had
been teaching at Berkeley in the English Department as a linguist. Then she
married one of her colleagues at which point Berkeley said, “Sorry. You
can’t be married to another faculty member so you’re out.” So she applied
for a job at Stanford who gave her one.
And she was a very good historical linguist, but Berkeley had this
very strict nepotism rule, which was nearly always applied against women,
whereas it had been devised in the 1930s to apply to the fathers and sons or
uncles and nephews, but not to be held against women. So that was sort of
an interesting little view of it--it turned out it was California-wide.
[01:19:00] If you were any employee of California, then this nepotism
rule applied. So you couldn’t have any couple in state offices or any position
in any of the UC system or state college system. You might want to look it
up. A friend of mine at Berkeley was quite prominent in testifying in

51

Sacramento as to why they should get rid of it. And this was around 1972,
1973.
Samra: You mentioned that your colleague was the female in a couple at Berkeley.
You and your husband were an academic couple here.
Clark: Right, yes.
Samra: Can you speak a little bit about your experience and sort of what challenges
you faced?
Clark: Yes. We got some very interesting advice from Herbert Simon, who was the
economist at Carnegie Mellon. He got a Nobel Prize for his work. At one
point we knew him quite well at Carnegie because we used to have lunch
with him often.
[01:19:58] He gave us advice when I was starting to look for a job,
and he said, “Well, there are a few things you should do.” We had published
one paper together. He said, “You shouldn’t publish anything together.
Make sure your areas are quite separate.” Because although we were in
[separate] departments, our research areas overlap a bit. And he said, “What
you have to do is establish an independent reputation for each of you. And
then after that you can pretty much do what you want.”
We took that advice very seriously. I think the paper we published
was in 1968, and we didn’t publish anything together for nearly ten years.
And then we published a textbook together. But by that time--well, my
husband had tenure when he came--I also had tenure by that time.
[01:20:58] And so in a way, it didn’t matter. Because we were in
separate departments, I think there wasn’t any particular effect of being an

52

academic couple, except we started to realize that some other academic
couples who had come around the same time as us had some problems.
One was the Rosaldos. Shelly and Renato Rosaldo were in Anthropology
and they actually split a position for a while, and then eventually they were
given two full-time slots. And there was another couple. I can’t remember
their name, but they were also featured in an article on academic couples at
Stanford, in the Stanford Weekly. I haven’t had time to look that up.
One of the things that you started to notice was that in other
departments, there were always a number of lecturers and a number of
tenure-track faculty. The lecturers were always female. Tenure-track faculty
were always male.
[01:22:04] And one of the things I do remember rather vividly, I
think it was in 1972, someone broke into the dean’s office during one of the
student demonstrations against the war. And all the department chairs had
just put in their recommendations for salary raises for the following year.
And the Stanford Daily published the whole lot of them. And what was very
clear was the huge discrepancies in salary. Even when you had women who
had the same rank as men in the department, they were being paid much,
much less.
The other episode I still remember vividly--there was a woman in the
French Department, and I think her first name was Pauline, I don’t
remember her second name. And the French Consulate called and said the
French government was going to give her the Légion d’Honneur for the
work she was doing on French and French literature.

53

[01:23:02] The department suddenly sort of went into spasm and
appointed her a full professor in the next few weeks so that when she was
given this Legion d’Honneur, she was not a lecturer anymore. She was a
professor of French. And I thought this is such hypocrisy that they don’t
want to appear bad to the French Consul so they then make this big effort
which they hadn’t bothered to do in the ten years she had been at the
university before that.
So you can see where my attitudes lie on that. [laughs] You asked
whether I was a feminist, and, yes, I was a feminist before I came here. And
I’ll tell you one little story which I think sort of captures some of it. One of
the things I had not realized and I still don’t know whether it was just
peculiar to the States at the time or not.
[01:24:00] But when I got married and moved to Pittsburgh, I met
lots of people locally and colleagues of my husband, and I remember going
to one party where I must have been asked about ten times, “What does
your husband do?” And I got very snarky with them and said, “Why don’t
you ask him?” Because I thought how come they have not one of them
asked what I do and they never did. And I thought, “This is just weird,”
because I was not used to this. And I thought, “Is it because I’m now
married or is it because this is just the prevailing attitude in the US?”
And I’ve never really got the answer to that. I think it was partly a
prevailing attitude. There were lots of things I noticed as odd, asymmetrical.
So men would shake hands with each other, but wouldn’t shake hands with
women. There’s still some of that in the States I think.

54

[01:24:56] I was used to living in France where you shook hands with
everyone, and in Britain the same thing. You always shook hands when you
met someone. You didn’t withhold that because it was a woman. So I just
found some of these sorts of things very strange. And that certainly made
me be very adamant about doing things that I thought were more
egalitarian.
Samra: Yes. So what kind of stereotypes did you encounter when you were at
Stanford, like particularly in the Linguistics Department?
Clark: Oh, I would call up to arrange travel to a meeting, and give dates and time
and things, and the person from the travel office which we used to have on
campus, would say, “So what time does your professor want to travel?” I
said, “What do you mean ‘my professor’?” She said, “Well--.” I would say,
“This travel is for me. I am the professor.” And there would be a silence at
the end, and then I would say, “Haven’t you ever encountered any female
faculty at Stanford?”
[01:26:00] I know it’s sort of nasty, but I thought, “How do you teach
people this unless you say it explicitly?” But now you do everything online,
so it isn’t a problem anymore. I think it’s true that there were not many
female faculty and we should look up the exact figures, but when I was
hired in 1971, I think it was certainly under 20 percent female faculty. I
think it was more around 15 or 16 percent who were in the tenure line. And
now it is up in the, I believe, maybe high 20s. So you can see how long it
takes to move these things. And this is with the university really trying, I

55

think, to move it. But students have always been at least 50 percent female
since the start.
Samra: I think that’s a good place to end for today.
Clark: [01:26:58] Okay. That sounds good.
Samra: We’ll resume on Friday.
Clark: Excellent.

Samra: We’ll start today off with talking about how you managed having a career
and a family.
Clark: Okay. One of the things that we did I think from the very start when we got
married, we knew we were both working full time and I was writing my
dissertation. My husband was teaching and doing research at Carnegie
Mellon, and so ever since we got married, we had this arrangement that one
person cooked one week, the other person cooked the next week, and
whoever wasn’t cooking did the cleaning up in the kitchen. And we’ve
actually done that all our lives with one exception [laughs], which was when
I was nursing our son until he was about ten months old. My husband did
all the cooking during that time because nursing takes an awfully long time.
But we’ve always split all the sort of household stuff equally and that has
made a very big difference. So from a practical point of view, that has
worked well and that certainly helped.
[00:01:07] In terms of our work, one of the things that we found was
useful--well, being in different departments I’m sure helped. But our areas

57

of research overlap a bit, and so we could sometimes go to the same
conferences, we could travel to the same meetings, and that was fun. We
had a larger research community that we both knew and that was always
good.
[00:01:45] And because our areas overlapped, we read each other’s
papers and criticized them, and made suggestions, and also, if we came
across stuff that was relevant in another field, we could pass it on to each
other. So a lot of that was collaborative, but it was covert collaboration in
that we really did not publish together aside from the textbook that we
published in 1977.
Samra: Can you speak a little bit more about your decision to have children and did
you ever think that would impact your career?
Clark: I waited till I got tenure. We had been a little bit undecided about children
and when to have them, but once I had tenure, we thought, “Okay, this is
the time we have to decide.” So we decided, okay, this is when we’ll try, see
if I can get pregnant, and then we’ll go from there. And I got pregnant very
quickly [both laugh] and so our son was born in September 1979.
[00:03:02] That year, it turned out I was up at the Center for
Advanced Studies [Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences],
which worked very well because we had someone come in to help look after
him, but I stayed at home all morning so that I could nurse him. Then I
went up to the center and stayed there till 6:30, seven o’clock at night, and
my husband would come home, relieve our caregiver, and give our son

58

some milk that I’d expressed and left in the fridge. Then I would come back
and nurse him again when I got back.
[00:03:46] Because I was up at the Center for Advanced Studies, I
had no obligations beyond what I wanted to do. I mean it’s a place where
you can go and work on particular research projects. In fact, I think Damon
was born about a couple of weeks after I started at the center and that year
was very productive in terms of a baby and most of the work for two
monographs. [laughs] It was an interesting year because I also met a whole
lot of people at the center who did work on child development, so they
would feed me information about what sorts of changes to expect. It was a
very good year, actually, a much easier year than if I had been teaching in
the department and had obligations to students and to committees, and
everything like that.
So we managed pretty well. Our son, I think, looks back with
amusement in a sense on some aspects of his child rearing, but I think he
also enjoyed a lot of what we did. We traveled a lot from the time he was
about, what, eight, ten months old. He always came with us. I remember
giving lectures in Germany and Belgium, and Herb brought Damon back
from the little day care place that we’d had him in for the day, so he would
be playing on the floor while I finished my lecture. [both laugh] But it was
very easy in lots of ways.
[00:05:45] It does take planning but if you plan, then you can get
things to work, and we were both at the point where we had enough money
that we could get help when we needed it.

59

Samra: Do you think sort of growing up in Europe impacted how you saw your
role as a mother?
Clark: I certainly didn’t have the view that you had to stay at home and look after
your children, which a lot of Americans seemed to have in that era, but also,
I had been brought up in a house where we had an au pair or nanny for
many years until I was about seven or eight, I guess. I took that for granted.
That I suppose may have made a difference.
[00:06:43] On the other hand, my mother hadn’t had any formal
training for a job, although she did work from the time I was about twelve
or thirteen. She did have at least a part-time job to try and ease our finances
a bit, which were pretty bad. [both laugh]
Samra: I guess we can change topics a little bit.
Clark: Absolutely.
Samra: You mentioned that you and your husband wrote a collaborative textbook.
Do you want to speak more about that and some of your other
publications?
Clark: We are in a field called psycholinguistics, both of us. I work on children’s
language acquisition and my husband worked mainly on adult language use,
so you can see this is how we had this overlap. There was one other
textbook in the field but it was very narrow, and we had a sabbatical year in
London in 1975, 1976, so we thought, “Okay, let’s write a textbook as our
project.”
[00:07:49] So we made detailed outlines. We decided what range of
things we should talk about, and what approach we should take to the field,

60

which was very different from the current approach at the time. And we sat
in our flat in London and wrote chapters, on typewriters. You don’t even
know that. [both laugh] I’d always had a little Olivetti, by that time, I think
we had electric Olivettis. That helped, and we wrote version after version of
each chapter, read each other’s chapters, rewrote them, sent all of the
chapters to a friend at Berkeley who was in the same field, Dan Slobin, and
he sometimes wrote very complimentary comments and sometimes very
acerbic comments [laughs] on what we were doing.
[00:08:50] And we ended up, by the end of that year, submitting a
very long manuscript to Harcourt Brace, and then we had a spectacularly
good copy editor. I’ve never had anyone who could do that since, who said,
“Look, you’ve got an 800-page manuscript. We need to reduce it to around
500 pages [laughs] and this is how we will do it.” And he read it. He
understood all the material, and we spent--I think it must have been about
two months on the copy-editing. Every day, the phone would go at 7:15 in
the morning. He was on the East Coast, and we would talk to Bill Dykes for
two hours about his latest suggestions for particular chapters, and this
would always be a chapter we got by courier the day before, right, so [both
laugh] it was a long process.
[00:09:40] We learned a huge amount about writing and how to make
things readable, and how to put them together in a better way, and we just
learned an enormous amount just from getting this textbook written
[Psychology and Language: An Introduction to Psycholinguistics], but it also turned
out to be a very successful textbook. It sold for about twenty years, I think,

61

Harcourt Brace kept it in print. We decided not to do a revised edition or
anything so we let it go out of print. Currently it is only in print in the PRC,
in China, and we gave them permission to reprint from the original plates,
so every student we get from China has read it, [laughs] but it’s not on sale
here anymore.
[00:10:32] And I think we both learned a lot from that. We also
became very well-known from that. But all the other books I’ve done have
been more directly on my area, and I have since then written another
textbook, the book I have on acquisition [First Language Acquisition], for
which the third edition just came out. The first version of this seemed to
take forever. The two revisions have been a lot faster, but they still are a
time-sink. It takes you a good six months or more to do each revision
because you have to update everything, go and look for what’s the most
recent work. Is it interesting? Does it change any conclusions? Do I want to
cite it? Shall I just skip it? And just making all those decisions always takes a
lot of time.
But I’ve always had a research program going on, too. I do a lot of
my research--much of it involves experimental work--I’ve done all the work
that I’ve done on English at the Bing Nursery School on campus, which is
for me the ideal experimental lab. It’s a nursery school built around a central
courtyard with what they call game rooms along two sides of the courtyard.
These are small rooms with observation windows where you can work with
a child one on one.

62

[00:12:23] First you have to get to know all the kids, but then you go
to a classroom, fish out the kid you want to work with, provided the child
agrees. They don’t always do that [both laugh], and then go and run through
whatever experimental game we’ve devised to find out what they know
about the meanings of particular words or particular constructions, or how
they will describe particular events, and then you take them back to the
classroom.
[00:12:55] It’s a really excellent setting because you can videotape
there. We always make tape recordings of every session, but more recently
we have done videotapes as well. Also they have a classroom where they
have two-year-olds. At the very beginning of the year, there are lots of
children who are not quite two, and so you can study kids from about one
year ten months, up to age five or five-and-a-half by the end of the year
over the span of the school.
I’ve done a lot of work in that age range as a result, and we’ve also
used the nursery school as the English base when I’ve been doing
comparative work. For example, I did about ten years of work with a
colleague in Tel Aviv, Ruth Berman, where we compared children’s
acquisition of English and Hebrew, and I’ve also done odds and ends pieces
of work looking at acquisition of German. I haven’t done much
experimental work on French, I do a lot of work on the acquisition of
French, but it’s all analysis of observational data. We make recordings of
kids and keep track of what is changing over time. So you may go in every

63

two weeks or every month and make a quite detailed recording of what’s
going on as they talk and play with whoever’s around.
Samra: [00:14:32] Can you just speak a little bit more about what got you into the
language acquisition field?
Clark: Oh, well, originally I think it was from my dissertation work. I worked with
this little nursery group in Edinburgh, I think I told you, and I was just
recording all the things the kids said basically and I realized that a lot of the
time they were talking about series of events, so they would say things like,
“I climb on the boxes and then I jump,” as they were climbing up on
various structures in the classroom.
[00:15:01] I decided that one of the things that might be interesting
would be to look at how they talk about a series of events and what happens
to the kinds of constructions they use. So you could say, “When I have
climbed up on the boxes, I can jump off,” or they could say, “I climb up on
the box and then I jump off,” or “Before I jump off, I climb up on the
box.” So you can use when, you can use before, you can use after, you can use
and, but then you have to decide what order you put the events in.
I was also interested in the fact that all the current theories of syntax
said it was more complicated to embed a subordinate clause in a main
clause--have a main clause and then attach when or before or after in another
clause to it. But that seemed more complicated than just using a description
of the first event followed by the second event.
[00:16:01] And so I thought, “Well, if this really reflects some kind of
complexity at the conceptual level as well, then we would expect that

64

children will all start off using and, and only later use forms like when, before,
and after. Maybe they would always start by putting the subordinate clause
second because the main clause is easier to plan. But that’s a bit
complicated. Because if you always put the subordinate clause second,
sometimes it’s the first event and sometimes it’s the second event. If the
subordinate clause contains the first event, then that’s more complex
because we’re talking about the second event first and then the first event.
[00:16:39] So I looked at the syntactic structure, whether the events
were in order and what was what we might call the information flow, that is,
had any of these events been mentioned beforehand by another speaker and
did the child pick up on what had been mentioned and was then pushed to
produce that order by that? I looked at the patterns of development for
children between three and five from the group that I had recorded and I
just extracted every instance where they described any kind of complex
event. This got me really interested in how children manage these things.
One of the first experimental studies--when I went back to this after
working on the Universals project--that I did at Bing Nursery School was a
study of children’s understanding of the words before and after. What I found
was that at age three, they actually didn’t understand either conjunction.
[00:17:45] What they did was listen to me and whatever I described
first they treated as the first event, and whatever I described second they
treated as the second event. And this resulted in the paradox that they get
after right when it introduces the first clause and they get before right when it
introduces the second clause. And otherwise, they get them wrong. [laughs]

65

And so it was very clear they didn’t actually understand them. They were
depending on what I call order of mention. Where that corresponded with
actual order in time, they did fine, and when it didn’t, they didn’t do fine at
all.
[00:18:25] But the older children started to get some glimmer of
understanding of how before worked, what its meaning was, and so they
started getting both of the before clause constructions right, but they
continued to get after half right and half wrong. And it was only at age five
and later that they got both of them right. So then I tried to figure out what
it was in the meanings of these terms that children are attending to that
would account for this order of acquisition, and that got me really sold on
looking much more closely at the meanings of words in a whole range of
domains.
We did a big study of children’s understanding of kinship terms,
which was fun. For example, you ask a five-year-old, already five, mind you,
what a brother is, and she says, “It’s a boy who has pants with pockets.”
[both laugh] Right? Not quite a kin term. [laughs] So we did extensive
studies of kin terms, and we also sent to each family a questionnaire about
what relatives the child actually had and saw frequently--and found no
relation whatever with their understanding of kin terms. [both laugh]
[00:19:45] Part of this, of course, is because in this culture and in
other cultures I know, a lot of kin terms are also used as address terms, so
you call someone Aunt So-and-so, but Aunt So-and-so may actually be just
a close friend of the family and not actually a blood relation This can make

66

it a bit more complicated for learning the kin term meanings, and it takes
children a while to get kin terms straight. Children get a few like terms that
are central to the family--mother, father, son, daughter--earlier than they get
grandmother, grandson, and much earlier than they get uncle, aunt, cousin. So
when you start going out to lateral relatives, those seem to be more
complex. We had a very detailed schematic analysis of the differences in the
meanings of kin terms. We borrowed some of this from anthropology
where there’s a huge amount of work on kinship terms, and this was a fun
project.
[00:20:48] We also looked at how well children did on spatial
prepositions. So you have what are called topological relations like in, on,
and under which have to do with the properties of the landmark object. So if
I say “on the table,” the table is a landmark. “Your phone is on the table.”
The phone is the object that’s being placed. And what we did was compare
prepositions like in, on, and under.
You go to a pediatrician’s office with a one-and-a-half-year-old, they
always give you a cup and a little block and ask the child to put it in the cup,
and the child always puts it in the cup. I pointed out to my pediatrician,
“That would happen whatever you said or if you didn’t say anything and just
held out the cup and this block. The child would put it in. [laughs] That
doesn’t tell you anything about their understanding of in.” But it does tell
you that containers are conceptually very salient and that kids focus on
those, and those are more salient than surfaces, and they’re certainly more
salient than spaces underneath surfaces.

67

[00:21:49] So anyway, we explored those sorts of relations and also
terms like above and below, on top of, at the bottom of, in front and in back, at the
side, so a whole set of different spatial terms, and charted the order in which
they were acquired and how this related to the complexity of their meanings.
We took up all sorts of domains like that and did a whole lot of studies to
see how complexity of various kinds affected order of acquisition. And in a
way, I was fortunate there was no one else doing that kind of research at the
time, so I had this completely open field, so to speak. [both laugh]
Samra: [00:22:28] Can you speak a little bit about some of the research that you’re
doing now?
Clark: What I’m doing now is looking much more at how the interaction between
adult and child--the sorts of conversations parents have with their children-affects children’s learning of language. One of the things we started with in
this line of research was looking just at tape recordings of kids talking to
their mothers. What we realized was if we tracked all the errors that children
make--children leave lots of things out; they may leave out prepositions;
they leave out words like the and a; they leave out pronouns; they leave out
word endings, like plural endings, for instance, or past tense endings.
They make lots of errors of omission and also errors of commission,
what are often called regularization errors. So they’ll say things like, “I bringed
it.” “He sitted on the ground,” those kinds of things. And they make word
order errors. So what we did was take a whole set of transcripts and mark
up all the errors that children made, of whatever kind, and then we looked
at what the adult, usually the parent, said immediately after that error. What

68

the adults do very frequently, between 40 and 60 percent of the time, I
think, is check up on what the child meant.
[00:23:58] So a child says, “He sitted on the ground,” and the parent
says, “Oh, he sat on the ground?” But with rising intonation, so they’re
checking on whether that’s what the child intended when he said sitted
because the parent would have expected the conventional sat. We called
these adult utterances reformulations, and we looked at how often they
occurred after child errors, and it’s very frequently. Interestingly, because
the child’s parents are checking on the child’s meaning, this is in a sense a
correction but it’s not saying, “No, you’re wrong. You should say X.” It’s
just checking up on what it was you meant and offering you a conventional
way of saying it.
[00:24:41] This is very direct feedback, and kids are quite attentive to
it, so they repeat the corrected item about 20 percent of the time. They
acknowledge it another 10, 15 percent of the time by saying, “Mm-hmm,”
or “Uh-huh,” and then going on, or else they just continue--“Yes, that was
what I meant. Here’s where I’m going next.” [laughs]
So we argued that this showed--because parents do it so often and
particularly the younger the child, the more often they do it--this showed
that (a) parents were attending to how their children said things and (b)
children were attending to what they got as a follow up. And so by age
three, three and a half, you get nice things like a child says, “Don’t fall me
down the stairs.”
And the father says, “No, I won’t drop you down the stairs.”

69

[00:25:36] And the child takes it up and says, “No, don’t drop me
down the stairs.” This is when the father was carrying the two-and-a-halfyear-old. [laughs]
So you get this sort of uptake eventually, and it may take a long time.
If the child’s been making the mistake of using fall instead of drop for the
causative verb, that may take of course lots of examples before the child
gets it into his head, “Oh, no. This isn’t how you do it. I may say open for the
intransitive verb and for the causative, but with fall, you’ve got a different
version for the causative. It’s fall and drop.” And of course kids have to learn
what those patterns are.
[00:26:16] There are some languages which actually are much nicer in
English in that respect. Turkish, Hindi, various other languages have this
very regular system where you add a nice little causative ending onto the
verb when it’s causative, and this is absolutely consistent through the whole
verb paradigm, so you don’t get these kinds of errors in those languages.
You get other errors, of course [both laugh] but not those ones.
We looked at these reformulations and, well, I certainly started
realizing that actually it’s the sort of to-and-fro in conversation which is
really important for displaying to a kid, “This is how you say it.” And
sometimes it’s very explicitly done by following up an error of the child, so
it’s saying to the child, “Is this what you meant? If so, this is how you do it.”
[00:27:10] We’ve done some more work on reformulations, some in
French. We’ve looked in some detail at how children sort out the different
meanings that a single verb form can have. In French, you have a lot of

70

what are called homophones. They’re actually different parts of a verb but
they sound identical. So you have a verb like to give, donner, and the
infinitive donner sounds exactly like the past participle donné, and when the
child just produces “donner” on its own in context, how do you know
whether the child means donner or donné?
[00:27:53] Well, parents are very consistent in assigning an
interpretation, so if it’s an action that hasn’t yet happened, they assume it’s
going to happen, and so they check up with the child by saying, “Tu vas
donner le livre à quelqu’un?” “You’re going to give the book to someone?”
And they use a future or a modal verb and an infinitive. But if the child has
already given something to someone that’s in the room, they say “Tu l’as
donné à ton frère.” [00:28:21] “You gave it to your brother,” and they use
an auxiliary verb which goes with the past participle. So what they do is pull
these indeterminate forms apart and assign the appropriate meaning for the
event in context.
Now what we had was tape recordings and videotapes so we could
see what happened and how the parent was interpreting what the child said
relative to that, and parents were just very consistent. That suggests that this
kind of reformulation is very helpful both for pulling apart meanings where
the forms sound the same as well as for directly correcting errors.
I’m doing some work a bit like that on Hebrew now with one of my
post docs, and we’ve been looking again at verbs. Children produce this
thing which is a sort of root and you can’t tell what inflection it’s meant to
carry, whether it’s first, second, third person, or whether it’s present or past,

71

active or passive. I mean, you just have no idea from these early verb uses.
Parents reformulate these at an amazing rate in Hebrew--this is just looking
at the verbs. It’s something between 70 and 90 percent of the time very early
on when most of the verbs children produce take this form, and then the
number of reformulations drops as children start adding inflections to the
verbs.
[00:29:57] So this is one place where you see this sort of interaction
between adult and child very directly, but you also see it in a very simple
kind of conversational exchange. Early on, a child might say something like,
“Dolly.”
And the parent says, “Yes, that’s your dolly.”
And the child will just repeat, “Dolly.”
But a month or two later, the child says, “Dolly,” and the parent says,
“Yes, that’s your dolly.”
And then the child might say, “Sleeping.”
So what they’re trying to do is frame the conversation with the child. And
often the parents will then encourage the child by saying, “Yes, she’s
sleeping. Do you want to give her a bath?” And then they can push on a bit
more and eventually the child goes from these single word contributions to
actually combining words, and that, too, very clearly is helped by this
communicative interaction directly with the parent.
Samra: You mentioned a little bit earlier that when you first started in the field of
linguistics, when you first started working that there was no one else really
doing what you were doing. Can you explain how you’ve seen the

72

Linguistics Department at Stanford and in general develop and how you feel
you’ve contributed?
Clark: [00:31:13] Well, part of the question here is that I do work on first language
acquisition. I do experimental work, much of which is published in
psychology journals. I do work on taking an analytic approach to what is
going on in acquisition. A lot of that is published in linguistics journals. So
I’ve always had a foot in both camps. Most people in this country who work
on first language acquisition are in fact in psychology, but as a result, they
often don’t have very much training in linguistics, and so sometimes their
claims about language I think are a bit of a mess, I mean, put it mildly.
Okay? [both laugh]
[00:32:09] What I found is there aren’t so many people--certainly not
in my department but not in the States generally--who are necessarily in my
field, but if I go to Europe, to Israel, I have a lot of colleagues, many of
whom have become good friends over the years, who have a similar
background to me. They’re trained in linguistics, but also some who are
trained in psychology but then learned a whole lot of linguistics afterwards.
What I found in the department, I think, everyone has said, “Oh, yes,
acquisition is important for this department.” And particularly as this
department became one which was leading the way, I think, in saying, “If
we’re going to look at language, we actually have to look at the facts of
language. How do people use it? What does real conversation look like?”
Rather than doing what many of us have called armchair linguistics--that is
you sit in your armchair and you introspect about how someone would say

73

this particular thing in English or maybe some other language--although that
has been rare. There’s a very Anglocentric bias to some of this work.
[00:33:37] And of course when we did start moving towards looking
at language and being more empirical about what data we considered in
looking at language, then people realized that actually people who look at
language acquisition or who’ve looked at other kinds of processing have
been doing that all along.
I would say probably the most influence I’ve had is not necessarily on
my colleagues here, but on the students I’ve had. I’ve had a number of
students who’ve gone out I think as very competent linguists, but who also
know how to do experimental work, know how to do the necessary
experimental design, the statistics you need to analyze your data, and who
have carried this sort of approach further into the field, which I’m very
happy about.
Samra: Yes. Can you speak a little bit more about your relationship with your
students? Do you teach undergraduates, graduates?
Clark: I do teach undergraduates, though not a huge number. In the past, I have
taught more undergraduates. I used to teach with a colleague who sadly died
a few years ago. I used to teach the Introduction to Linguistics with Ivan
Sag, and then we had quite big classes. These were usually around a hundred
or so and there we would teach every aspect of linguistics and the only thing
I bowed out of--because I said, “I’m never going to get the American
vowels right,”--is phonetics. [laughs] I always asked Ivan to do the
phonetics.

74

[00:35:14] But we would look at phonetics, phonology, morphology,
syntax, semantics, pragmatics, acquisition, sociolinguistics, historical change,
comparative linguistics. That took the ten weeks. That’s about the ten topics
and that was one of the general humanities courses that people could take,
so I think we had a lot of people who took it who never took another
linguistics course. Of course, there could have been another reason for that.
[both laugh]
[00:35:51] But then I also teach a course every autumn called First
Language Acquisition and that’s usually about half undergraduates and half
graduate students, and most of the undergraduates come from Symbolic
Systems or Linguistics, but we have a very small major. It’s about ten or
twelve students only, so that’s not a very big number, but sometimes I get
some students from Human Biology and then I get the random student
from Mathematics or Music, and I don’t know why they came but they
enjoy the course. [laughs]
But in that course, which I’ve always enjoyed doing a lot, I have all
the students collect data so that they have to find a child. I do give them
some help with that. I send them over to Bing Nursery School [laughs] and
they make an initial recording, which they have to transcribe and then
comment on, discussing on anything which is not adult-like in their child’s
speech.
[00:36:49] But then they do follow-up projects where I give them an
experiment to do, and they have to go get materials together, run the
experiment with the same child, write up the data, give me the score sheet

75

for what their child actually did and said for each of the instructions, and
then what I do is put the data from the whole class together and then we
talk about the data for the whole class. We always have a class session on
each of these projects and go over what the findings show.
[00:37:24] I have been very careful over the years to take studies that
I know replicate--however badly you do them--[both laugh] because if you
don’t do that, you can get some very weird things happening. So that part is
fun. I’ve taught this course for a long time. I change the experimental
assignments from time to time. I have actually a whole set now I sort of
rotate through from one year to the next.
I actually teach two other undergraduate courses when I think about
it. I taught for a number of years, probably about ten years, an introductory
seminar on growing up with two or more languages, and for that I’ve always
made sure that at least three-quarters of the students in it were in fact
bilingual, or trilingual, or whatever, and I would take a few other students as
long as they had quite good knowledge of another language. This is a topic
that’s very difficult to tackle unless you really know two languages well.
That, again, has always been really fun to do. I had a personal stake in
it, of course, [laughs] but I also would get together big projects. I can’t
remember if it was the first or the second year that I taught it, I had a lot of
discussions with students as to what they would like to do as a big project
where they could write up individual parts but where we could do it as a
whole class project.

76

They decided they wanted to do a survey of all the freshman dorms
and look at all the languages that were spoken and whether the people
speaking these languages intended to maintain them. [00:39:31] Did they
expect to marry someone who spoke that same language? Would they bring
up their children speaking that language as well as English? And then
looking also just where they came from, how many languages, and their
attitude about the language, whether they felt comfortable writing in that
language. Had they done schoolwork in that language or in English?
[00:39:51] A lot of the class--we would reserve some time every week
for this--was taken up in designing the questionnaire because they didn’t
know anything about designing a questionnaire, so we did spend quite a bit
of time on that. And then about the fifth week of the quarter, they set out
with copies of this questionnaire and went through everyone in their
freshmen dorms. Since it was a freshmen seminar, they were all in freshmen
dorms and collected a huge amount of data.
Then we analyzed it, probably not very well, but we found that
actually there was a surprisingly high proportion of Stanford students who
had grown up speaking another language and learned English later or who
had grown up speaking both English and another language from very early
on. It was on the order of twenty-five to thirty percent, which struck me as
very high actually. That was one project.
[00:40:50] More recently, another project we did was look at a whole
set of pictures of spatial relations that I got from the Max-Planck Institute
where I worked for several years. For example, there’s a picture with a

77

finger with a ring on it, a foot in a shoe, a cup on a table, an apple hanging
from a branch, a whole lot of different spatial arrays of that sort, and two
versions of each of them, one where an arrow points to the landmark,
another where the arrow points to the object that has been placed with
respect to that landmark.
[00:41:26] And what we did was discuss in English how you would
describe these in English in the classroom and came to some consensus on
it. Then I said, “Okay, the project for your paper is that you go find at least
two other speakers of your other language, and collect data from them, and
write that up, and compare it to what you would do in English.” And
actually in the current days of Facetime and Skype, what was great was I had
Filipino students who would call up cousins in the Philippines and collect
data from them, one who collected data from something like five cousins.
[laughs] Again, they started to see how you might compare two different
languages, where they differed in grammatical structure, and so on. They all
had to give a short presentation on this other language in class.
So these kinds of projects with undergraduates I really enjoyed, and I
think they enjoyed that class. And another class I’ve taught a number of
times is a class on gesture and language, so looking at how we use gesture as
we talk and generally it’s a very odd phenomenon. We all use gesture in
various ways when we’re talking. There are big cultural differences in exactly
how gestures are used and what gestures are used. It turns out there are
some striking differences and the same gestures used in one country we

78

regard as obscene in another and vice versa [laughs], so you always have to
be careful.
[00:43:10] You also find that people are sort of aware of the gestural
information, but as soon as they’ve interpreted what someone said, they
forget what it was. So you say, “Well, what gesture did he make?”
[00:43:26] And they sort of look puzzled and say, “Well, I know there
was something, but I have [laughs] no idea what it was.” And so we’ve
looked a lot at what gestures are doing when you communicate and how
people use them. So one thing we find is that they’re used for directing
people’s attention. You get all sorts of pointing, or indicating gestures, or
someone gestures towards something, points at it directly, and whoever
they’re talking to will in fact follow that direction, but won’t always be aware
that that was what got them going.
So anyway, we look at the role of gesture. We start usually with
looking at what gestures you see depicted in medieval paintings. In a
religious painting, you get a blessing gesture, which is nearly always this
[Clark gestures], which I think actually you find in a lot of cultures as a sort
of gesture of conferring peace, blessing, whatever, but you also get pointing.
You get offers with an open hand. There’s a range of different ones that you
see in these paintings.
[00:44:51] And then you get these various treatises from about the
16-17th century on about rhetorical language and those date back to
Cicero’s day because there was lots of discussion about how you could use
gestures effectively in a law court. And in the 17th century, they decided an

79

important part of lawyers’ education was in fact to learn how to make these
oratorical gestures to give more emphasis to their speech, to capture
people’s attention, to carry them through with your argument, and so on. So
there’s a long history of using gesture very directly in that way. Then we’ve
looked at just what goes on in everyday conversations.
Samra: [00:45:39] Can you tell me a little bit about your sabbatical to the
Netherlands? You mentioned that you and your husband did one in
London.
Clark: Yes, we went first I think in 1983, our son was nearly four I guess at the
time. 1983-1984 we spent the year there. We went to the Max-Planck
Institute for Psycholinguistics. They had linguists and psychologists there,
so it really was an ideal place for the two of us. It’s in a small town in the
eastern Netherlands, called Nijmegen. Basically, we were given offices, the
run of the library, and lots of different people to talk to who all were in our
field, unlike [laughs] at Stanford. We put our son into the first year of
kindergarten. They have a two-year kindergarten there for four-year-olds
and five-year-olds before they start in the school system, so he went there
and learned to speak Dutch.
[00:46:54] We just had an extremely pleasant, relaxed year there. We
had done a year of Dutch ourselves here at Stanford before we went
because I realized that I might need Dutch for dealing with babysitters. I
didn’t expect that most twelve-year-olds would necessarily be fluent in
English. Quite a few of them are, actually, but I discovered plumbers didn’t
speak English, piano tuners didn’t speak English, the electricity office where

80

we went to pay our bills did not speak English. [laughs] Later on, we
discovered that some older people really didn’t speak English much at all,
operating in Dutch was much easier, so this was good for us.
[00:47:42] I enjoyed learning Dutch because it was the first nonRomance language I had learned aside from English and I found out lots of
things about English from looking at Dutch.
Nijmegen is a quiet, fair-sized town, and very pleasant, very childfriendly, lots of music, and we had good friends there, and so it was an
extremely pleasant year. As a result, we went back three more times, and I
also taught there several summers in workshops that the Max-Planck
Gesellschaft put on, and we got to know all the people at the institute very
well.
So we went back for subsequent sabbaticals. We went back when my
son was eleven, so he did sixth grade there. Then we went back, I guess, the
year he started university. He was not wild about that because we sent him
off to East Coast and left the next day for the Netherlands, so we didn’t go
with him to settle him in, which I think he held against us for [laughs] the
first year, and then we were back there again about, let’s see, four years ago
also for about six months.
Samra: You served as the chair for the Max-Planck Institute I think for a little bit?
Clark: [00:49:22] For the Max-Planck Institute? They have an advisory board, and I
was chair of that. I was on the advisory board from the very time they
started this first as a project group in 1977 and then as an institute, and then
I was chair of the advisory board for some six years. I can’t remember now.

81

I did somewhere write down these dates. Yes, I was chair from 1987 to
1993 of the advisory board.
What you do with that is you go every year or every two years and
you get a presentation of work that’s being done at the institute, and you
discuss it with the members of the board and then you write a report to the
Max-Planck-Gesellschaft, which is the general organization that oversees
some fifty Max Planck Institutes in Germany and then a few outside. This
one is actually in the Netherlands--the one that I go to, because the original
director was Dutch and wanted to stay in the Netherlands. And then there’s
one in Rome, I think, and there’s probably at least one other outside
Germany.
[00:50:44] These institutes are funded partly by the German
government, partly by the state that the institute is in, and this institute in
the Netherlands also gets some funding from various Dutch research
organizations.
Samra: In 1991, you were elected to be a member of the Royal Dutch Academy of
Arts and Sciences, which serves as an advisory board to the Dutch
government. Can you tell me a little bit more about that?
Clark: Well, it’s like the National Academy in the U.S. and what service I’ve done
as a member of that academy was serving on a special committee to appoint
Academy Professors. For a while the Dutch government became very
worried about not having enough younger professors coming into the
universities in the Netherlands, and they needed somehow to enlarge the
space and job opportunities at the younger end. What they did was set up a

82

system where they would appoint certain members of universities as
Academy Professors, and the universities had to put in nominations and
these were competitive. I was on a committee that judged them and decided
who would get to do this, where you could become what was called an
Academy Professor. Then the Academy would pay all the salary for that
person and so free up that person’s salary for either one or two junior
faculty members who the university could then appoint. So this would be a
way of putting some continuity into the faculty at a point where the
universities per se were not expanding very much.
[00:52:28] I was on that committee for about three rounds of
selecting university professors. That was extremely interesting because I got
to know a lot about the Dutch university system. I’d known about all the
linguistics departments there because I’d been on advisory groups for
evaluating linguistics there, but this was university-wide so it was physics,
mathematics, archaeology, linguistics, languages, whatever you like. For that,
we would get all the folders to read and then we would go to Amsterdam
where the academy is located and have two or three days of discussion as we
made our decisions. So that was very interesting.
Otherwise, I would say it’s more of an honor to be a member of
these organizations than actually involving much work. I gave one talk there
that I was invited to give. I’ve been to a couple of meetings there.
Otherwise, I would say I don’t do anything much for them, [both laugh] nor
they for me.

83

Samra: But you have served as president of the International Association for the
Study of Child Language. Can you speak more about what the association
does, and what kind of work you do, and challenges you faced?
Clark: [00:53:57] Okay, this organization was set up in the late 1970s to try and pull
together all the people who were doing work on children’s language
acquisition, whether normal language acquisition or abnormal acquisition in
children with various speech delays or speech problems like dyslexia. And
the aim of it was first to help sponsor a journal, so we started the Journal of
Child Language with Cambridge University Press and that has been, I think, a
pretty successful journal. Every member gets that as part of their
membership.
[00:54:45] And then we have meetings every three years where it’s
usually a really big meeting with poster sessions, symposia, and various
invited talks, and those have been really interesting. I’ve probably been to
two-thirds of them. You hear about a lot of really current research, and it’s a
way of seeing colleagues who you might not see very much otherwise.
It’s also a very international body because it does have a fair-sized
American membership, but it has a very large European membership. Also
people from South Africa, from India, from Australia, New Zealand, and
Japan, so it’s worldwide, which is nice.
It’s a pleasant organization. I didn’t really have to do very much as
president. I gave out a couple of awards and, of course, I worked on some
of the logistics of the meeting, but that’s usually organized at a local level by
a committee that’s set up in the place chosen. The last time, 2014, it was in

84

Amsterdam, that was nice because that was very familiar territory to us and
going there allowed us to see a lot of old friends independently of the
meeting.
[00:56:35] The next one is going to be in France, in Lyon. It travels
around various countries in Europe and then every now and again is held in
the States.
Samra: [00:56:45] You’ve also done a lot of visiting professorships and lectures and,
as you’ve been mentioning, you’ve done a lot of work internationally. Can
you just speak on a couple of the most memorable experiences?
Clark: What would I count as the most memorable? Some of these have been
teaching at summer schools where these summer schools may be a month
or six weeks of fairly intensive courses. Those are fun. You meet students
who ask very different kinds of questions. You get a chance to talk to
colleagues who you might not see otherwise who are also teaching in the
summer school.
Some of them have been smaller but quite intense. I went to one
which was quite fun outside of Toulouse. It was held in an old mill about
fifty kilometers north of Toulouse, I suppose, in the country, and it was just
an idyllic setting. Everyone, if they did wake up early, would stroll out to the
nearest bakery and get their breakfast there, and then you’d come in and
you’d have some lectures in the morning. Then you’d break for a nice long
lunch and a lot of talk. Then you go back and have another session in the
afternoon. It was just very pleasant and that was about three weeks, so it
wasn’t long but it was very nice to be there. I hadn’t known that area very

85

well. It’s well west of Provence which I know from university days in Aixen-Provence.
[00:58:27] I taught in another summer school in Denmark, which was
very interesting. I didn’t know many of the people there. I remember vividly
going to yoga classes there and thinking, “This is a form of yoga I have not
experienced before,” and feeling very stiff the next day [laughs] after the
first time.
[00:58:50] But the students are always very highly motivated at these
summer schools because they’re coming specifically to learn about this area,
which they don’t have access to in their own university. Always when you’re
teaching, when you have students who want to learn, it makes a massive
difference.
Samra: We want to switch back to talking just a little bit more about Stanford and
the Department of Linguistics here. We’ve talked a little bit about this but
what was the Linguistics Department like when you came here? What was
the culture of the department?
Clark: Well, the Linguistics Department wasn’t when I came here because there was
no department. It became a department in 1975. Before that, it was a
graduate program. It had a little advisory board which consisted of one
professor from French, one professor from Anthropology, two from
Speech and Hearing. Charles Ferguson--I don’t think he was attached to
either department, he was actually appointed to eventually make this into a
linguistics department. And then there were just a very small number of
appointments, probably there was one associate professor, and I think

86

maybe three assistant professors, and then Ferguson, who was a full
professor, Greenberg, who was really in Anthropology but also Linguistics,
who was a full professor, and that was it.
[01:00:28] So it was very small and I think the year after I was
appointed, they appointed someone who taught phonology who was here
for a long time, and then someone who taught syntax, a man called Thomas
Wasow, who just retired this year, but he’s been called back to head
Symbolic Systems until the end of June. They were appointed quite early
along with me, and then who else? I think Ivan Sag was appointed just after
we became a department, so in about 1976.
[01:01:05] We were in Building 100 on the Quad, in a space now
occupied by Anthropology, but Anthropology only had one office there at
that time which was up at the top of the stairs on the second floor where
Joe Greenberg hung out and the rest of it got assigned to Linguistics, so that
was our building. But at a certain point, we outgrew that and then they put
half of us up on the fourth floor with Psychology, so I had an office up
there for a while, and people got housed in various places.
We were scattered across about three buildings for quite a long time
and when I became chair of the department, it was about a year, maybe two
years after the earthquake, the 1989 earthquake, and they were moving
people around as they refurbished buildings to make them “earthquakeproof.” They had told us earlier that we would probably move into this
building [Margaret Jacks Hall], but they wanted us first to move to Encina
and they would move us back. Computer Science had been in here but they

87

were moving into the Gates Building, so I said, “Why can’t we just move
straight into this building and not have two moves? You would just have
one move and that would cost you a lot less.”
[01:02:30] And they sat on that proposal from I think about March
until the end of July and then they said, “Yes, why don’t you move right in?”
Of course we had a month before the quarter started to get ourselves
moved in and sorted out, and so that was something of a mess, but I think
that I’m very glad we got them to move us at that point because we’ve been
in here since. We have the ground floor and a good chunk of the basement.
At the time, Computer Science still had one part of the basement, but they
promised that we would get it when they moved out, which we did. And so
that has worked out very well, and then English is upstairs.
Samra: [01:03:16] Can you speak a little more about being chair of the department
and what those responsibilities were?
Clark: You spend a lot of time sort of figuring out what different people need to
teach. You have tasks like assigning people to departmental committees and
hoping you’ve picked the right people who will actually do what you would
like them to do. The chair also is responsible for doing things like setting
salaries for the next year. You have regular meetings, usually a whole group
of chairs at once, with the dean and sometimes with the provost. And every
now and again, you encounter things which really horrify you.
I think the first general meeting of chairs that I went to after I was
appointed chair was when Condi Rice [Condoleezza Rice] was the new
provost. One of the first things that happened was that someone from the

88

Medical School got up and said, “Well, I’ve got a grant from NIH, but they
won’t pay the overhead that Stanford wants. What should I do about it?”
[01:04:33] And Condi, without even blinking an eye, said, “Turn the
grant down.”
And we sat there thinking, “Does she not know that you need a grant
to maintain your lab, to pay your post docs, to pay your students, to buy
your equipment and your supplies? How can you turn down a grant like
that? What you have to do is adjust the overhead.”
[01:04:52] There was a sort of gasp around the room from everyone
who had ever had anything to do with granting agencies, and we were all
extremely unhappy. [laughs] That didn’t get much better actually. [both
laugh] At one point, she wanted to turn Bing Nursery School into a day care
center, which would have reduced the number of children by half--which
would have been fine for the kids, but they would have been there all day
and we would not have been able to use it anymore as a lab school because
we wouldn’t have had enough children.
So several of us went to our associate deans and said, “We’re going to
need lab space off campus which is paid for and where we also have a lab
manager who’ll be paid for who can do recruiting of children, because if we
don’t have Bing Nursery School as a lab we need something else.” And I
know that some people who talked to Condi got thrown out sort of saying,
“I don’t want to hear so-and-so’s name anymore over this.”
[01:06:02] But then, thank goodness right at this point, she got
appointed to George Bush’s government and she took that position and no

89

one ever heard a word more about changing the lab school into a day care
center. [laughs] So that I must say I have vivid memories of. These things
can get complicated.
Samra: Can you speak a little bit about the Loma Prieta earthquake and what that
was like being on campus during then?
Clark: [01:06:38] I actually was not on campus that afternoon because I was at my
doctor’s having my annual checkup. My doctor was a fairly new one. She
had moved from New York six months before, and we were on the top
floor of the old Palo Alto Medical Foundation building, which was in
downtown Palo Alto and it was the fourth floor or fifth floor. I don’t
remember. And everything started shaking and her glass container for her
instruments fell into the sink and broke, and the lights on the ceiling were
sort of shaking.
And Patty was saying, “So what do we do?”
I said, “We stand in the doorway and hope that it doesn’t last too
long.” [laughs] And when it stopped shaking, I said, “Okay, let’s finish my
appointment and then we’ll go down and listen to the radio in the car and
find out what happened.”
So we did and of course all the electricity was out, and I thought,
“Well, okay. Our kid is at day care at Lucille Nixon [Lucille M. Nixon
Elementary School] on Stanford Avenue.” I didn’t know where Herb was.
He was in the Psychology building, I thought, and indeed he was. He was in
his office and various things fell down. I think his computer fell off its stand
onto the floor. I think it cracked its screen. None of his books came down

90

though because the wave came this way and his books were on that wall, so
then they weren’t affected.
[01:08:05] The worst affected building as I remember was Geology,
which was closed the next day as being unsafe, and of course all the faculty
members in Geology were going around inspecting all the other buildings
and saying whether they were safe or not, and they couldn’t get in to their
own offices. [laughs]
[01:08:21] And our son was at day care, and he was very intrigued. He
said he spent a lot of time keeping the little kids from crying when this
happened, but he said what was amazing, you looked out at the grass in the
playing field next to the school and it was rippling as though it was water. It
was going up and down like this and he said he had just never seen anything
like it. He was ten, I guess.
In our house, we thought, “Well, let’s see what damage we have.” We
had one crack in one of our windows. We had a piano which had moved
from one side of the room where it was to the other side, and we had a liter
bottle of Ribena--which is condensed blackcurrant juice, so it’s very sticky-which was in a cupboard above our refrigerator, and that fell out onto the
kitchen floor, and we have tiled floors in our house. So it broke of course
and that floor felt sticky. I always walk around in bare feet, for weeks
afterwards. [laughs]
But we had no electricity. We did have gas and there was no sign of it
leaking, and so we ended up for the next three or four days actually cooking
for friends who lived in Los Altos and whose house was pretty much

91

destroyed by the earthquake, so we felt very lucky because we really did not
have any structural damage and absolute minimal other damage.
[01:10:05] And partly it was--nothing could fall out of our closets
because we had never bothered to remove childproof latches from them
and so they all stayed shut. Whereas our friends whose house was destroyed
didn’t have any, and they all had glasses in the upper cupboards and stuff,
and these had all swung open and all the glasses had come out and broken
on the kitchen floor. So we went over to help them and we were sweeping
up six inches, a foot, of rubbish off every floor just to get a path through.
[01:10:35] They had bookcases along one corridor. All the books had
fallen out so the corridor was blocked, so we had to move all of those. It
was a big mess.
Samra: Did the earthquake impact the Linguistics Department aside from having to
move buildings?
Clark: No. We were in our old building, and I don’t think we had any damage in it.
Books fell out of bookcases in various rooms, but I was up in the top floor
of the Psychology Department. I didn’t have any damage in my office at all.
Jordan Hall had been rebuilt and when they rebuilt it--this was in the
early 1970s--they had put in this metal framework inside the limestone
blocks and then attached the limestone blocks to this metal frame and then
rebuilt inside using that, and so it was in pretty good shape. And this
building I think happened to be in pretty good shape because it had also
been refurbished the same way. But Geology Corner had never been
redone. It is now redone [laughs] and so that’s a main difference.

92

[01:11:51] But what was really frustrating--because we had no
electricity, we had no telephones that worked for a while--after we got
electricity back, we’d get all these reports from friends outside California
and from relatives saying, “Oh, we saw what was happening at the baseball
game. They were having the playoffs up in San Francisco, and we saw how
the cameras were shaking and then we saw what had happened to the
freeways and the bridge.”
[01:12:23] We never saw any of that [laughs] or any pictures because
we couldn’t get any TV. We had no electricity, no access to that at all. They
were trying to call us to find out whether we were okay, but of course until
they got the phone system back up, we had no contact. So we would just
keep in contact with people locally. It was very interesting.
It was frightening because it was much harder than any other
earthquake. I’d noticed how much our house moved in other much smaller
earthquakes, sort of 3.5, 4. One time I was correcting page proofs at our
dining room table and I could feel the table starting to move. I looked up,
and I could see a beam across the other side of the room was moving in
fact, and I thought, “Hmm, this house luckily is made of wooden beams so
it can move but how much can it really move?”
Have you ever felt an earthquake?
Samra: No, none in the Central Valley. I guess the next topic would be how has
being a woman impacted your career at Stanford? What was it like being one
of the few female faculty members in the Linguistics Department?

93

Clark: [01:13:53] Yes, I was thinking about this and in retrospect, it’s very hard to
say. You’re aware that you are pretty much a minority. On the other hand,
the department I had the most contact with, which was Psychology, had
quite a few very vocal women, notably Eleanor Maccoby, who was
professor of psychology there for many years. So I saw women around, not
many. And of course I did have a woman colleague here, Elizabeth
Traugott, from the very start, and so I didn’t notice it so much.
[01:14:39] But then I started realizing when I was on certain
committees that there were departments that had no women in them at all,
notably Engineering but also departments like History, I think, had very
few. Then Estelle Freedman came, and when she came up for tenure there
was a big fight.
There was another couple we knew quite well called Rosaldo, Shelly
[Michelle Rosaldo] and Renato, who were in Anthropology. Shelly was very
active in what became the Women’s Center. I never was but I used to hear
from her about it. It was interesting because I always have considered
myself a feminist and I always spoke out when I felt I had to, but I didn’t
see what I could contribute to what was at that point being called women’s
studies because I was looking at language and language acquisition. I had, at
the urging of one student I worked with, always looked to see if there were
any male-female differences in my data, and I’ve [laughs] never found a
single one, so I don’t know really what I can say given this.

94

[01:16:08] But Shelly, very sadly, in the late 1970s died in an accident
in the Philippines when she was doing fieldwork, and that was a real loss.
Renato stayed here for a number of years before he moved to NYU.
I think the one time I really noticed what this was like, and I can’t
remember if I mentioned this last time, but I was appointed as an outside
member of a search committee in French and Italian, and they were looking
for a new faculty member. When I got to this meeting, I was the only
woman there. I was the only person from outside French and Italian,
although all my background had been in French literature. It was very clear
when they began the meeting that they’d already decided who they were
going to hire, and I had only just seen the list of folders. I hadn’t looked
through any of them.
[01:17:10] And so I said, “Don’t we have to look at all the
candidates?”
And René Girard said to me, “No, no. We already know who we
want. We’ve decided that. And you’re only here because you’re a woman.”
I said to myself, “Okay, to hell with that.” As soon as I left that
meeting, I went to the dean’s office and said, “I will not serve on any
committee where I’m appointed only because I’m a woman, and I also do
not agree with search committees where they’ve made up their mind who
they’re going to hire before they’ve even had every committee member look
through the folders.”
And the dean canceled the search, which I thought I was very happy
about, but at the same time, I think I sort of got blacklisted by the French

95

Department [laughs], not surprisingly. On the other hand, I did see a couple
of the lecturers from French a few weeks after that and they were delighted.
[laughs] I think there was quite a lot of friction in that department of various
kinds.
[01:18:12] I did feel strongly about that, so when I was on any
committees, I always made sure that I made my views of whatever was
going on clear. One recurring thing that I noticed again and again, and I
think many women have noted, is that you’re in these committee meetings,
you make a suggestion about how to solve a problem. No one takes any
notice. A man makes the same suggestion five minutes later, fifteen minutes
later, and everyone takes it up. To this day, that irritates me. I don’t know
how you change the culture enough, and I think it’s having more women.
Samra: [01:19:01] Have you noticed any changes in gender dynamics sort of when
you started to now?
Clark: I’ve been on committees where I think that has not been such an issue in
recent years. For about the last eight or ten years, until I resigned last year, I
was on the Board for Judicial Affairs and that has very good split of men
and women on it and everyone gets a voice, so that I thought always was a
very fair-minded committee in terms of how its business was run.
Interestingly, of course, it’s chaired by a student, so I think that may also
have affected the culture a bit in terms of the age of the people involved. Of
course it’s a very interesting committee to serve on, although you see an
awful lot of problems coming up in front of it.
Samra: Can you speak a little bit more about the committee and your time on it?

96

Clark: [01:20:06] Well, I was asked well before that to be a panel member for the
judicial panels and I did that for a number of years. When we had to assign
penalties for Honor Code violations, one thing I found interesting was that
students were much stricter than the faculty on that [laughs] in terms of the
penalties suggested and imposed. But again, we had good discussions and
always heard from everyone. I think that in general, people were very fairminded, so that I found interesting.
[01:20:52] Then I was asked to join the Board for Judicial Affairs and
they were in the middle of trying to rewrite various aspects of the charter, so
I learnt a lot about the history of things like the Honor Code at Stanford.
The universities I went to did not have that system. Partly, of course, you
didn’t live in student housing and what they did was just proctor all the
exams and that I took for granted. There were big rooms, lots of people
taking the exams, and also, we had exams once a year over everything that
you had covered in that year, and so it was a very different system. It wasn’t
this sort of end of one quarter in terms of the amount of work that was
involved, so I thought, “Okay, this is a very different system.”
The Honor Code in general seems to work pretty well, but it has to
be maintained by students. It can’t just be maintained by faculty and that’s
where sometimes it breaks down. Students get pressured and feel they have
to do something, and usually it’s very unwise. For instance, if they decide
that computer science courses are ones where they can get help from a
friend, this is a problem because that help is always visible to the [laughs]

97

instructors in computer science. But there were a number of different cases
that came up.
Samra: [01:22:30] Can you speak a little bit more about the other committees you’ve
been on?
Clark: I’m trying to think back to what I’ve served on. Oh, the most interesting
committee of all that I think I’ve ever served on was a committee which
now no longer exists because they do this differently, but it was a committee
called Appointments and Promotions. It was the Humanities & Sciences
[School of Humanities & Sciences] committee that looked at all the tenure
cases and senior promotion cases that were sent up from each department.
[01:23:03] The way tenure works at Stanford is that the department
first looks at each candidate for tenure and votes up or down. If they vote
up, it could be unanimous or it could be a split vote, but anyway, it gets sent
to the dean’s office at that point and the dean used to give it to the
Appointments and Promotions committee. I think there were six or eight of
us, and we would get all the cases for each meeting and we were meant to
look at the folders, and the letters of recommendation, and the vitae, and
sort of come up with a general evaluation. We’d come to the meeting, and
we would have our discussion of each case and the dean and all the
associate deans sat and listened to us.
They didn’t say anything but they listened to the whole discussion
and then we would have a vote on it. Then the deans sometimes would not
like our vote or think there were other circumstances that needed to be
taken into account, but generally it went with what we voted.

98

[01:24:10] But what I loved about that committee was that you would
see a folder for someone from Marine Biology together with a folder from
someone from History, someone from Comparative Literature, someone
from Biology--it was all through the university and of very different topics. I
found it fascinating, and I felt I learned a lot with each folder that I looked
at, so that was fun.
Samra: [01:24:40] You’ve also served as the chair of the advisory committee for the
Bing Laboratory Nursery School. Can you tell me a little bit about that
experience?
Clark: Yes, well that’s I would call vague oversight. What we do is we meet usually
once a term, and we look at what they are proposing by way of their budget
for the following year and sometimes make suggestions about changing
what they’re doing. We hear reports on the amount of research that’s going
on, how many people are involved, what the projects are, what additional
training for teachers are being offered--they do some in-house training--and
what the lab school itself offers to the whole area.
Now they do a little summer institute for nursery school teachers in
the whole area and that has been going extremely well. Bing Nursery School
is regarded as a model lab school and so the methods they use I think
people like a lot and many come to get more detailed information about
how they run it, what sort of curriculum they use, and how they deal with
the kids.
[01:26:11] All the classrooms are mixed age, so they have children
between three and five in all three big classrooms. A lot of schools tend to

99

do much more age segregation even at the young ages, so they’re interested
in how that works, and what proportion of play, and how much children
actually start doing any pre-reading stuff, a whole lot of issues that come up.
[01:26:38] But with the advisory board, really you take the director of
the school, and the teachers, and the enrollment officer, and sometimes you
make recommendations to them and sort of say, “Well, for your scholarship
program, maybe you should look more closely at some of the groups in East
Palo Alto. For a long time, we had a very good scholarship program for
East Palo Alto families. It doesn’t seem to be doing quite as well now, so I
would like to see that increased again. These things sort of go up and down
over time.
Samra: Do you think that you’ll have any sort of role in expanding it to EPA again?
Clark: Probably not.
Samra: Probably not?
Clark: No, I won’t have a role. I think that we did talk to them last time about
trying to extend the scholarship program again, and what’s interesting of
course is the EPA population is changing a lot and so that of course is also
affected. But I think it’s important to have a sort of presence and make
people aware that there is a scholarship program so that if they would like
their kids to come-[01:27:57] Frankly, I think one difficulty is that if you go to Bing
Nursery School, you can only go for certain mornings or certain afternoons.
There isn’t an all-day program at all for every day, and this is because they
want to maximize the number of children since it’s a lab school. At one

100

level, it’s a great school to go to, and at another level, if you are a full-time
working mother, it’s completely impractical. [both laugh] So I have sort of
mixed feelings on that, as you can see. In fact, we never sent our kid to Bing
because of that.
Samra: [01:28:37] You were also one of ten women who was on the fifty-three
member Faculty Senate at Stanford from 1973 to 1974. Could you tell me
about that?
Clark: It’s a long time ago. I’m not at all sure how I got elected to that. I found it
quite interesting because I found out a bit about how the university was
governed, who had influence, and who spoke a lot--all the men. [both laugh]
To be quite honest, I cannot remember. You’re on it for one year, right, so I
can’t remember whether there were any critical decisions or anything in that
time. I did get to know a number of the faculty who were on it quite well at
the time and some of them were quite a bit older, so they’re no longer
around.
But I think what I found most helpful was I did learn quite a bit
more about how the university ran from that. This is always something of a
mystery, and when you come here as an assistant professor, you have no
idea who has what power, or under what circumstances, or who you can go
to for different things. Now I think they have a faculty handbook which
gives you some of that information, but that, as far as I know, did not exist
when I first was appointed, so a lot of these things have become more
transparent.

101

Samra: [01:30:12] Was there any sort of tension surrounding the appointment of the
women that you remember?
Clark: No, but of course I would only have seen this in my own department or
possibly in Psychology, and those were both departments that I would say
were friendly to women in general. So that doesn’t tell me anything about
what happened in a department like Sociology, or Biology, or Physics, or
anything like that, or the School of Engineering, which I believe had only
one woman on the faculty for something like twelve years after I came.
[both laugh]
Samra: [01:30:52] Others have mentioned that the period of student protests during
the late 1960s and early 1970s was a particularly memorable time for them.
Clark: Yes.
Samra: How did you experience those times?
Clark: Well, what I do remember is that we moved to Stanford in August 1969 and
I do remember in that first year, maybe through the first two years, that if
we ever came on to campus in the evenings, you smelled tear gas and every
now and again, you ran into this huge crowd, which actually I found very
scary. Being in a car in the middle of a crowd is not a comfortable
experience [laughs], and those things I do remember vividly.
I remember my husband was at Stanford as an undergraduate from
1958 to 1962, and this was at the time of the Free Speech Movement in
Berkeley. He said when he was an undergraduate, if you had any
demonstrations, they were always at Berkeley, and this looked like a real
reversal because the demonstrations at Stanford in that year were I think as

102

big as any at Berkeley. He, I think, was quite struck by that in terms of the
contrast with his memory--Stanford being this very quiet, fairly conservative
place in many respects and now suddenly things were just chaotic. Labs
were getting broken into, the dean’s office was getting broken into. There
were marches and demonstrations several times a week.
[01:32:33] And there was one faculty member, whose name I can’t
remember, who actually ended up leading a lot of these demonstrations, and
he got fired by the university--and he was tenured. I mean it was a big, big
fuss. I don’t know how the case eventually got resolved, but that was a huge
topic of conversation for many weeks.
Samra: The women’s movement was also going on at the same time. Do you have
any sort of-Clark: Right. Well, as I said, I was always a strong feminist and made that known
and clear to people I talked to, but I was never involved in the women’s
studies center. Most of the activism I think on campus stemmed from that,
and so I really did not see that.
Samra: What do you think Stanford can continue to do to make it a more
hospitable place for women?
Clark: One of the things they need to do is just hire more women in faculty
positions. I think they have got much better. For instance, the Medical
School I know has got a lot better because they now have many more
women on the faculty there. I think that things have changed a lot there and
presumably for the better, but it’s still nowhere near parity in terms of being

103

over 40 percent, let’s say, and I think it would be good if we got to
something closer to that.
[01:34:24] The private schools, if you compare them to state schools,
they have very different ratios of men and women. If you look at Stanford,
Harvard, Yale, Princeton, they all fall together in that they are sort of
bastions of male faculty and forget about what the students were. It’s just
taking a very long time to change the ratios, I think.
Samra: [01:35:00] Yes. Could you just tell me a little bit about what your experience
has been with students at Stanford and how that’s really impacted your
career?
Clark: Well, I think one thing that I found really striking in moving from teaching
French at the University of Pittsburgh to teaching various linguistics courses
at Stanford was that the students here were (a) interested in the topic, (b)
they were nearly always very good. And so this makes an enormous
difference when you’re teaching and so this I really enjoyed. I found that it
makes teaching much more stimulating and interesting.
I taught at least one or two new courses every year the first few years
I was assistant professor, which meant that I was reading a huge amount of
stuff I knew relatively little about and then I had to be prepared to explain it
to other people. I learned an enormous amount that way, and over the years,
I’ve always learned a lot from my students. I found it really fun talking to
them, and seeing how their dissertation topics evolved, and how much they
learned, too, in the course of the program.

104

[01:36:22] So this I’ve really enjoyed about Stanford and I think that
in a sense it’s a special place in that you have students who are good, you
have excellent research facilities, and you are pushed to do more in a sense
because all of your colleagues are doing really good work, and I’ve found
that has just been a great atmosphere for doing my research. So I find it
hard to think of whether any other place could have been as good as
Stanford in that way.
Samra: [01:37:00] Yes. Well, thank you so much for your interview.
Clark: Okay, you are very welcome.