
Genovese: Charlotte, I was wondering if you could talk about your book on Jonas Salk,
which will be coming out this summer, given the historic moment that we are
in right now with the controversy over vaccinations and parents and others
wanting to not vaccinate their children for fear of autism and other side
effects.
Jacobs: [00:00:27] Jonas Salk: A Life is a biography of a man who concocted two of
the most important vaccinations we have, that for influenza and that for
poliomyelitis. I can speak to vaccination issues from a more historical context
than I feel comfortable addressing today when vaccines are very different
from back in Salk’s day. Jonas Salk set out to try to prevent two devastating
diseases for which we had no vaccines. Today many consider influenza a
nuisance for the general public, although every single year thousands of
elderly people die from influenza.
[00:01:30] But back in 1918, flu changed its stripes and became a deadly
virus. Millions died from it worldwide. It had a predilection for young
people, and almost as many young men died from influenza as in World War
I combat. For those who lived through that period, the fear remained that

13

the influenza virus would again mutate or revert back to its deadliest form.
During Gerald Ford’s presidency when there were sudden deaths from swine
flu, the country decided to embark upon national immunization.
[00:02:29] Just as the US was entering World War II, Salk set about with
Thomas Francis, Jr. at the University of Michigan to make a flu vaccine
because they did not want the troops to be devastated again. As compared to
the only three other vaccines available at that time, smallpox, yellow fever,
and rabies, which were all made with live virus, they made a vaccine with a
killed virus which was very effective. The problem with influenza over the
years has been to predict correctly which organism is going to rear its ugly
head so that a vaccine can be made to protect the public. There’s never been
mandatory influenza vaccination because the CDC is never sure from year to
year how effective the vaccination is going to be, although Salk would have
liked it to be mandatory.
[00:03:28] Then came poliomyelitis. One of the worst epidemics in the
United States occurred in 1916. From that period forward, every summer
was terrible for those of us who actually lived through the early 1950s
because every year the incidence of polio increased. What made it so tragic
was it had a predilection for children, and those who grew up in affluence
had a higher chance of contracting poliomyelitis. The poliovirus left in its
wake a generation of cripples.
[00:04:23] The National Foundation for Infantile Paralysis/March of Dimes
under Basil O’Connor’s leadership, set out to make a vaccine to prevent
polio. Historically this is fascinating because it’s a time in the country’s

14

history, the only time where the entire public gave of itself through the
March of Dimes to provide funds to make a vaccination. That saga plays out
in my book. Jonas Salk made a killed virus vaccine which challenged the
wisdom of the biologic community, all of whom felt that only a live virus
vaccine could provide lifelong protection. And he showed that to be wrong.
[00:05:18] At the time, in 1954, when the largest national trial in children was
begun, parents were all clamoring to get their child vaccinated. Walter
Winchell, who was a very prominent newscaster, based on erroneous
information, warned that it could kill their children.
[00:06:08] After Walter Winchell made his announcement, a number of
parents withdrew their children. Boston did not participate in the trial, and
no one there got vaccinated. And the following year when the vaccine was
shown to be protective, a large number of children became crippled or died
in Boston. Salk felt it was important that vaccination be required. This speaks
to today’s issue, because vaccination is not only protecting an individual
child; it’s protecting the public.
[00:07:00] If a number of children are not vaccinated and get polio then they
can spread it to other populations. Even though the vaccine is 90 percent
plus effective, there are children in whom it doesn’t work and children who
have poor immunity or adults, for example, who are bone marrow transplant
patients, or the whole AIDS community would be at high risk and could get
the disease. So what transpired with measles is that someone made a choice
or wasn’t vaccinated as a child, and measles began to spread. And because
measles had been wiped out in the United States, some parents and others

15

became more lackadaisical either from lack of knowledge or from choice or
from oversight, and didn’t get their children vaccinated.
[00:08:07] Then we have the situation that we have today. It’s a very tricky
issue. The issue about autism, which is what parents fear, has been put to
rest. That data relating vaccines to autism was not accurate, but it had made a
lot of press.
[00:08:51] But there are other potential side effects from vaccination. When
Albert Sabin made a live virus polio vaccine, a number of people across the
country got polio from the vaccine.
[00:09:31]. People are right to have some reservation because no vaccine is
100 percent harmless. But if you had a country where everyone decided not
to be vaccinated, we’d go back to the days of epidemics of smallpox and
polio and measles, and the death rate would be quite high.
Genovese: Thank you that was great. So now I want to talk a little bit about your
childhood, where you grew up and your parents’ occupations and how many
brothers and sisters did you have and what number were you?
Jacobs: [00:10:43] I grew up in east Tennessee in the Appalachian region, although
not in the mountains. The name of the town is Kingsport, Tennessee. My
father worked for Eastman Chemical Company initially as a chemist then as a
chemical salesman, and my mother was a housewife. There are five children
in my family. I’m number two. In many ways, I felt I had the most idyllic
childhood. I grew up on a gravel road in a little brick house where during the
winter you could pick the ice off the inside of the walls.

16

[00:11:37] I didn’t go to school until I was almost seven and mostly played
out in the woods and in the gulley that ran down our street. My parents were
wonderful. I attribute everything that’s been positive in life to their influence.
They loved people. They were happy. I felt secure. They loved music. My
father played violin in the local symphony, so there was always music in our
house. My mother played the piano, and we had family shows and concerts
at home in the evenings. I used to gather some of the neighborhood kids and
put on shows with them. Most weekends we went to the library. My father
made sure we all had a library card.
[00:12:36] My father liked to read poetry to us. This was after the war, the
early 1950s. It was a wonderful time in this country when people were
positive. The public loved Dwight Eisenhower and felt there was no limit to
what could be done. I was very fortunate. We had little but we had so much
more.
Genovese: What expectations did you have for yourself in terms of career and what
were your parents’ expectations for you in terms of marriage, motherhood,
education, career?
Jacobs: [00:13:23] I’m assuming you’re talking about when I was growing up. I grew
up in an era where most women stayed home and were housewives. That was
the norm, and how you looked and how you managed your home and how
your children behaved were very important. My mother never went to
college. My father did, and education was important to them, not really ever
spoken but clearly very important to them. The expectation for all little girls
was that you would play with dolls and learn to cook and sew and keep a nice

17

home and find a nice husband. From the time I was about five years old-before I attended first grade--I wanted to be a doctor. Now that seems
unusual for a little girl living in east Tennessee, and here’s how it came about.
The company that my father worked for had a club called Horse Crickers
where all the kids came on Saturday mornings to see movies. There were two
movies that influenced my life greatly. One was a movie about microbe
hunters. It was boring for most of the kids who were throwing popcorn and
screaming and running around.
[00:15:19] But to me, it was absolutely fascinating. It covered Jenner and
smallpox and Pasteur. It was just amazing to me what these scientists had
done. But maybe even more important was Lash LaRue. I would call Lash
LaRue a minor cowboy. He was not up there with Hopalong Cassidy and
Roy Rogers and the Cisco Kid. Cowboys were a big thing back then. Lash
LaRue didn’t carry a gun. He just carried a whip, that’s why he was called
Lash, but he was always saving people, saving towns, helping people.
[00:16:15] I used to dream about being a Lash LaRue kind of person, and I
melded that with microbiology. So when I was very young, I knew that I
wanted to take care of people; I wanted to be a doctor. Often people have
asked me -did you have a wonderful doctor in town, someone that you
admired? No. The only doctor in town I associated with getting a shot every
time I felt bad, and he was a stuffy old man. So I didn’t have any role models.
I never voiced the fact that I wanted to be a doctor to anyone because that
was kind of weird for a little girl.

18

[00:17:09] I did used to go on rounds with the postman up and down our
street and so I tried it out on him. I’ll never forget--he was opening the mail
collection box one day, and I said, “When I grow up, I’m going to be a
doctor.” He patted me on the head and said, “Sure you are.” I had good
schooling, but I was an above average student. I didn’t stand out. My parents
barely even looked at my report card. That wasn’t really that important. In
the sixth grade, however, I started to bloom. My teacher called me up and
gave me my report card and said, “I don’t want you to get a big head, but
you’ve got all A’s and I think you could do something special someday.”
[00:18:12] That was the first time anyone had ever said anything like that. Her
name was Mrs. Walsh. I’ve kept up with her a bit over the years to let her
know what a major impact that she had on me. I knew then I could be a
doctor. And I never wavered from that. That’s what I always wanted to do. I
could never imagine being anything else.
Genovese: Can you talk a little bit more about then your next stages in your education
and how you went from sixth grade with Mrs. Walsh to medical school?
Jacobs: [00:18:58] I have a wonderful, wonderful mother. I couldn’t have had a better
mother in the world. But I remember once in junior high bringing home a
report card that was all A’s, and my mother said to me, “Charlotte, men don’t
want A’s on a report card; they want A’s as in good apple pies.” My mother
tried so hard to teach me how to cook. She enrolled me in sewing classes.
[00:19:35] I was a total disaster. I think she and my father were a little
perturbed when I was about 10 years old, and they asked what I wanted for
Christmas, and I said I wanted a Gilbert microscope set. I started doing

19

experiments in my closet, mixing all kinds of things and dragging people in to
look at flies under the microscope. They were a bit worried. Then the next
year I wanted a slide rule, and I know they were really worried then. They just
wanted me to be happy. When I was in high school, my father was
transferred to do sales in Cincinnati, Ohio. Although we lived in a middleclass neighborhood, it was in the Indian Hill school district, located in the
wealthiest suburb of Cincinnati.
[00:20:34] We lived, as my friends always told me, across the tracks. It was
great being in Cincinnati because I could participate in science fairs, and I
had a wonderful biology teacher who encouraged me. Some of that I did,
shall we say sub-rosa, because I always loved having friends, I was a
cheerleader, I did theatre, I did sports, I had boyfriends. I wanted to have a
normal life and not be a nerdy person. I kind always had these two different
sides.
[00:21:28] It came time for college and most of the top places for women to
go were the women’s colleges which were not co-educational back then. I
never even heard of Stanford; I didn’t know anything west of east Tennessee.
I started looking around, and by then I was very engaged in theatre. Theatre
and science were both of my loves. I wanted to go to New York City to be
near Broadway, but my father said, “There’s no way you’re going to New
York City. That’s a big, bad place.” So I decided to apply to women’s
colleges and he said, “You’ll never find a husband that way. Besides all those
women have hair on their chests.”

20

[00:22:16] They just wanted me to be happy and find a nice husband, but be
educated. I only applied to one college--the University of Rochester. It was
co-educational, had Eastman School of Music and a wonderful theatre
program and a very strong pre-med program. Because Eastman Kodak is in
Rochester, and my parents had now moved back to Tennessee, I could fly in
the company plane back and forth to school. So I went to Rochester, and I
loved it.
[00:23:08] I got to do theatre and science, and it was a wonderful, wonderful
place. I only had one slight detour. I had a boyfriend who wanted to get
married but did not want to suffer through medical school. I transferred into
nursing school during my junior year, but I knew I really wanted to be a
doctor because I took pre-med courses at night while I went to nursing
school. About six months into the nursing school, I ran across one of my
biology teachers, and he asked me, “When are you coming back to us? You
know you want to be a doctor.” I told him I loved nursing.
[00:24:11] Then the head of the nursing school, who was matronly and
foreboding, called me into her office. She pointed out that I had been in
nursing school six months, and I was the only one in the class who had not
successfully made hospital corners nor successfully put a patient on a bed
pan. She said all this very seriously. Then she said, “Why don’t you do the
nursing profession a favor and go back and be a doctor?” She proceeded to
read to me my essay from my application to Rochester. She said I had made
the wrong change, switching into nursing. I credit those two with getting me
back on track.

21

[00:25:05] Throughout college, I enjoyed performing in musical theatre. I was
a closet pre-med. About 50 percent of the undergraduates started out as premeds. It was highly, highly competitive. As they narrowed themselves down,
it became a very nerdy group who did nothing but study. I mostly hung out
with my theatre friends. I didn’t let anyone know that I was pre-med. In my
senior year, I finally got my revenge in a biochemistry course which met at 8
o’clock on Saturday mornings.
[00:25:57] This was the cream of the crop of the pre-meds who were
competing against each other to get into medical school. I walked in at 8
o’clock, sat down front. I turned to one of the men in the class and I said,
“Gosh, I just got accepted into Yale Medical School yesterday. Is that a very
good school?” I could hear the groans reverberate throughout the class.
At that point in time, again, historically there were very few women in
medicine and very few in medical school.
[00:26:42] In the late 1960s, most of the medical schools at most had a
couple of women in their classes. I applied to University of Rochester,
obviously because I was there, and to Yale and to Case Western--just the top
schools. I didn’t apply to Harvard, I think because my pediatrician in
Tennessee had been at Harvard, and he was so stuffy. Rochester had two
women, and they didn’t seem very happy.
[00:27:37] I did get accepted at the University of Rochester. One strange
thing happened in the interview. They had psychiatrists interview all the
women applicants. Maybe they had them interview all the men, too. I don’t
know. The psychiatrist leaned across the desk and asked, “How will you feel

22

being a woman in medicine?” I replied, “Well, I guess I’ll feel like the men in
medicine.” When I interviewed at Yale, I didn’t meet a single student, which
made me suspicious that maybe there weren’t any women. At Case Western,
the admission dean was hiding behind his desk and when I sat down, he
jumped up as if to scare me. I withdrew my application.
[00:28:22] Back at Rochester, I was walking across campus one day, and I ran
into a friend of mine. I asked him where he was going. “I’m going to a
medical school interview for Washington University,” he replied.
I said, “Where’s that?
He said, “St. Louis.”
“Oh.”
“Why don’t you come along; maybe you can talk to them too?” he
suggested.
[00:28:47] So I went, and I met with the dean of admissions, John Herwig,
who was happy to add me on. We talked about theatre and my other
interests, not necessarily medicine. The next week, I got an invitation to visit
Washington University. They paid for my flight to St. Louis, and they put me
up in the Chase Park Plaza Hotel. That night a handsome, charming secondyear medical student took me out to dinner. As we sat by the fire, sipping
liqueurs, he told me about the school. The next day I went to a class, and
none of the men wore suits and ties. It was a refreshingly positive place.
[00:29:36] The other thing that struck me was that there were quite a number
of women students, and they seemed happy. When the dean of students
offered me almost a full scholarship, I accepted. That was the perfect choice.

23

Washington University in St. Louis is now ranked as one of the top medical
schools. We had a class of about 80. I was in seventh heaven; this is what I
always had dreamed about. While some students were moaning and groaning
about all the hours that we had to study, I just reveled in it.
[00:30:31] I still kept my fingers in musical theatre. I wrote and directed a
student show, which they do to this day at the end of the year, poking fun at
the faculty. The first two years of medical school were spent in the laboratory
and classrooms--8 hours a day. The last two years were the clinical years, and
that was fantastic. That’s what I wanted to do. Entering medical school, I
thought I might become a pediatrician and go back to a small town to
practice.
[00:31:29] But I became intrigued with research and knew that was the only
way to move the field forward. I didn’t want to be practicing the same thing
my entire career. I wanted to help make a change. So I decided on a career in
academic medicine. But the model then and for many, many years after was
that if you were in academic medicine, you did laboratory research, saw a few
patients a week, and taught classes. That was the academic model. I wanted
to do clinical research, which was just then becoming a little more acceptable
but not at Washington University at that time.
[00:32:15] I was told by several faculty that I couldn’t have that kind of
career, a career where I could do clinical trials and teach as well as have a
large patient load. I loved caring for patients. I determined that’s what I
wanted to do. It came time to apply for internships. I had loved everything I

24

did. To this day, I know I probably would have been happy being a plastic
surgeon or a pediatrician or an obstetrician. I loved every rotation.
[00:33:01] I just enjoyed every single moment of it. I especially liked taking
care of cancer patients, although there were no good role models at Wash U
at that time. So I chose internal medicine to later specialize in oncology.
[00:33:56] I started looking at internships and decided to apply to stay at
Washington University’s Barnes Hospital because it was considered one of
the top internal medicine training programs in the country. But there had
been very few women in internal medicine training there. In fact, in the
medical school there were very few women faculty even though there were
15 or 18 women in my class.
[00:34:43] I applied for internship at Barnes Hospital, and two of us out of
the entire group of interns were women. I barely saw the other woman the
entire year as we were on no rotations together. She mostly kept to herself. I
worked predominantly with men. It never bothered me except we were on
call every other or every third night, and often we shared the call rooms. I
could say that I slept with more men [laughter] than any of my friends during
that year. Half the time I didn’t even know who was in the other bunk bed
because I would crawl into bed for a few hours of sleep in my clothes before
getting up to start making rounds again.
[00:35:45] Barnes Hospital wasn’t prepared for women interns. But that was
fine. Sometimes if the patients were really sick, I’d end up sleeping down on
the wards in an empty bed so I could be right there. Internship is a grueling
year. I didn’t have time for much of anything except being on call. Again I

25

loved it. My friends thought I was crazy, but I really loved it because now I
was a doctor. I was doing what I wanted to do, and I was with very, very
bright people. There was one woman who was a resident named Diane
Mickley who’s a very close friend to this day. She was outgoing and funny,
and so I enjoyed having her as my supervising resident. I spent my second
year as a resident at Barnes also.
[00:37:00] I took a third year of medical residency at UC San Francisco. I had
wanted to go to Stanford because I wanted to take my oncology fellowship
there. I interviewed with the residency director, who was quite obnoxious
and kept rubbing his knees against mine. After my interview at Stanford, I
wrote a note withdrawing my application. I decided even if I didn’t get into
UCSF, there was no way I was going to spend a year with the Stanford
residency director.
[00:38:08] After three years of internal medicine training, you’re an internist. I
knew I wanted to do oncology or cancer medicine which required another
two years of fellowship training. I had to apply while still an intern in St.
Louis.
[00:38:54] A friend of mine, the same one who had suggested I interview
with Wash U, was attending a cancer conference in St. Louis. He said, “Oh,
you have to meet Saul Rosenberg.”
“Who’s Saul Rosenberg?” I asked.
And he said, “You don’t know Saul Rosenberg? He’s one of the top
oncologists in the world. He is the leading lymphomas and Hodgkin’s disease
oncologist, and he’s here for a big conference on Hodgkin’s disease.” Henry

26

Kaplan, the most prominent radiotherapist in the world, was also at Stanford
University. “If you’re going to go anywhere for a fellowship,” my friend said,
“that’s where you need to go.”
[00:39:40]So I applied to Stanford and was invited for an interview. I was
sitting outside Dr. Rosenberg’s office, chatting with his secretary. “You’re the
only person that we’ve ever interviewed that didn’t go to either Harvard or
Yale,” she informed me, “and who didn’t do research at the NIH.”
“Guess I’m going to be different,” I said. I was wearing a pink pants suit.
After Dr. Rosenberg called me in, the first thing he said was, “I didn’t know
if I was interviewing a cheerleader or a prom queen.” Both of those were
true, but I didn’t know how he knew, and it was a strange comment.
[00:40:34] Then he said, “You know we take very, very few people. We only
take four a year, and we’re the most sought after--which was true--training
program in the country. So what will you do if I don’t accept you?
“I’ll apply again next year,” I replied, “because this is where I want to train.”
[laughter] He did give me a position. That’s how I ended up at Stanford. That
was 1975.
Genovese: In talking about your medical school and residency, it doesn’t sound like you
had very many challenging situations being a woman or was it just that you
were so enthralled with what you were doing that there wasn’t an
opportunity for that or…would you like to talk a little bit about that?
Jacobs: [00:42:00] I have to say I never thought of myself as a quote “pioneer” or a
woman who was doing something unusual. It was nice when I worked with
women, a nice balance. But I never really thought about it very much.

27

I think I was already in medical school and just fixated on my studies when
the women’s movement heated up.
[00:43:19] I never felt discriminated against. But that doesn’t mean I didn’t
face some challenges. I learned early on to approach them with good humor
rather than with umbrage or rather than hiding in a closet crying. I first
realized the importance of humor when we moved from east Tennessee to
Cincinnati, and I happened to attend a high school in an affluent area. The
first day of school I wore crinolines.
[00:44:05] Now for people who aren’t southern, crinolines made your skirt
stand out, like in Gone With the Wind. I wore white anklets and T-strap shoes.
I had a fresh permanent and my hair teased up in a bubble. When I walked
into the first class, it was as if somebody from outer space had entered that
school. When I said, “Hi, how are y’all? I’m so glad to be here at yer ol’
school,” the kids began snickering.
[00:44:55] All the girls wore Scarab jewelry and wore nylons and kilts. It
became clear to me that I had three choices: I could go home and cry and
become a total outcast or I could try to imitate them and blend into the
background or I could play up my southernism and let them enjoy it. Within
a few weeks, at homeroom everybody wanted me to read the school menu.
In English class, everybody wanted me to read my essay first. And so even
though I eventually lost my southern accent, for a while I exaggerated it for
their pleasure. Before long, I was invited into the sorority and to the parties
with the popular kids, became a cheerleader. I enjoyed high school
immensely because I kept my sense of humor. And so that is how I

28

approached negative interactions during medical school. I’ll give you some
examples. It was clear that having women in medicine was not a positive
thing for the old guard.
[00:46:54] Once I was assigned to assist a private surgeon. We’re standing
over the sink outside the operating room, scrubbing our hands and arms
prior to surgery. I had never met him before. Suddenly he said, “I think it’s
despicable that women are admitted to medical school. All you’re going to do
is get married and have children, and you’ve taken the place of a man. “
I kept scrubbing and feigned tears. “You don’t have to worry about me,” I
said, “because I’m sterile.” That surgeon felt so bad, and he was so nice to
me after that. I realized that instead of rushing to the dean and saying,
somebody said something bad to me or showing anger, I probably
accomplished more with my white lie.
[00:48:12] As another example, when I was a college senior, I did research
with a senior professor in neuropharmacology. We had a weekly seminar, and
I spent a lot of time in his lab. One day he invited me out to lunch, and I was
flattered. I planned to ask him to write a recommendation for medical
school. We were going to publish a paper together, and his support was
obviously very important to me. When we walked into the restaurant, and I
noticed it was kind of dark, I began to think he had other ideas.
[00:49:01] We sat down in a circular booth, and he circled around so that he
was right next to me. As we talked, he placed his arm up on the booth just
above me. I remember thinking at that point in time, “OK, what are my
choices here?” For one, I could go to the bathroom and never come back,

29

but I needed that recommendation, and I was doing research in his lab. So
that wasn’t good. Second, I could confront him, but he would act shocked,
and that would be awkward. Third, I could report him, but he would deny it,
and my research would end. Of course, there was no way I was going to
succumb to his advances. That was out of the question.
[00:49:53] At that moment, my hand moved to the left and a glass of ice
water poured into his crotch. “Oh my gosh,” I said. “I’m so sorry. How
clumsy of me.” He had to move over as the space between us was soaking
wet. Again, I think somehow I just had the ability to respond in a way that
was right for me because it was a no-win situation otherwise. And so I faced
a dilemma that I think a lot of women face. I had to respond in a way that
was comfortable for me.
[00:50:58] During my internship, we had to share on-call rooms, and I had no
idea who was in the next bed. One night I was so tired. At 2:00 in the
morning, my head had just hit the pillow, and I had just dozed off when I
realized there was a naked body in the bed rubbing up against me. “I think
you’ve got the wrong bed,” I said, after which I rolled over and went to
sleep. I have no idea how long that person was there. He was a resident from
a neurology service. I could have screamed; I could have reported him; I
could have made a scene, but he never approached me again.
[00:51:50] I think it was tough for some women physicians, but fortunately I
felt pretty savvy around men. And my theatre background in Rochester
allowed me to take on a different persona to deal with it. Sometimes I just
didn’t deal with it at all, such as that residency director at Stanford whose

30

knees were touching mine during the interview. The best response for me
was to remove myself from the situation.
Genovese: When you were in medical school and residency did you and other women
sort of try to hang together or support each other or was it difficult in terms
of divisiveness because of the competition or because of the situation?
Jacobs: [00:53:11] No, we never felt competitive. During residency I did socialize
with Diane Mickley, but she was married and had a child during her
residency, and we just didn’t have the time. In medical school I had women
friends and men friends whose wives I enjoyed.
[00:53:55] Wash U was a positive place for women. There weren’t women’s
groups that I recall. We were treated in general by the faculty with respect. I
remember being bullied only once when I was a senior student taking a
cardiology rotation. There was a faculty member who was my height. So I
always thought he had the little man syndrome. He would just ride me and
bully me.
[00:54:47] After one bad episode, I just left and went to the park across from
the hospital to cool off. I wouldn’t have thought of calling other women
students. One of my classmates, a male student who subsequently went into
psychiatry, happened to be in the park. I was obviously upset, and he was
very comforting and told me I should go talk to the dean of clinical students
about it. So I went to talk to him, but my solution was to drop out of the
cardiology clerkship.
[00:55:26] That was my solution--just to take myself out of the situation. He
said I couldn’t do that because I had to complete all my clerkships to

31

graduate from medical school. That night I got a call from the chairman of
medicine. I was shocked that he had called, and he assured me the behavior
would stop. I hadn’t gone to complain about the cardiologist. I just wanted
to drop out of the clerkship, but within hours, they had acted on my behalf.
That was one of the times I realized how supportive Washington University
was to its women students. I don’t remember any of the women students
complaining about anything in terms of discriminatory action against women.
I think I was very fortunate in choosing that school, and I think I was right
on the cusp of the wave of women starting to enter medicine.
Genovese: How did your parents react once you went to medical school and while you
were going through medical school and your residency?
Jacobs: [00:57:04] There are five kids in the family, and my parents were equally
proud of all of us, which is very healthy. My brother was selling mobile
homes at that point, and they were proud of him as well as of my sister who’s
a superb cook and seamstress. They still always worried if I would be happy
in life. I think they were concerned that I had made a choice to have a career
and not have children, which wasn’t the case at all. I always wanted to have
children. But they just treated me as they always treated me. They didn’t
make a big to do about my going to medical school.
[00:58:03] They just said, “Well you set out to do something you wanted to
do, and we’re glad you got to do it. If I had turned out to be a nurse, they
would have said the same thing. I grew up at a time when in my hometown
the only women that worked were unmarried women who were teachers or
nurses or divorced women who had to work, and people whispered about

32

them. Women didn’t work unless they were poor and had to clean houses to
help support their families.
[00:58:55] I had a Scottish grandmother who read a book a day. She never
had a formal education but educated herself, and I think she was really the
most proud, although she died during my first year of medical school. A pat
on the back wasn’t what I was after. I wanted to take care of patients. I didn’t
want somebody to tell me how wonderful that was. What was wonderful for
me was that I got to do what I wanted to do.
Genovese: You mentioned wanting to have children. Where in your career did you meet
your husband and how did that work in terms of your training?
Jacobs: [00:59:48] I knew I always wanted to have children. I was married during
medical school, but that didn’t last long. I re-married at the end of my
medical residency, and at the beginning of fellowship I had my first son. I
took a faculty position in July, and he was born in November. I had a second
son a year and a half later. I loved having children. I also have three stepsons.
Children are the best thing in life. I used to worry my sons were cheated, but
I realized if I were a stay-at-home mother, I wouldn’t have been very good at
it. Stanford didn’t have any policy then for maternity leave.
[01:01:02] I took my two weeks’ vacation and one extra week and went back
to work in three weeks. I went into labor while I was seeing patients. There
was no such thing as maternity leave. I guess I was one of the first woman in
the department of medicine to have a child, and there weren’t that many
women faculty. Every Saturday morning, we had an oncology conference

33

where we presented all the new cases from the week. It was pretty informal;
we had donuts, and people came in casual clothing.
[01:01:52] I started bringing my son in a baby carrier to conference. At first
people looked askance, but in time, many of the men started bringing their
children. When my sons were a little older, they loved Saturday conference
because it was the only time they got donuts and could sit in one of the
infusion rooms and watch cartoons, which I didn’t let them do at home.
Suddenly they had friends joining them, and it was fun for them. If I was at a
faculty meeting or in the dean’s office--when I became a dean--I might say,
“Oops 3:30, I’ve got to go because my son has a basketball game.”
[01:02:45] I talked about my children. I realized how much men wanted to
talk about their children, too. I wanted to make it okay for other women to
feel proud of being pregnant and having children and incorporating them
into their work lives and telling cute little children’s stories at meetings. In my
small way, I wanted to help make it seem normal.
Genovese: Can you talk about the reactions of your faculty colleagues during your first
years at Stanford and then how your career progressed at Stanford?
Jacobs: [01:03:41] Saul Rosenberg was the reason I came to Stanford. He is one of
the most famed oncologists in the history of medical oncology. Henry
Kaplan was the head of radiation oncology, and the two of them are
probably responsible for the cure of Hodgkin’s disease today. I was fortunate
to be selected as one of the four post-doctoral fellows to enter oncology that
year.

34

[01:04:31] I was getting to take care of cancer patients and do clinical
research. Saul Rosenberg did clinical research, and so he was a role model of
the kind of person that I wanted to be, that I’d always been told didn’t exist.
Almost everyone in the department of medicine at Stanford had a laboratory
and did laboratory research. That was the model. In a sense, when he came,
he broke that model. I had two years of post-doctoral fellowship. I always
assumed I would go back to Washington University. They wanted me to
come back.
[01:05:13] That was where my heart was. It took a long time to switch
loyalties to Stanford. There were five faculty in the oncology division at that
time: Saul Rosenberg, Frank Stockdale, Ron Levy, John Daniels, and Dayton
Misfeldt. Saul did clinical research. Everybody else had a laboratory. The
standard then was six years on the faculty as an assistant professor, and then
you got tenure and became an associate professor or you were out. That was
it. That was the model.
[01:06:06] Then after another about six years or shorter, if you were brilliant,
you could become a full professor. I didn’t think about those things. I knew I
didn’t want to go into practice. I knew I wanted to do clinical research. I
assumed I’d go back to Wash U and try to do clinical research there. But Saul
Rosenberg offered me a position at Stanford. I was not the model of the
people in the division or in the Department of Medicine. They didn’t have a
faculty position open; that required a national search.
[01:06:54] So he offered me a position as an acting assistant professor. I
wouldn’t be on the regular faculty line, but I would be treated like a faculty

35

member, and I would take care of patients, continue my clinical research, and
teach. He wanted me to take over the oncology course for second year
medical students, and he wanted me to do administration. At that time,
oncology clinics were held in the medical clinics. We were allocated a few
exam rooms which we had to share. Dr. Rosenberg had managed to obtain a
large amount of space in the basement of the hospital for the new Oncology
Day Care Center. He needed someone to design it, to hire all the staff, and to
administer it.
[01:07:52] He wanted to do that himself, but the department chairman told
him he couldn’t do that and be chief of oncology; so he asked me to do it. I
knew in the back of his mind he thought I would just do what he wanted
which didn’t turn out to be the case. I had my own plans. At that point in
time, he said I had two career choices: I could go the standard route and do
research, see patients, and teach; my whole career would be focused on
achieving a national reputation based on my research. Or I could devote
much of my time to building up cancer at Stanford University. I could
become--I remember he used the word--a local hero. Now I don’t know why
he chose “hero,” but he said I would do that at the price of not being known
as well nationally because I obviously couldn’t do it all.
[01:09:20] “You can have your choice,” he said, “but I’d like you to stay.” I
saw our faculty trying to take care of patients in these few little rooms in the
medicine clinic. I took on the charge to build the clinical program at Stanford
and the Oncology Day Care Center, realizing I’d have to work extra hard to
do my research and to get a national reputation that I needed.

36

[01:10:23] I never looked back, and so administration occupied from a third
to 70 percent of my work the entire time I was at Stanford. I didn’t assume
the administrative load to be what Dr. Rosenberg called a local hero. I loved
the challenge of trying to make a better cancer service at Stanford, which
could be a model nationally. That was a turning point in my career. I thought
I’d be at Stanford a few years, and then I’d go back to Washington University
in St. Louis, but I never did.
Genovese: Right, and if you want to, talk a little about how you got interested in clinical
research because that was a bit unusual, given the timeframe, and then talk a
little bit about your research in the context of your career.
Jacobs: [01:11:35] As I mentioned, at the time, most people did laboratory research.
They thought, for example, in cancer you had to start with a cell and work
upward. Saul Rosenberg and Henry Kaplan advanced the field remarkably
through their clinical trials. Although Henry Kaplan was a brilliant scientist as
well, it was through their treatment programs, combining chemotherapy and
radiation, and sequentially working on those trials, that they went from 20
percent of people to 90 percent of people being cured of Hodgkin’s disease.
[01:12:21] So that was a wonderful model. At the time we were starting to see
more and more results in oncology come through clinical trials. Now if I had
gone into nephrology, I would have had to be in the laboratory because
kidney disease is all about the basic science, not large clinical trials. I
happened to pick a field where trying out new treatments in patients was the
only way to move the field forward, and so it was a perfect match. I’m a
people person. I didn’t like the isolation of a laboratory. I conducted

37

laboratory research as an undergraduate and in medical school. That wasn’t
where my heart was.
[01:13:17] I liked the challenge of clinical trials and seeing results with
patients. How did I choose what research I was going to do? When I was
starting my post-doctoral training in oncology, I needed to choose an area of
research. Saul had asked me if I wanted to be involved in some of the
lymphoma trials, but there were a lot of people involved in the lymphoma
trials.
[01:14:11] I was still trying to decide what I was going to do. I was in the
beginning of my fellowship on a rotation, which indicated I needed to go to
the head and neck cancer tumor board. Now it’s pretty commonplace at
cancer centers that cancers are taken care of by multidisciplinary teams of
surgeons, radiation oncologists, and medical oncologists jointly. When Saul
Rosenberg and Henry Kaplan joined up to have a multidisciplinary team,
they led the way.
[01:14:59] They were one of the first groups in the country. Besides them, at
Stanford, the head and neck cancer surgeons and radiation oncologists
formed a multidisciplinary group. On Thursday mornings they presented all
their new patients and discussed the management together. Sometimes they
fought over the best treatment of the disease for an individual patients. All
the trainees, nurses, social workers, and speech therapists attended. They
heard people debating the best way to manage patients. Out of that would
sometimes come new ideas. When I walked into that room they all said,
“Wow, a medical oncologist.”

38

[01:15:55] No other fellow had ever bothered to go to that conference, but I
did what I was told, and so I had gone. They grabbed onto me and wouldn’t
let go. That began my work in the field of head and neck cancer. Head and
neck cancers are cancers of the tongue and the tonsil and the throat. They’re
terribly challenging because they’re so debilitating. A patient with a big
tongue cancer often needs the tongue cut out. A patient with a throat cancer
may require resection of the voice box. Radiation could be used for early
cancers, but most of them are advanced so that the cancer and its treatment
are debilitating and devastating to patients. The role for a medical oncologist
at that time was to give palliative chemotherapy to patients with recurrence.
[01:16:55] The only trouble was there was only one chemotherapy drug at
that time called methotrexate. No wonder few oncologists were interested in
the field because there wasn’t much one could do. I thought that was a
challenge which directed me in two different kinds of research. There was a
new chemotherapy drug called cisplatin, or cisplatinum as it was called, which
was actually based on the metal platinum. It had been tried in testicular
cancer and looked very effective except that the majority of patients had
kidney failure. The drug had almost been shelved because of that toxicity.
[01:17:52] It could still be used in some testicular cancer patients because
they were young people, and even if they lost half their kidney function, they
would still survive. I found that drug very interesting and obtained some
from Bristol-Myers. I teamed up with a nephrologist, a kidney doctor, whose
laboratory was based at the Palo Alto Veterans Hospital. Together we
attempted to figure out the underlying cause of the kidney dysfunction.

39

[01:18:52] Based on some of our work, I devised a way to give the cisplatin
that I thought might be safe. At the same time, they were studying that at
Memorial Sloan Kettering, both of us using different ways to do it. The first
patient I treated with cisplatin was a veteran with a head and neck cancer
with huge metastases to his lungs. He was so short of breath that he could no
longer fly.
[01:19:56] He loved to fly; he was a pilot. I gave him this experimental drug,
cisplatin, and 50 percent of his tumor just melted away. We realized we were
really onto something. I was just a fellow and had no other oncologist
working with me. We did have a senior visiting professor from Yale at the
time, Joe Bertino, who helped me design a trial to see if cisplatin was
effective in head and neck cancer. We found it to be the most effective drug
yet.
[01:20:50] That was a very exciting period in my career because I wasn’t even
a faculty member then, just a fellow. I was invited to give talks and attend
conferences. In the meantime, I was working with Willard Fee, who was the
chief of head & neck surgery, and Don Goffinet, who was the radiation
oncologist. The three of us became kind of the three musketeers, and we set
out to change the paradigm of the treatment of head and neck cancer.
[01:21:36] Every Thursday for four hours, we talked about new patients, and
in the afternoon, we all saw patients together. We were an active
multidisciplinary group, which was new, particularly in the head and neck
cancer field. That in itself was beginning to attract notice. We argued bitterly,
particularly Bill and I. I remember when I was nine months pregnant, and I

40

was battling it out with him over a patient. He was senior, the chairman of
the department or maybe he was near being chairman.
[01:22:26] I was a lowly fellow. But we had a fantastic time, the three of us
taking care of patients and traveling and giving talks. We had little mini
retreats, usually at my house. I remember once we were in the family room,
and the kids’ toys were scattered all over the place. Bill would periodically
pick up a tractor or Star Wars figure to play with. Out of that meeting came a
new approach to head and neck cancer. We proposed to take patients who
had advanced cancer and would require extensive surgery, i.e. patients who
would lose their tongue, their voice box, their lip, and we would give them
chemotherapy first.
[01:23:21] If they had complete shrinkage of the cancer, we would not do the
surgery. We’d only do radiation. That was unheard of, absolutely unheard of.
Of course we were a nervous. The three of us together examined every
patient on the study every week, and when all was said and done, we realized
that half the patients didn’t have to have this debilitating surgery. They could
be treated with radiation after the chemotherapy and do as well. That was
called an organ preservation approach.
[01:24:03] After we published our first paper, we were on the map as they
say, asked to speak at all the major conferences. In order to prove that that
approach was as efficacious as surgery, we needed to do a randomized trial
where half the patients got the chemotherapy prior to surgery, and half got
standard treatment. But head and neck cancer is only 5 to 10 percent of
neoplasms in the United States. We set out to form a national cooperative

41

head and neck group. Surgeons, radiotherapists and medical oncologists from
the top cancer centers came together and agreed to do a trial.
[01:24:48]That was a tour de force because the surgeons all thought their way
was right, and medical oncologists had not been involved with these cancers.
Examining the head and neck area is very difficult. Most oncologists didn’t
even know how to do that. Don and Bill had trained me so that I could do it
very well. We had a lot of credibility in the field, and we actually were able to
get this ornery group over a few days to agree to a national trial. That became
the first big national head and neck randomized trial with a cooperative
group. Out of that, we formed wonderful friendships and camaraderie, and I
was getting to do what I always wanted to do, that is do clinical trials that
would make a difference to patients.
[01:25:46] After that trial, the Veterans’ Association tested our organ
preservation approach in a trial just with larynx cancer patients and showed
that in over half the patients they could save the voice box. It was very
rewarding mainly because of the patients; we knew we had made a difference.
At that time I was still an acting assistant professor. That was the title that
Saul Rosenberg had given me because there was no faculty position.
[01:26:33] I remember giving a talk on cisplatin chemotherapy and head and
neck cancer. The room was filled with about 500 physicians. At the end of
the talk, one physician stood up and asked, “What exactly is an acting
assistant professor?” I said. “I pretend like I’m an assistant professor even
though I’m not.” What else could I say? I engaged in many different research
endeavors over the years, but that organ preservation trial was special. In the

42

meantime, I was building the Oncology Day Care Center and staffing it while
teaching a second year medical school course and seeing patients two days a
week.
[01:27:32] And I had my two boys at home. Fortunately, I had very good
babysitters. It was crazy time but fun. Years later, when I got tenure, I
attributed my academic success to these two more senior faculty members,
Willard Fee and Don Goffinet, from two totally different departments, not
my department of medicine. They were supportive, treated me with respect,
and valued my ideas, even though we often fought. This was an academic
fight, not a personal fight.
[01:28:22] In fact, the day we were sitting in my family room and Bill Fee was
playing with one of the trucks, and we had been talking about the organ
preservation approach, he said, “We’re going to do it; we’re going to be the
first; we’re going to give chemotherapy, and I’m not going to operate if they
get a complete response to it. So that was the beginning of my career.
Genovese: You just mentioned when you were at UCSF…
Jacobs: [01:28:52] That’s when I was a resident in internal medicine.
Genovese: OK. I think I just missed that. So you went there instead of Stanford the first
time. OK. Do you want to talk about your experience there at UCSF?
Jacobs: [01:29:06] Let’s talk about it later because I had a bigger experience at USCF
later in my career.
Genovese: Oh great. OK. In terms of--how long did it take you not to be acting
assistant professor and how did that unfold?

43

Jacobs: [01:29:22] As I said, the standard academic path at the time I became a
faculty member was you were an assistant professor for six years; then you
achieved tenure or you had to leave. During all of this, I didn’t care that
much what I was called. What I was doing was more important to me than
my title. I was getting to do what I wanted to do in a place that was heavenly
and which had terrific people who were very supportive.
[01:30:10] Later in my career when I mentored women, many of them
became very upset if they didn’t get an assistant professorship immediately. I
said I had been an acting assistant professor for three years and, in fact, it
was great, because the tenure clock hadn’t started ticking, and I had two
children. It gave me some extra time. After three years, I became an assistant
professor. At six years I would have to achieve tenure or leave. I had, in a
sense, nine years, although I was doing a lot of administrative work.
[01:31:06] Then the rules changed. When I was in my fourth or fifth year, the
medical school realized that the model--the university model of six years up
and out-- didn’t work when you were trying to build a huge clinical program.
For faculty who are predominantly doing clinical work it’s unrealistic that
they would have the same academic success that an economist might have or
someone in the history department who just teaches and doesn’t spend all
this time treating patients. The Dean got the University to agree that a limited
number of faculty could be in a clinical line, and they would have longer time
if they needed it to get promoted to associate professor. They would never
get tenure, but they could stay. It was not a tenure line.

44

[01:32:46] It was a separate line, although they still had university faculty
status and could still serve on the faculty senate. In the Department of
Medicine, it was clear that there were a group of us who had very heavy
clinical loads and did clinical research, and this was a much more appropriate
line for us. It was unrealistic for us to compete with the laboratory based
people. So six years after I was an assistant professor, I became an associate
professor (clinical) in the Department of Medicine. And that was fine with
me. A lot of other schools had been doing that for years.
[01:33:37] Stanford was kind of a hold-out as was Washington University in
St. Louis for having very strict tenure regulations throughout the whole
university whether you were in medicine or education or the arts and
sciences, it didn’t matter. One size fit all. The medical school had finally
broken that mold. But we still received the same salary as other faculty in the
tenure live. That didn’t bother me because I had chosen to be a professor not
a practicing physician. I didn’t expect the university to pay me like the Palo
Alto clinic would have paid me.
[01:34:23] As time went on, the school then did a major overhaul; we had just
been this small cadre. Saul Rosenberg led the effort to form the medical
center line for outstanding clinical faculty. These faculty didn’t have the same
privileges of tenure-line faculty. They couldn’t serve on the university senate
or be a member of the golf course.
[01:35:08] On the other hand, those faculty would make a salary based on
their income from patient care which was higher than that of tenure-line
faculty in the same department. So what had happened was that clinical

45

people who were seeing a lot of patients realized that at the Palo Alto Clinic
they were paying up to four times as much for a similar patient load. So many
left and went into practice.
[01:35:55] The medical school leaders decided the clinical line faculty salaries
needed to be competitive. This was a huge debate that went on in the faculty
senate. In order to be an academic medical center that could attract patients
and be a major player and have patients to do clinical research, you had to
have a cadre of faculty for whom clinical work was a major portion of their
activities. At that time in my career, which I’ll come back to, I was the Senior
Associate Dean of Education and Student Affairs, and I was helping to build
Stanford’s clinical cancer center. I didn’t fit into the tenure or medical center
line.
[01:36:39] I can’t remember if Ron Levy was now the chief of oncology, but
suddenly they were putting me up for tenure. I assumed I would be on the
medical center line, but I had done a lot of research by then, had a national
reputation, had received a large number of teaching awards, and I was a
senior dean. I was left out of that discussion, but before I knew it, I was a
tenured professor. I thought that was cool since I had done it my way.
[01:37:28] Suddenly I was a tenured professor, and I had an endowed chair—
the Drs. Ben and A. Jess Shenson Professor of Medicine. All of that was just
icing on the cake to me; they weren’t things I was striving for. I didn’t even
think about ever having an endowed chair, but it’s just one of the greatest
blessings. It gave me total academic freedom. Four years later, I became a full

46

professor. What normally would have taken a faculty member twelve years
took me sixteen years plus three years in the acting position.
[01:38:28] I obviously had to count it all up because I never really thought
much about it. I just wanted to be able to do my work and accomplish the
things I set out to do.
Genovese: You mentioned teaching awards and so I was going to ask you for the next
fifteen minutes or so, we have about fifteen minutes and then I think we’re
definitely going to need to reschedule our next session--but to talk a little bit
about your teaching and your approach and one of the questions is in terms
of your student reaction to you as a female professor if you noticed if there
was any difference with that?
Jacobs: [01:39:14] I’ll answer the first. Perhaps they noticed that I was a female
professor. I never felt anybody treated me any differently, although years
later, I’d have students say I was their role model. But I never thought of
myself that way. I taught the second year medical students a course in cancer
medicine in the classroom. I hated lectures, so I ran the class like a mini
tumor board. If we were going to talk about lung cancer, I would present a
brief case and then I would have a surgeon and a radiation therapist and a
medical oncologist talk about the cause, epidemiology, and the treatment.
[01:40:13] They covered these topics in the context of a tumor board which
made it more alive for them. Students loved that approach, and I got several
teaching awards for pre-clinical teaching. Most of my teaching was what you
would call bedside teaching; that is, students I taught as they rotated through

47

the oncology clerkships. When I was responsible for the patients in the
hospital--that’s called attending on the wards--I taught students there.
[01:41:02] That’s the kind of teaching I liked the most. Again, I realized
teaching residents and medical students about cancer chemotherapy is
probably one of the most boring topics. They need to learn the list of
chemotherapy drugs and how they work and what their side effects are.
That’s pretty boring, so I made it into a game called “What’s My Drug?” I
listed all the chemotherapy drugs on a blackboard, and then I pretended to
be a patient calling in with a side effect from a drug. They had to start
guessing what drug I had been given.
[01:41:56] Once they guessed the drug, then I would go through some of the
basic pharmacology. They loved playing games. I won quite a number of
clinical teaching awards.
I was an associate professor when David Korn, who was the dean the time,
decided to appoint two senior deans. One would be in charge of faculty
affairs and research and one would be in charge of the education and wellbeing of students—students being defined as medical students, graduate
students, residents, post-doctoral fellows, so thousands in total.
[01:43:03] He just created that position--the Senior Associate Dean of
Education and Student Affairs--and had an open search with people around
the country who were mostly education deans applying. I was interested and
asked Saul Rosenberg if I should apply. He said to go ahead and apply; I
could always withdraw. After they did a national search, Dean Korn offered
me the position.

48

[01:43:53] I told him if I was going to become a dean then I first needed to
attract a junior faculty member to take over the head and neck cancer
research program, which I did—Harlan Pinto who is now chief of oncology
at the Palo Alto VA. I also told the Dean that I wanted to continue general
oncology one day a week. I never wanted to stop being a general oncologist,
and he agreed. That began a wonderful, new part of my career as a dean with
David Korn and Robert Cutler, who was the Dean of Faculty. We had an
exciting and challenging time together.
[01:45:03] David was one of the most brilliant people with whom I’ve ever
worked. He cared deeply about the school, was no-nonsense, was nonpolitical in his decision-making, and highly supportive of me starting out in
this new position. I was a senior associate dean about a month when Frances
Conley, a neurosurgeon, decided that she had been harassed her entire career
at Stanford and wrote a book called Walking Out on the Boys. She made
headlines in national news. Here I was with the other two deans trying to
defend Stanford University which was not exactly the hotbed of harassment.
[01:46:02] Suddenly the spotlight was on me as a woman. The San Jose Mercury
News, was going to town, and the last thing they wanted to hear was that I
had had a wonderful career here. I didn’t have any bad stories to tell them.
The provost sent me a note saying this was my initiation with fire but not to
worry, it would only get worse. There were many ups and downs during that
time.
[01:47:00] One of the things I enjoyed most was helping to revamp the
education program for the school of medicine. I got to know the education

49

deans at the other top medical schools; we formed a consortium and met
regularly. I took education courses in the School of Education with Larry
Cuban. He was fabulous. When it came to all the graduate students and the
post-doctoral fellows, I got to know Pat Devaney. I served many years in the
University faculty senate which was how I got to know the University so
well. I was now involved in education on a much higher level for me rather
than just the courses I had taught as well as making administrative decisions
such as setting the tuition.
[01:48:04] It was an exciting and rewarding time despite some of the difficult
issues such as expelling a medical student or arguing with the lawyers. It was
a wonderful time with David Korn who Frances Conley panned as being anti
–women. I never saw that, and I was with him most of the time. My office
was one door down from his. I loved being in the dean’s office. I was
partway through my deanship when David Korn called me one day at home
and he said he was so frustrated; he wanted to build a cancer center at
Stanford.
[01:49:01] It was time to take that multidisciplinary approach and incorporate
it all in one building. He needed somebody to lead that effort, and he wanted
me to do it. I said, “David, do you remember that I’m your senior associate
dean of education and student affairs?” He said he had given it a lot of
consideration and thought the cancer effort needed me now. I switched back
into the cancer world and helped fundraise and plan and build the clinical
cancer center at Stanford which now houses almost all of the

50

multidisciplinary programs. So now the head and neck cancer team actually
take care of patients together in one area.
[01:49:59] All the lung cancer people do the same. The cancer center was
designed for patients, staff and physicians. I called it my magnum opus. It
was a huge, huge undertaking. City Council did not want a cancer center at
Stanford. That particular building sits in the city--we should have put it
someplace that was just in the county, but instead it was in the city because
we wanted it attached to the children’s hospital and the adult hospital. We
had to as you say, “fight city hall.” That was a major effort in which
Condoleezza Rice, who was at that time Provost, was unbelievably helpful
and astute.
[01:50:50] She’s so politically wise. I’d gotten to know her when we were
university fellows. The president picked eight people who were perhaps
destined to have leadership positions. We had dinner once a month for a
year. Condi and I were in that group together. I had immense respect for her.
That was when she was a political science professor. But during the cancer
center brouhaha, she was provost. The next major change was when David
Korn left. The Stanford trustees wanted our entire medical program to unite
with UCSF to create UCSF Stanford Healthcare.
[01:51:39] They thought this was the only way that both healthcare systems
could survive. In planning the cancer center, I’d studied the economics of
health care delivery. The trustees decided they were going to unite the two.
David Korn thought it was foolhardy, and he and Gerhard Casper, who was
the president at that time, parted ways. Eugene Bauer became the new dean.

51

Here I was trying to put the cancer program together, and I had just stepped
down as being the senior associate dean, and I was asked to help put the two
healthcare programs at the two schools together. You can imagine it was like
trying to meld two different animal species because the culture of the two
medical schools is quite different.
[01:52:43] The dean at UCSF and Gene Bauer had focus groups working
together. Cancer and cardiology are two big moneymakers for any healthcare
system, so making sure the cancer program and the cardiology programs
from the two schools melded together was really, really important. The two
deans both asked me to become the director of the UCSF Stanford
Healthcare Cancer Program. This was while I was trying to build our cancer
building at Stanford, but Gerhard Casper wanted me to do it. The three of
them kind of twisted my arm. During all of this, I still insisted on seeing
patients one day a week.
[01:53:32] I would never stop being a doctor. But my cancer research and
then my education research were taking a backseat. Now I spent half my time
at UCSF and because I spent my last year of medical residency there, I knew
the culture and a lot of the players. One of the first things that I did was I
worked with one of my colleagues at Stanford, Brandy Sikic, and set up an
educational retreat in Napa Valley once a year where Stanford and UCSF
faculty ran a program called the UCSF Stanford Tumor Board. It was an
educational program for practicing physicians run as a series of tumor
boards. [01:54:25] Instead of lectures, cases were presented. The people in
the audience voted on what they would do, and then the experts talked about

52

it. It became highly successful and ran for ten years. It was a popular postgraduate educational program. It helped bond the faculty from the Stanford
and UCSF cancer programs. Stanford and UCSF cancer faculty came
together for a common good in terms of treating cancer, and it was one of
the successes of the joining of the two institutions.
[01:55:22] Then I ran afoul with one of the trustees. UCSF was applying to
be a cancer center, an NIH cancer center. That’s a huge, huge undertaking,
millions of dollars at stake. They’d been working on it for years. It was
proposed by one of the Stanford, now UCSF/Stanford trustees, that we join
them in applying for a cancer center grant. The trustees agreed with him. I
stood firm that that was foolhardy. That had never been done successfully.
Stanford faculty had always been opposed to having an NIH cancer center. I
knew all the history. There were many fights over the years among the
faculty. There was potential for creating immense friction between UCSF and
Stanford. Besides, the joining of the two healthcare centers was about health
care.
[01:56:20] It wasn’t about basic science research. I finally had a showdown
with the head of the trustees. We were at a lawn party, and we went behind a
hedge to talk. I said, “The two schools will never agree on an NIH cancer
center, and it is unfair to UCSF as they have almost completed their
application. Besides it will scuttle the attempt to join the two clinical
programs. I will not move. I’ll resign today if that’s what you want.” He gave
in. UCSF went on to get a cancer center grant. They were very successful.
Stanford followed many years later, but it would have been the total downfall

53

of the liaison. The cancer programs melded beautifully, but the whole entity
did not. I felt bad for Gerhard Casper; it was taking all his time as president.
[01:57:05] I spent enormous time with him during all this and have such
respect for the man. It just was heartbreaking to him when finally there was a
divorce, and the two institutions separated. The healthcare field changed
after that and made it possible for them both to survive separately. That was
another huge detour in my career. We finally opened the new clinical cancer
center at Stanford which I loved. As we celebrated the groundbreaking
ceremony, we had a new dean. This was Dean Philip Pizzo, and we had a
new acting head of the hospital. Melinda Mitchell who had resigned as the
president of Stanford Hospital and Clinics had been very supportive of me as
we built the clinical cancer center.
[01:58:03] I was the director of now what was called the clinical cancer
program, which entailed making all the clinical programs work, setting up a
research group to support clinical research support, hiring staff for the cancer
center, and enumerable other tasks. Now we had a new dean and a new
acting head of the hospital who wanted to control the clinical cancer center-big bucks, money. He didn’t want me to have any control. He decided that
he was not going to fund my position as director of the clinical cancer
program and cut out my million-dollar budget. He thought the chairman of
radiation oncology could direct the clinical cancer center as part of his job.
[01:59:00] I went in to meet with the new dean and the acting hospital
director, and I could tell there were all kinds of politics going on. I could feel
the ground shifting, the rumbling of an earthquake that was about to happen.

54

I went into the meeting, and the acting hospital director said he didn’t have
any budget for the clinical cancer program that year.
[02:00:08] I knew the cancer program brought in big, big bucks, and the
hospital acting director wanted to control that money. I stood up and said,
“No budget, no position. I resign.” Then I walked out. It was very hard for
me because we had just broken ground on the cancer center building, and I
wanted to be involved in every detail of putting the building up. I don’t think
Dean Pizzo understood what had just happened because he sent me a letter
the next week asking me about doing several tasks as clinical cancer center
director. I wrote back, “You’ll have to ask someone else to do that because, if
you recall, I just resigned.”
[02:01:07] At that point in my career, I had been out of the research realm
for a while, but I helped build the sarcoma program and the lung cancer
program. I helped bring in junior faculty, support them, mentor them, and
helped them rise to become faculty members. Ironically, most of them were
women. More and more women were entering the field at that point in time.
I had a women’s group and met with the women junior faculty and talked
about all the issues that were important to them.
[02:01:58] At that point in time, I wanted to spend more time writing as well.
I didn’t have my next mountain to climb at Stanford, and one of things that I
dislike is senior faculty who hang around and say, “We already tried that, it
didn’t work or in the good old days… or we used to….” I was always critical
of that, and the first time I heard myself say that I thought to myself, “I am

55

out of here.” Besides, I was holding onto a tenure position and an endowed
chair with which they could recruit some talented new faculty.
[02:02:44] They need new people now with new ideas. So I considered what
is it I really like to do? I like to write, and most of all I like to see patients. I
took early retirement and finished up my Kaplan book and then went to the
VA and talked to the chief of oncology and asked if he had a part time staff
position. I didn’t want a title or benefits or an office. I just wanted to see
patients, and I didn’t want to do any administration. That’s what I do now. I
spend half of my time taking care of patients at the VA and half of my time
writing. I’m now ending my career getting to do two things I love the most,
and that’s the end of the story.
Genovese: Wow, that’s wonderful.

Genovese: OK, thank you. Now I’d like to talk about payment between male and female
faculty members and if you noticed a discrepancy during your time at
Stanford.
Jacobs: [00:00:17] Not really. In the School of Medicine, there is a discrepancy
between what physicians at Stanford make and practicing physicians in the
community. That’s a major discrepancy that lurks in the backs of the minds
of the clinicians. That doesn’t pertain to faculty engaged in laboratory
research. During my time at Stanford, the medical center line came into being
in which physicians could receive higher income based on their productivity.
[00:00:55] I was on the tenure line, not on the medical center line. The
discrepancy between the income for the faculty on the medical center line
and the tenure line was probably greater than the discrepancy between men
and women. When I worked in the dean’s office, Dean Robert Cutler was in
charge of faculty affairs, and so issues related to potential discrepancies were
handled by him.

57

Genovese: I understand you have a theater background, and you’re also a published
author. I was wondering if you could talk a little bit about how your
background in arts contributed to your career as a physician, and vice versa.
Jacobs: [00:02:04] My two dreams when I was growing up were to become a doctor
and an actress in musical theater. Up to the time I was getting ready to leave
for medical school, I was also toying with the idea of going to one of the
training programs in musical theater in New York City. I reasoned that if I
went into medicine, I had a 99 percent chance of succeeding and making it
through medical school; if I went into theater I had a 99 percent chance no
matter how hard I worked of never making it.
[00:02:50] I could always do theater for fun, but I could never do medicine as
a hobby. That settled it. Besides, I couldn’t imagine not being a doctor.
Nevertheless, the two have always been important parts of my life. I started
performing when I was a little girl, taking dancing lessons and writing and
directing my own shows. As I mentioned before, my family was musical, and
singing was a form of entertainment for my family. When I chose college, I
chose a school that had a good musical theater--University of Rochester--and
good, strong science. Throughout college I was always involved in musical
theater. In my senior year, I helped build a local playhouse mainly for plays,
not musicals, which is still active today.
[00:03:47] I remember studying for a biology and chemistry exams backstage
in between performances. I preferred musical theater over plays. Performing
was more difficult during medical school, but as I think I mentioned to you
before, we introduced the end-of-the year medical school shows to spoof the

58

faculty. Participation in musical theater became impossible when I was an
intern and resident and on-call every third night. During my postdoctoral
fellowship, I wrote and directed yearly shows for our oncology group to
perform during our yearly national meeting.
[00:04:39] Dr. Saul Rosenberg had a dinner for all of his alumni as well as the
leaders of cancer programs at the National Cancer Institute, Yale and
Harvard. Saul starred as the “oncologist on a chair” as we did a spoof of
Fiddler on the Roof. We did How to Succeed in Oncology Without Really Trying. We
even performed an operetta in which Saul Rosenberg played Carmen’s
toreador. I didn’t have a great deal of talent to work with, but we certainly
had a lot of fun.
[00:05:24] When my children were about nine and ten and went off to
summer camp, I decided it was time to get back into theater. I auditioned for
the Palo Alto Players and got cast in Kiss Me Kate. Since then I have tried to
do at least one or two shows a year. That’s a great deal of fun for me. It’s a
different world, a different group of people. How it helped with patients? I
think that playing different kinds of roles helped me gain insight into
different kinds of people. If you’re in the role of an elderly ill woman, or
playing a scatterbrained person, or someone that is mentally ill, you have to
assume that persona on the stage.
[00:06:30] You have to try to understand that person. I think that gave me a
deeper understanding of patients and illness and the effect of illness. The
other way it helped, which sounds a little self-serving, is that for most
patients, their relationships with their doctor is important. There’s no one-

59

size-fits-all so that I try to figure out what kind of doctor that patient wants
or needs. Do they want someone who is always serious? Do they want
someone who will laugh with them? Do they want someone who’s nurturing
and hand-holding? Do they want someone who’s a little more intellectual?
[00:07:18] Do they want to be told what to do, or do they want to decide
what to do? Every patient is unique. Although I’m always true to myself, I
can vary my personality to meet that patient’s need. I think that has served
me well over the years. Being a physician and understanding human nature
has helped me be a better actor, and playing different roles in theater has
helped me understand individual patients and be a more effective doctor.
Genovese: Can you talk a little bit about writing and how you came to writing. I think
you came to it while you were practicing as a physician. Then the same thing.
Does that help inform your work as a doctor?
Jacobs: [00:08:28] I did come to writing mid-career. I always loved to read, as I
mentioned. Another source of entertainment for my family was to go to the
library. My father read poetry to us. Biography and memoir were among my
favorites as a child, and there was a series of biographies published by
Bobbs-Merrill in our elementary school library. Anyone of that era will
remember the orange-covered biography books. There was a long line to
check them out every week in our school library. I just couldn’t read enough
biography during my childhood.
[00:09:10] When I was an intern, we were on call every other or every third
night. We practically lived at the hospital. There were a lot of potential
stories, as you can imagine, regarding patients. A book about Beth Israel

60

Hospital, House of God, came out a little bit after I’d finished my internship. It
had a lot of dark humor and was very sarcastic about medicine, not the way I
felt at all. I had jotted down notes about my internship and patients that I
met and the impact they had on me. So I began a memoir about my
internship. Internship is an incredibly special time in a doctor’s life.
[00:10:03] You go from being a student to suddenly being responsible for the
lives of patients. In medical school, you learn the science of medicine. During
internship you learn how to be a physician. I found it was the patients who
molded me into the doctor I am today. Young physicians have to be willing
to listen to patients and to be informed and educated by them. At Barnes
Hospital in St. Louis, I started out on a medical ward with indigent patients. I
rotated to a city hospital and a VA hospital. I was amazed how much I
learned from patients.
[00:10:55] During my first year as a faculty member at Stanford, I began
writing a memoir entitled Ward Rounds about my year of internship and how
the patients shaped me. I told this through patient stories. I soon realized
that my writing skills hadn’t changed since college English, and that I needed
to improve my craft. I read a lot about the skills of writing, and during my
first sabbatical, I took creative writing courses on the main campus. . Then
Henry Kaplan, the head of radiation oncology, and one of the most famed
physician researchers in the history of medicine, died [00:12:01] from lung
cancer. He was the man who developed the linear accelerator which is used
to treat people with cancer today and is responsible not only for the cure of
Hodgkin’s disease, but also for saving lives of millions and millions of other

61

cancer patients. Ironically he died of metastatic lung cancer; the radiation that
was used to cure so many did not cure him. He was also an absolutely
fascinating man. He was a human rights advocate; he helped move the
medical school from the city to the main campus. He was a very
controversial man, called a “dean killer” by many. Someone had to write his
story.
[00:12:47] I woke up one morning and said to myself, “I’m going to write
Henry Kaplan’s biography.” I knew that while I was doing all the research
and starting to write, I also seriously needed to learn writing skills. One of my
creative writing professors introduced me to another creative writing
instructor, Ehud Havazelet. I asked him if we could start working in a weekly
seminar. He said he rarely took on other students, and here I was a faculty
member, and where would I find the time. I had two young children at that
point. He asked me to write the first chapter and give it to him, and I did.
[00:13:30] The next week I met with him, and when he gave it back. It had so
many marks all over it, it looked like a bloodbath. He said I had one week to
rewrite it. He didn’t tell me what to do; he just told me what was wrong with
it. I knew that was going to be a test in a sense, because if I argued with him
or thought it was just great as it was, there was no way he was going to take
me on as a student. I worked very hard and brought it back, and he was
satisfied. That led to about a decade of weekly seminars with him.
[00:14:10] Ehud eventually left Stanford and became the head of creative
writing at the University of Oregon and Oregon State. We continued a
weekly seminar by phone. My weekly homework was working on my book.

62

He never ever told me what to write, only what was wrong, what he didn’t
understand. I learned the craft of writing from Ehud During this time, I
needed some free time to write and began to apply to artist colonies, where I
could go for a month and do nothing but write in total isolation except at
meals.
[00:14:56] When people at residencies learned I worked with Ehud
Havazelet, I was amazed how many writers had been touched by him, had
gone to his workshops, heard his talks, read his short stories and books. I
was blessed to learn the skills of writing from one of the greats. It took over
fifteen years to write that biography because I was busy advancing in my
academic career, raising my family, becoming a dean, and starting a clinical
cancer center. Besides which my mentor, Saul Rosenberg, told me not to
write Kaplan’s biography.
[00:15:38] He said it would end my career. At Stanford, you’re promoted by
the research that you do. Besides which, he said, “You’ll find out that Kaplan
was not necessarily a nice man. If you are going into this all starry-eyed,
thinking he’s a hero, you’re going to be very disappointed.” Saul Rosenberg
and Henry Kaplan worked together for many, many years, and fought
bitterly. There was a lot of ill will between them.
[00:16:22] Henry Kaplan’s wife was very cooperative, as were his children.
Leah Kaplan had been a dean of students on the main campus and an
Ombudsperson. She was incredibly talented and quite a character. She said,
“I will help you, and I’ll work with you on one condition--that you don’t

63

portray my husband as a saint. You must reveal all the good and the bad
about him because that’s what he would have wanted.”
So that was a fascinating book to write. I felt that I kind of learned how to
write biography by writing his biography.
[00:17:06] I was fortunate to get a top literary agent in New York, Robert
Lescher, who was in his more senior years. The book was published by
Stanford University Press. I loved the entire process--the research and
interviews and the writing. Every day I’d wake up trying to figure out how I
could find time that day to work on the biography. I just loved it.
[00:17:54] Not that I wanted to give up medicine or theater, but I loved
writing. I began thinking who would be the subject of my next biography.
My literary agent, Robert Lescher, advised me, “Next time please choose
somebody who is a household name.” The problem with getting the Kaplan
book placed and sold was that he wasn’t someone that people would just
flock to read about, unless they were in the medical profession.
[00:18:36] I knew I would spend another ten or fifteen years on a biography,
so it had to be somebody I really wanted to write about as passionately as I
did about Kaplan. One of the first people I immediately thought about was
Jonas Salk. Salk was the hero of my generation. I grew up in a time when in
the summers we had to be careful or we could get polio. We couldn’t go to
the swimming pool; at times we couldn’t even go to the movie theaters. On
newsreels and in magazines we saw children with crutches, children in iron
lungs. It was a frightening time.

64

[00:19:21] At the movie theaters, a short called The Crippler preceded the main
attraction. It was scary. A shadow engulfed children having fun at a
swimming hole. The crippler was a nasty character who bragged about how
he was going to cripple children, and he didn’t care whether they were rich or
poor. Then the lights would come on, and the ushers would pass around
containers in which to put our dimes for the March of Dimes.
[00:20:01] The March of Dimes had a huge presence in my childhood. It
conducted a very large nationwide field trial testing Salk’s polio vaccine. Salk
concocted the vaccine, and the National Foundation for Infantile Paralysis
through the March of Dimes did the trial--selecting towns across the United
States-- different sized towns with different socioeconomic groups. They
chose places that had had a relatively high incidence of polio which
Kingsport, Tennessee, where I came from must have had. I didn’t realize that
we were any worse than anyone else.
[00:20:39] So my town was selected as one of the sites. My mother recalls
that someone sent a notice home saying that they were going to be testing
the polio vaccine in first, second, and third graders. Those were the kids with
the highest chance of getting polio. Children were randomized to receive the
vaccine or placebo. That was one part of the trial. In another part of the trial,
everyone in the second grade got the shot, and they incidence of polio in this
group was compared to first and third graders. I’m not sure which trial I was
in, but I remember it was a big to-do, except that we got a shot; in fact, we
got three shots.

65

[00:21:27] We got a lollypop, a Polio Pioneer button, and a Polio Pioneer
card as a reward. We were participating in some great adventure. When the
vaccine proved to be successful, Jonas Salk became our hero. He was
celebrated by heads of states around the world; he was on the cover of every
magazine, every newspaper. But the scientific community looked askance at
him and his work. As I grew up, all I had was an image of this young man,
barely forty, who had become an international icon. I wondered periodically
what ever happened to him.
[00:22:15] Salk seemed to just disappear off the scene, and I became curious:
What does one do the rest of your life when you’re a hero at the age of forty?
When you’re a Charles Lindbergh and become world-renowned at an early
age? As well, I came to learn that Salk had been ostracized by the scientific
community, and I wondered why. Those two questions puzzled me about
Jonas Salk, and I became more and more intrigued. I didn’t want to spend
ten or fifteen years with someone unless I was totally engaged. I initially
wanted to write a biography of either a woman or a person of color in the
field of medicine or science.
[00:23:00] My agent had suggested I pick someone who was well-known. It
seemed that every person of color or woman who had made a major
discovery already had numerous biographies written about her or him.
Interestingly, there was no biography of Jonas Salk. Still I wasn’t sure I was
going to write about him. I asked many people who they would read a
biography of, who they thought was the most interesting and most important

66

person in the history of medicine. Finally, after a year I came back to Jonas
Salk. I was surprised to find no formal biography of him.
[00:23:41] There were some childhood biographies and some books on polio,
but there was no formal biography of him perhaps because his archives were
closed. Now, if the archives are closed, a biographer is dead in the water.
Salk’s archives are housed at UC San Diego. Eventually a researcher could
get permission only through his sons. That became a major obstacle
compared to the Kaplan bio where everybody just bent over backwards to be
helpful. Salk’s three sons were quite leery of anyone who wanted to write
their father’s biography. They were afraid it would be a People magazine kind
of biography. After sending them examples of my work and the Kaplan
biography, and after being interviewed by each son, I finally got into the
archives and was able to write his biography.
[00:24:25] I don’t know that writing Salk’s or Kaplan’s biography affected my
medicine, although it did give me pause in my career and my approach to
patients, particularly Henry Kaplan who not only was an outstanding
scientist, but also a wonderful clinician, beloved by patients. I would say that
having a medical background and understanding the science and clinical trials
and the culture of academic medicine allowed me to understand better what
the two men went through and what they contributed.
Genovese: You just mentioned patients. I was wondering if you had any favorite
patients over the years, or patients that stood out for various reasons that you
wanted to talk about.

67

Jacobs: [00:25:27] Actually, there are so many, I couldn’t even begin to pick one
favorite. In fact, sometimes now my veterans will say to me, “I thought I was
your favorite patient.”
I reply, “My heart is very big and very full and can hold lots of love for lots
of patients.”
That’s the same thing I used to tell my sons when they would say, “Who do
you love most?”
[00:25:53] I would say, “There’s room in my heart for all my children.”
I’m always fascinated by patients. The amazing thing about being a doctor is
that if you’re willing to listen, you’re invited to hear the most intimate details
of a person’s life. I wish I had more time with every patient. In fact,
sometimes I’ll go out of the way to see a patient late so I can just spend time
talking with him or her. There are many, many patients who have touched
my life. They have molded me into the kind of physician that I am today.
[00:26:48] Oncology is an amazing field because you see the heights and
depths of emotion. When you have a patient who is cured of what you
thought was going to be an incurable cancer, and you see them, ten and
fifteen years later and they go on to marry and have children and have
careers, it’s just a wonderful feeling. In fact, every time I have a patient who
goes into a remission, we rejoice together. There are many patients whom I
know from the onset are going to die, and my goal is to help them have as
good a death as possible. I liken it to landing a plane in a storm.
[00:27:48] You want to have a gentle landing, but often it’s very bumpy, and
you hit the ground flat. To see how people deal with death or with living

68

when they know their time is limited, and to have them share that with me is
an incredible gift. When patients thank me for what I’ve given them, I always
remind them that I get a lot more in return about life’s lessons from them. I
usually work about twelve hours at the VA on Tuesdays and Thursdays
seeing patients in the clinic.
[00:28:35] There’s a lot of laughter, which always amazes me, that people see
all the humor in what’s going on. At the VA, many patients also have PTSD.
To survive Vietnam and then they get cancer seems so unfair. To try to work
with that and help patients, and try to understand and make decisions around
what will work for somebody who’s suffering from PTSD is a major
challenge.
[00:29:18] There are many, many patient stories that I have, but it’s hard to
pick out one particular story to tell. Maybe I’ll finish my memoir one day.
Then there will be a lot of patient stories. [laughter]
Genovese: I was wondering if you had any advice to young folks going into medicine,
particularly women, and particularly a career in academic medicine, and how
you manage to maintain balance or achieve everything that you achieved.
Jacobs: [00:30:04] My advice is to, make sure you’re choosing medicine it for the
right reason. That’s key. Particularly in academic medicine, you have to enjoy
science, and you have to enjoy people. I’m not talking about the PhD, but
the MD who’s going to be seeing patients. First, in academic medicine you
have to love to answer questions and seek new therapies or a better
understanding of disease. And you have to enjoy caring for patients. To have
those two melded together is crucial, particularly now when practicing

69

medicine is a little more challenging. It’s sad to see people in academic
medicine or in practice who are unhappy. It’s such a blessing to be a doctor.
[00:31:19] It’s such a hard road to get there, having to achieve and be at the
top from the time you’re in high school through residency or fellowship. It’s
a tragedy to see people unhappy because they chose medicine for the wrong
reason i.e. fame and fortune, they’re bound to be unhappy. You have to
choose it because you want to make things better for other human beings.
That’s my advice.
I tell those medical students who are contemplating academic medicine, if
you don’t like to write, don’t go into academic medicine.
[00:32:12] Academics is about writing. It’s one thing to make discoveries in
the laboratory or from clinical trials, but you have to sit down and write up
and publish your results; unpublished work is no work at all. That’s part of it.
You have no business in academic medicine if you don’t want to do research.
What is the point? You might as well be practicing and using your clinical
skills. On the other hand, there are academic physicians who want to see only
two or three patients a week. [00:33:00] I ask myself, well, why are they in
academic medicine? Why didn’t they just become biochemists or work in a
pharmaceutical company? The key to success in medicine is knowing what
you like, and what you want to do and being honest with yourself. I think it is
harder for women who bear the burden of having the children. And the role
of mother often falls more to the woman in a household. Choosing not to
have children is a difficult decision for women in academic medicine or many
other high-pressure careers.

70

[00:34:01] It certainly it takes a lot of organization. I think part of my success
is because I’m very goal-oriented. I start my day with lists, and at the end of
the day I make sure everything on list is crossed off. I trim the fat out of my
life. So if I’m going to sit down and watch television, I have to ask myself if I
really want to spend an hour watching a program. When I get up every day I
know I have the same number of hours as everybody else, but there are
certain things I want to do during that day.
[00:34:55] I think organization, being able to keep five balls in the air at the
same time, has allowed me to do the things I want to do. I think women
should feel equal with men. I always have. I never felt that I was
discriminated against, as I mentioned before. Discrimination is certainly less
now, when half of the students in medicine are women. At the VA there are
five women faculty and one man. What a change from when I was an intern
and there were only two of us.
[00:35:53] I think the other key is to maintain balance. I do that through my
friends, through my family, through making sure that I have time for the
other things that I love to do. Throughout my career I thought, “If I can’t do
theater, if I can’t have children, if I can’t do biography writing, etc. well, then
I’m not going to do academic medicine, I’ll do a part-time practice.” There
are certain things I want, and wanted, and still want, and am unwilling to
compromise. I don’t know if you have any other questions.
Genovese: Yes. I’d like to wrap up by asking you--it’s probably difficult because you
accomplished so much at Stanford--if there are one or two things that you’re
particularly…. I don’t want to use the word proud, because you’re not a

71

prideful person in that sense, but in terms of a legacy that you’ve left at
Stanford.
Jacobs: [00:37:07] Legacy is a big word, but I’m proud of moving the field of head
and neck oncology forward by helping make a new drug safe, which has
turned out to be the most important drug in head and neck cancer. I’m
proud of the organ preservation approach and the multi-disciplinary
approach, which is now very strong in the field of head and neck oncology.
Of course, I credit Bill Fee and Don Goffinet. I could never have done that
alone.
[00:37:50] I’m very proud of the clinical cancer center at Stanford, because
Stanford has always been very strong in the multidisciplinary approach to
cancer. It just needed a building to bring everyone together so that people
from multiple specialties can practice side by side. The building was very well
thought out for patients, faculty, and staff. As I said before, I consider that
my magnum opus. I’m proud of some of the changes that we made in the
medical education program under my deanship. I am proud of the students
that I mentored, that I taught.
[00:38:45] I hope I was a positive role model, particularly for women, about
how you can enjoy life and enjoy your family and have an academic career at
the same time. I think my biggest legacy is the patients, the patients that I
cured or helped face life when they were going to die. I just hope that I made
life a little bit better for all of them. They are what drove my career, and they
still do.