
Tobey: This is Karen Tobey interviewing Helen Kraemer. It is October 29th,
2014. Helen has been a pioneer in math and statistics at Stanford. Helen,
I thought we would start today with where you grew up, your youth, and
your family.
Kraemer: [00:00:42] I grew up in Ansonia, Connecticut, which is just a little outside
of New Haven--not the pretty part of Connecticut but the industrial belt.
My father was Stanley Chmura, a factory worker born in Massachusetts,
but brought up in Poland with the equivalent of about three years of
formal schooling. He knew enough English to read the newspapers, but
he never read a book and could never, to the end of his days, add,
subtract, multiply or divide. I’m mentioning that because—I am the
oldest of the four, a younger sister and two younger brothers, and all four
of us have advanced degrees in mathematical sciences of some sort. I
find that somewhat remarkable.
My mother was born in Poland and came here as a three-year-old.
She grew up in the United States, spoke perfect English and went
through the United States school system. [00:01:44] But it was she who

13

eventually had to be naturalized. She was a high school dropout.
Academics were not a big thing in my family, but my father put
tremendous emphasis on the importance of education, having had none
himself. When he died, at his funeral, many men came up to me to say,
“You know, your father, he kept saying to me, you have to educate your
children, you have to educate your children. Now my son is a doctor or a
lawyer…” My father was really committed to education.
Tobey: That commitment to education, in spite of your parents’ lack of higher
education, really spurred you and your siblings on.
Kraemer: [00:02:35] Absolutely.
Tobey: That’s very interesting.
Kraemer: [00:02:39] I graduated from Ansonia High School and got a scholarship
to Smith. I got my degree there in 1958 in mathematics.
Tobey: Which was unusual at Smith at that time, wasn’t it?
Kraemer: [00:02:56] Oh, yes. My recollection was that there were two math faculty
members when I first came and three when I graduated.
Tobey: Three math faculty members?
Kraemer: [00:03:05] Math faculty members. [laughter] Moreover, it was all
theoretical math. We had only one course in any sort of applied math and
that was Probability and Statistics. ..That course was taught by a Mount
Holyoke professor, because we had no faculty to teach it at Smith. Now
Math is a huge department with a lot of faculty and a lot of graduates. It’s
really changed. In my class But, I think there were only four math majors.
Tobey: In a class of how many?

14

Kraemer: [00:03:39] Three hundred? That’s a guess.
Tobey: Three hundred. So girls were not generally into math at that time.
Kraemer: [00:03:45] No. I graduated in 1958. It was a time when you went to one
of the “Seven Sisters”1 to meet Ivy League men, get married, have
wonderful children, and be their mainstays. Your husband and children
would succeed and you would bask in their glories. There wasn’t any
great emphasis on what you yourself were going to do for a living or
what you were going to do with your life.
Tobey: You didn’t have great expectations for a career yourself?
Kraemer: [00:04:19] No, and actually the situation was somewhat worse. Because of
the theoretical nature of my major, I could not envision how one could
make a living in mathematics other than teaching. So initially I thought
that after I got out, I would teach. Then after my junior year, I had a
summer job at Bell Telephone Laboratories. I suddenly realized for the
first time the value of statistics. This was just after I had taken the
Probability and Statistics sequence and gotten the only B that I had ever
in my life gotten in math.
Tobey: In statistics.
Kraemer: [00:04:50] That obviously told me that this is where I should devote my
life! What they were doing at Bell involved both mathematics and
statistics, and I was totally intrigued. Instead of just going off and getting
a teaching credential, I decided to get a master’s degree in statistics,

The Seven Sisters is a group of liberal arts colleges in the Northeastern United States that are historically
women's colleges. They are Barnard College, Bryn Mawr College, Mount Holyoke College, Radcliffe College,
Smith College, Vassar College, and Wellesley College.
1

15

realizing I only had one course as an undergraduate. I applied to various
postgraduate institutions and finally got a Fulbright for the first year and
then came to Stanford for the second year.
My experience then also tells you how different the times are. I
applied to Harvard. At the time Harvard did not have women
undergraduates, but were admitting some women in the graduate
programs. [00:05:38] I was informed that they would welcome me, that I
could come and take the classes with the Harvard men and take all the
same exams, but at the end of it, I would get a Radcliffe degree! I’m a
Smith graduate and a Radcliffe degree is not an inducement to go to
Harvard! I also applied to Cal Berkeley, which had a statistics department
headed by a woman, Elizabeth Scott. She wrote me they would be glad to
have me, but it was their policy not to give money to women. [00:06:10]
You can imagine, coming from Connecticut to California with no
promise of any sort of support was not in the cards.
Stanford welcomed me with open arms and offered me a teaching
assistantship. Then when I was offered the Fulbright, Stanford said that
they would just hold off for another year. Needless to say, I came to
Stanford with great joy.
Tobey: Because that was the most affordable alternative.
Kraemer: [00:06:36] Not only that, but Stanford was welcoming, and that made a
big difference. That didn’t mean that everybody here was welcoming. I
was greeted my first day at Sequoia Hall (the Statistics department) by a
faculty member who told me he believed that there was no place for

16

women in the graduate programs. Having women in the department was
a waste of time and space and he would do everything possible to see
that I would never get a degree.
Tobey: In statistics.
Kraemer: [00:06:58] But he was one man in an otherwise very welcoming
department, so it worked out.
Tobey: So that department was math and statistics or just statistics?
Kraemer: [00:07:12] Statistics, a standalone department at Stanford, yes.
Tobey: It was a standalone department. So that’s where you entered and that’s
where you got your PhD.
Kraemer: [00:07:18] Yes. I got a PhD three years later, I think. Yes, three years
later.
Tobey: That’s a quick turnaround.
Kraemer: [00:07:25] Yes, it actually was. My daughter, who many years later got her
PhD in biochemistry at Michigan State, told me she felt that I got my
degree almost by accident. She said when I described my experience, I
fell into a wonderful thesis problem and it worked out very nicely. I took
my orals and I got my degree and there I was, [laughter] whereas she
struggled.
Tobey: You were a pioneer in the field at that time.
Kraemer: [00:07:52] Actually, my daughter is probably more than a little bit right. I
did have a lot of good luck.
Tobey: Part of the equation is sometimes luck, isn’t it?
Kraemer: [00:08:01] That is true. That is true.

17

Tobey: You were speaking a little bit about your daughter, so somewhere in this
period of time, marriage and motherhood came into play.
Kraemer: [00:08:17] I actually took my orals one week and got married the week
afterward. And [laughter] then our first child (our son who later died
when he was six), was born some fourteen months later. So I went from
Ph.D. to wifehood to motherhood rather quickly. I had a daughter
(Stacey) three years later and a second daughter (Karen) another three
years after that, just after our son died.
Tobey: You had some difficulties in terms of those early years with the son who
passed away.
Kraemer: [00:08:48] Very much so. Yes, it was very difficult. Robbie was epileptic
from the time he was born. He began having seizures at about four
months. By the time he was six, the seizures were totally out of control
and no medication seemed to be able to control them. . He was in the
hospital about once a month with some sort of pulmonary problems and
eventually he died of those pulmonary problems.
Tobey: Oh, how sad.
Kraemer: [00:09:16] Robbie died on a Monday, and Karen, my youngest daughter,
was born the next Sunday. Very quick. Very difficult.
Tobey: It had to be very difficult. And were you working at this time?
Kraemer: [00:09:29] Yes and no. Initially my noble plan was that I would stay home
with the children until they were in school and then I would resume my
career. I now know that this is not a very logical or feasible plan for that
stage of life. But actually I never followed through on the plan because

18

within about six months of being a stay-at-home mother, my husband
was urging me to go back to work. It wasn’t that I didn’t enjoy being
home with the baby; it was that I vegetated and Art ended saying, “But
you’re not the woman I married! [laughter] Go back to work!” So, I did.
Tobey: So he influenced you to go back.
Kraemer: [00:10:09] Absolutely. We got a licensed practical nurse to come in and
stay with Robbie and I went back to work halftime. Then I worked
halftime until the girls went to school.
Tobey: That was a nice way to balance work and family responsibilities.
Kraemer: [00:10:30] Moreover I was tenured while I was still halftime.
Tobey: You were tenured while you were halftime. Does that happen today?
Kraemer: [00:10:37] I was told by a dean--many years later -- that getting tenured
while part-time had never happened. I had to show him in the records
that I was still halftime when I was tenured. But that happened a very
long time from the time I first began working at Stanford.
Tobey: Good for you. Well, that’s certainly pioneering in and of itself.
Kraemer: [00:10:58] I think there’s something worthwhile being able to say that
happened at least once, so it should be able to happen again.
Tobey: Right, yes. You believe it should be able to happen again, especially for
women who tend to go part time as they’re having children?
Kraemer: [00:11:17] Or for men who are sharing childcare. I think the whole
process of promotion and tenure should be based completely on the
quality of the work. If you can produce in a half time job the quality of
work that’s equal to somebody else production in a full time job, it

19

doesn’t make any sense to deny you the stature that’s associated with that
production. But I have to admit I did go to full time very shortly after I
was tenured. [laughter]
Tobey: And then stayed with your career for many, many years afterwards.
Remembering back to that time when you were first at Stanford, what
was going on in the outside world at that time? Do you recall?
Kraemer: [00:12:08] The Vietnam War.
Tobey: The Vietnam War was probably the big item, wasn’t it?
Kraemer: [00:12:12] I had two brothers that were of draftable age and status,
although my husband was in a job that precluded being drafted. It was
very troublesome era and it was a really rough time.
Tobey: It was a rough time. How did that affect you in your work or the
environment at Stanford?
Kraemer: [00:12:32] I don’t remember that it really had very much direct effect on
me. I was struggling in so many other areas that I don’t think I was that
involved, to be honest.
Tobey: At the same time, the women’s movement was just beginning. Do you
recall that beginning and what was that like for you?
Kraemer: [00:12:50] Oh yes. Can I tell you a story that I think illustrates what was
going on and how rapidly things changed?
Tobey: Absolutely.
Kraemer: [00:12:56] In my last year of graduate studies in the statistics department,
we had a biostat seminar (one still ongoing today). The presenters were
talking about the use of survival methods to look at breast cancer

20

survival. In this case, a lecture was given by Lincoln Moses talking about
the statistical issues and by an oncologist who was talking about the
medical issues. This was at the time researchers first started looking at
lumpectomies as an alternative to total mastectomies and radical
mastectomies. The evidence was very clear that under certain conditions,
the lumpectomy was just as effective as these radical mastectomies,
which basically were crippling.
[00:13:47] I was the only woman in the room. That was the way it was at
the time. I raised my hand and said, “Well, you know, there have been
these five or six studies, all of which have shown that lumpectomies are
just as effective as more radical procedures. How long will it take to
convince the medical community not to do radical mastectomies in these
circumstances?” The oncologist laughed and said, “Oh,” he said, “I’ll
continue to do radical mastectomies forever, because I feel so much
better when I hack it all off.”
[00:14:18] Everybody but me in the room laughed—it was meant as a
joke. I must have turned scarlet and I didn’t know what to say. Five years
later, I was now a faculty member, and there were a handful of women in
the room. That’s one change right there; more than half of
biostatisticians these days, I believe, are women.
Tobey: Oh, huge. Sea change.
Kraemer: [00:14:40] Huge change and it happened so quickly. Five years later, the
same oncologist came in and said the same thing in answer to one of the
female students’ questions. But this time that woman stood up, looked

21

him in the eye and said, “I hope you do the same thing for testicular
cancer!” The oncologist said, “Oh, that’s different…different entirely.”
She said, “Not to me it is!” I thought, oh, things have really changed!
There is so much to be gained in having a mixture of men and
women, whether we’re talking about the faculty or the student body.
Everything changes and it was so rapid.
Tobey: That’s a wonderful story to illustrate how the women’s movement began
to integrate itself into your professional career and into the whole society.
Do you have other stories of that sort that have to do with women
getting their views more listened to, maybe more included in the
department?
Kraemer: [00:15:55] The women’s movement was mirrored in the ever increasing
number of women that were coming into the medical school, for
example. When I first was there, I had always had the impression that it
was very difficult for women to get into the medical school. When--I
don’t know how many years later, seven, ten years later perhaps--I was
on the admissions committee of the medical school, about half who were
being admitted in were women.
Tobey: Right. That is a big change.
Kraemer: [00:16:23] So there was no longer major discrimination. Integration of
the faculty is still a problem. Women are still a minority on the faculty,
even true today. There’s something about the entry to the faculty that’s
more difficult than entry to professional training programs.
Tobey: Do you have any idea what that is?

22

Kraemer: [00:16:42] I don’t know. There are problems in a number of areas. I
know of one case with a happy ending to the story. The female faculty
member is now, I believe, tenured at Harvard. But she didn’t get
promoted and tenured here at Stanford because she worked so closely
with a male professor who was very prominent in his field. The suspicion
was that somehow she acted as his assistant or associate, as opposed to
being a freelance investigator on her own. Yet if you looked at the
record, she and this male professor had been very careful to make sure
that the path that she was carving was distinct from the path that he was
on. I worked with them both, and it was clear to me and those they
worked with that they were both independent investigators.
[00:17:30] And yet when it came to the promotion process, it just didn’t
work. She left Stanford and went elsewhere and succeeded. I mean, she’s
a marvelous researcher. But there were many problems of that sort.
Tobey: Yes. I think it still happens here and there.
Kraemer: [00:17:47] Unfortunately, it still happens, yes.
Tobey: Going back to your college and your PhD work. Did all of your financing
come from scholarship and TA-ing (working as teaching assistant)?
Kraemer: [00:18:16] I was rapidly moved off the TA-ship when I came to Stanford
to a public health traineeship, which was wonderful. Not only did that
mean more money but the money was tax-exempt. Lincoln Moses met
me when I came and he and I had a talk. When he realized how
interested I was in application of statistical methods to health, in
particular to the behavioral aspects of health, an interest I’ve never lost,

23

he very quickly moved me into his training program. Yes, all my money
came from public support. The condition of such support was that after
you graduated, you would devote some time to medical research. I did
that for forty-five years. I think I paid it back!
Tobey: You paid it back and then some. So Lincoln Moses was kind of a
mentor?
Kraemer: [00:19:14] Yes, he was.
Tobey: Can you tell us a little bit more about what he did to mentor you as a
woman in that field?
Kraemer: [00:19:23] He was one of the three or four faculty members in the
department of statistics that were determined that women would actually
get PhDs in the statistics. There had been none here before. I had
actually come here for a master’s degree, but every time I asked how do I
file for the master’s degree, my advisors kept saying it’s OK, just keep
going. Before I knew it, I was in the PhD program and going through
qualification exams, working on a PhD topic. At that point, I was almost
finished. I never did get that master’s degree. That is part of why Stacey
says that my PhD was almost an accident. [laughter]
[00:20:00] Lincoln and other faculty simply determined what was going to
be. Yes, there’s a bit of paternalism here, but a very benevolent
paternalism. Then just as I was finishing the PhD, there was a group of
professors, Lincoln and several others, who decided to figure out where I
should go next to be best located.
Tobey: For your more permanent work.

24

Kraemer: [00:20:29] For a permanent position, for a faculty position. . Considering
my interest in the behavioral aspects of medicine, they decided that I
should go to Columbia, which is still one of the really good places in that
area. Unfortunately, I had forgotten to notify them that I was getting
married to somebody who was staying here and I intended to stay with
him, [laughter] Columbia wouldn’t work. Paternalism only goes so far. I
stayed here at Stanford on a post-doc with Lincoln and Pat Suppes, my
thesis advisor, who is still emeritus at Stanford2, a half time post-doc with
Lincoln in medicine and a half time post-doc with Pat over in the
behavioral side.
[00:21:13] Then I had the baby, stayed home a bit and then went back to
work. It was Lincoln who had a long discussion with David Hamburg.
David had just reorganized the psychiatry department for what was then
the new Stanford Medical School, which had only fairly recently moved
from San Francisco. David Hamburg was determined that his
department of psychiatry would be very research oriented, as opposed to
the more non-research oriented departments in the rest of the country.
Lincoln told him that if a research orientation was going to happen, they
were going to have to get a statistician. And by the way, he said, “I have
just the one for you!” [laughter] In 1964 I was hired by David Hamburg
into the department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences.
Tobey: I see. So that’s how that all began.

2

Pat Suppes died in November 2014.
25

Kraemer: [00:22:03] Well, Lincoln was of the opinion that research in psychiatry
required innovative statistical analysis--and I think he was right. He also
believed that there were a few areas of medicine where the problems are
so unique that you really need to have statisticians acclimated to those
particular problems. Those areas included psychiatry, pulmonary
medicine, anesthesiology, and a couple of other areas -- and Lincoln tried
to place statisticians in those fields. I’m the one who lasted the longest,
but that I think was more because of David Hamburg’s vision of what
the department of psychiatry was to be about than something about the
fields or departments.
Tobey: You think that’s why you lasted?
Kraemer: [00:22:44] To succeed, I think you’d have to have an awful lot of support
from the department chairman, at least to get started in a specialty field
of that sort.
Tobey: And you had that.
Kraemer: [00:22:52] I did.
Tobey: Yes. As you proved your competence. That’s all really interesting, I mean,
everything from how you got here to why you stayed. There were
obviously any number of influences from Stanford in your life and in
your career. Were there other people who mentored or influenced you to
do what you have done?
Kraemer: [00:23:28] I’d hate to use the word “mentoring” per se, because it’s more
like a collaboration, doing the kind of work I do. I collaborated with
virtually everybody in the department. Everybody in the department with

26

whom I’ve collaborated has taught me a little bit more about what they’re
doing and what I should be doing. So yes, there have been a lot of
people. I’d mention in particular my ex-department chair, David Kupfer,
who’s at the University of Pittsburgh (where I had an appointment after I
retired at Stanford). He and I started working together thirty or so years
ago and published extensively together.
Tobey: I saw his name on a number of your publications. Just an insert here,
when I asked for your resume, there were forty-one pages of resume with
thirty-five of those, at least, being publications where you have either
been primary author, co-author, or research collaborator.
Kraemer: [00:24:33] Oh, much more than thirty-five. More like three hundred!
Tobey: Pages. Thirty-five pages of research studies, articles, and books.
Kraemer: [00:24:36] Oh, pages! Thirty-five pages, I will admit. [laughter]
Tobey: And I was rather overwhelmed.
Kraemer: [00:24:45] Well, it’s interesting, because most people struggle for
publication. Statisticians generally don’t. We have a sort of a funny
obverse problem. If we put our names on every project that we consulted
on, that wouldn’t be thirty-five pages; it would be a hundred pages. One
of the things that I learned from Lincoln Moses early on was that you
had to make a decision whether your intellectual contribution to a
particular paper or a particular study was sufficient to warrant coauthorship.
[00:25:21If all you’re doing is saying, “Here’s how to do a routine
standard procedure,” -- that might be very helpful to the researcher, but

27

it doesn’t really take any of your intellectual ability to do it. In those cases
you have to say no to being a co-author, and that happens a lot of times.
When looking at a statistician’s resume, which is the way you should be
looking at mine, you have to distinguish between those efforts in which I
am the senior author that appear either in methodological journals or are
didactic papers in psychiatry, psychology, and whatever other fields I’ve
published in, which are basically my research, and those where I am a
junior author listed lower down in the authorship list, which probably
means I’ve contributed in a major way but it isn’t my own research.
Tobey: That’s a good distinction to make and I wouldn’t have made it without
your help.
Kraemer: [00:26:18] I realized that I wasn’t the only one who was thinking about
such issues when President Donald Kennedy, our president at Stanford,
wrote a position paper talking about the responsibilities of accepting
authorship on a paper. His argument was very much along this line: you
don’t give authorship to somebody who merely handled the papers in
your study. People who are listed as authors have to have made
identifiable intellectual contributions to the study and must take
responsibility for them.
Tobey: Since we’re talking about some of the studies that you’ve been involved
with, and there have been so many, what do you consider the most
significant of those studies, if any?
Kraemer: [00:27:18] This is like asking me which of my children I like the best.
[laughter]

28

Tobey: Oh, is it? Well, I don’t want to do that.
Kraemer: [00:27:23] Actually, I think I’ll discuss a recent experience. I think that
the work that I did with DSM-5 is a culmination of a lot of work, an
effort that in essence I prepared for about thirty years.
Tobey: The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Psychiatric Disorders.
Kraemer: [00:27:38] That’s right. The fifth version. I think it was the first time that
I could apply the work that I had previously done in looking at the
reliability of measures in diagnosis, the work that I’d previously done in
optimizing decision making, the work that I’d previously done in
randomized clinical trials and risk research--a broad spectrum of things
that somehow all coalesced on one problem. Did I succeed? Probably
not as well as I would have liked to, but I was really grateful for the
opportunity to get those ideas out and I think I made a difference. I think
DSM-V is different from the earlier versions. .
Tobey: What were some of the differences that you feel you were responsible for
or had a hand in?
Kraemer: [00:28:26] One of the major difficulties that I saw in previous DSMs was
that when it came time to evaluate the quality of the diagnosis, the field
trials, they didn’t actually specify for whom these diagnoses were meant
to be used. It makes a big difference whether you’re talking about
diagnosing people who are coming into a clinic versus diagnosing people
you’re calling and interviewing on the phone in an epidemiological study.
I think it has always been incorrectly assumed that if it was good for one
purpose, it was good for all purposes.

29

[00:29:02] So in earlier field trials they did things like selecting--very
carefully selecting -- the patients to go into those field trials, as opposed
to just taking patients as they came. I did convince the DSM researchers
this time that you had to evaluate the quality of treatment on the people
you intended to use it on and you had to evaluate that quality using the
clinicians who were intended to use the DSM. For the most recent
version, the field trials did it exactly that way. The downside of doing it
that way is that, because we’re now talking about very heterogeneous
samples of both patients and clinicians, the reliabilities in DSM-5 seem
much lower than they had been in DSM-4, just as had been predicted.
But I think we did it right, which is, I think, the thing that I most value.
Tobey: Good. It sounds like a wonderful contribution.
Kraemer: [00:29:55] I hope so.
Tobey: It also sounds like you had some wonderful relationships with colleagues
over the years. You’ve already mentioned Lincoln Moses and Pat Suppes
Are there other collaborations and other people with whom you’ve
worked who come to mind as having had an impact or having been
wonderful to work with?
Kraemer: [00:30:26] This is again…
Tobey: Picking your favorite children.
Kraemer: [00:30:29] Yes, picking my favorite children. [laughter]
Tobey: We know that you might leave some out.
Kraemer: [00:30:34] I am still working with a lot of the people that I worked with
in the past. I’ve been retired now for seven years, but I am still working

30

with some of the people that I have worked with before, those that I
truly enjoyed working with. Jerry Yesavage, I still see frequently. He and I
worked together for about thirty years. He’s in the department of
psychiatry here at Stanford, at the VA. I am working with VJ Periyakoil,
who is actually not in psychiatry, but runs the hospice at the VA. Her
area of interest is issues related to death and dying, which I think is an
important area, not very well researched or understood. .
[00:31:22] There are people like Jack Barchas, who is currently chairman
of the psychiatry department at Cornell but who used to be at Stanford
and with whom I’ve worked extensively.
For the last twenty to twenty-five years that I was working at
Stanford, I took about a quarter of my salary and earned it somewhere
other than psychiatry. I have to admit that the reason I did this was
because I thought medical research was much easier in other fields than it
was in psychiatry. I thought psychiatry was particularly tough. .
[00:31:58] I found by doing research in other medical fields that it’s no
tougher or easier in psychiatry [laughter] than it is anyplace else. But that
gave me the opportunity to work with Bob DeBusk, in cardiology, and
later at the Prevention Center. I chose to work at the Prevention Center
because epidemiology seemed so weak in psychiatry. I wanted to learn
about epidemiology and how it was done in cardiology, oncology and
other fields where it was very well developed.
It’s really hard to answer your question. There are so many people
that I worked with. [laugher]

31

Tobey: You obviously worked with a lot of wonderful people and you’ve been a
part of a fair number of administrations at Stanford, too. Can you
describe any of the administrative people and how you saw the university
changing as you saw different presidents come and go?
Kraemer: [00:33:00] I think in the medical school, we’re more affected by the
provost, the dean and our chairman than we are by the president. At least
I was.
Tobey: Then let’s talk the provosts.
Kraemer: [00:33:05] There have been so many since I first came on. I really don’t
have great insights as to how they compare with each other.
Tobey: They didn’t have a direct influence.
Kraemer: [00:33:19] I’ve been in the department under every chairman of the
department of psychiatry since the beginning until my retirement and
that does have a direct effect on everybody in the department.
Tobey: Let’s talk about that a little bit then.
Kraemer: [00:33:31] Well, David Hamburg was the first chairman. He stayed for a
number of years until that famous kidnapping in Zaire. Do you know
that story? That’s interesting.
Tobey: I don’t know that story.
Kraemer: [00:33:45] Well, Jane Goodall was doing research on chimps. This is
while she was still in Gombe, which is the name of her research facility.
There was a liaison forged between the psychiatry department at Stanford
and Jane and her group at Gombe. We would train young researchers
here to observe, record, and analyze research having to do with

32

chimpanzee studies. Then we’d send them over to Gombe and they
would work there. This went on for a couple of years.
[00:34:22] David Hamburg was the person who had forged that liaison.
Then several of our students were kidnapped by guerillas, not gorillas,
guerillas. Guerillas from across the lake. , David Hamburg left Stanford
and spent a lot of time negotiating to get the release of those students.
Tobey: What year was this? I wonder.
Kraemer: [00:34:47] Oh, dear. I’m so bad on dates.
Tobey: Oh, I know it’s hard.
Kraemer: [00:34:51] It was the year before David Hamburg resigned as chairman.
Tobey: It was that year.
Kraemer: [00:34:57] When David came back, he said he didn’t think he was doing
enough on a world basis working at Stanford and decided he would
leave. He left to become chairman of the Institute of Medicient, and then
later went to the Carnegie Foundation. He was replaced by Mickey
Stunkard, who recently died. Mickey only lasted about a year but it was a
very interesting year.
As I’ve already mentioned, David had put major emphasis on
research in the department of psychiatry.
[00:35:32] Many people perceived ours as being only a research
department, short on clinical training, which wasn’t really true. When
Mickey came, he wanted to shift the emphasis to the clinic, which I have
to say was more in tune with my own feelings. Mickey was a favorite of

33

mine, but he lasted only a year and then he went back to the University
of Pennsylvania.
[00:35:59] We went through a long period where we didn’t have a real
chairman. Then Tom Gonda was appointed. I never got along with Tom
Gonda. He was a real problem for not only women faculty but for male
faculty. You depend so much on having the support, not only of your
colleagues, but of the department chairman, to do very good work. Tom
was not a researcher -- he had never really done research. In particular,
he had no concept of what it was I did for a living. As a result, he was
not very happy about having me in his department and tried to nudge
[laughter] me away. But by this time, I was pretty set. . I was happy with
what I was doing and the rest of the department was happy with what I
was doing, so I wasn’t about to be nudged out. But it was a rough ten
years.
Tobey: Oh, that was ten years.
Kraemer: [00:36:57] Yes, this lasted a long time.
Tobey: Ten years while you were tenured.
Kraemer: [00:37:04] Ten years and I was tenured during his…
Tobey: During his administration.
Kraemer: [00:37:08] …his administration. I’ve already mentioned Jack Barchas.
Jack tells a story, which I think is true. Gonda was so eager to get rid of
me that when my long form ended up on his desk, it stayed there. Instead
of his signing it and sending on to the dean’s office, it was tabled.
Tobey: What is the long form?

34

Kraemer: [00:37:29] The long form—ah, the intricacies. The long form is a full
description of everything a faculty member does and it is the basis of
consideration for promotion and tenure decisions. It is compiled by
somebody in the department. It goes to the department chairman for
signature, and then it goes to the dean’s office, and further. Anyway, my
long form ended up on Gonda’s desk and it was tabled there. So I waited
for two and a half years while the long form simply sat there. It finally
got off of that desk because Jack Barchas was the associate chairman of
the department. When Tom went on vacation, Jack got to sit at Tom’s
desk. He signed off on the long form and sent it down to the dean’s
office, and I was later tenured. Jack has .told this story many times of
how he “illegally” got me tenured at Stanford. But, yes, I did get tenured
while Tom Gonda was chair.
Tobey: I see.
Kraemer: [00:38:30] After Gonda there was again a long period where we didn’t
have a permanent chair.
Tobey: Just an acting chair?
Kraemer: [00:38:34] An acting chair. I think that what I remember most about this
is how much the nature of the chairman of the department determines
the nature of the department. This seemed true to a degree that I had
never anticipated. I think I didn’t anticipate it because the department of
statistics, where I came from, alternated the chairmanship, so everybody
got their turn at being chair.

35

[00:39:02] It’s quite different in the medical school. During the period
that Gonda was chair; it was like everybody hunkered in their separate
corners and got into a self-protective mode. I was probably the only
person who actually went from corner to corner to corner during that
period of time. It was really not a very good situation at all.
Tobey: It can be very uncomfortable.
Kraemer: [00:39:27] Very. The next chairman, quite a bit later, was Alan
Schatzberg, a breath of fresh air. Unfortunately, by this time I had
learned that if I saw Gonda coming down the corridor one way, I quickly
moved in a perpendicular direction. I learned to just stay out of his path
so I wouldn’t get into trouble. When we got a new chairman, I continued
that learned behavior. It took three months before Schatzberg could pin
me down to even say hello. It was such a relief to find out that he knew
what my role in the department was. Moreover, the department began to
glow again. It was just great.
Tobey: Now is he still…?
Kraemer: [00:40:11] No. He recently stepped down and we’ve got a new chair.
Tobey: But that was quite recent, wasn’t it--the last couple of years?
Kraemer: [00:40:23] He stepped down, I think, a year after I retired so it was about
2008. .
Tobey: OK. Interesting. Did you feel isolated as a female in those years or did
everybody, male or female, react to the department head?

36

Kraemer: [00:41:03] It was a combination of both. I know now that the problems
in the department affected everybody individually. I had never thought to
talk it over with people at that time.
Tobey: It was hard to do that, I suppose.
Kraemer: [00:41:19] It was. You’re being so self-protective in this kind of a
situation. But after it was over, one of my very dear friends, Anneliese
Korner, also a professor in psychiatry--a child psychologist--and I got to
reminiscing about what had happened during that period of time. She
pointed out something which I didn’t know: that there were only three
women faculty members in the department of psychiatry at the time and
all three of us had had major, major difficulties, much more than the
others did.
Tobey: Much more than the men.
Kraemer: [00:41:53] Our perception was that part of the problem was that he was
uncomfortable with women on the faculty to start with, and he created
an additional layer of discomfort beyond what the men were
experiencing. We did have problems.
Tobey: But you all stayed through his entire….
Kraemer: [00:42:10] We all stayed. Actually, I think we all survived him. [laughter]
We were all still there after he left.
Tobey: It is nice to know that you had the resilience to do so. As you were
working with the department, you were also obviously working with
students some of the time. Can you tell me something about your

37

relationships with students, the courses you taught, what you got from
the teaching experience?
Kraemer: [00:42:40] I’ll tell you that the most difficult course was the very first one,
which Lincoln Moses had previously taught -- a required biostatistics
course for medical students. Unfortunately, it was the first quarter of the
first year and medical students don’t come in particularly inspired to take
statistics. [laughter] But Lincoln asked me to teach it and I had always
really thought I taught well. I always enjoyed teaching. I hadn’t
anticipated any problems. But the difficulty here was twofold.
[00:43:16] One of them is the medical students were totally not motivated
to this. They really felt compelled to take this course—it was a required
course. It is now not a required course. It is now optional and I think
that’s probably unfortunate--fortunate for the teachers, but unfortunate
for the students—but probably a better situation. You have to be
motivated to learn something. So that was a difficulty. The second
difficulty was that I had some students in the class whose knowledge in
mathematics was so rudimentary, I couldn’t believe it. I can remember…
Tobey: These are medical students.
Kraemer: [00:43:50] These are medical students. I remember putting up on the
board x plus two equals four and off-handedly saying therefore you see x
is two and turning to say something else, when a hand went up. I said,
“Yes?” The student said, “How did you figure out that it was two?” I
thought, “Oh, my dear, I’m going to have to teach basic first year high

38

school algebra to first year medical students!” [laughter] So I quickly
passed that off.
Then there was the additional problem that I was pregnant again. I
discovered something this time that I hadn’t realized before. The last
time I was pregnant, I was doing a post doc, so I could work at my own
speed and in isolation if need be.
[00:44:32] I don’t know whether it happens to all pregnant women, but
boy did my thinking get muddy [laughter] with that pregnancy. The baby
wasn’t due until well after the end of the quarter, and I was confident
that I could complete the course. But I can remember standing at the
board, looking at a chi square test, and trying to figure out what the
degrees of freedom were (a really basic problem). I couldn’t figure it out!
So I had to call Lincoln and say, “Please, you’re going to have to take
over the rest of the course (the last week). I think I have to give it up.” I
said, “I just can’t think!”
[00:45:02] That was the most difficult course [laughter] I have ever had to
teach. Since then most of my teaching has been either one-to-one with
post docs or what I called a methodology workshop started about 45
years ago. Three quarters of each academic year, one two-hour session a
week. This course was not to teach basic statistics but to teach the
specific types of statistics students would have to know in order to do
research in this field. But it meant review of the basic statistical
principles. I taught that workshop right until the time I retired. Now my

39

successor, Booil Jo, is still teaching it, and I’m still coming in to teach a
class or two.
[00:45:51] I’ve also taught in psychology. I took over for Merrill
Carlsmith one year and taught his statistics course. I’ve taught in the
school of education, teaching some of their basic statistics courses.
Tobey: Were these graduate level courses?
Kraemer: [00:46:08] The School of Education by its nature is graduate level and the
psychology course could be taken by undergraduates, but it was taken
mostly by graduate students -- pre-doctoral students. I’ve also taught
medical students. I mean, in addition to that miserable first- year course.
Tobey: You’ve taught other courses to medical students.
Kraemer: [00:46:28] Other courses to medical students.
Tobey: And I hope those went better than the first. [laughter]
Kraemer: [00:46:33] Oh, yes. I have to say after that first year, I didn’t teach for a
couple of years. I was so discouraged because I thought it was all me
[laughter] -- and then I said, “No, it wasn’t all me. It was the
circumstances.”
Tobey: Lots of circumstances. I think we’ve talked a little bit about the fact that
there were very few women in your department, only three. Do you
know how women were treated in terms of salary as compared to men
during the time that you worked -- and whether eventually things
improved?
[Break in recording]

40

Tobey: We were about to talk about financial salaries for women and if you
know enough detail about this to compare salaries to men over the years
that you were there.
Kraemer: [00:47:49] In detail, I don’t. I can tell you my own experiences and I can
tell you in general. I think my salary was commensurate with male faculty
when I first started.. For the work that I was doing, I was getting what I
perceived as the same salary as everybody else. When Tom Gonda
became chair, it was one of his strategies not to give me a raise. So there
was this period of years when I continued at more or less flat salary—
ending when, in fact, some senior research associates were getting a
higher salary than I was as an assistant professor. It’s a difficult pill to
swallow and there was nothing I could do about it except leave.
Tobey: And you didn’t want to do that.
Kraemer: [00:48:29] And I didn’t want to do that. If you can’t negotiate with your
chairman, where do you go? When Schatzberg came in, it took him three
weeks to pin me down. He summoned me to his office, which I have to
tell you scared me. I sat down and he said, “Helen,” “Your salary is a
disgrace to this department and I want you to know that I will get you up
to parity, but I may not be able to do it all in one year.”
[00:49:05] I sat there absolutely stunned. [laughter] I thought, “I’m going
to get paid when I work!” This man recognized that I was being paid so
very badly.
Tobey: Well, it is wonderful to know that Schatzberg came through in that way
and he did get you up to speed over a period of years.

41

Kraemer: [00:49:28] My general impression of the women who came after me in
the department is that they still weren’t getting as much as they should
have been getting, but that a lot of it was because they didn’t ask for it.
They didn’t negotiate for it. One of the changes I saw as time went on is
that women came in willing to negotiate a salary. They really had a sense
of what they were worth and they were willing to say, “I want it. Give it
to me.” I think it’s getting better. I wish I knew whether it was all on
parity now.
[00:50:06] I just don’t know.
I spent a number of years, somewhere around the 1990s, compiling
statistics on women faculty. I wasn’t focused on salaries, though, but on
the promotion process. I was still so conscious of the fact that women
were so underrepresented on the faculty and I wanted to find out where
exactly the barriers were. I was given the faculty roster each year for a
number of years and I compiled the statistics from that.
[00:50:38] Salaries aren’t listed there, so I never looked at them.
Tobey: And did you reach any conclusions?
Kraemer: [00:50:52] I did find that there were some departments that were much
better than others about hiring and promoting women. I did not make
myself very attractive to some of the departments by pointing out that
they had never had a woman or that they had never managed to promote
a female assistant professor to associate professor.
Tobey: Can you mention the departments that were doing a good job in this
area?

42

Kraemer: [00:51:21] Actually, the ones that really impressed me were Genetics and
Health Research and Policy. There were many others who were at the
other extreme. But things have changed since the 1990s. We now have
women department chairmen. There were none at that time. My
perception was that tenure was a major blockage. I don’t think this
problem has solved itself completely. I think that there is a major
reservation to, giving women tenure or putting them on the tenure line.
[00:51:58] In the medical school, many more women come in on the
clinical lines or the research lines than come in on the tenure lines. If you
look at the (pardon the expression) death rates--people who don’t make
it all the way up the faculty ladder for one reason or another--some of
them actually go on to success at other universities. So this is not a failure
necessarily. The failure rates are much greater in the non-tenure lines
than they are in the tenure lines. [00:52:29] Putting women into the
faculty positions where men and women are unlikely to stay in the long
run is naturally going to reduce the number of women on the faculty. I
thought bringing it to people’s consciousness would do a lot of good. I’m
not sure it did any good at all.
Tobey: It may have, you know.
Kraemer: [00:52:48] It may have, who knows?
Tobey: It’s a long process.
Kraemer: [00:52:51] Yes, it is.

43

Tobey: Change, doesn’t occur overnight, as we know. On another note, I’m
curious about how your marriage and family life influenced your career
and how you managed to do both. Did you feel balanced?
Kraemer: [00:53:24] Never. Never balanced.
Tobey: There were periods of imbalance. OK, so let’s talk about that.
Kraemer: [00:53:29] I think I’ve discovered over the long run that if you’re trying to
do both, you’re not going to do either as well as you really want to do it.
There were periods in my life when I felt I was really shortchanging my
family because I was so focused on things related to my career. There
were other times in my life when I did it exactly in the opposite direction
and my career suffered because there were family problems. I just felt
guilty all the time. I don’t think I actually came to terms with that until
my children were grown and gone from the nest [00:54:03] I finally
realized that this is probably the way it’s got to be. If you can’t fully focus
on one job, whether it’s home or the career, you’re always going to think
there’s something more you should have done.
Tobey: So you think that’s a female characteristic? Do men feel that way as
much, you think?
Kraemer: [00:54:25] Well, it’s hard for me to say.
My son-in-law puts a great deal more emphasis on family than my
husband ever did. It’s a generational thing. In my generation, the men
were totally focused on their careers. They were supportive and helpful,
but when time came to change the diaper, the child was mine. It seems
really quite different nowadays. But I still think you have to make choices

44

and you have to live with the fact that if you choose to try to balance
multiple areas, each one of those areas is not going to be as perfectly
done as you might have done if you had focused totally on that area.
That is life.
[00:55:12] But I got a great deal of satisfaction out of doing it the way I
did it, so I’m not going to recommend against it. So it’s fine.
Tobey: That’s good to hear, too. I know that young women today struggle with
these questions as much as you did and feel the same kind of guilt. I
speak from my experience.
Kraemer: [00:55:29] I think that one thing that’s easier now is that there was
nobody I could talk to, to ask how to handle the problem like this,
whereas now there are enough female faculty members, there are enough
women in all sorts of professional positions, there’s always somebody
you can talk to. The role model situation is really much better now than it
was then.
Tobey: And that does make a difference.
Kraemer: [00:55:53] Oh, it does.
Tobey: Even just knowing there are other people going through what you’re
going through and are encountering some of the same difficulties make
you feel better.
Kraemer: [00:56:03] Absolutely.
Tobey: Was your husband a career oriented person who encouraged you to
work? What kind of career did he pursue?
Kraemer: [00:56:15] He’s an engineer.

45

Tobey: He’s an engineer.
Kraemer: [00:56:17] He started at Lockheed and he ended at Lockheed, working
with lasers and aerospace and things of that sort, a field very different
from mine.
Tobey: And did you meet here?
Kraemer: [00:56:30] We met at Stanford, yes. We were both in graduate school at
the time.
Tobey: Do you want to tell us about that? Your meeting and…?
Kraemer: [00:56:38] I wish I could give you a great romantic story.
Tobey: Sometimes they’re not.
Kraemer: [00:56:43] He was dating the girl who lived in the apartment next door to
me. [laughter] We went out a couple of times and we hit it off and got
married.
Tobey: You were in your early twenties then?
Kraemer: [00:56:58] I was twenty-one, twenty-two when I came to graduate school.
Tobey: Twenty-one or twenty-two when you were married and had…
Kraemer: [00:57:03] No, I’m sorry. I was twenty-five when I was married.
Tobey: Oh, twenty-five.
Kraemer: [00:57:06] We met during that period when I was in graduate school.
Tobey: And then you had your children before you were--well, you must’ve been
in your early thirties by the time the last one was born.
Kraemer: [00:57:19] Think I must’ve been thirty-one when Karen was born.

46

Tobey: Let’s talk a little bit about Stanford and how you perceive the university
today as compared to when you first entered it because I think you’ve
lived through a period of broad change.
Kraemer: [00:58:07] Not only that, I’ve lived through several roles. Came here as a
graduate student, then was on staff, then on faculty, and then my
youngest daughter was a student at Stanford and a graduate student at
Stanford.
Tobey: So you’ve seen it from many perspectives.
Kraemer: [00:58:22] So I’ve seen it from wonderful perspectives. The one negative
thing I have to admit is that I encouraged my older daughter not to go to
Stanford. The reason was that she is one of these people who likes to be
taught, as opposed to my younger daughter who is one of these people
who goes to lectures, listens to what people have to say, and then goes
home and teaches herself. Stanford puts the emphasis on self-motivation
and self-actualization, and I think that makes it hard for some of the
students on the undergraduate level.
[00:58:57] On the graduate level and the medical school and post doc
level, this doesn’t make any difference at all because by that time, they are
self-motivated and taking care of themselves. I don’t think that has
changed over the years. I think we’re still a university that really wants the
self-motivated kind of people to come here. And my older daughter did
just wonderfully at the university she did go to, while my younger
daughter did just wonderfully at Stanford. That worked out fine.

47

Tobey: There are different strokes for different folks and we have to recognize
that.
Kraemer: [00:59:27] There are different strokes for different folks. Stanford’s a
much bigger institution now than when I first came here. There has been
so much 1growth.
Tobey: Oh, yes. Growth.
Kraemer: [00:59:33 I came here in 1959. There hasn’t been a time since then when
there haven’t been new buildings going up, new initiatives being
inaugurated -- to the extent that I, to this day, can’t find my way across
campus.
Tobey: I know.
Kraemer: [00:59:53] Because the roads are always changing and new buildings
going up.
Tobey: I’ve had the same experience. It’s a very changed place.
Kraemer: [01:00:02] You can’t be complacent if you’re [laughter] trying to get
around Stanford.
Tobey: The graduate schools have grown even more than the undergraduate
schools, I think, with a much bigger emphasis on sciences and
technology and engineering over the humanities. While the humanities
are still important in many people’s eyes, I understand there are many
fewer majors in the humanities today than some years ago.
Kraemer: [01:00:34] Interestingly enough, when I was on the medical school
admissions committee and interviewing, there was a greater preference
for somebody applying to medical school who had a degree in English

48

literature than somebody who had a degree in chemistry. It had
something to do with being the well-rounded doctor, and it always
puzzled me. I mean, obviously they had to have the chemistry, biology,
and all the background the medical school requires, but they really rather
preferred people who had a more humanistic background to come into
the medical school. I don’t know that French literature would work as
well, but... [laughter]
Tobey: I wonder if that’s still true today.
Kraemer: [01:01:20] I think so, actually.
Tobey: They want to get physicians who have some ability to relate to human
problems that have to do with psychology, I guess, as well as chemistry.
Kraemer: [01:01:33] Medicine is both art and science and I think they really would
like not to be so focused on the sciences to the exclusion of the arts.
Tobey: Yes, the arts. Back to women, do you know if there have been policies
put in place at Stanford, in the medicine school or psychiatry department
or elsewhere that have made it easier for women faculty?
Kraemer: [01:02:08] I think the one that I am most conscious of was the
establishment of an office where sexual harassment was actually
documented and the documentation was kept. The reason for this goes
back to the time when I was working with David Hamburg at the
outdoor primate facility. There were several research assistants there who
were, they reported, molested by one of the psychiatry department
members--not David, obviously. I won’t mention this person’s name,
(he’s long gone by now). Anyway, it was a legitimate complaint. What

49

they were reporting was real molestation. This was not simply harassment
or “he says, she says” kinds of things -- unless they were lying, which it
turned out they weren’t. Because there were so few women faculty
members, the reported incidents landed on my desk.
[01:03:18] I was assistant professor at the time, which meant that this
shouldn’t have landed on my desk at all. I went to the chairman of the
department once I ascertained that this was really a true report. These
three girls were extremely upset and all they wanted to have happen was
for the molestation to stop. They didn’t want the psychiatry department
member punished, they didn’t want anything else. They wanted the
molestation to stop. I reported to the chairman of the department, Tom
Gonda, who fundamentally said, “Boys will be boys.”
[01:03:53] Those are actually his words. I then took the matter to Herant
Katchadourian, then the ombudsman of the university. He took it to the
dean, Miller at the time. I thought they handled it wonderfully well. They
asked this faculty member to write an undated letter of resignation and
sign it and told him that if this ever happened again, even one more
incident of this type, they would simply accept his resignation at that
point in time. Things cooled off for the next few years.
[01:04:31] The problem was that when an incident of this sort happened
again, some fifteen or twenty years later, there was no record of the
earlier incident. The woman involved decided to sue Stanford.
Tobey: Was this the same man?

50

Kraemer: [01:04:46] Same man. She was his research assistant. She decided to sue,
and her lawyer made it clear that unless there had been some knowledge
by the university that this was going on, Stanford could not be sued. She
could sue him, but she couldn’t sue Stanford. The question then was:
Had Stanford any knowledge of any untoward activities by this man? By
this time, there was a different president of the university, a different
provost, a different dean, a different chairman. Everything was different.
[01:05:20] Nobody officially remembered the previous incidents at all.
The lawyer went to Frances Conley and said. “Do you know of
anything?” Frances said, “If anybody knows, it’s going to be Helen.” I
had all the documentation and gave it to the lawyer. I thought that was
only fair. But the letter of resignation was gone, so the wonderful
solution all those years before had just disappeared. The suit was finally
settled. The faculty member resigned and left the university, and he died
a few years ago. The matter was settled.
[01:06:01] Institutional memory is important in situations of this kind.
They should have kept an eye on him all those years. The kind of
behaviors that he was reported to have engaged in with these girls were
not subtle, and in absence of oversight, he was going to repeat. Just
ignoring such a situation was really bad. This problem landed on poor
Alan Schatzberg’s desk -- one of the first things that happened after he
came to be [laughter] the chairman of the department. He was not happy
about it.
Tobey: Was it under his leadership that this guy resigned?

51

Kraemer: [01:06:37] Yes.
Tobey: Good. That’s quite a story.
Kraemer: [01:06:43] There were actually two women faculty members involved.
There were only three women faculty during this early period of time,
and the one who supported and helped me during this time was Alberta
Segal. The situation was bad for me, because you cannot put a nontenured person in that position when the person who’s doing the
harassing is a tenured professor. I lost funding. I got punished for doing
this.
Tobey: You did the right thing.
Kraemer: [01:07:13] I have to say one of the wonderful moments that I treasure
during this time was that, when they finally instituted the suit against
Stanford, I was contacted by Stanford lawyers, saying they needed to talk
to me. This unnerved me, as you might imagine. The Stanford lawyers
came in and said, “You do realize that you may be required to testify
against Stanford? However, what you did was part of your duty as a
Stanford faculty member and, therefore, if it does go to court, Stanford
will pay for the lawyer of your choice.” I thought, “Hey, that’s class!”
[laughter] It never went to court, fortunately.
Tobey: It was settled outside of court.
Kraemer: [01:07:52] Yes. But to go back to your original question, there is now
somebody who is in charge of maintaining a file about this type of
complaint, so that if ever the question of institutional memory comes up,
the complaint is on file.

52

Tobey: That’s great. I mean, I’m happy to hear that this change has occurred.
Kraemer: [01:08:15] It also gets past one of the really difficult things that women
have had to deal with because they, in many cases they’re harassed or
whatever, they’re afraid of reporting it. They’re afraid that they’re the
only ones who are going to be punished for this. But if they report it and
there are other similar reports supported by other people coming in, it
means they are not alone in the world and they will be believed. It’s an
important step forward.
Tobey: Yes, it definitely is. I’m really pleased to know that you’ve had a role in
that. Well, you’ve had quite a career. If you were to do it again, would
you do it the same way or would you take slightly different paths at any
point?
Kraemer: [01:09:00] I think I’d do it the same way, actually.
Tobey: You’d do it the same way. In looking back, you’re pleased with your
career.
Kraemer: [01:09:06] You know, looking back I can say, “If I knew then what I
know now, I would’ve done something differently.” But knowing what I
did at each point in my career, you know, I took missteps, but you
know….
Tobey: Every human being does. Would you have advice for young women
today who are entering the field?
Kraemer: [01:09:28] What I would tell them is, in essence, what I never did, but….
Tobey: Which would be?

53

Kraemer: [01:09:33] To determine what is it that you want and then to think in
terms of how to get from here to there in the next five years or so. What
may happen during these may change the path you want—or it may not.
What you planned to do may not be as direct a path as you thought it
would be. But I think there is something really advantageous to having a
road ahead of you to look down and then, if you decide to take a side
road, that’s fine. But having a five year plan [laughter] is awfully useful.
[01:10:05] I don’t think women in my generation ever did that. I mean, it
was all sort of an accident happens here and an accident happens there
and aren’t we lucky and that sort of thing -- and that’s not the way to go.
Tobey: So to have a plan and work toward it, knowing that there are side roads.
Kraemer: [01:10:24] Also saying, “This is what I want, not what everybody expects
from me. This is what I want.”
Tobey: That, I think, a very good place to end our interview.
Kraemer: [01:10:38] Thank you very much.
Tobey: Thank you. I appreciate your time and your genuine nature as you
answered all of these personal and academic questions.
