
Rodriguez: [00:00:00] This is Michela Rodriguez with the Stanford Historical Society’s
Oral History Program. Today is May 12, 2016. I am here with Stanford
University’s Lucy Shapiro, Virginia and D.K. Ludwig Professor in Cancer
Research and director of the Beckman Center for Molecular and Genetic
Medicine. We’re conducting this interview in Professor Shapiro’s office at
the Beckman Center as a part of the Stanford Faculty and the Stanford
Pioneering Women oral history projects.
Professor Shapiro, I’d like to begin by asking you to tell us about
your childhood. Where were you born? How did your early life function?
Shapiro: I was born into a warm and loving family of immigrants; the family came
from Russia. Well, Moscow one part and Kiev the other part, which was not
then the Ukraine but Russia. I was the first generation, born here in the
United States. My mother is college-educated. My father essentially had no
education. When he came here at the age of twelve, he had to go to work to
support the family. He was definitely self-educated.
[00:01:19] The first three years of my life, we lived with my

13

grandparents and all my aunts and uncles. And oddly enough, that was a
really good, strong, solid beginning because it was clear that I was loved and
that I could do anything. So when I had my own children, I made sure to
give them that kind of start.
We then moved away and lived in another part of Brooklyn, New
York. One of my most important parental interactions was with my father.
He was a salesman so was barely around during the week. But, every Sunday
afternoon he spent with me and at the age of four, he taught me how to play
chess. Most Sunday afternoons we would go on an adventure to museums,
to the observatories. New York City is and was an exciting place to be.
[00:02:18] I did have other siblings, and I’ll talk about that in a
moment. But my interaction with my father, who had no formal education,
is what really started my life as an intellectual and a scientist. He taught me
astronomy. He taught me all kinds of things as he was learning them on his
own. So that was a major factor in my young life.
My mother was a New York City schoolteacher, a pianist and a piano
teacher. She started my piano lessons, also at the age of four. So I was a very
busy little girl from a young age on. Because I hated the piano lessons, and
the hour a day practice, I made a deal that I would do the piano lessons if I
could take dancing lessons. So also, at the age of four, I joined the Isadora
Duncan training troupe of dancers, and I continued to dance with the
Isadora Duncan troupe until the age of thirty-six.
[00:03:20] So it was definitely a major part of my life, and in growing
up, really what was important to me was the arts and music. The whole

14

family was very musical. Everybody played musical instruments and was full
of music and songs and dancing. We were quite poor, but I never knew it. It
never occurred to me that we were poor because we were rich in so many
other ways.
The other, and I consider this probably the most important influence
on my life, was that one of my sisters, just seventeen months younger than
I, was brain-damaged at birth. Enid is a complete aphasic with some
communication skills, but not many. Because both my parents worked, from
a very young age I was in charge of Enid, and starting in my first or second
grade, Enid came to a special class in our local public school, and I was in
charge of her. So in a sense, I was never a carefree little kid. I had
responsibilities for a really damaged sister, a challenged sister.
[00:04:41] When I was seven, another sister was born, but the sevenyear difference was big. Our small apartment was a very busy, loving and
somewhat chaotic place. Dealing with how the world responded to Enid,
the daily discrimination against a challenged child at our public school, was
an added challenge. And there was another kind of discrimination that was
not trivial. We lived in a place called Sunset Park, near the border with Bay
Ridge, in Brooklyn, and in our grammar school my family was the only
Jewish family. There was real antisemitism, and so I spent from kindergarten
through eighth grade dealing with overt antisemitism, and it was both
difficult and isolating.
[00:05:33] But in a sense, dealing with my sister Enid and dealing with
antisemitism, I believe made me stronger, and I could deal with it because of

15

the very strong home environment. And all of these things of course go into
making who you are as an adult. Yes, you have adversity, but you don’t
really know it’s adversity. This is life. This is what you have to deal with, and
you just do.
[00:06:03] When it came time to go to high school, my local high
school would have been a place called Manual Training, which prepared
their students to go out into the workforce immediately, no college. To my
parents, this was a total no-no. For them, everybody in my generation had
to go to college. That was really important, and especially my father pushed
that because he had had no formal education, but was hungry for
knowledge.
Fortunately, we lived in New York City, and New York City has
these wonderful public high schools that are special. They are like private
schools, but they’re free if you get into them. There’s the Bronx High
School of Science, Stuyvesant High School, the High School of Music and
Art. The High School of Music and Art, appealed to everybody in my
family. I had been taking piano lessons my entire life, and so my parents
decided that I would apply and take the test, the entrance test, to Music and
Art in music.
[00:07:13] But as I said, I did not like playing the piano. I was not a
good musician, and I knew it. So what I did, I guess at the age of thirteen, (I
took the test when I was thirteen-and-a-half, not quite fourteen), I went to
the library and got out a book by Jon Gnagy called How to Draw. Every night
after I did my homework, while my mother spent her 2 hours at the piano, I

16

got out my bits and pieces of paper and I learned how to draw from that
book. I very quietly put together a whole portfolio.
And when the time came for me to go up to the High School of
Music and Art to take the test, which at that time was in Harlem (a two-hour
train ride from our house in Brooklyn) I told them that I had changed my
mind and I was taking the entrance exam in art, not music, which I did do.
Fortunately, I evidently had talent, and I took the test and was admitted. It
was a great shock to my parents to hear that it was not in music, but in art.
And I have been painting ever since.
[00:08:25] My four years at Music and Art were wonderful. That
wonderful High School introduced me to a world I didn’t know about. Up
until that point, my life had been extremely family-centric, as immigrant
families tend to be. You didn’t go out to dinner parties with friends. You
didn’t go out to restaurants. You went to family dinners. And that’s good,
but it didn’t really show me the world. The High School of Music and Art
did. We had people from every sector of New York society. And it was
small. I think there were a hundred of us per class, four hundred students.
And it was rich and exciting; rich intellectually and artistically and culturally.
[00:09:10] Very soon after I entered Music and Art, I made friends
with someone called Lucy Steig, we were the two Lucy’s. Lucy Steig’s father
was a New Yorker cartoonist, Bill Steig; her mother was an artist; and her
aunt was Margaret Mead. And because the Steig family lived in Greenwich
Village and not in the depths of Brooklyn, for three nights a week I would
live with the Steig’s in Greenwich Village. This living arrangement

17

introduced me to an amazing family. Aunt Margaret was right there. So we
all interacted, and it was a very exciting time.
And so, my four years at Music and Art were tremendously
instrumental in who I am today. It was an exciting, wonderful place, and I
did well academically and in my painting. So I made the second discovery
which I didn’t know about, and that was that I was smart. That was nothing
I had ever thought about, but then while dealing with all these other people
and challenges, I found school to be easy. I loved to learn, and I was good at
it.
[00:10:18] Then it came time to go to college, and, oh, I would have
loved to have gone to Barnard or any number of wonderful schools. But
even with scholarships, there was no way the family could afford it. I had to
work to help support my family. All during high school, I worked. I worked
from the age of fourteen on doing everything imaginable from working in
department stores to being a math tutor, learning the math the night before
what I was tutoring the next day. I would take any kind of job. Also, the
amount traveling to and from school and dancing lessons was enormous.
But I wasn’t at that point, while in high school, in charge of my sister, Enid.
It was my younger sister Judy who took over at that point.
[00:11:12] College; where to go? My mother was the first graduate of
Brooklyn College. Again, New York City had this wonderful group of free
colleges. There was Hunter College; Queens College; CCNY [City College
of New York) that’s City College which at that time was adjacent to the
High School of Music and Art in Harlem) and Brooklyn College. So I

18

applied to and was admitted to Brooklyn College. At that point, you had to
have a pretty high grade point average to get in, because there were tons of
us immigrant kids who couldn’t go anywhere else.
So I got into and attended Brooklyn College. When I first started
there, Brooklyn College had initiated something called the Honors Program.
A guy named Naphtali Lewis ran it, a sociologist. Ten of us were selected to
be scholars in this honors program. This meant was that I had no prescribed
requirements. I did not have to go to class, but I had to map out with my
mentor what it was I wanted to study and which courses I would take. I
didn’t even have to attend. I just had to meet periodically with my
professors and pass the finals.
[00:12:37] So I did that, and I took a lot of literature courses while I
minored in fine arts, and I took some biology because it started to interest
me. I took inorganic chemistry and hated it, but I forgot to drop it. And so
when it came time to take the final exam, I had to take it. It was multiplechoice, so I circled all the Bs, and I got a D in the course. So that’s on my
record. Everything else I took, I got pretty much an A in.
[00:13:13] I continued my dancing lessons, I continued to do a lot of
painting and took all kinds of literature courses. I finally did my senior thesis
on Dante because I was very interested in the Italian Renaissance. My senior
thesis was on Dante and why he wrote in the vernacular and not Latin. I
was able to get access to many things in the original Italian at the New York
Public Library by working and sitting next to the Italian curator at the New

19

York Public Library, reading the Vita Nuova and many of the very seminal
things that Dante wrote, other than The Divine Comedy.
[00:14:02] I did dip into science whenever I could. I was intrigued by
biology. I found it really, really interesting. But my background in science
was fairly weak. So, during my years at Brooklyn College I was really a
humanities major, even though I had a double major ultimately in fine arts
and biology.
I went on to eventually win the distinguished alumna award at
Brooklyn College. I remember that at the award ceremony, the people who
were still alive from my mother’s class (my mother sadly no longer was)
were there, decked out in yellow robes. It was very touching, and I wished
my mother had been there. It was very special moment.
Brooklyn College was not a wonderful experience. It was interesting.
Of course, it’s a city college. You don’t live there. You lived in your
apartment somewhere. I married a childhood friend at the age of nineteen. I
had met Roy [Shapiro] when I was fifteen, and he was a young engineer at
Bell Labs [Bell Laboratories].
[00:15:23] When I was coming to the end of my years at college--I
graduated in about three-and-a-half years; I could have finished in three--a
very important thing happened. After talking to a lovely person, and I forgot
her name, a professor in the biology department, she introduced me to a
friend of hers named Ted Shedlovsky. Ted Shedlovsky was a professor of
physical sciences at Rockefeller University. He was also a very talented
violinist. I was introduced to Ted, and it turned out that Shedlovsky had this

20

thing about trying to get young people from the arts into science. He felt
that was a way of keeping creative people in the arts.
[00:16:18] So before I formally met him--I knew I was going to meet
him--I invited him to a group art show at Lever House in New York that I
was part of as an alumnus of the High School of Music and Art. And he
bought one of my paintings. We got to talking, and then he invited me to
visit Rockefeller, and I guess I was interviewed by him. He decided that he
would like to get to know me better, so he invited my husband, Roy Shapiro
and I up to Woods Hole, which is a scientific institute up in Massachusetts,
to spend a week.
[00:16:58] I spent a week up there talking about world issues and him
giving me a lot of word problems, head problems, which I was quite good
at, and at the end of the week he decided, okay, he was going to be my
mentor’. He said the first thing he wanted me to do was take a course in
organic chemistry, really. I had been out of college for about five or six
months by then, working as a medical illustrator. But a Professor George
Peach,,who was head of the chemistry department at Brooklyn College at
that time, was giving a special honors course in organic chemistry. It was the
only organic chemistry course available.
So I went to the chemistry department office, introduced myself to
the person who was running the office, and I explained to her that I would
like to take Dr. Peach’s course. She said, “Fine. You do realize it’s his
honors course. Have you had other organic?”
[00:18:06] I said, “No.”

21

“Have you had other chemistry?”
I said, “Well, officially.”
“What was your grade?”
“I got a D.” And she at that point was showing me the door, and I
said, “But there was an extenuating circumstance. I circled all the Bs.”
At this point, this lady clearly didn’t want anything to do with me
anymore, but Dr. Peach was in his office and happened to hear this. He
came out, and he said, “Why on earth do you think you can take my honors
organic chemistry course with your background?”
And I said, “Well, I’m very smart.”
And I remember him looking at me as though I were vaguely mad,
and he said, “All right, you take that course.” And I did, and of course I got
an A. I loved it. Taking organic chemistry was truly the defining moment in
my life. I had really worked very hard in the humanities. I had worked very
hard on my Dante thesis. But there was something so beautiful about
chemistry, something so beautiful about visualizing a world, which at that
time, I couldn’t see.
[00:19:24] Because I’m an artist and a painter and I see things in three
dimensions, seeing chemical molecules came easy for me. The other thing
that made it easy for me, and I didn’t know I had this ability, eidetic
memory. If I see something written, it’s like my brain takes a picture and I
can read it back. So I didn’t have to memorize anything in organic
chemistry; I saw it in my head. So organic was very easy for me and
beautiful, and that changed my whole life.

22

[00:20:04] I remember sitting and talking with Ted Shedlovsky and
describing this to him. He said, “Yes, I knew that. That’s why I wanted you
to take organic chemistry.”
And then I said, “Well, what now?”
He said, “Well, you don’t know enough quite yet to go to graduate
school. So I want you to get a job as a technician in a lab somewhere.”
Okay. So I applied for technicians’ jobs in New York in various medical
schools and I remember going to two interviews, one working on dissecting
mice, which was really anatomy.
The other was with someone who had just discovered RNA
polymerase, the enzyme that copies DNA, and it was all biochemistry and
physical chemistry, of which I knew essentially nothing. But it was exciting
and challenging, and I took the job that I could barely do because it was an
incredible challenge. Again, when faced with the question, “Why should I
hire you,” my response was, “I’m smart.”
[00:21:12] I lasted as a technician about six months, and then I was
offered entry as a matriculated graduate student. This was at New York
University School of Medicine, and I was very fortunate in that my lab bay
mate that first six months as a graduate student was a visitor from Paris
named Jacques Monod. He had just won the Nobel Prize and was simply an
exciting and brilliant scientist. And I was sitting next to him.
[00:21:55] The task that was given to me as a beginning graduate
student was to determine if there existed an RNA polymerase that copied
RNA instead of DNA. So where did that question come from? Well, a

23

scientist at Rockefeller University named Norton Zinder had just discovered
the first virus that contained RNA instead of DNA as its coding sequence.
It was a bacteriophage, a bacterial virus, called f2, and he had just published
its discovery.
I sent him a letter asking for the phage. He said no. I won’t go into
how I got it, which was fairly nefarious, but I got it. I was able to
demonstrate with time after infection that a new enzymatic activity
appeared, and this new enzymatic activity copied RNA into RNA. This was
a first. I remember the Saturday morning that I got these results.
[00:23:03] Generally, you worked pretty much around the clock,
seven days a week. Our lab had a ‘counting’ room. We counted the
incorporation of radioactivity into polymers, and the radioactivity was put
on these little metal discs called planchettes. You put these planchettes into
the radioactivity counter. That morning, I found that with time after phage
infection, the radioactivity (incorporation into RNA) increased. I had
discovered the induction of this brand-new enzyme.
I was so excited. I ran in to get my bay mate, Jacques Monod, who
was there that early Saturday morning, and dragged him into the counting
room. I said, “Look at that. That’s a discovery.” And when I look back
upon that now, I blush because this was the most amazing scientist in the
world, and I’m telling him about this.
[00:23:55] Maybe there’s something about naiveté and being young
and making discoveries that you don’t stop to think that, “Oh, ho hum, this
is boring to somebody else.” It’s so important and exciting to you, and it

24

mattered that this great man listened and talked to me about it and put us
almost on the same plane. It was an amazing experience.
That turned out to be my thesis. But you have to realize I started as a
graduate student with no background. So I had to take physics, tons of
math, chemical orbital theory, quantum mechanics, statistical mechanics.
The only biology I took was biochemistry. So actual biology I’ve always sort
of learned on my own. I think in college--at Brooklyn College--I took a
microbiology course as part of this honors thing, and I liked it. It was really
wonderful. But that was it. So I had to take all these courses as a graduate
student.
[00:25:05] The first year that I was at New York University as a firstyear graduate, our whole department was bought by Albert Einstein College
of Medicine up in the Bronx, and we moved lock, stock, and barrel from
34th Street in Manhattan up to the Bronx to go to Albert Einstein College
of Medicine. That’s where I spent the rest of my education and the
beginning years of my science. [laughs] That was really quite an amazing
experience.
I was faced with the question of where to take all these courses. So
now I was at NYU, that’s when I started taking courses, and I had to finish
my course work when our lab and most of the Department moved, en
masse, to Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx. But New York
again, is in a sense, a very exciting place to learn. There was Columbia
University. I took all my chemistry at Columbia. I took my orbital theory
and all kinds of chemistry up at Columbia. At NYU, I took statistical

25

mechanics and all the physics that I needed, and the math.
[00:26:23] So really, I took my courses at NYU and Columbia in
order to learn how to think analytically. It was a great shock to me that it
was really hard work. It was the first time in my life that something was
challenging, and I did nothing but solve problem sets in physical chemistry
or problem sets in quantum mechanics or in physics. I liked the math. It was
good. I loved differential equations. For some reason, even though it was
hard going, I was told by my then-PhD mentor that if I got less than an A
in anything, I was out. I believed him.
[00:27:02] Remember, this was the 1960s. There were very few
women doing what I was doing. Actually, there was one other graduate
student who was a woman. She and I became friends and are friends to this
day. So it was quite a challenge being a woman in this male world, and I had
to excel. I mean, I was not going to be given any pass. I had to really do
well. So I was sufficiently scared so that I did very well. And that was my
graduate training.
I did make a major discovery as a graduate student, which was nice,
and it was a wonderful feeling. It was the discovery that I knew would be
the rest of my life. There was no question then that my passion is science,
and learning about the physical world was probably the most beautiful thing
I could do. It’s not that I wasn’t grounded in the humanities. I was; I am.
[00:28:21] I read in the Stanford newspaper this week an article about
a new humanities curriculum, and in the article, near the end of the article,
somebody made the most outrageous statement. I was furious. The

26

statement was that science and technology do not deal with the beauty of
the world. What a stupid thing to say.
I said, “Now what do I do with this? Do I write them a letter? No,
they’ll discount me. Can they possibly believe that?” And then I decided,
“Yes, they believe that because many people in other academic worlds, other
than the one I live in, are in some way scientifically illiterate.” They don’t
know or see the world that we live in through the lens of science, which has
its own validity and beauty.
[00:29:17] The world is a complex place, and there’s beauty
everywhere. Just like there is beauty in astronomy, in the stars, just go the
other direction into the minute world that you can’t see, but is filled with
molecules and tiny machines.
Both of those are equally beautiful and equally as beautiful as nature,
as literature, as thoughts, as philosophy. You can’t slice and dice the human
experience. The statement that science and technology cannot appreciate
beauty, and that was in that article, just drove me crazy. I don’t know how
to counter that, I really don’t.
[00:30:05] There is this great feeling that there is this divide between
the humanities and the sciences. There’s the “techies” and the “soft stuff.”
That’s artificial. It’s meaningless, and the only way we can deal with that is
by education. I want my “fuzzies” and my humanities friends to know
enough science to see the beauty in it, and I want my scientists to know
enough about the humanities to understand the beauty in that. We’re doing

27

a terrible job of combining these things.
I have to stop. I talked without you asking me any questions.
Rodriguez: [00:30:54] I know. You just kept going, and it was great. I guess I want to
backtrack a little bit and talk about some of the larger historical forces that
were at work when you were growing up. You grew up in a time of pretty
great change in the United States. Your early years were during World War
II and, post that, the United States was living in sort of a state of fear. I
imagine that your college years and early graduate years, there were probably
rumblings of the civil rights movement.
Shapiro: Well, I think that in my first year in graduate school, 1963, was the
assassination of President Kennedy, which is a horrendous memory. But I
also remember at the age of five standing on the fire escape in our Brooklyn
tenement waving a little American flag as cars passed blasting their horns
because the war was over, the end of World War II. World War II had an
enormous impact on people of all ages.
[00:31:53] I also remember at that time being in my grandparents’
house, and there was a copy of Life magazine, or was it Look? I don’t
remember. The magazine had the first photographs of the people from the
concentration camps. It was lying out on the table, and I went for it. I
remember my aunts tried to grab it away so I wouldn’t see it, and my
grandfather said, “No, she has to see it. This is the world she lives in.” I was
five. He showed me the pictures, and he described what was going on, and
that really--at the age of five--was my introduction to antisemitism. So
nothing was kept from me, ever.

28

These things of course all had defining impacts on us, and I
remember that as soon as I was able to comprehend it, and this was in high
school, I read all of the Winston Churchill books on World War II. I since
have reread them because I think they’re brilliant. But of all the wars that I
have lived through, even though World War II was when I was little, it
reverberated throughout the rest of my life.
[00:33:14] The civil rights years were something we were all
tremendously involved in. We were then very involved in the Vietnam War,
going to demonstrations and caring about all these things tremendously.
How did they affect me? I don’t know. It’s hard to tell. We certainly
were involved in the world beyond ourselves. But I think that I was in fact
so focused on my education that I was rather selfish. I had to worry about
my sister, Enid. I had to worry about getting out of the Brooklyn tenements.
I had to worry about learning. Learning was really important, because that
was your way out.
[00:34:19] In a sense, those years were selfish years. I’ve never
thought about it this way, but it’s true. As I became more established in my
life, I could more easily deal with what was going on outside of my original
environment. That’s something I’ve never thought about before, Michela,
but it’s true. And maybe we all are somehow. If we’re not, if we’re very, very
involved in the world, as many of my classmates at the High School of
Music and Art were, they neglected to develop as their own person. It
sounds strange, but it’s really true.
[00:35:12] It’s hard being young. It’s hard becoming something, and

29

becoming something was important in my family life from day one. I
remember when I was eight my grandmother telling me, “You must have a
full life. You must get married. You must have children. But never depend
on a man for your life. Always have your own values, your own
accomplishments.” She was uneducated, but she was probably the smartest
person I have ever known. She had an enormous impact on me.
[00:36:02] I was always pushed to become something, and as a little kid
that takes a lot of work. So, yes, everything else was going on around me. I
knew what was happening. My family was very aware of world events, as
most family immigrant families are. But they were so focused on my
generation making up for their lost generation that there wasn’t a lot of
room when you were a little kid to do more than worry about how you were
going to make something of yourself.
Rodriguez: Well, you certainly became something and made something. How did your
family react to what you ended up pursuing, since it was such a divergence
from your initial interests as a child?
Shapiro: I think they were puzzled. My family were all in the humanities, and here I
was, a graduate student in science. They didn’t understand what I was doing.
No matter how hard I tried to explain it to them, they thought it was
strange.
[00:37:09] Did they ever really understand it? No, and my parents
didn’t live long enough to see that I was successful. They always knew I
would be somehow. They died fairly young. I’m not answering your
question very well.

30

Rodriguez: No, you’re doing a great job. It’s super helpful. I want to talk about this
great, life-changing discovery that you made in graduate school that changed
everything and defined what you would do for the rest of your career. So tell
me about it.
Shapiro: Well, when you study science and you try to--what is science? Science is
trying to figure out the world around you. It’s trying to understand the laws
we live by? What makes us a living being? What makes a rock not a living
being? What is happening in the world we cannot see?
[00:38:15] And these are questions that are cosmic, and different
scientists approach it in different ways. Some approach cosmology. Some
approach theoretical physics. Some say, “Well, what’s going on in the
chemistry of everything on Earth?” Others say, “Well, we’re living beings.
What is a living being?”
And from the very, very earliest days in my scientific career, I knew
that there was no such thing as biology. It was the physics and chemistry of
a living entity. This was clear to me. It was also clear to me that something
was living because of its chemistry.
[00:39:04] Once I took organic and then as a first-year graduate
student made a discovery--I figured out how an important thing happened
inside, deep inside a cell--I felt empowered. This meant that I could actually
ask questions and get answers. What could be more exciting than that?
Nothing. And that’s when I knew that that’s what I had to do. I have always
been driven not by technology, but by unanswered questions. How can I
answer the question? Equally important was formulating the question.

31

Asking a question for which I could get an answer, that’s another challenge.
[00:39:55] While all that was going on, I never stopped painting. I
never stopped dancing. So I was constantly balancing my right brain and my
left brain, and I think I’ve had a total of four solo exhibits in New York City
and sold most of my work. I still paint somewhat, but not enough. You have
to paint seriously.
So I managed to do both, and I think they fed each other. I think by
continuing my painting and my work in the arts, I was more empowered in
the sciences. Facing a biological question is very akin to facing a blank
canvas: “What am I going to put down there? What question am I going to
ask? What tools am I going to use to get my answer in the laboratory? What
tools in the painting world am I going to use? Am I going to do a collage?
Am I going to do sculpture? Am I going to paint watercolors? How am I
going to do it?” So my entire life has been a balance act between these two
things, and I haven’t talked about it much, but I’m convinced that there’s a
connection.
[00:41:20] I can’t tell you how fulfilling a life in science is. It’s filled
with wonder. It’s filled with having enough strength to get through the
downtimes, and there were a lot of those. Mostly things don’t work. Mostly
you ask questions and don’t get answers. But for the times that you do, the
high, the joy, of learning something even small that no one knew before is
incomparable.
[00:42:00] I just can’t say how thrilling that is, and it’s happened to
me enough times in my life to really affect my career path, my desire to

32

always excel beyond what I think I can do. I always take the harder path. I
always go to the harder place. I always interact with people who I deem
smarter than me. I always reach for the stars.
Rodriguez: You said you don’t talk much about the connection between the humanities
and the sciences part of your life. Do you want to talk about that a little
more?
Shapiro: Well, I’ve never really thought it through.
Rodriguez: Okay. [both laugh]
Shapiro: I think that the most obvious connection is the one I said earlier, and that’s
having spatial vision. So I see things. I see the invisible world in science in a
way that most people don’t, and that comes from my art and the fact that I
see the world. I see this world in art, and I see the invisible world that makes
up a living entity.
[00:43:20] In fact, that’s what dictated how I would approach my
entire scientific life. So once I got my PhD, I finished my thesis in three
years, which was really fast, and I spent a fourth year because I was just too
young, and again made another discovery. RNA is usually a single-stranded
polymer. In my final year as a grad student, it was discovered that there were
viruses with RNA that had a strange structure, and no one knew what that
structure was like. I figured out that it was in fact double stranded RNA. I
did that my final year in graduate school.
[00:44:06] I decided to do--I’m going somewhere with this, so bear
with me. I decided to do a postdoc in physical chemistry because hydrogen
bonds are very important in putting together strands of polymers. There was

33

a really fine physical chemist at Princeton and I was all set to do a
postdoctoral fellowship with him. We even had rented an apartment at
Princeton. But, six weeks before I was to begin in his lab, his wife became
critically ill and he went on a sabbatical. I couldn’t go. My postdoc was off,
but I was still at Albert Einstein College of Medicine finishing my PhD.
So I stayed there with a scientist in another department working on
mitochondrial DNA. After six months, the chairman of the department in
which I had gotten my PhD, and the faculty in that department, invited me
back. I remember it was on a Friday afternoon, and Dr. Horecker [Bernard
L. Horecker] invited me into his office with his impeccable pressed white
lab coat. It was just very perfect. I was hardly that.
[00:45:22] He told me that the department had discussed my future
and rather than going and doing another postdoc they were offering me a
position as an instructor in the department. This was on a Friday. I thought
about it, and I said I was very honored, and thank you very much. However,
I would come back to the department as a tenure-track assistant professor,
and he could let me know on Monday.
Where I got the chutzpah to say that I will never know. It just
seemed logical to me. I didn’t want to be an instructor. I wanted to do my
science, and I was ready. I was ready to run my own lab. I didn’t want to be
an instructor, and if they didn’t want me to be an assistant professor then I’ll
do something else, somewhere else.
[00:46:10] I came back on Monday. By then he had closed his jaw,
the faculty had met, and they offered me an assistant professorship. But

34

there was one caveat, and that was that I take three months off--not
vacation, but three months off from doing what I was doing--and read and
decide what it was, what questions I wanted to approach, in my scientific
career. That was the greatest gift that anybody could ever have given me.
These days when we hire an assistant professor, they’ve spent four
years as a postdoc. We’re hiring them because they’ve published six papers,
and they’re doing some gorgeous work, already having most of the results.
They hired me on futures. They hired me on what I might do, which hardly
ever happens.
[00:47:07] So at that time in science, it was the beginning of
molecular biology. In the 1950s, Watson and Crick had learned about DNA.
In the 1960s, all the biochemistry to build these molecules that did this
wonderful information transfer in the living cell was happening and I was
part of it. Incredible genetics was being done with bacteria and phage .The
science I was interested in, the “what is life” science, came in two flavors.
One flavor was you took the living cell and blasted it open and
dumped out its guts and did the chemistry and biochemistry of the enzymes
and molecules in the cell. There was no recombinant DNA technology then.
This work was hard. The other flavor was using very sophisticated genetics,
which is beautiful and it’s logical and lovely. You work with mutants, and
you do crosses, and you figure out the logic of what should be going on in
the cell. That was mainly done in E. coli because you couldn’t really do it in
higher cells, not then, not before recombinant DNA.
[00:48:22] My response to that was, “Well, that’s all fine and good,

35

but I want to know and study fundamental events in the living cell, and
what does it really mean to do that.” Then I thought, “Well, we’ve done all
this work with the genetic code. We’ve done all this work with the enzymes
that copy DNA. We’ve done all this work in understanding information
transfer.
But there’s one very big unanswered question: How do you go from
a one-dimensional genetic code with a string of letters to three-dimensional
space? How does the cell know where to put something, and how is that
information inherited? Furthermore, one of the most important events in all
of biology is a cell division that gives you two different cells. How does that
happen? The two cells that divide have the same genetic information yet
they look and behave differently. Why are they different? How does that
happen?”
[00:49:32] So I had my questions. Now I needed a system to study.
This all happened in the three months that I was offered as a special oasis of
thinking time. I read and read and read and came up with a bug, a bacterium
called Caulobacter. It was not unlike E. coli, but it had things at each pole of
the cell, a flagellum at one pole and a stalk at the other. And this little critter
every time it divided gave you two different cells. So it had asymmetry, and
it had a single chromosome.
[00:50:07] I said, “Wow, here is this simple, simple cell. It had a small
genome. It had an asymmetric division and it had polarity. It knew where to
put things.” I said, “Okay, that’s going to be my system.” Again, being naive
allowed me to do that. If I knew more, I could think of a thousand reasons

36

never to touch that. There was no genetics. There was no biochemistry. You
could barely grow the critter. It was insane, but not to me. To me, it was
empowering: “I’m going to do this.”
The other thing that occurred to me in thinking about what to do is
that here you have this living cell, and you have the DNA instructions.
Everybody was studying different things that happen in the cell. They were
studying how to copy the DNA, how to divide the cell, how to grow a
flagellum, how to go through the cell cycle. That’s all fine and good, but it
had to be--and this was really an epiphany for me--it had to be that that cell
operated as an integrated system. You couldn’t have any one thing
happening without it being connected to something else. It was all
connected, and I then called that a system. This was in--God, when was
this? 1970, earlier than that, 1968. This was the very, very beginning of
something called systems biology, which has since become a large scientific
discipline, and it came out of my head.
[00:51:57] So what I did was sit down and write out a program for the
next umpteen years as to how I was going to approach this, and I have stuck
with that program for forty years. I have in fact gotten the answers. When
President Obama awarded me the National Medal of Science a couple of
years ago, the statement as to why I got it is “for the pioneering discovery
that the bacterial cell is controlled by an integrated genetic circuit
functioning in time and space that serves as a systems engineering paradigm
underlying all cell differentiation and ultimately the generation of diversity in
all organisms”

37

Rodriguez: That’s beautiful. You were incredibly busy during this time. How did you
balance doing this groundbreaking research, still practicing your art, and also
being married and being a mother?
Shapiro: [00:52:58] Well, I’ve recently learned that I have something called Grave’s
disease, and I have probably had it most of my life. That’s hyperthyroidism,
which means that I am always bouncing off the walls. Now that I’m on
thyroid meds for the past month, I’m calm. I’ve never been calm in my life
before. So maybe it’s all biochemistry.
But I think, Michela, that I have been driven by insatiable curiosity
and the desire to learn and know as much as I could possibly know, to eat
up life, and I didn’t want to miss anything. I didn’t want to miss having
children. Family is important to me. But I knew something else. I knew that
if I didn’t have a core family, I would be like a machine without a governor.
I would never leave the lab. I would not have any sort of normal life. I don’t
have a normal life anyway, but it would be a lot more sterile, and that would
not be good.
[00:54:15] I was married for many years to Roy, seventeen years, and
we’re wonderful friends. But then I decided I wanted to go it alone. I’d been
with him since I was fourteen. We were good friends. We were like brother
and sister. We’re still good friends. Then we divorced, and a while later I
met Harley, and Harley McAdams and I have now been married for thirtyeight years.
It was incredibly exciting to meet someone who thought and worked
with science the way I do. He’s a physicist. We’ve just had a wonderful time

38

in science--he’s also a painter--in science and the arts. In fact, in later years
we actually worked together here at Stanford. But that’s for later. That’s for
the Stanford years.
[00:55:08] I’m trying to think of where I’m going with this. What
drove me--what drove me to do the science I did. I had decided that the
critical question was how do you integrate the functions of a living cell?
How do you construct a living system and understand what it takes to make
a living being? What does it mean to be alive? If I stop one thing and the
cell dies, why does it die? What happens to the rest? And I just kept asking
questions. Fortunately, my graduate training in biochemistry and physical
chemistry was very rigorous, so I knew how to ask questions and get good
answers.
[00:56:02] But by following a very logical progression of work, I
decided that I had to do in vivo biochemistry and started using fluorescently
labeled molecules as tags so I could see inside the living cell for the first
time. This was years ago, before everyone knew how to do this, and nobody,
nobody, thought you could do this with the tiny bacterial cell. The tiny
bacterial cell is one-tenth the size of a nucleus of a human cell. It’s tiny, but
I was able to do it.
So then I became enamored of technology because I needed the
technology to see my invisible world. And so I became very, very involved
in imaging analysis and in in vitro reconstructions and building things. That’s
when I realized what I really was was an interdisciplinary scientist, and we
can pick all of that up tomorrow because that all happened at Stanford.

39

Rodriguez: [00:57:18] What was the influence that your family and your parents had on
you as a parent? I know that your dad spent Sundays with you. Did you
bring any of your previous family life into yourself as a parent?
Shapiro: Well, I think that my parents instilled curiosity. My father more than my
mother, even though she was the formally educated one, instilled in me
curiosity about the world. Learning to play chess and learning to play the
piano instilled some rigor, instilled logical thinking, showed me the world
wasn’t all easy. Other kids played with dolls. I played with chess pieces.
[00:58:09] And in a sense, I think that my dancing was a relief and a
release from that. I loved it. I loved the dancing. I don’t know how to put
that into any box. I don’t know what to do with that except it was extremely
important to me. I loved it, and of course it helped me make money because
I worked--even as a kid--as an instructor in the classes. So earning money
was always something that went on underneath the surface of everything.
Nothing was for free, and I had to help support lots of things.
Rodriguez: What do you paint?
Shapiro: Well, I’m a watercolor painter, and they’re not faint and shy. They’re very
strong. I love to paint people. I love to do portraits. I love to put people in
my pictures of the world. I paint anything, but they’re strong. They’re not
what you think about when you think about watercolors. I also did
watercolors because they dry fast, and I could take them on all my trips. Oils
were too much of a pain.
[00:59:19] I would like to do oils, and I keep saying to myself, “When
I retire, I will do X, Y, and Z.” I’d like to do graphics, actually, which I love.

40

But I don’t want to retire. I’m too busy to retire. I’ll know when it’s time to
retire. And I just got a five-year NIH grant, so I’m not going anywhere.
Rodriguez: You seem to have had a lot of incredible mentors in your early education.
Shapiro: Yes.
Rodriguez: How did having those mentors shape you as a mentor?
Shapiro: That’s a good question. It taught me one very important lesson as a
prospective mentor: mentoring matters. There’s nothing to replace it.
Shedlovsky was my mentor. My father was my mentor. Jerry Hurwitz was
my mentor.
[01:00:14] Barbara McClintock was my mentor. She was a very great
geneticist. When I was in graduate school, I spent three summer months
every year at Cold Spring Harbor Labs on Long Island, and I met Barbara
McClintock, the Nobel laureate, in her lab there. She was an unbelievable
lady, strange, brilliant, like no one else I have ever met, and she was a
mentor. She told me to see things no one else can see.
My PhD thesis advisor was very much a mentor. He just keep
pushing me beyond what I thought I could be. No matter what I did, it
wasn’t good enough, but not in a bad way. He really, really pushed me. He
could be tough. He could be nasty, but he was rather careful with me
because I was a woman. We’ve remained friends until this day.
[01:01:08] In fact, there’s a funny story. We talk about every six
weeks. He’s ninety. Still works in the lab. One afternoon he called me--no, I
called him. He was in the lab. It was four in the afternoon, our time on the
West Coast. He was in New York. I’m talking to him on the phone about

41

experiments, and one of my dogs started barking. Jerry [Hurwitz] said,
“Kitty.” He called me Kitty. Can you imagine? He said, “Kitty, where are
you?”
I said, “I’m home.”
He said, “It’s four o’clock in the afternoon. What are you doing
home? You’re supposed to be in the lab.”
I said, “Jerry, I’m sixty-six years old.”
And he said, “That has nothing to do with anything.” He said, “You
have work to do.” And so that’s the kind of mentoring I had. So I knew that
mentoring was vitally important for my students and postdocs.
[01:02:08] I also learned that the way to best mentor is to observe and
understand what your student or postdoc is good at, what they excel in, and
move them to that, and then give positive feedback. Don’t rely on negative
feedback to get anything. You have to give positive feedback.
I have been successful as a mentor. Twenty-four of my postdocs are
now professors running Caulobacter labs, the system I started. They are like
my children and have remained that. I have trained eighty-four people, and a
few years ago they all gave me a festschrift, a two-day symposium here, and
they came from twelve different countries. It was unbelievable.
[01:03:07] Mentoring is the greatest thing in the world, and as a
scientist, next to making discoveries, the most important thing you can do is
train young people to become successful scientists. Not necessarily in your
image--they can be quite different--but having values and understanding
what it means to have a passion for science.

42

Rodriguez: Wow. What did your peer network and your support system look like during
this time when you were super busy? You mentioned that you had another
friend, one of the only other female graduate students.
Shapiro: Yes, Ann, Annie Skalka. Annie became the director of Fox Chase Cancer
Center. She is just wonderful. Annie is just great. We both had children at
the same time. We raised our kids together. And then twenty-five years ago
I moved out here. She stayed on the East Coast, but we’ve remained as
close.
[01:04:07] There wasn’t much room for friends. There was no time. I
had my friend Annie, maybe one or two other friends, my friend Ora Rosen,
another scientist. She was a physician. Ora died quite young. Then there was
my family. There was no room for anything else. I had my dancing classes. I
had painting. I had science and I had children.
I have one son that I birthed, and when I married Harley I got two
more children. So we’ve raised three children together from when they were
quite young, and my children are all amazing. They really are. My daughter is
an engineer at Livermore National Labs, and one of my sons is a urological
surgeon, and my other son is the president of a company in New York. So
they’re all amazing. Mama was never home but always with them “My
mother, the telephone,” they used to call me.
Rodriguez: [01:05:10] Did you try to instill a love of science in your children or did you
encourage them to find their own path?
Shapiro: I wanted them to find their own path. I gave them all kinds of
opportunities. They worked in my lab. We always had dinner together, and

43

when the boys were thirteen and fourteen, we hired them to run dinner
parties. Paid them well. They all became chefs. All three of my children are
incredible chefs.
No, they had to follow their own way. Paul was very, very interested
in chemistry. He really loved it and wound up in medicine. Peter, what was
Peter interested in? Peter was interested in making money. He ran
companies. He built companies. Heather was an engineer. How did we do
that? Heather was the youngest.
[01:06:00] When Heather was eight years old and the boys were ten
and twelve, we got our first computer, this little Apple thing, and it was just
unbelievable. I remember the day it arrived. We were all at the door, and this
box came, and the boys were jumping all over it. Harley handed Heather a
screwdriver and said, “Heather, you are in charge of this computer. You
have to figure out how it works, you have to put it together, and you have to
make a time schedule so that it’s shared by the three of you.” She was eight
years old and the only girl, and we made an engineer.
Rodriguez: That’s amazing. I want to talk a little bit more about you being a woman. I
know this isn’t the point you want to put emphasis on, but you brought it
up a little bit today. Did you ever feel alienated by being a woman?
Shapiro: [01:07:05] No, and I think maybe it comes down to two things. I used the
word “selfish” once before. I was so involved in what I had to do that I had
no time to think about that other stuff. And there’s a second, very important
thing. Whatever my loving family did, they instilled in me a confidence that
I rarely see in the young women I train now.

44

I have never been without confidence. I’ve never doubted what I
could do. If you have that confidence, whatever is going on around you is
their problem, not yours. I know that sounds odd, but it made a huge
difference, having faith in myself. I didn’t need someone else to tell me what
I could do--I knew. Did I face discrimination because I was a woman? Of
course I did. We all did. But to me it was their problem, not mine. I had a
job to do, and it just never stopped me.
[01:08:17] There were difficult experiences. Of course there were. I
remember once giving a talk. I was quite young. It was just after I graduated.
I gave a talk at a Gordon Research Conference. Gordon Conferences are
meetings held up in New Hampshire and Vermont on specific areas of
science. They go on for a week, and you meet in the morning and you meet
at night. It’s scientists, all the hotshot scientists in your area.
So it was a big honor that I was giving a twenty-minute talk at this
thing, and I remember it was at night. It was in the days of miniskirts. This
is late 1960s, early 1970s. It was rare to have women around, and there I
was. I got up on the stage to start my talk, and my mic didn’t work. I said,
“Should I take it off?”
[01:09:12] And some guy--I’ll never forget this--in the audience said,
“Take it off. Take it all off.” And there I am, standing there alone on this
stage, at night, in a dark room, with the light on me, and all these men. I
burst into tears. I had never done that before. The tears were just streaming
down my face. Suddenly it got quiet in the room, and these guys had
realized that they had crossed some terrible barrier.

45

I sniffed and wiped my tears away, and I said, “Are you done, and are
you ready to hear some science?” I took a deep breath, and I gave my
goddamn talk. And that was the worst experience I had ever experienced. I
figured if I could get through that, hey.
Rodriguez: [01:10:10] Did you ever have to take maternity leave?
Shapiro: No. [Phone rings] Is that you?
Rodriguez: No. [recording paused] You didn’t have to take maternity leave?
Shapiro: Well, I didn’t. Let’s see, I was pregnant five times. I had one living baby. I
lost a lot of pregnancies.
There’s a delightful story about Peter’s birth. I had Peter at NYU
Medical Center, which was where I was doing my graduate work, and the
hospital was in the same building as the medical school. The big auditorium
was in the basement.
[01:10:55] Peter was born early on a Sunday morning, and Sunday
night was a talk by Sydney Brenner, who was God as far as I was concerned.
He was giving a talk at eight o’clock at night. I remember buttoning up my
housecoat, taking the back elevator down to the basement after I knew they
were all sitting, and going in and sitting in the back row and listening to
Sydney. This was the day that Peter was born. I was young. I was healthy. If
you’re young and healthy--I was in labor for one hour and so I was fine. So
I went down to my seminar and then took home my beautiful baby the next
day, and I was home for two weeks.
But what I did was very, very carefully hire a nanny starting two
months before Peter’s birth, and I interviewed a lot of people. I invited who

46

ever I was interviewing to come with a family member, not alone, because I
wanted to see the interaction of this prospective person with a family
member, and the most important reference was the family physician. I
found Mrs. Hazel Kohler, who is this wonderful Swiss lady, and she was our
nanny for twenty-two years. She not only took care of all three children
ultimately, but me as well.
Rodriguez: [01:12:26] So she moved to California with you?
Shapiro: No. I moved to California when the kids went off to college. But I needed a
nanny, and I didn’t have her anymore. It was really hard.
Rodriguez: I wanted to go back a little bit to daily life in a lab. I can’t imagine that every
day doing research is thrilling. You’re not making discoveries every day. But
what does it look like?
Shapiro: Well, you know, it’s interesting. When I talk to undergraduates who are
thinking about what is a life in science like, the first comment they all make
is, “Oh, it’s going to be so lonely.”
[01:13:09] I say, “Lonely?” It’s the most social life you can possibly
imagine. You’re in a lab with students and postdocs and professors, and
you’re bouncing off each other all day long. You’re sharing ideas. You’re
complaining about why things don’t work, and, “I can’t get my thesis done,”
and, “The paper wasn’t accepted,” and, “I have to write a grant.”
But you don’t do this alone. You do this as part of a world, part of a
community. Every day you come in and, “I’m going to do that experiment.
I’m going to get that answer,” and of course you don’t. But sitting right next
to you is someone doing a set of experiments, and sometimes, sometimes, the

47

results you get, the other person says, “Oh, wow, this means that what I’m
doing is that.” Then you have this instant, exciting connection, and this
happens a lot. People help each other learn. People teach other
technologies. And you always have someone around who knows what your
problems are.
[01:14:12] So it is easily the most social thing I know. We go to
seminars all the time. We have group meetings. We eat lunches together. We
go out to dinners. We’re like a family. So the everyday life in a lab is
incredibly interesting, busy, sometimes boring and sometimes repetitive. It’s
a job, but it’s a job that you are running yourself. It’s like you don’t have a
boss. This is all coming from your head. Whatever you do, you are
responsible for.
I never tell my graduate students what to do. I say, “Tell me what you
plan to do” and then I say, “Well, that might not work.” And then if I say
that, I know for sure at that at 2:00 in the morning they’re going to try it and
not tell me. Some of the--not some, a lot--of the discoveries are made at
2:00 in the morning by my students after I tell them it won’t work.
[01:15:15] So the life in the lab is a combination of life anywhere:
routine, boring, failures. But there’s a big difference: the highs are higher,
the excitement is more, and it’s a shared experience. I would imagine being a
writer is lonely. I would imagine that being a scientist may be very much like
a musician playing in a symphony orchestra.
There are all these worlds out there. Some are more isolated. Being
an athlete is pretty lonely. If you’re a tennis player, you’ve got to psych up.

48

Not in science, not in music. I think painting was more lonely because
ultimately it’s just you. Not so in science. It’s a community action. The ideas
come from you, but it’s a community action. It’s not lonely. That’s a
misconception.
Rodriguez: [01:16:23] Do you value the alone time that comes with painting?
Shapiro: Oh, I love it, but I don’t have enough time for it. When I paint, the world
goes away. But it’s also true when I’m reading and thinking about a new
scientific approach. Three hours can go by, and I don’t know where they
went because I’m thinking. Do I call that alone time? I don’t know. It’s time
in my head. Is it alone time? Yes, I guess it is. I’m not talking to anybody.
[01:17:01] But it’s a vital part of being a human being. We talk to
ourselves all the time, incessantly reevaluating how we’re interacting with
this person or that person, “What does that person think? How am I going
to figure out the answer to this problem? How am I going pass this course?”
We chatter constantly, and it’s very nice to turn the chatter down.
The way you turn down the chatter in your head is by focusing on a
problem, whether that problem is designing a research paper, making a
painting, designing an experiment. That’s when the chatter goes away, and
three hours disappear and you’re amazed. “Have I really been sitting here
for three hours? Yes.” I don’t know if any of this is making any sense.
Rodriguez: No, it’s making complete sense. I love hearing this. You’ve talked a lot
about these high moments that you get as a scientist, and the joys and the
moments of discovery. Are there any memorable low moments or mistakes
or failures?

49

Shapiro: [01:18:08] Millions. Of course there are. Of course there are. You wouldn’t
be a scientist otherwise. You can have a great, grand scheme in your head as
to how something works, and you just do that extra experiment to make
sure that your beautiful synthesis is real, and the experiment kills it all dead.
There you are back at ground zero. This happens. This definitely happens.
And that’s why I say you have to be resilient. I give myself one day. I
can even cry. One day. Next day you come back fighting. So, yes, there are
lows. Of course there are lows. We wouldn’t be human otherwise.
[01:18:58] But I think the important thing is learning how to deal
with the lows, learning from your failures, learning that you can survive even
a gigantic failure. Even three years of work that looks like it’s gone down the
tube, you can survive that. And I think being a survivor--my husband always
jokes with me that my main attribute is that I’m a survivor. And no matter
what happens, I’m going to get up the next day and I’m going to show the
bastards.
Rodriguez: When and how did you meet your husband?
Shapiro: In Russia. We went on a Bell Labs tour. Both of my husbands were Bell
Labs men. And so I was on a Bell Labs tour and I met him. It was really a
meeting of the minds. It was amazing.

Rodriguez: This is Michela Rodriguez with the Stanford Historical Society’s Oral
History Program. Today is May 13, 2016. I am here with Stanford
University’s Lucy Shapiro, Virginia and D. K. Ludwig Professor in Cancer
Research and director of the Beckman Center for Molecular and Genetic
Medicine. We’re conducting this interview in Professor Shapiro’s office at
the Beckman Center as part of the Stanford Faculty and Stanford
Pioneering Women Oral History Projects.
Professor Shapiro, I’d like to begin by asking you about the time in
your life when you transitioned from the East Coast to Stanford. What
caused it and what were you feeling at that time?
Shapiro: [00:00:40] Well, what caused it was a job offer that I could not turn down,
which is frequently what brings people to the Stanford campus. But let me
give you some background. In my field of molecular genetics, Stanford was
Mecca. It was simple as that. The fundamental discoveries in molecular
genetics and molecular biology over the years had come from Stanford and

51

my heroes in science were pretty much all here. I had been recruited a few
years before that to move to Stanford, but I couldn’t at that time.
[00:01:34] Then it was decided that there would be a brand new
department in the Medical School, a Department of Developmental
Biology. It’s very rare to start a whole new department. Furthermore, this
department would be housed in a new building on the Stanford campus. I
was invited to come and talk to them about taking the position as the first
chairman of this department and building it from scratch. This was just an
incredible opportunity.
I remember talking to my husband about this, who at the time was a
chairman of a department at Bell Laboratories. He’s a physicist. I was then
the chairman of the Department of Microbiology and Immunology at
Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons. Our whole family
was in New York. I had always been a New Yorker. The chance, the
opportunity to build a brand new basic science department at Stanford was
amazing. But it meant a major move. I had just, literally just, accepted that
chairmanship at Columbia and here they were saying, “Come and look at
some extraordinary opportunity.”
I remember talking to my husband about this and he said, “How
often does one get a job offer like this? It’s an amazing opportunity. But
equally important, how often does a woman get a job offer like this?” Very
rarely.
[00:03:26] And so we thought about it. There was a lot of traveling
back and forth, a lot of hand wringing, and it took almost eight months for

52

me to get to the point where I would be interested in actually making this
move. It was a very difficult decision, but probably the best decision I’ve
ever made in my life--for a number of reasons.
Number 1, the extraordinary science going on at Stanford, and the
atmosphere of collegiality, and sharing of ideas, and technologies, and
thoughts was just tremendously appealing and that led to two things. It led
to a literal explosion in my scientific output and that was due to issues that
I’ll talk about more in a few minutes. One was the beginning of the
interdisciplinary nature of science and technology at Stanford, which was
unique. The second was the openness of Stanford University to interacting
with the corporate world in a transparent and supportive way so that our
discoveries could be translated to human consumption. Both of these things
were important to me.
[00:05:12] Finally, and I alluded to this a few minutes ago, this
atmosphere of open communication is rare. It certainly isn’t like that on the
East Coast. I’ve worked in the East Coast universities, and they’re terrific.
Columbia was wonderful, but there’s no comparison with Stanford. Here,
anyone’s success is everyone’s success, anyone’s new ideas or technology is
available to everybody, and there isn’t this hierarchical way of interacting
between students, post-docs, faculty, administrators. The professors are not
living on high. They are accessible to everybody, and my students at
Stanford are my colleagues.
This was very hard to enact on the East Coast. I believe Stanford is
quite unique in all of these characteristics and is the reason why I believe

53

that Stanford right now is arguably the best university not only in the United
States but worldwide. I truly believe this. Working at Stanford has opened
worlds to me and we can talk about that.
Rodriguez: [00:06:45] Great. Wow, where to start? So what year was it that you came to
Stanford?
Shapiro: 1989.
Rodriguez: Okay, and you moved out with the whole family?
Shapiro: Well, all three children were in college. But Harley did an amazing thing.
Harley left Bell Labs and a phenomenal job without a job on the West Coast.
He did this for me because it was a chance for a woman to take on a
challenge that few women get the opportunity to take on, number one.
Equally important, he believed it was vital to the progression of my science,
and so he agreed to make the move.
And the story has a very nice outcome. Harley is a brilliant scientist,
and he became interested in biology and then applied his knowledge of
electrical circuitry to genetic circuitry. In fact, working with a post doc in the
Department of Chemistry here, Harley set up a computer lab in our campus
home and from our house, he and Adam Arkin, who was a post doc from
chemistry, essentially started the field of systems biology. And I published
with Harley, Harley published independently of me with Adam, we all
published together, and those initial papers with Harley and Adam had the
byline of our home address on the Stanford campus. These were absolutely
seminal papers that were paradigm changing.

54

[00:08:38] Then Harley was offered a grant without even applying for
it from the Office of Naval Research, and one thing led to another and he
became a Stanford faculty member. Harley just went emeritus as a professor
of developmental biology, as a physicist, and this is going to speak to the
incredible opportunities that one has at Stanford of integrating all the
scientific disciplines.
Rodriguez: [00:09:09] Have you found that you also have pushed yourself to learn more
about Harley’s original field of work?
Shapiro: Of course. We’ve worked together. I mean we taught each other and that’s
very rich. That’s what you want to do. But most important to me was my
lab got up and running almost immediately. Some people moved with me
from Columbia, but I got incredible graduate students and post docs
because everybody wants to come to Stanford. So while I was building this
department from scratch, literally, and hiring multiple faculty, my lab was
going full tilt. The science that came out of my lab at that point was also
paradigm changing, and a lot of it was due to the people I was interacting
with at Stanford, the scientific milieu, the excitement, the ability to teach
students who were open to new and exciting ways of thinking. So I credit
being at Stanford with my success as a scientist. It was the smartest move I
ever made in my life.
Rodriguez: [00:10:28] What were some of the obstacles you faced in building a
department from scratch?
Shapiro: None.
Rodriguez: None?

55

Shapiro: Yes. I know that’s a strange thing to say. Stanford made it quite easy for me
to do that because they had gotten funding that would help make this
happen; so I had the funding I needed to hire who I wanted. Stanford
already had in place great developmental biologists like David Hogness and
Dale Kaiser and David Clayton, and I took them away from their current
departments and put them right into my new department. And then it was
not difficult to hire the very, very best young developmental biologists in the
world. I was not looking for people who were just continuing on a welltrodden path. I wanted people who were pioneers. I wanted people who
were opening up completely new ways of thinking.
[00:11:35] And in fact, Stanford’s choice of having me build this
department was in itself very surprising because I’m a microbiologist,
essentially, and I work with bacterial cells. Yes, I ask the same questions as
more standard developmental biologists “What makes a cell divide into two
different cells? What is the fundamental basis of the regulatory mechanisms
that will allow cell differentiation?” But I was not a classical developmental
biologist but I was forging new ways of thinking. But I had a parallel
pathway. The parallel pathway was to make sure that we always thought
about and considered how we could translate our fundamental, very basic
research into ultimately designing new drugs, new diagnostics, new ways of
helping humanity. So to me, the people I was busy recruiting had to be
multidimensional. I must admit out of all the job offers I put out, I only lost
one. I got everybody else I wanted.

56

[00:13:03] I remember one of my colleagues at MIT saying, “If we
come up against Shapiro recruiting, we’re going to lose.” And it’s not
Shapiro, it’s Stanford and what this place has to offer.
I had an opportunity to look back over all my papers from when I
first moved here. I don’t know how I did everything I did. I must have had
very high thyroid levels because it was complete hyperactivity, and I was
able to keep multiple things running at the same time.
Rodriguez: [00:13:41] It was very groundbreaking that Stanford chose to hire a woman
for the position. Did you ever feel any pushback in your being a woman?
Shapiro: No, not at all, and it was interesting because I was the first woman chairman
in the history of the Medical School and I think only the second woman
chairman in all of Stanford University. When I came to the Medical School
as a chair, of course I was the first woman on the executive committee, and
it was quite startling to all of these gentlemen. There were very few women
professors, tenured professors. There just weren’t a lot of women on the
faculty, and I set about changing that. And the way you change that is by
example, so here I was, perfectly functional.
And I sat on many search committees. I helped in the recruitment. I
think maybe ten or fifteen years ago, we were up to five women as chairmen
of Medical School departments, and we have many, many, tenured women
faculty now. Things have truly changed and not just in the Medical School.
This is throughout the whole university. And we’re still striving. We’re still
trying to make it better, but it’s almost a non-issue. My department is onethird women, tenured. It could be more, and we’re working for that.

57

Rodriguez: [00:15:17] I want to talk more about your research, but you just said
something that made me think. You’ve been on a lot of different search
committees at Stanford both for Medical School hiring but also you were on
a committee that hired President Hennessy and several other high-ranking
faculty members.
Shapiro: Yes.
Rodriguez: How did you get selected for that purpose?
Shapiro: I was like the human resources person for a while at Stanford University.
[Rodriguez laughs] I was on every major search committee. I think that what
I had done was demonstrate, number one, good taste in who to hire in the
Medical School. Number two, my interests were well beyond the Medical
School. I was in the Faculty Senate. I cared about teaching. I cared about
students in many different places, and I had a very broad view of what a
university needs.
More important than that, I’m very straight spoken, and I make
decisions based on what’s good for the university--not just the Medical
School, or my department, or my lab. So having a broad perspective that is
independent of the skin I might have in the game was important.
[00:16:42] The second thing that was important was being articulate,
being able to lay out a problem clearly and succinctly, attending many
university meetings and seminars beyond the Medical School. And there’s
another thing that added to that, and that’s an entirely different issue, which
I’ll mention now but we can go into further.

58

About--oh, God. I don’t know how long--maybe fifteen years ago.
Well, it was before we named Hennessey president, so it’s a little before
that. I had reached a status in my field where I was essentially like a senior
statesperson, and I became involved in what I believed to be was a major
global issue and that issue was emerging infectious diseases and growing
antibiotic resistance.
[00:17:46] I knew then, because I follow what goes on globally, that
these issues were going to have an impact on our country economically. It
was going to have an impact health-wise. It was going to have an impact
politically, and it was going to have an impact ultimately on our institutes of
higher learning. And it seemed to me that this was a problem that I was
equipped to try to pay attention to and in some way influence for the good.
Having said that--just like when I got my first job as an assistant
professor, I sat down and laid out a plan for how I’m going to do my
science for the next some-odd years, thirty, forty years--I sat down and laid
out a plan of how I, as a single individual running a lab, a professor at
Stanford, could possibly influence a global problem. What I decided to do
was divide it into three parts.
One part was to become a public speaker and to speak to anyone
who would listen, from high school classes, to spending an hour on NPR
radio, to speaking in Washington, to every time I gave a seminar at
universities globally I would always ask for an hour to talk about this global
problem either with just students, post docs, faculty, community leaders,
anywhere.

59

[00:19:33] I learned how to do this by practicing my talk with Harley
because I wanted to learn how to get rid of lingo in my talks. I wanted to get
rid of the words that we all use in science that make it impossible for the
general public to understand what we’re trying to say. So I would prepare a
talk, I would give it to Harley, and he would say, “Stop. I don’t know what
replication means.” Or, “Stop. What do you mean by that word? What do you
mean by this word?” By an iterative process, I learned how to give a talk to
any public audience without diluting the concepts by speaking in English
and not using our buzz words. This was a challenge, but extremely
important.
[00:20:26] I remember at one talk I gave, I think it might have been in
Utah. After my talk, a gentleman came up and he said, “I didn’t realize how
smart I was,” which meant he understood what I was saying, and that was
my goal. So I turned out to be a pretty good public speaker and I did it as
much as I could, so that was one arm of my overall plan.
The second arm was to get to the corridors of power because you
can’t do any of this without money, and so all of my public speaking led me
to meet all kinds of people. At one point, President Bill Clinton, during his
administration, I think this must have happened in 1993 or 1994, I’m not
sure, was very concerned about recombinant DNA technology and genetic
engineering being used by nefarious ends to create very difficult pathogens
that could be used in biological warfare or terrorism. He invited a scientist
to come and speak to him and his cabinet about this issue. [00:21:43] That
was Craig Venter, who was very involved in DNA sequencing. Craig had

60

heard me talk at other places. The other person who was asked was Joshua
Lederberg from Stanford, and both Craig and Joshua Lederberg told
Clinton, “The person you want at this meeting is Lucy Shapiro because she
can explain these things.”
[00:22:05] So I was invited. We were invited to speak to not only
President Clinton but his entire cabinet in the cabinet room. The night
before, we were very carefully coached. “You have five minutes to say what
you have to say. The president is on a very tight schedule. You have just five
minutes. Tell me what you’re going to say.” And it was really highly
orchestrated.
Well, we got into the room, and Craig Venter and Josh Lederberg-two people who are never cowed by anybody--kept to their five minutes. It
was my turn and instead of talking about bioterrorism and horrible infective
disease warfare, I told President Clinton that our biggest problem was
Mother Nature, not what terrorists would design in the lab. Our biggest
problem as a country was dealing with emerging infectious diseases and the
very bad things that can come from nature and from our changing global
village and the movement of really very difficult diseases out of China, out
of Africa, out of Moscow, out of Detroit, that would be moving globally
because we don’t know how to control them.
[00:23:40] So Clinton got all excited. My five minutes was up and he
said, “Please tell me how this works.” And so I told him the story of a
terrible pathogen called E. coli 0157, which causes kidney disease in children
and is transmitted from not well processed hamburger meat, lettuce, all

61

kinds of things that are commonly used and it came from the combination
of a very safe E. coli and a bad pathogen happening in a Shigella dysentery
epidemic down in Central America.
[00:24:23] And I told this whole story to the assembled cabinet and
this went on, and on, and on, and Clinton’s handlers were jumping up and
down. They had to get him out of there, and he wouldn’t move. And every
few minutes, he recounted what I was saying and said, “Do I understand
this now?” It was an important event. What came out of that was more
funding for not bioterrorism but for basic research, for understanding how
and why infectious diseases were spreading. I then started teaching this at
Stanford to undergraduates in Human Biology, and that was the beginning
of my entrée into speaking in Washington, D.C.
So that was the second arm. During the Bush Administration, I met
with Condoleezza Rice and the people at Homeland Security, and I kept up
all of my communication with people who make the laws and the budgets of
this country who had to be considered and listened to in a very much
broader context.
[00:25:43] Now with Ebola, and Zika, and Dengue fever, and
Chikungunya, and every different kind of infectious disease, this is all
coming to pass. Furthermore, now we have an additional problem and that
is climate change. Very small changes in ambient temperature, one degree,
half a degree, will let carriers like mosquitoes move into the temperate zone
and that’s what’s happening. So we have an enormous problem with
emerging infectious diseases at the same time that our antibacterials,

62

antibiotics, and antivirals, and antifungals, are losing their effectiveness
because we’re not using them responsibly. So there’s this huge problem.
[00:26:41] Given that, I turn to the third arm of my plan, and this
goes back I guess to 1998 when I had been sitting on the board of directors
of drug companies. One of them was SmithKline Beecham. The other was
GlaxoSmithKline. There were other smaller companies that I advised and
directed as a non-executive director. I watched how they tried to make new
antibiotics and new antifungals and new antivirals, and they were not being
successful. So I decided that I knew enough to do this.
So I decided as my third arm to go ahead and design new drugs. I
hooked up with a visionary chemist at Penn State named Steve Benkovic
and we sent in a proposal to DARPA [Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency], the Defense Department, saying that we had a plan to design new
antibiotics and they gave us a good deal of money. We designed a complete
new chemical space. We didn’t go to natural products. We didn’t go to
existing libraries.
And out of that has come a highly successful company, Anacor
Pharmaceuticals, that is now a publicly traded company. I never worked for
the company, never held a line position. I was on their board of directors
and I was a scientific advisor, but my work in my lab was separated
completely from what happened at Anacor. We just guided what they
should be doing. There is now on the market the first absolutely new
antifungal in twenty-five years, and we have new antibiotics in the works.

63

[00:28:36] I have recently used our novel chemical library to approach
another global problem and that is fungal infection and bacterial infection of
our food sources: Bananas, strawberries, wheat, rice, citrus fruit and
tomatoes. Now we have founded a second company; Boragen, LLC. Again,
I will not run the company or work for the company. I will just give them
my science. So now I am extending my approach to combating infectious
disease not just to human populations but to our sources of food.
[00:29:17] I have to tell you, Michela, that I don’t think I could have
done any of this if I had been at any other university. When I first came to
Stanford, as I said when I started this interview, I found this willingness to
engage in global security and health. That meant being able to translate what
we did from basic principles into the application of things that are needed
worldwide.
As soon as I made my first discovery, I forgot who I met, but they
said, “Did you patent that yet?” Patent it? That never occurred to me, and
then I remember getting exciting results and someone said, “Well, do you
have a company?”
I said, “That’s next.”
I watched our president, President Hennessy, build an incredible
company. I’ve watched many Stanford faculty in physics and computer
sciences, in biological sciences, in medicine, really change the world and
build Silicon Valley. Here I am in Silicon Valley. Why not do the same? So I
really do maintain my basic science my interaction with corporate America,

64

and my ability to translate what I do into medicines that will help global
health, that I don’t think I could have been done anywhere but at Stanford.
[00:31:02] Let’s stop. [Recording paused.]
Rodriguez: All right, quick clarification question. How do you spell the second
pharmaceutical or the second antibacterial company you started?
Shapiro: [00:31:17] Biogen.
Rodriguez: Biogen. Okay.
Shapiro: Excuse me, Boragen. [both laugh] B-O-R-A-G-E-N, and where that name
comes from--and it’s an interesting story--is our new chemical library was
based on putting boron instead of carbon at the active site in our chemical
library and that’s what made this a new chemical space, and again, a whole
new way of designing drugs. So boron is not terribly different from carbon;
it’s right below it on the table. Yet we knew that boron at the active site
could be quite reactive and so we put it in a ring which would control its
reactivity. Then we made very small compounds and tested what they could
do against many, many different pathogens, both bacterial and fungal. Then
we also tested human cells because of course we wanted something that
wouldn’t touch a human cell but would be specific for bacterial and/or
fungal pathogens, and we found these immediately. We knew very early on
that we had something extremely exciting, which has proven to be the case.
[00:32:40] It was 2001, right after the attack on the United States and
the World Trade Center and the use of anthrax spores, that we then got the
attention of Homeland Security. They gave us eleven million dollars to start
a company to go ahead and develop this new class of drugs.

65

I did this for a while until I realized that I wanted more dissemination
than just the government. I actually gave them back some of this money and
then went to VCs, venture capitalists, so that I could have a company that
would treat the world globally and not just the US government alone,
although of course it was important for Homeland Security and we did that
as well, but I wanted it open. That was based on my strong beliefs that it
was important that these drugs be available to everybody, worldwide, based
on the fact that we live in a global village and if we can’t control an outbreak
of a disease in Nigeria and in Toronto, we are not going to be able to
control it here. Fundamentally, we have no borders anymore, not when it
comes to infectious disease, so that’s why I made that decision.
Rodriguez: [00:34:15] Okay, let’s take a few steps back and talk about the work that you
were doing when you first came to Stanford. You said you were making all
sorts of groundbreaking discoveries with people in your lab. What exactly
were those discoveries? How was the field changing?
Shapiro: Okay. I think I referred to this yesterday. The field was changing because
people were studying isolated things that the cell does, and they were using
genetics and biochemistry. My thesis, I mean my idea, was that the cell is an
integrated system, so my goal was to demonstrate how that worked. We had
all these separate things that the cell does that we were studying using
standard methods, right, how the cell divides, all the machinery to do that,
the machinery to copy the DNA and move it to where that has to go, the
machinery to build organelles on the cell’s surface.

66

[00:35:22] To me, the cell was like a great big department store with
different charges happening at each of these different places, and they were
all chemical machines. So we, again, decided to take a multipronged attack
to understand the machines, to understand how the machines were
controlled, and the big breakthrough was to show that all the machines were
part of a continuum and one was dependent on the synthesis of the other so
that a living cell functions as a highly integrated system that uses not only
the control of the read out of the DNA--and this was our big discovery--but
also positional information, where in the cell regulatory and signaling
proteins were localized to specific sites in the cell.. So this was the first time
that one had to consider the third dimension in bacterial regulatory circuitry,
and this was groundbreaking and very exciting.
[00:36:34] And then soon after, Harley (and his physicists and
engineers) he was now on the Stanford faculty, and I decided to integrate
our laboratories. Several laboratories were doing interdisciplinary work, but
we were amongst the first; in our lab in the Medical School, we had
biochemists sitting next to physicists. We had molecular engineers sitting
next to electrical engineers. We had computer scientists working with cell
biologists. It was the most exciting mix I can possibly describe.
We had group meetings once a week for an hour and a half,
sometimes two hours, where everybody in our combined labs--and it wasn’t
that huge, maybe fifteen people at the top. I don’t believe in huge
laboratories. The fifteen people included both the people who were

67

primarily working for me and the people primarily working for Harley doing
the hard sciences. One person would present their research at each meeting.
[00:37:50] If it was a physicist, that person had to be able to describe
to a cell biologist or a geneticist what they were talking about, and when it
was a geneticist, that person had to make sure that the engineers, and the
physicists, and the computer scientists knew what they were talking about.
To do this, we had to teach each other. We were teaching each other daily
and then people from other schools and other departments became excited,
and they started coming to our group meetings.
[00:38:23] I remember one day when Steve Chu from physics,
Richard Zare from chemistry, Jim Spudich from biochemistry, and--I think
it was a Saturday morning--we were sitting in Steve Chu’s office. He was
then chair of Physics. We were all talking about our interdisciplinary science,
and we said, “We should have a single institute here that helps bring
everybody together. What should we call it?”
At that time, what was exciting was the program X Files and the X
Generation, and Richard Zare said, “Let’s call it Bio-X.”
And we said, “Okay, let’s do that.”
Then we went off to President Gerhard Casper to try to pitch this
and we succeeded. Lots of money was gotten actually from someone who
was then the CEO of Silicon Graphics--a computer company that, by the
way, I was serving on the board of directors at that time. Clark [James H.
Clark], in fact, then gave a whole bunch of money and that was the
beginning of the Clark Center or Bio-X, where we house, in labs right next

68

to each other, people from surgery, from electrical engineering, from
biochemistry, from computer science, all intermingled in one large space,
including what we call hotel space where people can come in from other
departments, other universities, for periods of three months, six months, a
year, to bring in new and exciting ideas.
That was the birth of Bio-X, and so from the ground up, the birth of
interdisciplinary science pretty much in the United States happened at
Stanford.
Rodriguez: [00:40:23] I’ve heard that Clark was a character. Can you tell me a little bit
about him?
Shapiro: I have to be careful here because I was on the board of directors, and he
was instrumental in hiring me on the board of directors, which was a very
unusual thing for him to do. I was not a computer scientist. I was a basic
molecular geneticist working on bacterial cells. Yet he heard some of my
talks about genetic circuitry, and how they are parallel to electrical circuitry,
and understanding complex systems, and my dedication to communication
and teaching. He thought that that would be instrumental and helpful on his
board of directors. That was the first board I sat on.
What I found was that he was quite visionary, extraordinarily smart,
and able to see things that most others don’t. That’s a hallmark of the
movers and shakers in Silicon Valley. So he’s a character, yes. The most
paradigm changing people in Silicon Valley are all characters, so there’s not
a lot I can say further than that except that I joined the board of Silicon
Graphics, and he was instrumental in having me take a course in the law

69

school on sitting on a board of directors and understanding audit
committees. He helped me get yet another level of training.
Rodriguez: [00:42:08] Let’s talk about the Beckman Center and your work here and
working with Paul Berg.
Shapiro: Oh, that’s wonderful. Remember I said when we started that Stanford had
my heroes? Many of the heroes were in the original department of
biochemistry here. The head of that department originally was Arthur
Kornberg, who we all affectionately referred to as King Arthur. Arthur
Kornberg was an extraordinary biochemist who dedicated his life to
understanding how DNA makes more of itself and all the beautiful
biochemistry involved in that. When Arthur Kornberg moved here from St.
Louis where they were all before, he brought his best and brightest, so he
brought a group. There were five of them all told, and they were all
extraordinary. As I say, these were all my heroes.
[00:43:06] Amongst them was Paul Berg. So Arthur Kornberg won a
Nobel Prize for his work. Subsequently, Paul Berg won a Nobel Prize for
his work in recombinant DNA technology, and the other three people in
this group were also award winners of all kinds. They were all visionary
scientists, and they were very instrumental in bringing me to Stanford.
David Hogness was one of this group, and he’s the one I stole away from
the Department of Biochemistry to the new Department of Developmental
Biology.
Paul Berg is unusual in that he has a very broad vision, and of course
influenced me in my vision of the scientific world. But there was another

70

connection and that is another person that was with Arthur Kornberg and
his group in St. Louis--an extraordinary biochemist named Jerry Hurwitz.
Jerry moved to New York at the same time that all these guys moved to
Stanford. Jerry was at NYU and then turned out to be one of my PhD
mentors. It’s like scientists have dynasties. I was part of the Arthur
Kornberg dynasty because he trained Jerry Hurwitz and Jerry Hurwitz
trained me. Jerry Hurwitz and Paul Berg have been closest friends their
whole lives, both scientifically and personally.
[00:44:38] It’s an example of there being, for want of a different
word, a dynasty of ways of thinking and working. So my coming to Stanford
was very much part of understanding these people and knowing what they
were doing, and Paul Berg had a major part in that.
Then when I got here, it became clear that the Beckman Center,
which was just being built, was really the brain child of David Hogness, Paul
Berg, the then dean, David Korn, and many other people as well. Paul went
out and raised money and got Mr. Arnold Beckman to put in, not all of it,
but a major share of it and made this all possible. Arnold Beckman was
dedicated to the mission of using technology to make breakthrough science.
That was part and parcel of finding people who are pioneers in science and
to open new doors, and new windows, and new ways of thinking which was
the fundamental basis for founding the Beckman Center.
I was the original founding chairman of the Department of
Developmental Biology in the Beckman Center. After, I think, eight years as
chair, I stepped down because it was time to stop being a chair. But soon

71

after, Paul Berg went emeritus and I was asked to take over as the next
director of the Beckman Center. Paul Berg was the first, I was the next, and
to this day, I remain the director of the Beckman Center.
[00:46:30] We help fund symposium programs. We give seed grants
competitively to people doing breakthrough science. We have established
service centers so that very expensive technologies can be available to
everybody on the Stanford campus and beyond, and we have some of the
most phenomenal imaging centers, biochemical centers, computer centers
anywhere on campus
Rodriguez: [00:47:03] Was it an easy decision to take over as director?
Shapiro: Oh, absolutely, yes.
Rodriguez: What do you like most about teaching? You’ve talked a lot about research,
but what do you like about teaching?
Shapiro: I like to spark the love of science in young minds. I love communicating the
excitement, and the potential, and the possibilities of applying really
fundamental science to help the world. I want students to know the
connection between cultures and technology and science.
I touched upon this previously and what I try to instill in my students
both in a formal classroom and in a laboratory(I have undergraduates in my
lab as well) what it really means to be a scientist and I find that young
people just don’t know and it’s not enough to do book learning. It’s not
enough to memorize formulas. It’s not enough to understand, oh, this is
how the body is built and this is how metabolism works. A student has to

72

understand the excitement of discovery, where discovery comes from, and
the importance of evidence.
[00:48:32] To me, this is crucial to one of our major problems in the
United States today and that’s scientific illiteracy, not only in our young
people but in the people who are running the government, of members of
different political parties who don’t understand that science can help them
understand the world around them and help them make decisions. I’m not
going to get into political arguments right now. I’m not going to get into
creationism. I’m not going to get into anti-climate change. But all of these
things illustrate the desperate need for education and having our wonderful
students from all walks of life be exposed to the scientific method and
understanding evidence, understanding what it can tell you and
understanding what it can’t tell you. What I try to do in my teaching is
disseminate that.
Rodriguez: [00:49:45] Well, kind of speaking of politics, tell me about meeting Mikhail
Gorbachev. [both laugh]
Shapiro: Yes, that was quite amazing. So that goes back to my friendship with
George Shultz, Secretary of State George Shultz. Pretty soon after I moved
here, I guess a few years after I moved here, George Shultz, who as
everyone knows, has held multiple cabinet positions and is just a brilliant
thinker as well as politician, was writing a book on various things that
affected the United States economy. He’s an economist, he has a PhD in
economics from MIT and he was interested in how the new recombinant
DNA technology and genetic engineering was going to affect things like the

73

pharmaceutical world, and ultimately the medical world, and ultimately our
economy.
[00:50:57] So he arranged for a lunch here at the Beckman Center
sitting out on our patio, and he invited Arthur Kornberg and Paul Berg, and
Paul Berg invited me, possibly because I can talk in a way that everyone
understands. So we had this lunch and we talked about many things, and
George was continually turning to me and saying, “Explain that better.”
[00:51:20] Well, that started a twenty-three year friendship and
George Shultz remains one of my best friends. I have a ninety-five-year-old
best friend. He’s just an extraordinary man. Because he could understand
when I described complex phenomenon, he started inviting me to meetings,
dinners at his house where I was the after-dinner entertainment, just many
different venues.
Then when Mikhail Gorbachev was coming to Stanford and on that
momentous day when in Memorial Auditorium he announced the end of
the Cold War, before the speech in Memorial Auditorium, George arranged
for who he considered were about ten leaders in Stanford in many different
disciplines--history, economics, science--I was one of the ten. We met
privately and we each spoke with him. We talked for about two hours, and
then, of course, our little group was sitting in the front row in Memorial
Auditorium.
There were then several dinners that I attended at George’s home
with Gorbachev and some of these were small dinners, fifteen people,

74

sixteen people, and I got to spend time talking about world matters with
both Raisa [Gorbacheva], as well as with Gorbachev.
[00:52:58] That was really my introduction to the fact that Stanford
offered the opportunity to meet with and influencing world leaders. I then
spoke at many meetings that were held in the Law School, international
meetings, a meeting with Helmut Schmidt, a meeting with President Ford,
and I spent time with all of these people. Again, it’s part and parcel of being
a part of a university that is a worldwide resource and that is considered a
place of learning, a place of influence, and a place where world leaders come
from and where world leaders go to. Through my friendship with George
Shultz, through my sitting on the board of directors of a British company,
Glaxo, through my interaction with other people at the NIH and the
government, I was able to communicate with and influence people in many
walks of life.
Rodriguez: [00:54:15] Did the Cold War ever have any impact on your science, your
research? I know that’s really broad.
Shapiro: Only in the fact that we couldn’t communicate with science going on in the
Soviet Union, and that was a problem because good science happened there.
Difficult science happened there as well. I became very, very interested in
nuclear threat. Did it have a direct influence on what I did in my lab? No.
Rodriguez: What are some technological innovations that have happened that really
influenced your work, whether they took place in your lab or outside that
made your science easier?

75

Shapiro: That’s easy. There were two things, and they’re equally important. One of
them is the ability to sequence DNA and the fact that we can now rapidly,
easily, cheaply read whole genomes from humans, to animals, to model
systems like mice, and flies, and worms--and interestingly, most paradigm
changing, having the sequence of practically every known pathogen on this
globe and getting whatever information you want. You want to make a
mutation and check its accuracy? You sequence the whole thing in a day, if
you’re talking about a bacterial genome.
[00:55:50] Just because we have the genetic book and the sentences
doesn’t mean we know what they mean, and so my challenge in my lab has
been to interpret the reading of the genome to find out the function of
every single gene in the genome. Having a combination of molecular
biology and recombinant DNA technology and the ability to read the
sequences in the genome and start figuring out what they each do--how do
they each control things--we have now a completely new vision of how the
genome is read, and in fact, how evolution proceeds.
[00:56:38] If we go to Darwin, the original idea of fitness and survival
of the fittest had to do with mutations that made changes in gene products
like proteins and enzymes that would do something different and if it was
good for the living thing, then it got preserved, and if it wasn’t, died out.
Well, by combining sequencing, by combining all of our tricks for playing
with the genome, we now know that the sequences in front of genes that
control how they’re expressed, that control when they get turned on and off
during development, on and off with being infected by a pathogen, has

76

shown us that evolution makes its major leaps by changing those regulatory
sequences, not the proteins that they control.
So a lot of this went on in my lab, many labs in the Department of
Developmental Biology here at Stanford, and one of the best labs is run by a
scientist named David Kingsley, who has shown how these regulatory
sequences in humans have influenced how our brain grows, how our limbs
grow, and identifying which are the critical genomic sequences that do this.
[00:58:05] So DNA sequencing is not just ‘let’s see if there’s a
mutation in someone who has diabetes’, it’s determining what these genes
are, and how can we control these genes. It’s enormously broad and it
affects all parts of science, including medicine, technology, food, anything
living on this globe. So DNA sequencing is the major change. Of course,
side by side with that but secondary, is genetic engineering and recombinant
DNA. Combining genetic engineering with the sequences is what’s allowed
us to start reading the book of life.
[00:58:50] The second major--and I think equivalent--paradigm
changing event was in imaging technologies. We had light microscopes and
we had electron microscopes that let you see things, but now--in fact one of
the leaders, W.E. Moerner, recently won the Nobel Prize for his work in
that--we can now go beyond the diffraction limit and we can actually, using
fluorescent probes and other technologies, visualize individual molecules in
living cells. In collaboration with W.E. Moerner’s lab here at Stanford, we
have now been able to follow, in the living bacterial cell, individual
regulatory molecules that have to take up residence at a specific place in the

77

cell, and by taking up residence at a specific pole of a cell--one set of
regulatory proteins at one pole, another set at the other pole--allows you to
establish asymmetry (getting two different cells at cell division) so that when
the cells divide, you have different regulatory proteins in the two new
daughter cells. These regulatory proteins control how the genome, how the
DNA is read. Thus, because you have different proteins trapped, you have
different genetic readouts, and that gives you asymmetry. And that’s what
my lab has uncovered as the fundamental basis of the generation of diversity
in all organisms. .
Rodriguez: [01:00:19] That’s incredible. You’ve won a lot of awards and been
recognized in a lot of different ways over the course of your career, but
what are a few of the awards that have meant the most to you or you were
most proud of?
Shapiro: [01:00:34] I guess there are two. One is winning the Canada Gairdner
International Award, which is essentially the Canadian Nobel, and that was
really a big deal. What made it so special is I won it with one of my best
friends and colleagues, Rich Losick from Harvard, and we’ve worked in
parallel tracks on not the same system but close. The actual winning of the
award, the actual giving of the award, was a week-long event and it was
amazing. The event happened on a Thursday night in Toronto. It was a big
government-run bonanza. It was unbelievable, with formal gowns and
everything else.
The award event started the Sunday before when I had to travel to
Vancouver, and from Vancouver stop at cities all across Canada, winding up

78

in Toronto on Thursday, and at each stop, I gave a seminar at a university, I
met with high school students, and in Calgary, it was a competition for
which students would be allowed to come and attend my talk. These were
high school kids, and it was a big deal for them. There would be 200 to 250
high school students, college students, graduate students, faculty—at stops
all across Canada.
[01:02:17]This Gairdner Award was a major event in Canada. It was
done in a way that the United States should emulate because it made science
exciting to high school kids. It was an unbelievable amount of work. I was
up at 5:30 every morning to catch a 7:00 plane trip to the next city, but it
was an extraordinary experience, and then winding up in Toronto for the
award ceremony was simply amazing. My whole family came to Toronto
and it was extremely exciting. It was an amazing and fulfilling honor.
[01:03:01] When you’re what I call “in the trenches” doing your
experiments, trying to make things work, trying to get new compounds for a
company, you don’t think about prizes, at least I never did. And then
suddenly they happen and it’s, wow. It’s gratifying. It’s nice and you feel
good, but it only lasts a little bit. Then you’re back fighting for grants, and
getting your papers published, and all the excitement’s over.
I’ve won other things, but what I would put on par with the Gairdner
Award was having President Obama present me with the National Medal of
Science. That was stupendous, and it was also very nice because the year I
won that a colleague here at Stanford named Sid Drell, who’s a physicist,

79

also won. George Shultz came to the event in the White House with his
wife, Charlotte, because he’s a good friend of both me and Sid Drell.
One thing I didn’t mention, is that soon after I met George Shultz in
the early 1990’s he started a lunch group that met once a month, and this
lunch was George Shultz, Sid Drell, Condoleezza Rice, and me, and we met
for years every single month. It was generally a Thursday or a Friday. We
would talk for two hours over lunch and it was always the same agenda.
We’d talk about global affairs. We would talk about the United States
economy and politics. We would talk about what each of us was interested
in in our own disciplines, and then we’d end with sports. And these lunches
were just amazing.
[01:05:00] When Condoleezza Rice went to Washington, Gerhard
Casper, who was then president of Stanford, replaced her at our lunches,
and he’s still on, and all these years later, we are still meeting once a month.
We occasionally invite a visitor. We’ve had the president of Israel, we have
had the president of Canada, we have had all kinds of people who get
invited to our lunch. But since two of us on our lunch group, Sid Drell and
I, both won the National Medal of Science at the same time, our lunch crew
came to Washington.
In fact, when the award was being given out in, I think, the East
Room of the White House--it was very formal with all these people taking
pictures--when President Obama marched into the room, he passed
Secretary Shultz and stopped and shook his hand. It was very touching.

80

And then the ceremony itself was memorable. . My grandchildren
and children came to part of the ceremony but there was also a formal gala
that night. My two little male grandchildren, who were I think twelve and
thirteen at the time, were wearing tuxedos, and my two little female
grandchildren, who were a little bit younger, were in very fluffy lace dresses.
When we walked into the ballroom (each of us walked in independently
there are about twelve of us representing all of the parts of science from
physics, to astrophysics, to biology, to mathematics) we were announced
with a description of what we did to win the award., We proceeded to walk
down the length of the ballroom, shaking people’s hands as we walked.
[01:07:00] My family was at a front table right next to George and
Charlotte Shultz and the Drells, and as I got to my table all four of my
grandchildren stood up and in a line very seriously shook my hand. [laughs]
It was wonderful. Actually, an interview with these four children is in a
Webcast recorded earlier in Washington.
Rodriguez: [01:07:25] That’s such a great story. What sports do you talk about at your
lunch group?
Shapiro: Mainly football.
Rodriguez: Are you a football fan?
Shapiro: No. [Rodriguez laughs] I’m a baseball fan so I talk as much as I can about
baseball, but they’re really not interested in it, and Sid Drell is not interested
at all, but Condi Rice certainly was and George is interested in golf.
Rodriguez: Do you want to take a break?
Shapiro: I think I have to take a break.

81

[break]
Rodriguez: Okay, I imagine that through your life and career, you’ve been referred to as
a first in whatever you’ve been doing. How does that make you feel?
Shapiro: To be perfectly honest with you, I don’t think about it a lot, never have. I
learned very early on, as I said previously, that being confident about who I
am levels the playing field immediately. I have sat on boards where there’s a
lot of military present and a trick I learned is learning everybody’s first name
and speak directly to them with their first name. I learned that if I’m new at
running something and some gentleman asks for coffee, I very carefully say,
“Why don’t you make it for us?” So I’ve learned all kinds of ways of dealing
with this.
[01:08:58] For example, I was on the MD PhD admissions board at
Albert Einstein College of Medicine and I was the only woman on that
board, and this is a bunch of years ago when there were more problems
with women executives. The way in which we would admit people is we
would each interview a person, and each person was interviewed by three or
four of us. We would each write a summary of our interview and then we’d
sit around at a big table and talk about each candidate.
[01:09:30] I was noticing that the kinds of questions my male
colleagues were asking were sort of odd. At one point I got to interview
what I considered one of the best applicants. He was from Johns Hopkins.
He had done all the right things, perfect everything. I said to him, “Well,
how are you going to manage raising children, and going to medical school,

82

and being a physician, and a scientist?” Because that was a question that the
male faculty were asking if there was a woman candidate.
So I asked this guy and he looked at me as though I were mad and he
said, “Of course, my wife is going to do that so I can do my work.”
Literally.
And I said, “Really?” And then he went on, and on, and on, and he
was wonderful, and he was a stellar applicant.
I wrote up my report and I said that John could not possibly be a
candidate for running a medical practice and research because he had no
idea how he was going to help raise his family. It was shocking, of course
when we all discussed this, it was bedlam. But he was admitted--he turned
us down. But never again, never again, did this group of people ask
questions like that.
[01:11:14] So what I have tried to do through the years is effect a
change not by raving and ranting, not by saying, “This is what you should
do. This is what you shouldn’t do,” but by example, by being part of the
system, not being outside of the system raising hell even though you’re
right. You’re much more effective making things happen in place, from
inside the system.
[01:11:41] Has this kind of behavior affected what I’ve done and how
I do it? Have I felt challenged? I can honestly say I have not. Part of it could
be that I don’t pick up the signals, that I’m not listening to it. I don’t even
know it’s there. Part of it is knowing how instinctively to work in the
dynamics of a panel or a board, how never to raise my voice. If what I’m

83

saying is spoken over, I wait and then I say, “Stop talking.” I then say what I
have to say. I think that I instinctively learned how to accommodate the fact
that I sound different and I look different, but my head is not different.
Now there are feminists who would maintain that my head is
different. All right. I don’t care. So a lot of how I’ve dealt with all of this
was not getting the signals, not caring, and being bored by bad behavior.
Rodriguez: What does that word feminist mean to you, if anything?
Shapiro: That women should be treated equitably, period. That’s it. Stop. In all walks
of life.
Rodriguez: [01:13:07] Fran Conley was very public about her opinions of sexism in the
Medical School. Did you know her and did you ever talk to her about that?
Shapiro: I knew her vaguely. Of course I knew her, and we talked a bit, but what she
did and what she was professionally did not intersect with my life. I watched
the whole scene. It was difficult. I felt badly for her. But there were lots of
Fran Conleys. She wasn’t the only one and I think she was instrumental in
making real changes in the medical environment here. Surgeons are
notorious, and you just have to learn to deal with these people. But she
helped and there’s been an enormous change in how women are dealt with,
and [treated] here, and respected, and given opportunities. And I reiterate
that we’re not done. There’s a long way to go.
[01:14:05] When I insisted just this past six months that we put in
lactation rooms in the Beckman Center, there were people who said,
“Lactation rooms? Who uses a lactation room?” But I got them. They’re
being installed as we speak.

84

Rodriguez: That’s great. A big topic of conversation in college life right now is this
crisis of women in STEM, and there not being enough women in STEM
fields. How do you perceive that and where are your thoughts on women in
STEM as a woman in STEM?
Shapiro: Well, obviously I want there to be more women in STEM. One of my
children, my daughter, is a woman in STEM. I think a lot of it is influenced
by example and learning that you as a woman can have a life at home, raise
children, and be a successful scientist in all of these disciplines. It’s a
problem because of our biological clock, and you have a window of time
when you can reproduce. During that time, it’s difficult to do everything you
do and take care of a baby and that’s why you need equitable help from your
spouse, whether your spouse is someone of the same gender or not.
[01:15:33] I was very fortunate in both my first husband and my
second husband in that taking care of the family was joint, and I fully
believe that’s what made my career possible. Also, the ability for me to have
child care and not only child care but ‘me’ care was extremely important.
Is it difficult? Yes, it’s difficult. I think every man and woman
responds differently to this. It’s a very complex issue, but I think it’s sort of
the core issue of women going into STEM. Mainly because a career in the
STEM disciplines requires a dedication and passion that not everybody has-for anything, whether it be STEM, or music, or what have you. Perhaps it’s
more in STEM. I think that women are as equipped as men to understand
all the disciplines, but they’re challenging, and you have to work really hard.
And there’s a pull and tug between being feminine and being a physicist or

85

molecular geneticist. Women have to have role models to see that they’re
compatible, and it’s our job as professors in the STEM field to educate and
serve as an example to women.
I think that we lose women as education proceeds. Young kids are
equally excited. By the time they hit high school, women are getting
different signals. College, it can come back a little, but then the signals come
in, and then you’re pairing off, and it’s time to have children, and so societal
impact is high. Also, familial impact is high. What did your aunt do? What
did your mother do? And I think because there are more women who are
actually in the STEM fields, their daughters are doing better.
[01:17:53] I know that my daughter never had an issue. She’s an
engineer. Are there problems? Sure there are problems, but it’s something
we all have to work with.
Rodriguez: Okay, back to Stanford, how has Stanford changed in the many, many years
that you have been here?
Shapiro: [01:18:16] I’ve been here twenty-five years. Number one, there are many,
many, more women who are tenured professors, who are deans, who are
department heads, who are having a major impact on this university.
Number two, and in my world very important, is the interdisciplinary
nature of Stanford that is now extending beyond interdisciplinary sciences.
It’s moving into law. It’s moving into economics. It’s moving into history,
and we in STEM talk with people in the Law School. We talk with people
dealing with ethics. Interdisciplinary now means much more than it meant
when we started Bio-X. It’s much more complicated and much more

86

important because we all realize that we’re part of an interconnected system--just like I study a bacterial cell as an integrated system, our globe is an
integrated system, our economics, our politics, our medicine is all
interconnected and we at Stanford, as this great university, are now putting
together all of these things in interdisciplinary programs to train the next
leaders in the United States and the world.
The Hennessy-Knight fellows (or Knight-Hennessy fellows) aim to
do just that and to make it not just U.S.-centric but global, and I believe that
Stanford is positioned as the core.
Rodriguez: [01:20:00] Great. What are changes that are coming that you’re really excited
about for Stanford?
Shapiro: I think it’s globalization. Stanford is now in a position to influence what
happens in the United States. It is growing into a position to influence what
happens globally, and to me, that’s the next twenty-five years; the growth of
all of these disciplines, understanding how we work with one another, how
world health is going to be intimately connected to world economies, to
world politics, to how we deal with climate change, how we deal with
geography.
[01:20:55] You say, “What do you mean geography?” Well, I mean
opening up of the Arctic Circle. That’s changing. Things are moving in the
globe as a whole. The fact that infectious diseases are moving. The fact that
new waterways are opening up. The fact that we’re going to change our
borders with our oceans. All of this is going to impact what we do.
Understanding how great civilizations like China are going to change their

87

relationship with great civilizations like Russia, or South Africa, or Japan. All
of these things are going to impact how our world works as a global unit,
and we at Stanford are positioned to understand and deal with these things
as an integrated system.
Rodriguez: You mentioned that you’re going to be here for at least five more years.
Shapiro: Yes [both laugh].
Rodriguez: Do you know what you hope to work on in those five years?
Shapiro: [01:21:59] Oh, yes, I do. And it has to do with understanding how infectious
disease evolves, understanding at a very deep level how molecules know
where to go and how to behave within the confines of a single cell. This
may sound boring to you, but it’s not. It’s tremendously exciting and during
this period of time, I want to not only understand these things in this cell
that I’ve been studying most of my life, I want to bring in students to see
the beauty and the excitement of these things, and then I want to place all of
that in the context of the design of new antibiotics and antifungals.
Rodriguez: [01:22:54] Great. All right. How do you want to be remembered?
Shapiro: As a visionary scientist. That’s it.
Rodriguez: That’s all? You have over fifty years’ worth of publications. Is there any one
or two that have been the most meaningful to you or that you think are the
publications you would point to as, “This is representative of who I am and
what I’ve done?”
Shapiro: There are a couple. One was when we discovered that studying all the
different things that a cell does; copy their DNA, segregate their
chromosomes, build structures, build tiny structures in the cell. We

88

discovered that one major gene that controls all of these things and it has a
sequence in front of it that is shared by all of them and this told me for the
first time that all of these modules that make a cell a living thing are
integrated in a single system. That was a breakthrough paper and influenced
many, many people.
[01:24:12] The next paper that was breakthrough was one in which I
published with my husband, Harley McAdams, where we showed that the
genetic circuit that controls this living cell is analogous to an electronic
circuit and all the rules for electronic circuits apply to genetic circuits--a
major change in all our thinking.
[01:24:38] And the third major paper is where we showed that
important proteins that control the cell have specific addresses in the cell
and that where a regulatory protein goes is an essential part of the regulatory
circuit.
All of these three things led to a complete burgeoning of fields from
many, many different disciplines.
Rodriguez: Do you have any free time, and if you do, what do you do in your free time?
Shapiro: I read. I read enormously. I read about two books a week and mostly at
night, but reading is really my escape. I love literature. I sort of read like a
vacuum cleaner. I’ll read almost anything. I like biographies. I like history. I
like novels. I occasionally read a mystery. I just love to read. And I like
reading about the world wars. It really interests me how societies deal with
things like this.

89

There are some really great writers out there, my favorite being
Winston Churchill, but I remember reading a really, fine book about a
brilliant mathematician from India and how he moved to Oxford and what
he did there. It was amazing reading this book. I don’t even remember the
title. I wrote a book review of it for the Toronto Mail.
[01:26:16] But I think reading pulls me out of myself and my daily
requirements and needs and lets me escape into the world as a whole. I can’t
imagine not reading all the time. A bunch of years ago, I switched to my
Kindle. [telephone rings]
Rodriguez: Okay, well, we’re about ready to wrap up, but is there anything else that you
feel like you are dying to say or something you feel like you’ve left out in
telling me about your life?
Shapiro: I guess I didn’t stress enough or talk enough about my painting and what
that has meant to me. When you said what do you do with your free time, I
wish I could say I paint, but the truth of the matter is you cannot jump in
and out of painting. For many, many years, I would take a month or six
weeks off every year and go somewhere and paint. If you do less than that,
you’re doodling. There’s a real difference.
[01:27:28] One of my big challenges is deciding when to retire and
my great desire always to retire and then dedicate the rest of whatever years
I have left to painting. But I’ve discovered that I can’t stop my science. I
love it too much. I’m as engaged now, at the age of seventy-five, as I was at
the age of thirty-five. That has not changed.

90

And I find that both astonishing and a lesson to the comments of,
“Well, if you’re a scientist, you’re going to do your good work before you’re
twenty-five.” Maybe that’s true for mathematicians. Maybe, maybe it’s true
for physicists, but it’s certainly not true for what I do. I think that we’re all
different. Our accumulated experience over a lifetime prepares us for
different ways of living. A full life is truly based on a passion for something,
and it’s not enough to just have your nuclear family, but that nuclear family
is the core of your existence.
Rodriguez: That sounds like a beautiful place to end. Thank you so much, Professor
Shapiro.
Shapiro: You’re welcome.