
DB: Why don't we just start with your childhood; What was it like to grow up in Ojai?
HGB: It was delightful. Do you want me to tell you more about it? How was it?
DB: Yes, When did your parents move to Ojai and why?
RGB: My parents moved to the Ojai just the year I was born. And my father was...They moved there because of mjy father's ill healthto the coast. And he went up to the mountains and stayed and my mother built a house and had me. They hadn't had any children for twelve years. And. they were so pleased with a little girl that they spoiled me . . ,Def inat^l^r." i . r ' ""
DB: You were more ^spoiled than. . . You've told me that \/our brothers and sisters always complained.
RGB: Yes.Tiieyhad three rather close together and then tfrey had no children for a long time and the others were all away in school- twelve, fourteen, and whatnot. And I whs home alone with them and they spoiled me and I enjoyed it. Thoroughly.
DB: Your father grew oranges.
RGB: Yes. He had an orange grove. My father... They moved there... ° His father bought a store for him, something for him to do. But he didn't like that and so he sold it and bought an orange grove. And I loved the orange grove and he did,too, We were there until I was in college. And then he sold it and we moved to Santa Barbara because of his ill health.And we couldn't get people to take care of the orange grove the way it should be so he sold it to someone else and we moved to Santa Barbara because he was sick by the end. He had pernicious anemia which you don't have anymore because you special vitamins and don't have it. But he was very sick.
DB: You went to school in Ojai though.
RGB: I went to school there. 1 went to the public school. It was quite a distance. There were two of them. And he thought one was better than the other. So I rode horseback three miles

everyday "to school.

DB: Was this when you had the mule?

RGB: No that was the donkey. I'd had the donkey first so to learn how to ride something. That was when I was five and six. I had the donkey. But later on, I had a horse and I rode my horse to school. And took some grain along for the horse's lunch. And then I'd go out and give the horse some water and his grain at noontime. And there was a little boy by the name of Tommy Church who later became a noted gardener up here and he used to be so interested in that horse. He'd go out and ask me if he couldn't give the horse his lunch. And that was that early childhood. And it was very enjoyable. Then my father sold the orange ranch before we moved to Santa Barbara and he bought a small place with nothing on it- just a house and a garden and a few- five acres, I think. And I liked that place very much also. So I used to come home from college and we'd be in that small house, no oranges but very nice- very- urider the oak trees, ten oak trees.

DB: Did your brothers and sisters go to college also?

RGB:My sister did not go to college. She didn't like school. And she got married f airly: young. My'brothers, one xof them went to Cal Tech and became a civil engineer. And the other one went to, what was called then Harvard School in Los Angeles, preparatory school and then he came up here and went to the University of California. And he went through the law school here and he became a lawyer.

c

DB: When ^ou were young did you always expect that you would go to college?
RGB: Well, I just thought I always would go to college. When the time came, I applied at Stanford, and I was accepted, and I went.

DB: Wasn't that a hard time for women to get in because they had a quota?

RGB: They had a quota of five hundred. And my very good friend who was a year older than I went to Mills for a year to wait for me. And when we both applied, although her marks were a little better than mine, I think, she didn't get in and I did because they were taking more straight freshmen that year. So she went to the University of California and thought she'd

-jcr
transfer to Stanford. But she liked the University of California so much that she didn't ever transfer. But we used to go back and forth. I'd go up there and see her and go to music or something. And if there was something going on she'd come down to Stanford to a dance maybe or something- We went back and forth.
DB: Wasn't Stanford an expiriment in co-education at that time?
RGB: I don't think it was. It was pretty well founded by then. I went there for so many years. I can't tell you! And for some reason I got mixed up in science. And then the Stanford Hospital where the Medical School was was in San Francisco. So I came up to San Francisco with a friend and we had a little apartment and I went. I studied bacteriology at the Stanford Medical School. And it was very interesting. And we had a project. Something called botulinus. Apparently, home-canned fruit and anything home-canned was subject to an infection in it which was botulinus. And three girls at Stanford and I... (interuption)...The botulinus situation: Seven people got sick on canned olives and no one would buy canned olives. So the Olive Growers gave $100,000.- half to Stanford and half to the University of California laboratories to study how they could prevent botulinus in their canned olives. And I was in the Bacteriology Department and they said,"Well, why don't you work on that?" And so -'I did. And it was very interesting. And we finally found between the two universitiesDr. Geiger was the field man and whenever there was a poison case, he would go out and bring us samples from the people who had been poisoned and we would work on it in the lab and we finally discovered that if you had things hot enough, canned things hot enough and under pressure you would kill if there was any chance that there was botulinus in it. And that solved the problem-r canned goods heat and pressure. And it was a very.interesting project. And I wrote it up for the head of the Bacteriology Department, Dr. Dickson at Stanford Medical School. I thought I had done a good deal of the work. When the article came out it was signed by Dr. Dickson, M.D., and said at the bottom,"and assisted by" Ruth Garland and another friend.And I thought,"Well, if I'm going into Science, I better have an M.D. and maybe then I could sign the projects." So I went back to Stanford and signed up in the Department of Medicine and went on into the Medical School.

-r
DB: Were there a lot of ®ther women in the Medical School?
RGB: No, there were only three or four. They limited the class to twenty-five, I think, entering. And I think there were about three women in that group.
DB: What was that like?
RGB: The Medical School? Well, it was very interesting. I had to stay on the campus and I went through certain studies thereanatomy and, oh, half a dozen different studies. You had to go to San Francisco for the final part and also to intern. So then I moved up to San Francisco and did my work there in the Pathology Department. And then I decided to intern. They didn't take many women at Stanford Medical School. You had to applythere was the County Hospital and the various ones but I thought I'd rather be at Stanford. And fortunate for me,I was accepted at the Medical School. I lived in that big old building there and- on Sacramento Street- and went through the internship there. It was very interesting, Because I was a woman, I was given more of women's ailments.
DB: What are "women's ailments?"
RGB: Of course, childbirth. I officiated, I can't remember how many births of children because I lived there and they always seemed to come at night. The first thing i'd hear in the middld of the night was I was wanted in the Obstetrical Department. And then there was a woman's wing v^iere women had whatever they had. They were separated from the Men's Department that was there. And I was an intern in the women's wing* And then I was in the Surgical Department which was very interesting.
DB: What was your first operation?
RGB: Well, first you watched people operate and then you went down. - . And Dr. Stillman was h#ad' of" the department. And He was- a very cranky man, very smart. And we all were around the t&le and he said, "Where is the intern?" And I said,"I'm the intern." So he whacked me on the hands and said,"Well, take this patient out and finish sewing it up." And I had never done such a thing before but I was handy with a needle. It was a thyroid operation so I... they wheeled the patient out and I sewed up the different layers of skin in my best needlework pattern and it seemed to work. Although I was unaccustomed to a curved needle because the surgical needles are curved and you

-12-
use the forceps with them. You don't just use the thimble and plain needle as in sewing. Then I went on with that and interned and, in the meantime, I met your gnndfather. So when I finished my intern year, he said he thought it would, be nice if we got married. DB: How did you meet him?
RGB: I met him at a dance. There was a group of bachelors who had a house and I knew one of them. His name was Russell Mackey, and he has since died. He was a young lawyer and he invited me. And he was the chairman of that group and he had a Thanksgiving dinner and they invited a lot of extra to come in and a dance. And when I wanted to go home, he had been drinking quite a bit and was unable to take me home. And your grandfather said,"Well, I have a car outside, I'll drive you home." That was our first happy meeting. And I didn't hear from him for a long time but eventually he telephoned. And he wanted to know if I would go out and have dinner with him. And we went on to a very nice friendship, to an engagement, and a marriage after I finished my intern year.
DB: Did that affect your studies- getting married?
RGB: I was through. I finished then. But I thought I should do something so I went first to the Well-Baby Clinic, then into the Department of Pediatrics at Stanford. And I went five afternoons a week, I think it was. And then I had the two boys, your father and your uncl&;.And I was too busy with my homelife, my husband and two sons and a house and a garden and whatnot. So, for a period of years I didn't do anything. Then the war came along, the First World War, it must have been.(Interviewer's note: In fact, it was tfe second World War) So many of the men doctors had gone overseas or into the army that Dr, Bloomfield, a very capable man from Johns Hopkins, who was head of the Medical Department, called me and said,"I think that if you would come back to our ward rounds and clinics and do some studying, you could help us out in this emergency." So I did. I went to ward rounds in the morning, I forget how many times a week, and the clinics where they went from bed to bed with the doctors and interns diagnosing and saying what they did to people. And I was given an appointment in the outside Clinical Department where you had patients who couldn't pay more than their five dollars

- IV or something. And I did that for four years and they gave me an increase from being, I have the letters but now I've forgotten, an assistant in the department to an assistant director or teacher or something. They paid me a dollar a year. Well, they said I was a dollar-a-year-woman or something, some ruling about that. And I didn't want to accept it but they said, "Oh, yes." So, I saved one of the dollars they paid me to show to my grandchildren to prove that I had had the job. And they'd paid me the dollar signed by the president of the University. And your grandfather said that I'd probably upset Stanford's bookkeeping for over the years for never cashing that checque. But I still have it. DB: Did they ever specify what a dollar-a-year-woman was?
RGB: Yes, A dollar-a-year-man, a dollar-a-year-woman, They had to pay something. I've forgotten why now. You had to be on their payroll. But you weren't accepting pay. But they said,"Well, just a dollar a year- then you'd still be on the payroll." I don't know the reason for that now but there was a ruling of that sort. And that's the end of my story.
DB: What was "Visiting Nurses?"
RGB: The Visiting Nurse Association was a very good group, I thought, of nurses who went to the poorer families who needed nursing care. And they wore their uniform and carried their little bag. And you always knew them on the street. And they were all around the city. I don't know if they have such a thing now. So someone said I should- I should be on the Board of the Visiting Nurse Association. They had a little house down there on VanNess Avenue, I think. I don't suppose they still have it. And the headquarters was there and the head nurse was there. And all the nurses came back in there. And we had our annual meetings, nomonthly meetings there. And we were in charge of seeing that these nurses took care of people who had no money, all over the city. And it was a very interesting project and I was thoroughly in favor of it because so many people were sick without any care, particularly old people in their homes who didn't know what to do. And you'd send in a Visiting Nurse and they'd clean it up and they saw to their meals and they got them in shape, and if they had to go to..a hospital, they got them there. It was very worthwhile. It may still be going on, I'm not sure.

DB: Whenwere you a part of the Visiting Nurses?
RGB: I can't tell you exactly. It was after World War II, as I recall. It was just a project that I thought was city-wide and was very good. And if you were asked to serve on it, you ought to do it. And so I did.
DB: You've told me an interesting story about your brother being a diabetic.
RGB: Yes. The year my father died, my mother was so alone because they had been married happily for so many years that I took the year off and went back. She'd moved to Santa Barbara where she had been brought up and had a small home. And I took a year off and went down and stayed with her. Before I left, a Dr. Addis,who was one of the Department doctors at Stanford at that time,said, "Well, now you will have time on your hands down there and perhaps you should be doing something." And he said,"I know a Dr. Sansum who is in the Cottage Hospital there and he may not remember me but I'll give you a letter of introduction to him. And if he has anything you might assist in, why,maybe there is something you could do." So, after I had been home a bit, I went out to Gottage Hospital and had an interview with Dr. Sansum. He was very much flattered with this letter from Dr. Addis who was such an important doctor. And he had just been to Canada to his father's funeral and while he was there, I think their names were Dr. Banting and Dr. Best, had invented or made insulin which was a specific for diabetes.
7 So, during the qugrum, my younger brother (Interviewer's note: The youngest of her brothers, not younger than Ruth, though.) who had been sent overseas- and while there he had developed diabetes. He came back to the Presidio and was in the hospital, here in the Presidio and they didn't wish to discharge him because he was a diabetic. And his health was endangered. So, Dr. Sansum said they were going to bring the recipe back from Canada and they were going to make it in the Cottage Hospital in Santa Barbara. And he said if I would help him, that would be a good idea. And I said I would be happy to do it but if we ever got enough insulin so that my brother could have it, I would helpyou know- with no pay, if they would take my brother on. So we worked like everything. There were two chemists from Harvard and there was a Chinese man, I've forgotten, a scientist of some sort. And he and Dr. Blatherwick from Harvard would go out-

-15-
he had to go to the slaughterhouses and get the organs which contained insulin and bring them back and grind them up and distill them and work on it until insulin came out. And my job was to test the insulin to see whether, you know if you took insulin and werenft a diabetic, you went into shock. My job was to test the insulin they had made on a three-pound rabbit. And if it went into shock in three minutes- that was our measure of the strength of the insulin.
DB: They're not still doing that now, are they?
RGB: Oh no, I'm sure not. Ifm sure not. Well, anyway, they would go out to the slaughterhouses and get pancreases, that's the organ, and the chemist would distill them and I would take the solution and try it out on the three-pound rabbit. And that was my job. And our first, Mr. Chapman was a severe diabetic and we gave him insulin shots. And he was just cured, well, not cured, but it took the place of the insulin he didn't have. And it was the only place in the United States, and we had people coming, and we only had thirty beds, and we had people coming from all over the United States- coming on special trains to get to Santa Barbara where they had insulin. It was a very exciting experience. And finally they had enough so that I could have some for my brother. It was quite impure compared to later on. And I would have to give him a shot of insulin that I would take home. And he could eati You know, before he was on this special diet that had no sugar and no starch and no...He was losing ten pounds a month, as it we re. And they didn't tftiink he could last very long. Well, it was like a miracle. The only thing was it was impure and I'd give him a shot in his arm and it would swell up almost as big as a walnut. And so I'd do it here and here (indicates various parts of one arm) and then I'd do the pther arm around various places and then I'd do a little in ther thigh here and then the thigh here (indicates various parts of thigh) and then I could start over here (goes to shoulder). And he said,"I know that this is the only way that I can live but there won't be room enough on my body pretty soon for me to have these shots." Gradually, it became purer and purer and you could have a shot that you wouldn't even notice. If you got too much, then, then you would pass out. And he and his wife came down and stayed in Santa Barbara and they stayed adjoining Mother and me. And we would play bridge in the evenings. And all of a sudden we'd notice that he was getting a little, you know-he wasn't playing bridge very well so we would quickly

give him a little piece of candy with sugar- would bring him right back. And once your grandfather saw him sitting on a bench in the park downtown. And he acted almost as if he were drunk (Ruth's brother). And he (Her husband) knew what was wrong. And he always had candy with him. So your grandfather got a piece of candy out right away and gave it to him and brought him to. He had to be watched. And his wife went away once; she watched over him. He'd forget and he'd tke his shot and it would be too much. And she came home one day and he was in there and he'd gone into one into one of these things and knocked over the furniture and was unconscious. So she gave him candy right away and brought him some sweet liquid or whatever they had and brought him right back. And he lived to be the age of sixty-one, I think, always having his insulin shots. And I suppose he was not more than maybe thirty-five when he was so sick. And he lived probably twenty-five or thirty years taking insulin every day.Of course it got easier and easier because that was more pure. But he still had to have his shots.
DB: Back to the Visiting Nurses. Was that related to the Heritage? How did you become involved in that?
RGB: I knew some people who were on the board and they thought it would be nice if I joined the Board of the Heritage. They invited me. It was cosidered kind of an honor to be on that Board. And it was it was something called the Crocker Home out here that took older people also. And they decided that if they joined with the Crocker Home whose facilities were very poor and they didn't know quite what to do about it because they had these people who had paid for a lifetime care. So by taking the Crocker Home and selling the property thdy.made enough money to build a wing on the house down here that held perhaps fifty people, whatever the number from the Crocker Home, so that we had the amount of people we hadn't had in our house plus yhe people from the Crocker Home was a much bigger establishment. And then they built a thirty-bed infirmary because people began to get sick, ill in their old age. And it's life care they paid in a certain amount depending on what they had. We had a lot of people who didn't pay anything. We had retired schoolteachers, we'll say, who retired on such a small pension that they couldn't live on it. And they'd apply and I was on the Admissions Committee for a period of time and it was really very interesting and...to see the people who were on marginal incomes could barely live and prices going up and they just needed us so badly.

DB: What were your duties?
RGB: Well, at first I was just on the Board of Directors. We had an upstairs for the patients when they got sick- we took care of , them. And I was on that committee and then they decided when they had the extra money they'd build a wing- and I think there were thirty beds in the wing. And then they decided at one meeting that it would be good if I was head of the Convalescent Wing. We got very capable nurses and a head nurse, particularly good. But they needed soemone who... And we had a doctor come. I think he came twice a week to examine people but they needed someone with some medical training to be in charge of that group there. And they asked me if I would do it. And I didfor a period of time- Ifve forgotten how long now. I eventually resigned because we had our place in the country and I didn't have time enough to do all that. I thought it was a very worthwhile project. Because these were people who needed it so badly and where were they going to go? They couldn't stay in their own homes and they didnft have money enough...peope with very marginal incomes. And it was very interesting and I think it probably still is. It was a very interesting project. San Francisco Ladies Protection and Relief. Mr. Haas gave two vacant lots way out in San Francisco and they turned out to be the land on which the Jack Tar Hotel is now built. And they get an income, good income from ;that rent of that land. So that helps the Heritage. San Francisco Ladies Protection and Relief Society-and eventually they named it the Heritage.
