
Rosenberg: This is Chelsea Rosenberg with the Stanford Historical Society’s Oral
History Program. Today is May 3, 2016. I am speaking with Stanford
University’s Nel Noddings, the Lee L. Jacks Professor of Child Education,
Emerita. We are conducting this interview as part of the Stanford
Pioneering Women and Stanford Faculty Oral History Projects. We are
speaking via telephone. I am on the campus of Stanford University, and
Professor Noddings is at her home in New Jersey.
I’d like to begin by asking you to tell us about when you were born,
and about the place where you grew up.
Noddings: Okay. Well, I was born in New Jersey, and lived most of my early life in
New Jersey, as a matter of fact.
[00:00:58] One feature of that early life I think may have been
important and that is I was the first grandchild on either side of the family,
and that probably contributed something to my sort of feeling that I was
loved and belonged.
I did my elementary schoolwork in Brookdale. That’s part of

15

Bloomfield, New Jersey. And considering the way things are today in
education, there’s an interesting bit there. I don’t think I had any homework
in the six years of schooling there. There were occasionally reports and
projects, and I can even remember the names of those projects, but no
regular homework. When I think what we inflict on kids today, it really
makes me wonder.
[00:02:52] We’re talking about elementary education and as I said, I
spent the first six years at this wonderful school. I’m quite sure that it would
be classified as a progressive school. And yet, when we tried to check on
that a few years ago, one of my daughters went to the school and talked to
the principal and asked about it. And she said, “Oh, yes, my. We are
progressive. We’ve got computers everywhere.” [laughs] Oh, God, that’s not
what I had in mind by progressive at all. Progressive philosophically was an
entirely different thing from having computers all over the place.
But anyway, after those six years, we moved to the shore area, and I
went to an entirely, entirely different kind of school and to high school in
that area. And apparently, my progressive, or maybe not progressive, school
did a very good job.
[00:04:00] I won’t say a whole lot about the tests and testing unless
you ask me as we go along. But at the end of eighth grade the principal said
that he had never seen a higher standardized test score in his life than what I
got in eighth grade after all those years of no homework. So that’s
something for people to keep in mind.

16

Rosenberg: That’s good to hear. Let’s look back a little bit earlier. So what was it like
being a child in New Jersey when you were young, and also you were
mentioning that you were the first grandchild for both of your sets of
grandparents, and that that was influential. So what were those early
memories like with your family?
Noddings: [00:04:59] Yes, well, I don’t want to make too much of that--the only
grandchild on both sides--because I have to think more about that myself to
see whether that really mattered. Probably the most important thing about
those early years was that somewhere along the line around age seven, I sort
of detached myself from the family as the most important feature of my life.
Mind you, there was nothing wrong with it. Everything was all right. But I
became so connected to school and my teachers that that really became the
center of my life.
[00:05:58] I still don’t have an adequate explanation for that, but I
know that it happened, and I know that that is true. So contrary to what a
lot of people experience in their early childhood, for me school was a home,
really. I mean I just loved it, but other kids were looking forward to
vacation. I was looking forward to going back to school. So that’s an
important thing.
Another sort of oddity, for those years I was very much a tomboy. I
played a lot of baseball, and I have two crooked fingers to prove that. But
when we moved to the Jersey Shore and I went to another school and then
by the time I started high school, I was very careful to hide that and to have
nothing to do with it. Because at least in that time, and I guess some girls

17

are still up against it, girls weren’t supposed to be tomboys.
[00:07:07] And so I kept that part of my life very carefully hidden. I
remember in high school when they had these, oh, I don’t know, I guess
they were nationally endorsed physical tests. They put you through a
number of things. And the gym teacher said to me afterwards, she said, “I
can’t understand why you’re in such good physical condition because I can’t
get you to do anything in PE,” which was true because I wasn’t going to
show I could do anything in PE because girls weren’t supposed to do those
things. So that was a sharp separation in my life from the tomboy
beginnings to the complete and utter disdain for anything in physical
education.
Rosenberg: [00:07:55] How do you think you learned that? So you said that girls weren’t
supposed to be tomboys at that time. How do you think you learned that as
a child? Were your peers giving you these messages? Was it your family, or
were there things that you read or watched that taught you that?
Noddings: Yes, that’s a good question, Chelsea. I’m not sure. All I know is that when
we moved, and I was in an entirely different community, I’d had the
opportunity to present myself the way I thought I should present myself, I
guess. And that’s when I gave up all the tomboy stuff. So there must have
been a societal pressure there against girls being too interested in physical
activities, but I can’t pinpoint it.
All I know is it happened for sure. And I went through all of high
school without doing anything along those lines, not part of any team, just

18

barely getting a passing grade in PE for showing up with a clean gym suit.
[laughs]
Rosenberg: [00:09:09] So do you remember why you moved?
Noddings: Yes, I do remember why we moved. It’s probably important to note I was
born into a working-class family. Neither of my parents went beyond the
ninth grade in school, and both worked very hard. My father wanted to own
his own home. And there was a new development along the Raritan Bay
where homes were accessible. They were not entirely finished, but my father
was capable of doing that for himself. So that’s the reason we moved from
an area that I would never have moved from, because I loved it so, to an
area that I came to love even more, but it took a while. [laughs] Yes.
[00:10:06] So that explains the move. And here--what are we talking?
We’re talking the 1940s just before World War II, when our country was
probably living in the most--what would you say--economically, a period of
equalization that we haven’t seen since, so it was an interesting time. Yes.
Rosenberg: Can you tell me more about your parents, more about what your mom and
your dad were like? What did they do? How did they spend their time?
Noddings: [00:10:54] Yes. My father was a worker. I think he was a painter by trade,
but we’re talking now about the Depression years and not many people
were getting their houses painted because they couldn’t afford to do that. So
he tried to get a job in a manufacturing plant, and he did. So he was a
worker, an ordinary worker all of his life. Advanced to like foreman.
My mother was enormously interesting. I don’t know whether the
whole family realizes how intelligent she must have been because with

19

comparatively little education--ninth grade--she always had office jobs and
she usually rose to the point where she was pretty much running the office-which didn’t mean a whole lot of money because even today women are
paid, as you know, considerably less than men and are given the work of the
head of the office, but not the title and all the rest of it.
[00:12:17] So I’ve always had considerable admiration for my mother
that she managed to do that, and she had to manage the household and the
cooking and cleaning and all the rest of it because my father never helped
with any of that. He was a macho type. He’d come home and expect to be
served. But I mean we’re talking about a very decent man, but not the sort I
would have wanted to marry. [laughs]
Rosenberg: [00:12:57] So during those years when you were living in the first town in
which you grew up, do you remember what you did outside of school? Did
you do things with your family outside on the weekends maybe, or did your
dad work on the weekends? What was it like when your mom wasn’t at
work?
Noddings: Well, I can remember trips to the lakes for swimming and picnics, family
picnics, and that sort of thing. I would describe it as normal, nothing
unusual there.
[00:13:56] Of course, my cousin, who was in the same grade, lived
downstairs. While we were living in Bloomfield, we had the upstairs
apartment and my cousin and his family, downstairs. And he and I played,
oh, my goodness, I can’t tell you how many games of Monopoly. And then
we learned a dice baseball game, and we both kept stacks of card references

20

on this. I had the American League. He had the National League. At that
time, there were only two baseball leagues. We had the names of all the
players, and, of course, they were playing by dice, not by real life, and we
spent hours and hours and hours sitting on my grandparent’s front porch
playing that game.
[00:14:53] Now, why is that important? Well, because we were
figuring baseball averages and I think we learned--he, my cousin and I-learned more arithmetic doing that than we learned in school.
Aside from that, I was always an avid reader, so I liked to read in bed
at night, and I liked to read. Somewhere or other, I had read a very romantic
story about reading under a beautiful tree. I thought, “Well, that’s what I
would like to do.” And you have to have some sort of drink in your hand,
lemonade or Coke or whatever, and preferably a kitty cat sitting in your lap.
So I thought that is ideal and I knew exactly the bush where this should take
place. And so I got my book and the pussycat and, I don’t know, lemonade
or whatever in my hand, and I went out and sat down to read.
[00:16:01] And, of course, it didn’t work. I spilled the lemonade.
[Rosenberg laughs] the cat ran hissing, running up the tree. [laughs] Well,
hmm, it was an idea don’t you know? But, see, that’s an example of the sort
of ideal life I guess that kids cook up. And sometimes it sort of works out
and sometimes it doesn’t. It must have been important to me or I wouldn’t
remember it this many years later.
Rosenberg: That’s a great story. Do you remember what you used to like to read--the
kinds of novels?

21

Noddings: Yes. Now I’m going have to think about that. Well, among other things, all
of the sort of standard kids’ things, Grimm’s Fairy Tales, I remember reading.
Let me think a little about that and later in our interview some of the actual
names will come back.
[00:17:13] I remember reading Robinson Crusoe. Practically everything
that’s on the kids’ list, I read, because I was an avid reader. And--here’s
another thing to be said about the way to go at things in education--none of
it was forced. We were taken to the school library at least once a week, and
we were completely free to choose whatever we wanted to read. And
nobody forced anything on us. And so I read, and, of course, I’m still a very
heavy reader even today.
Rosenberg: [00:17:58] Now just to clarify, was it your parents taking you to the library,
or were your teachers taking you to the library?
Noddings: No, no, no. It was in the school. The teachers would take time out of the
regular classroom time and take the kids to the school library.
Rosenberg: Were there any teachers who you think had a particularly notable impact on
you?
Noddings: I can remember the name of every one of my teachers from first grade
through high school. That’s how important the teachers were to my life.
Rosenberg: That’s wonderful. Do you have any favorite memories?
Noddings: Yes, it’s really incredible. Yes. Well, I have a lot of them, but I can
remember one. I mentioned earlier that this sort of switch of where I lived
in my mind came at the age of around seven when my real home became
school. I don’t want people to think that that’s because of something wrong

22

with my parents because there wasn’t. There was never, never, any cruelty or
anything like that.
[00:19:17] But there was just something where it wasn’t quite where I
fit somehow, and I did fit perfectly in the school scene. In second grade, the
teacher I remember vividly. She seemed to me to be very old then, but she
probably wasn’t as old as all that. But she welcomed me into the top reading
group and said so many nice things--now see there I remember. I was
reading The Prince and Pauper. I was in second grade. [00:19:59] And then I
do remember that. After that time with her, school just became the center
of my life.
Rosenberg: You mentioned that when you started taking standardized tests and testing
in eighth grade that you were getting really high standardized test scores. So
as a student, were you aware of how well you were performing at that time,
and do you think that drove the rest of your academic career, or were you
just enjoying the coursework?
Noddings: [00:20:58] Well, gee, I don’t know for sure on that. I think the latter. I was
just enjoying it thoroughly. There wasn’t the kind of pressure to be at the
top and be better than everyone else and what not. Maybe in some of the
more elite schools that was the case, but where I was in school, it wasn’t. So
I think it was just a real interest in doing it. I can remember somewhere
along the line deciding that I was going to read the whole encyclopedia. I
didn’t manage it, mind you, but it was just one of those things that appealed
to me. And I know I lost a couple friends at that time who just gave up--

23

”Oh, God, who wants to be involved in this project.” [00:22:08] So I mean
that’s just the way I was at that time.
Rosenberg: So did you have a favorite subject matter?
Noddings: Through elementary school, it probably was history and literature. But that
switched to mathematics in high school, or it seemed to, but that interest in
history and literature was still there.
Rosenberg: Can we talk more about what your high school was like because you
describe your elementary school as very progressive. And I’m wondering if
high school was very different from that.
Noddings: [00:23:07] Well, yes. The elementary school was through sixth grade. Then
we moved, and we were in a much poorer community socioeconomically.
And in seventh and eighth grade, I was in a school that had only four rooms
in it with seventh and eighth grade in one classroom and the teacher having
to divide her time between seventh and eighth grade, but she was a
wonderful teacher so that was okay.
[00:23:45] High school was very much in the old classical line where
if you took the classical course, you had five major subjects. And I took all
five all through for four years. And in addition, I had three years of public
speaking, and I took a year of typing. The principal caught me in the hall
one day, and he said, “I don’t know why you’re doing this. You should be
taking a second language.” I had four years of Latin, and he said, “Well, you
could be taking French.” Well, I took typing, and to this day, I am thankful
that I took typing because [laughs] even when you’re working on a
computer if you are an agile typist it helps a lot, so I’m glad I took typing.

24

[00:25:02] So that’s what the high school was like. It was a relatively
small school. Most were at that time. And as I said, I had four years of
English, four years of math, four years of history, four years of Latin, four
years of science, and three years of public speaking, and a year of typing and
a couple other things tossed in. But you can see how different that is right
off from today’s schools because we had eight periods in the day. Now kids
are lucky if there are six periods in the day, plus lunch.
Rosenberg: You mentioned the teacher in the second school you went to after sixth
grade was really wonderful. Can you tell me more about her, and how she
was able to manage a classroom with seventh graders and with eighth
graders?
Noddings: [00:26:01] Yes. Well, she was very young for one thing. Very young, very
pretty, very appreciative of a student who seemed to just lap up everything
she gave out. And, of course, I was very much in need of that kind of
connection because I was so homesick for my previous school and friends
and all the rest of it. So I think that was part of it.
Rosenberg: Then shifting gears a little bit back to your high school experience, what
were your friends like in high school and what were the other students like?
Noddings: [00:26:55] Very good friends. Some of them remained friends for a lifetime.
Of course, my husband was one of those. We met in high school, and oddly
enough, I remember on my first day when I came home from school and
I’m so excited, and my mother wanted to know all about it, and I was telling
her all about Latin and algebra. I just couldn’t believe it. I’m taking Latin
and algebra. She said, “Well, what about boys?” And I looked at her, I said,

25

“Boys?” And then I thought, “Hmm.” I said, “Well, there is this one boy.
He’s blonde, and he was wearing a royal blue shirt.” That turned out to be
Jim, the man I [laughs] was married for sixty-three years to, eventually. Isn’t
that something?
[00:27:57] He was the only one I noticed. But, of course, we were
about thirteen, so I can’t say we fell in love at the moment. That would be
ridiculous. But that incident I remember quite vividly. And at that time-we’re talking the high school years--was pre-World War II and World War
II. My last couple years in high school, we were in the middle of World War
II. But at that time, kids didn’t do that much dating. I didn’t know anyone
who had a car or drove until the end of my senior year in high school when
I got my driver’s license.
[00:28:55] We did most things in groups, and we did a lot of that. I
mean I had a solid, solid group of friends, some of whom are still friends
today.
Rosenberg: So how did you become friends with Jim, or closer friends with Jim?
Noddings: Yes, I don’t remember….
[Interruption in recording]
Rosenberg: So the last thing I heard was I asked you how did you become closer friends
with Jim and you said you didn’t know, but maybe you’ve thought about it?
Noddings: [00:30:03] Yes. Well, I know it had to be through group activities because
that’s the way we did things in those days. But my most vivid memory is
that in our sophomore year, we were both like between fourteen and fifteen
at that time. He gave me a heart-shaped box--small not huge--of chocolate

26

candy. And I kept that box for, heavens, I don’t know, I guess I had it until
just a few years ago. That was in our sophomore year in high school. But we
still were not what you’d call regular daters--it was just a different time. It
was just a different time. But at school dances, we danced a lot, but we
didn’t formally date--at all. And I think there were a lot of things that might
explain that in addition to the difference in time.
[00:30:56] The sort of what you might call formal connection
happened after we graduated from high school. He went into the army
immediately. Almost every boy in our graduating class did. This was 1946.
The boys who did this were given credit as World War II veterans. The idea
was that they would go into the service and relieve the boys who had
actually been involved in combat. So that’s the way he became a World War
II veteran. He was never in service during the war, but he had that year
afterward. And as I said, almost every boy in our class went in. They would
have been foolish not to because they had all the GI benefits and what not.
[00:31:57] So it was from that point on, from the time that he went
into the Army and I went to college, that we were at least semi-connected in
a formal way
Rosenberg: So what were those group activities that you did with your friends where
you and Jim got to know each other? What did you do?
Noddings: They were school activities for the most part--school dances we both
enjoyed very much. We participated in school organizations. In fact, he and
I ran for the school council--he as president, I as vice president and some
other people were on. We were defeated as a “clique” people thought, and

27

so that didn’t work.
[00:32:57] But we became--I president and he vice president of the
honor society--and then we conspired to take on every project that the
school council might have done, because we could do it better. [laughs]
Nonsense. School-type nonsense. But so we were connected through the
honor society. Then he was very active in athletics. But in our last year of
high school, we both had part-time jobs so there wasn’t all that much time
for just hanging around.
Rosenberg: What was your part-time job?
Noddings: My part-time job, the very first one--was even a couple of years before that-was at a boardwalk concession.
[00:33:59] See, I lived right in the Bay area just a short walk to the
boardwalk, and so that was my very first job at the boardwalk concession
serving hot dogs and ice cream and all of that stuff. And then by my senior
year in high school, I had a job at, I think the name of it, was Newberry’s
Department. It was kind of like a five and ten, like Woolworth’s or--I don’t
know what they call them today. But anyway, it was a retail job. And
through the holiday session, I worked pretty long hours, I mean from
Thanksgiving to Christmas. Then after that, that kind of died away.
[00:34:55] By the end of my senior year, I got a job that paid more
than twice as much per hour with the telephone company. So I was a
telephone operator, and that was sort of fun. [laughs]
Rosenberg: Now what did you use your earnings for? Were you saving up for college or
was this money for fun weekend activities? What was the money for?

28

Noddings: Well, mainly just for everyday living. I got to the point where I could pay for
my clothes and any everyday expenses and so forth. I guess I put some of it
into a savings account, but it couldn’t have been much because it wasn’t
much to begin with.
[00:36:01] But it relieved my parents of having to pay for my
everyday expenses. In college, I don’t know what would have happened
there, but I got a state scholarship, so that paid all the tuition and lab
expenses and that sort of thing. So that was wonderful.
Rosenberg: Before we started talking about your college experience, you mentioned
earlier that World War II started while you were in high school.
Noddings: Yes.
Rosenberg: Most of the men upon graduating high school, including Jim, went to the
armed services. So can you please just tell me more about what that was
like?
Noddings: [00:37:01] Yes. Well, the idea, of course, was to relieve the men who had
actually fought in the war. I mean you stop to think about it, some of them
were in there three, four years, and they’d gone through hell on earth. They
had to be released, and still we needed occupation forces in many parts of
the world. So the incentive was offered for boys graduating from high
school to go right into the service so that the guys who had fought the war
could be relieved. That’s what that was all about.
Attached to that was the designation of veterans, so it meant that all
the veterans’ honors and services were available, and that was important for
Jim because that would help to finance his college education when he was

29

finished with the service in the Army.
[00:38:15] It’s the kind of thing we don’t do now, not nearly so liberal
as we were then, but it was important. I mean stop and think about it. He
was just seventeen. We were both seventeen when we graduated from high
school, and he went right into the Army. I went right to college.
Rosenberg: This will be my last question about World War II, I promise you. But what
was it like as a younger student? Did you know any older men from your
community that went and served while there was fighting, or did any of your
family, friends, or other members of the community serve, were there any
stories or particular memories that stood out about that period of time?
Noddings: [00:39:16] No. There really weren’t. There weren’t any connections in my
family, and I don’t know about Jim. I don’t think there were in Jim’s either
because his older brother was exempt as a chemical engineer or something.
He was needed in industry.
What we both remembered vividly and have never forgotten--I don’t
know how many conversations we’ve had about it--but we both absolutely
adored our president, FDR, Franklin Delano Roosevelt.
[00:39:55] Even into old age, if his voice is repeated on a recording,
we hear it and immediately recognize it, and everything stops while we
listen. I mean he was our hero. But this was not unusual, of course, in high
school at that time. But that continued for years afterward. And it’s unusual
in this sense--we both came from dogmatically Republican families. Both
our fathers were enthusiastic Republicans and had nothing but contempt for
Democrats. Both our mothers were more moderate. They still voted

30

Republican, I think. I think my mother finally flipped [laughs] in Roosevelt’s
last two terms.
[00:41:07] But coming from families of that sort, and yet we were just
complete devotees of Franklin Delano Roosevelt. And that was probably
not unusual for high school kids at that particular time. But I remember that
vividly. And, of course, we were as a family, we rarely voted for a
Republican. Confirmed Democrats.
Rosenberg: Did you and Jim or other high school friends, did you listen to FDR on the
radio a lot, or how did you hear his voice?
Noddings: [00:41:58] Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Oh, yes. We listened to him on the radio
regularly. And he was so articulate and beginning every talk with, “My fellow
Americans,” and as soon as he said that, you’d sit down and you would
listen. And, of course, there was nothing like the sort of bizarre language
and really disgusting kinds of things that we hear today. It was very
dignified, grammatical, really quite lovely.
Rosenberg: Do you think orators like FDR and maybe other politicians of the time
inspired you to take that public speaking class in high school?
Noddings: [00:43:02] No, I don’t think that had anything to do with it. I don’t know
why I took the first year of public speaking. Maybe it’s because I was
planning to teach. For Jim, it was because he enjoyed acting. He was in the
senior play, and even into our early years of marriage, he was a member of
the Sketchbook Players in Woodbury. He enjoyed acting and being in that
sort of thing. I never did that. So I don’t know what the connection there
might be.

31

Rosenberg: Did you and Jim take a lot of classes together during high school?
Noddings: [00:43:58] Oh, you almost had to because it was a small school, and the kids
that were taking the classical courses would be taking them all together. He
did not take Latin. I think he took a half a year, and he hated it. And so he
concentrated on math and science. But in all the other classes, English and
social studies and math and science, yes, we were in the same classes.
And I can remember vividly in biology--I remember coming into the
room. It was early in the day for biology class, and it was my birthday. And
he didn’t even look up. And I said, “Hmm, he doesn’t know that this is my
birthday.”
[00:45:01] And a few minutes later, I got a note passed--kids did that
then, they do now--passed to me. And the note said, “Happy birthday to
you and to Sarah Ellen one year from now.” He had a brand new baby sister
born on that very day. And so she and I, to this day, of course, share that
birthday and birthday greetings.
These are weird things I’m telling you about. [laughs] I haven’t
mentioned this in I don’t know how long.
Rosenberg: No. These are absolutely wonderful things. I wish you could see that I’m
just so delighted by these kinds of stories. So you mentioned that Jim took
the public speaking classes because he was interested in acting, and you took
them potentially because you were thinking about going into teaching.
Noddings: [00:45:55] I think so.
Rosenberg: So when did you start thinking about going into teaching?
Noddings: In second grade. [laughs] Yes.

32

Rosenberg: Can you tell me more about that, please?
Noddings: Well, the second grade teacher that I mentioned earlier who so influenced
me, encouraged me in my reading. Yes, it was pretty much then that I
decided I wanted to teach. And in second grade, we were on the first floor.
Third grade, we were on the second floor, and we were facing I guess it
would be west--I could be wrong on the directions. I could see the red roof
of Montclair State Teachers College from that classroom window. And I
thought then--here I was third grader--that’s where I am going to go to
school. That’s where I will go someday.
[00:47:02] And, of course, that’s what I did.
Rosenberg: So did that line of thought carry you through high school? Because you
mentioned last week when we were speaking that you only applied to that
one school, to Montclair. And so what was that like in high school?
Noddings: Well, keep in mind that I applied to only one school because I could not
have afforded to go to school if I didn’t have a scholarship. I mean I just
couldn’t have. I wouldn’t. There’d be no way I could do it. I was
valedictorian of my high school class, and it was pretty clear that I would be
accepted. And so I applied just to the one place and got in. And that was
that.
[00:48:02] And even then, I couldn’t have afforded to live on campus,
but my grandparents lived just a couple miles away. Through the week I
lived with them and commuted to the college and went home on weekends.
And so that’s how I got through college.

33

Rosenberg: Can you tell me more about your college experience, first with life outside
the classroom? So can you just tell me more about what that commute was
like, what living with your grandparents was like?
Noddings: Yes, well, there were a couple of interesting things there. Before I got to
living with my grandparents, my mother sort of warned me that my
grandmother was a stickler. This would be my father’s mother, actually, it
was my father’s stepmother because his actual mother died when he was
maybe three or four years old. And she said she could be very difficult.
[00:49:10] I said, “Okay.” Well, I loved her. I mean she and I got
along beautifully. She was at the top of the list of my relatives. I found out
that when I was off at school, she would go upstairs and look at my room,
but she was very pleased that I kept it in order and always made my bed and
so forth. [laughs] It was really kind of weird. But she and I got along
beautifully. Also, I completed my college education in three years. For a
number of reasons I felt I had to rush and get out of there. So I did that in
three years.
[00:50:03] Another thing to keep in mind is that my high school
education wasn’t super good by technical standards, but it was rich. As I
told you, I had five majors for the whole four years and what not.
So in some ways, the college education was a little disappointing
particularly in anything that had to do with English and social studies. It was
like I’ve heard all this. I know all this. I learned it while in high school. I
don’t need to hear it again. So I can’t say that the three years of college
education were outstanding or particularly important.

34

[00:51:05] But they were okay, and I got out, got into teaching, which
I was looking forward to. Yes.
Rosenberg: Can you tell me a little bit more before we get to your teaching career, about
what that coursework was like? So parts of it were disappointing, but what
was it like? What was the material you covered? What were the pedagogical
tactics of your professors?
Noddings: Are we talking about college now?
Rosenberg: Yes. Still in college.
Noddings: Yes, I don’t remember a heck of a lot about it. The teachers by and large
were good, I guess. It’s a very a good question.
[00:52:01] I mean compared with later, and I know in another talk
we’ll say something about the later work at Rutgers and Stanford, but just in
a quickie, compared with my education at Stanford, it was just sort of blah.
[laughs] I don’t know how else to put it. It was okay. I did fine. And
everything went along. But when I started my doctoral work at Stanford, I
remember coming home and telling Jim, “I have now arrived at educational
heaven.”
That’s the way I felt. I mean my first courses at Stanford were just,
oh, just blew me away. They were like nothing I had ever experienced
before. So you remember that as a Stanford student.
Rosenberg: [00:52:57] I will. I’m very appreciative. I’m in my last quarter, so getting
more sentimental by the minute.
Noddings: Well, that’s it. I mean the thing is, though, if you haven’t experienced
anything to compare it with, you don’t have that same feeling that I had. I

35

don’t know how else to describe it except to say that it was wonderful. Let
me give you just one quick story on that then you can do what you like with
this.
It was a class in psychology and education. And it was a big class-half education students, half psychology students. It was toward the
beginning of the course. And a student asked the professor, “What’s the
difference between cognitive and affective?” And a lot of us kind of, oh, put
our heads down and said, “Oh, God, what a question?” It was a vocabulary
question. [00:54:02] How dumb can you be to ask a question like this? And
the professor put down the book he had had in his hand, and he said, “That
is an interesting question.” He changed his whole lecture to talk about
cognitive and affective and how they’re connected and so forth. I tell you, I
sat there and I thought, “This is the way education should be. This is way
teaching should be.” It was just wonderful. And as you can tell, I never
forgot it.
Rosenberg: Was there a reason why you studied mathematics and physical science at
Montclair? Did you see any early semblance to what excited you about
teaching that you noticed at Stanford, or did you simply just like math better
like you did in high school and decide to continue with it in college?
Noddings: [00:55:08] Well, yes. It’s a whole story in itself. I loved math in high school.
I think primarily because I was at least semi in love with the math teacher,
not in the romantic sense. I had the same teacher for four years. But he was-oh, I suppose he was what I wished my father had been like. Don’t
misunderstand me, my father was a very decent man. Never mean or

36

anything. But he never learned to speak grammatically, and he had no
interest in any cultural stuff.
[00:55:53] And here I had a mathematics teacher who spoke
perfectly, who was interested in music. Well, you can see how a kid in my
circumstances would be fascinated by man like this. So it was more his
influence than anything else that kept me in math. Later by the time I got to
my master’s degree, I had a more genuine interest in mathematics itself. But
that was the start of it. It was a very human attachment to the math teacher.
Rosenberg: Jumping a little bit back to college, so briefly before we move away from
this because I think it doesn’t provide as many rich stories or interest, what
were your math classes like? What was the math department like? If there
isn’t that much information that you want to share about it, we can just
move on.
Noddings: [00:57:00] Well, there isn’t a heck of a lot. The first year was what we would
call introduction to college math, I guess. The teacher there I think his name
was Davis. I know his last name was Davis. He was an excellent teacher.
I did develop a genuine interest for mathematics working with him.
The following year was calculus. Now you can see how all of this lags two
years behind what we’re doing now because what we did in the first two
years in math, the college level, is done now in high school in the last two
years. So all of that was good and helpful and I think prepared us better for
teaching math than most math majors today are prepared.
[00:58:15] Because there was always the side talk. It wasn’t only
learning the concepts or skills. But it was also what you can do with math

37

and how you explain them to others and so forth. So the pedagogical part
was excellent I think.
Rosenberg: So continuing in speaking about your college experience then, can you tell
me more about your step-grandmother that you grew so close with? Why do
you think you had such a connection with her?
Noddings: [00:59:00] Well, I don’t know why we had, but we certainly did have. We
enjoyed conversations. I think we just genuinely liked each other, and that
made the three years very pleasant. She did not have that close a relationship
with her three stepsons, but, gee, you can imagine what it must have been
like for her to take over a family of three boys, one not yet a year old, and
two others. I don’t know a whole lot about it. But I do know that for some
reason or other, we just hit it off.
Rosenberg: [01:00:03] What did you do with your step-grandmother or with your family
when you would go on the weekends during your college years? Were you
still working?
Noddings: [01:00:19] Through the holiday season, yes. And I remember getting a B in
my math course the one year and really berating myself for that. When I
look back on it, I wonder how I did as well as I did when I was working
twenty to thirty hours a week from the middle of November to the New
Year. And that was both in high school and in college. I wasn’t the only
person who did that in those years. A lot of us did.
Rosenberg: [01:01:02] Was that what a lot of people did that back then given the
timeframe or it was just more customary to work back then? I don’t
understand that point entirely.

38

Noddings: I don’t understand it entirely myself, [laughs] Chelsea. I think my situation
was different from that of most of my friends. I have to admit that, say it
right away. In high school, none of my friends had part-time jobs, except
Jim; he did. He worked in the supermarket while I worked in Newberry’s.
But none of my girlfriends worked part-time jobs.
[01:01:57] And at the college level, I don’t know people who were
doing that either. So we’re talking about a slightly different socioeconomic
level, and I had to work. That’s all. That’s the way it was.
Rosenberg: What was Montclair campus like back then? So you were at Stanford for
thirty years. So you’ve seen a range of what the campus is like in terms of
student groups and organizations and activity. So what was it like when you
were in college?
Noddings: Well, wouldn’t be fair to take my description as typical because I spent
almost no time on campus.
[01:03:04] I was there for classes. I thought I had to spend time with
my grandparents because they were good enough to give me a place to live
through the week, which was wonderful. So I can remember listening to the
news with them in the evening. I spent very little time on campus. I had
virtually no social life on campus at all. And that isn’t to say there wasn’t any
available, because I’m sure there was. And if you talk to other people who
were in the same class, you’d probably get a different story entirely.
Rosenberg: And you mentioned earlier that you rushed through in three years for
various reasons.
Noddings: Yes.

39

Rosenberg: So what were those reasons?
Noddings: [01:03:55] The main reason was to get out so that whatever was left available
for my parents to help my younger sister because she was ready to start
college the year that I finished, see? So I wanted to get out so that we could
help her get started. That’s the main reason.
Rosenberg: And so during college, where was Jim?
Noddings: Well, let’s see. The first two years, of course, he was in the service, and he
had an overseas deployment. He was in Korea, as a matter of fact. And
there, there’s a whole [laughs] wonderfully interesting story.
[01:05:04] He worked with an officer to start the first Boy Scout
troop in or near Seoul. I don’t have the records on that, but it was in or near
Seoul. He helped to get the first Boy Scout troop going there. So that’s what
he was doing in those two years.
Now what effect did that have? This was before the Korean War, of
course. But because he was so affected by that experience and I was so
influenced by the work of Pearl Buck. By the way, I should say I think it has
been underrated by too many people. She did win a Nobel Prize, but it was
begrudged her. [01:06:06] But if you really read her work, it is wonderful. I
was enormously influenced by Pearl Buck. And so later, after we were
married, in addition to all the kids we already had, we adopted three Korean
American orphans. That’s how influenced we were first by Jim’s experience
working with kids--he was little more than a kid himself in Korea--and my
being influenced by Pearl Buck. So, see, that really was an important
connection.

40

Rosenberg: When did Jim and you decide to get married?
Noddings: [01:06:52] When did we decide to get married? Well, at about age nineteen, I
guess. Yes, it must have been about then because we were both just twenty
when we did get married, and his father had to sign for it because at that
time, boys couldn’t get married if they were not twenty-one unless their
parents would sign for them. So his father liked me, and so he signed for
him, and we were married at age twenty.
I graduated from Montclair on August 17th, and we got married on
August the 20th.
Rosenberg: So when did your parents meet Jim?
Noddings: Oh, well, they knew him from high school. As I told you, these were group
gatherings. [01:08:04] Sometimes the group would be at our house. So when
we were, I don’t know, fourteen or fifteen my mother first met Jim, she said
to me afterwards, she says, “He’s so little.” And I looked at her and I said,
“He’ll grow.” I knew better than my mother. And, of course, he did. He
grew six inches in the following year. Funny things you remember from
childhood.
Rosenberg: So what did more--I think you referred to it earlier as formal dating--look
like for you and Jim?
Noddings: Well, we would go to whatever we were doing.
[01:08:59] Since a lot of this was taking place in the summer, I guess,
I don’t know, we did a lot of county fairs, that sort of thing. I don’t know
how many of those we went to. A lot of walking on the boardwalk. We were
on the Jersey shore, and there are all kinds of stuff going on the boardwalks

41

all summer long. So we did a lot of that. We’d go to movies. Meet with
other friends. Play cards. We played a lot of cards, Pinochle in particular.
We both loved Pinochle. We would play late into the night and get pretty
silly with it. That’s about it. I don’t remember anything else.
Rosenberg: So what was it like back then with couples deciding to get married? I’m a
twenty-one-year-old senior, and I think that I’m having difficulty
understanding the decision to get married that young. [01:10:13] So what
was that like, and what did your family and friends think and what was
considered the best plan?
Noddings: Yes, well, I guess it happened more often at that time. Although, I was the
first of my friends to get married, and I think I was sort of in some way
proud of that because people all through high school had more or less said,
“Well, she isn’t going to get married because her nose is in a book all the
time.”
[01:11:02] It was a little bit hard. In my senior year, Jim and I didn’t
date. We were still very close. We worked together on a lot of things, but we
didn’t date. And I did date a couple of guys from the neighboring town,
Keyport. I don’t know. I don’t know what more to say about that. I mean
we were younger even than our closest friends when we got married, but we
were ready to do it and so we did it.
Rosenberg: No, this is very fascinating. I know that it might seem like there’s nothing to
say, but this is very fascinating to me. When did you decide to start a family
with Jim?

42

Noddings: [01:11:58] Well, let’s see. Our first couple years, you have to realize, I was
teaching, but he was a student at Drexel Institute in Philadelphia. We lived
right across the river from Philadelphia in Woodbury, New Jersey.
Remember, he had been in the service, so he was just starting college at the
time I was about finishing. So through the first two years or so, we couldn’t
even consider a family because he was still in school.
But then we began worrying about it because I had had--strange this
is in an interview but you can do what you like with this--but I had these
sort of irregular periods where I would maybe go three months without the
usual menstrual period. [01:13:11] And we were worried and the doctor said,
“Oh, you know, you may have difficulty having children,” and that kind of
scared us so we thought, “Well, maybe we should give it a try.” Well,
[laughs] there was no difficulty whatever. I mean we immediately [both
talking at once] got pregnant. Yeah, I know. You really have to listen and
weigh carefully what doctors say because they’re often wrong. I had quite
the opposite problem. All he had to do is wink at me, and I’d be pregnant.
So our first child was born in 1952, and that was just three years after we
were married.
[01:13:59] And we’d probably if we hadn’t been nervous about the
possibility, we probably would have waited another couple years. But that
was fine.
Rosenberg: So what were the two years before your first child was born? Where were
you living in Woodbury? Were you living in an apartment together?

43

Noddings: Oh, you know that reminds me of something really important. I have a copy
of it sitting right here in front of me. I was teaching in Woodbury. I started
out with a sixth grade class, and here I was trained to teach high school
math. And so the sixth graders looked awful little to me. But I loved them.
At the end of that first year of teaching sixth graders, there was a space
problem, a shortage, at the junior high, and we were asked if we would
consider staying together into seventh grade.
[01:15:06] But the kids and their parents and I all had to agree on
this, and we did. There were three girls who decided they were going to go
to the junior high and not stay with us, and their reason was boys. They
wanted to meet some new boys. So we stayed together through seventh
grade.
And then there was still a junior high overcrowding problem at the
end of that year, and we were asked if we’d stay together for another year.
This was eighth grade. And we said, “Yes.” And then two of the girls who
had gone to the junior high came back, and their reason for coming back
was the same as their one for leaving, boys. First, they wanted to meet new
boys. Now they wanted to get away from them. [laughs]
[01:15:59] I mean it’s just an experience that is hard to describe,
working with the same kids for three years and at an age level where most
people would just as soon avoid kids. Seventh and eighth grade, imagine.
But I loved it. And what I was mentioning here at the start, there’s an
article. It appeared in the Philadelphia Inquirer in 2001. I could mail this to
you. We had something of a reunion of that class. And it’s a very nicely

44

done article in the Philadelphia Enquirer. [01:16:55] So here we are so many
years later. The article is in 2001, and we’re talking about 1950 and how
we’ve remembered each other and the things the kids remembered about
what Jim, my husband, and I did with them. And then the reporter
observing all of this couldn’t get over the fact that I remembered all of their
names. But, see, it was an extraordinary experience to teach the same kids
for three years. And it certainly has colored all of my teaching life.
[01:17:56] But I will send this to you or you could get it from the
Philadelphia Enquirer. Monday, May 28, 2001. And it’s apparently available on
e-mail in plain text and so forth.
Rosenberg: I’ll look up the article. I can probably find it. But I would love to talk more
about those first years teaching. So when we spoke earlier, you explained a
little bit about why you took this particular position and your transition
from college into this first teaching job. So could you go into a little more
detail again about how you ended up in this classroom? And then we’ll talk
about the class itself.
Noddings: Yes. Well, remember that I said that I graduated on August 17th, got
married on the 20th, and then we were immediately looking for a place to
live, somewhere within commuting distance of Drexel where Jim was in
school. And I was looking for a teaching job. And here we are, practically at
the beginning of the school year. I was trained to be a high school math
teacher, but I did have what was called then an emergency elementary
certificate. So I was eligible to teach elementary school and the job available
was the sixth grade classroom in Woodbury. And that’s how I got started.

45

And the kids and I just hit it off. It was a wonderful experience. As I
said, it has affected my entire teaching life. So that’s how that goes.
Rosenberg: [01:20:01] Were there any notable challenges that you encountered in the
beginning of this experience?
Noddings: Well, the challenge was balanced by enormous satisfaction because since I
had been interested in all the subjects in high school--remember my telling
you of those four years of all those things. The fun of teaching all of that
stuff instead of just math was wonderful. So the intellectual challenge was
very welcomed and just connecting with the kids. One of the things I did all
three years with the kids was to run a school play that would be available for
the whole community at Christmas time. And I think the kids all had
wonderful memories of that.
[01:21:13] We did The Christmas Carol. You remember the person who
played Scrooge, the people who played all the other parts. So it was so much
more liberating than just teaching math. We spent time preparing plays. We
did enormous amounts of artwork. It gave me an opportunity to use all the
stuff that I had been so interested in in high school in my actual teaching
experience. It was terrific fun.
Rosenberg: [01:21:59] Are there any other particular stories or memories that you’d like
to share with either your students or colleagues or family of your students
from those first couple years?
Noddings: There’s too many of them. I still see some of those people, in particular Dan
Chard, who is a professor at Brown University now. And he’s a pretty wellknown artist. We could spend hours talking about stories there.

46

Rosenberg: Do you have any stories of this particular professor from when he was a
child?
Noddings: [01:22:58] No, I don’t think I do except that he was a little bit shy and really
took to heart and apparently felt that I had encouraged him in that, and I’m
glad I did because he certainly turned out right for him.
Rosenberg: You clearly covered a broad range of topics and engaged in theater and in
art and literature and across multiple disciplines within this early teaching,
and, later in your work, you encourage other students, or other teachers
rather, to stretch their disciplines from within.
[01:24:02] Do you think that this period of time, which obviously
influenced your later work, are you able pinpoint certain moments that were
influential in your later research or your later career work?
Noddings: Well, it isn’t so much moments, I guess, as the whole constellation of things,
and this is what somewhat discourages me as an educator, I mean one with
a fair degree of prominence who has been quoted a lot and so forth. But it
just seems to me that in so many ways we’re on the wrong track. We’re just
so concentrated on cramming stuff into kids’ heads, so that they will give
good answers on the standardized tests that we forget that that isn’t the way
intellectual development occurs.
[01:25:16] And it certainly isn’t the way character and social
development occur. And we need to stop that and spend time with the
people we’re teaching. Talk with them. Listen to them. Encourage them to
find their own interests and develop them, and not to push stuff on them all
the time. The way we’re working now is just it’s just not necessary, and it

47

isn’t the way people develop intellectually.
[01:26:00] All you have to do is read some biographies of people who
are doing wonderful intellectual work, and you won’t find that their
crediting the people who helped them get good marks on standardized tests.
That just doesn’t appear in the stories.
Rosenberg: Did you have to administer standardized tests when you were teaching that
class?
Noddings: They did administer a standardized test. It was either at the end of seventh
grade or eighth grade to the kids. And I was kind of hoping my kids would
do better than the kids who were in the junior high, even though some of
them were in a more upscale economic condition. Well they didn’t do
better, but they did just as well. They were right on par.
[01:27:00] But, in addition to the standardized tests, the people
looking at this asked the special teachers--my kids one afternoon a week
would go up to the junior high for art and music and PE and whatever else
but from specialized teachers--and so they asked questions about the
affective and social skills of the kids. And there my kids ranked way above
all the rest, and that was very gratifying.
I mean all of the teachers said they preferred working with these kids
rather than any of the others because they were friendly and outgoing and
honest and full of jokes. So that was enormously gratifying. And I’ve never
forgotten that, and I think it’s an important thing for teachers to know now.
If you want to produce good people, you’ve got to do more than cram
arithmetic in them.

48

Rosenberg: [01:28:12] So what were your students like? What were their backgrounds
like?
Noddings: Well, I would say that the majority of them were what we would call today
lower-middle class or middle class. Most of them came from two-parent
families but not all of them. Three of the boys that Jim and I spent a lot of
time with had no fathers, and so they really took to Jim. That was another
thing. Jim spent a lot of time with them. He would come back home from
college across the river and come over and play basketball with the kids. We
taught them all how to dance and a lot of stuff like that.
[01:29:00] That was important. But their backgrounds, in today’s
language I would say middle class to lower-middle class, yes.
Rosenberg: So what was that involvement like with the students with Jim and with you,
and was that during the school day or was that outside of school hours?
Noddings: It would be right after school when Jim might be playing basketball with
them. The kids used to come over to our apartment, two or three of them,
on a Saturday morning and ask whether we could take a walk together.
I remember teaching them how to play chess, although I am not a
good chess player. I don’t play it anymore. But I knew all the moves and
what not, so we taught them to play chess.
[01:29:58] As I said, we taught them to dance, and apparently they’ve
never forgotten that because in the Philadelphia Enquirer article a couple of
them remember that.
[01:30:11] And Jim was just as interested. Well, as I told you, he was
interested in acting. He’s always been active with acting groups and so he, of

49

course, was fascinated with the school play that I insisted on doing every
year for Christmas and would help out with that. And the kids liked that,
too. So, yes. Both of us were very involved with these kids and liked and
enjoyed them.
Rosenberg: Do you remember your thought process around these different projects? So
with the play you wanted to do the play every year, with instances like
dancing or basketball, was the thought process, “These kids should learn
how to dance. I’m going to teach them to dance,” or did one of the kids ask
you for these activities? How did this perhaps sort of come to fruition?
Rosenberg: [01:31:12] It certainly wasn’t the first suggestion that you gave. These kids
should learn how to dance. We’ll teach them how to dance. That wasn’t it. It
was more like here’s something they have they want to do and we like it,
and we can show them how to do it and enjoy it with them. I know it all
sounds kind of wild in the current age of education, but that’s really the way
it was. And you keep in mind that we were only like seven or eight years
older than these kids.
Rosenberg: [01:32:05] That sounds wonderful.
Noddings: It was wonderful it really was. Yes.
Rosenberg: So you spent three years with that same class, and then what was your next
class like?
Noddings: Well, what happened then was that Jim finished at Drexel. I was with these
kids for the three years, and I was ready to go on with them in a sense to
high school and get back to what I was officially trained to do, teach high
school math. And the first job Jim got offered was in our old home

50

territory, so we moved back to that area some miles north of the
Philadelphia area in New Jersey.
[01:33:11] And that was the end of that. We moved away from
Woodbury and back to Central New Jersey, and the next job I got, I think,
was with New Jersey Television. And I wasn’t with them very long. And
after that, my teaching was all at the high school level in high school math.
Rosenberg: So what did you do or how did you spend your time when you weren’t
working if there were significant chunks of periods of time when you
weren’t working?
Noddings: Well, keep in mind that from 1952 on, I had kids, babies, one right after
another.
Rosenberg: [01:34:02] Let’s talk about the babies. Could you talk about the babies, what
was parenting like with having these children one after another?
Noddings: Well, for the most part, it was a joy. I think both Jim and I enjoyed it.
Although there were nights when a baby would cry, and I would hope that
he would get up and he would hope that I would get up. [laughs] I think
that happens in most families. So we were busy. I mean stop and think
about it. Our first child was in 1952. I had another in 1954, and then 1955
and 1957, so I had four kids in five years. That’s a lot of kids.
[01:35:03] And during that time, I think I had three years off from
teaching. The rest of the time I managed to do it.
Rosenberg: When you said you were very much influenced by Pearl Buck, and I’m not
exactly sure of the year of the publication that you read that influenced your
thought pattern, but when did you decide to adopt?

51

Noddings: Well, for all this, I’d have to go through my files and check on it. But we
learned that Pearl Buck had established an adoption agency. The Welcome
House is the title of it in Doylestown, Pennsylvania. And that was not all
that far away from where we were.
[01:36:07] What made us decide that we would do this, I have to give
that some thought. I don’t remember exactly. I can remember having lots of
conversations, his about his experience in Korea, mine about a lot of the
things I had read by Pearl Buck. So we contacted that agency, and that’s
how we got started on that process.
Rosenberg: What was the Welcome House Organization like?
Noddings: Well, it was a certified adoption agency. I don’t know how closely it was
connected to the Pearl Buck Foundation.
[01:37:04] But certainly there was some connection there. Have you
ever watched the TV series MASH?
Rosenberg: No, I have not.
Noddings: You’ve heard of it, though?
Rosenberg: Mm-hmm.
Noddings: Probably. It was very popular for a long time. Well, in this house, it’s still
popular. I still watch it regularly. And one of the episodes, the episode is
entitled “Yes, Sir. That’s Our Baby,” I think is the title of it. But it’s a story
about a Korean American infant who is virtually doomed if she has to stay
in Korea. It’s an interesting story, but at the very end of it, when they put all
of the credits and what not together, you get a quick flash--and I didn’t even
notice it for the first few years of MASH, but I know that it’s there now--

52

thanking the Pearl Buck Foundation for some support and information.
[01:38:14] It flashes on the screen so fast you don’t even get a chance
to read it. But she and her foundation were very, very influential in finding
homes for these children who were not welcome in Korea. Not only not
welcome, they were actually despised, just not wanted at all. And we heard
about that and thought, “Well, we should roll up our sleeves and help there
a little bit.”
[01:39:00] And our country wasn’t a heck of a lot better than Korea
was. Korea didn’t do anything for these kids. They didn’t even protect them,
and our country didn’t want any part of them, either. Other nations that had
participated in that war were more generous in helping with these kids. Our
country was not. But it turned out that you could adopt a Korean American
child thanks to Pearl Buck and her foundation, Welcome House.
But even there, our country put a limit of two. We could only have
two visas for Korean American kids. We wound up with three because one
of the kids was already in the country and had been brought in on someone
else’s visa and then that family decided they didn’t want him after all.
[01:39:59] And so that’s how we wound up with three Korean
American kids. It is not a happy episode in our history.
Rosenberg: In American history?
Noddings: In American history, yes. No, it’s not the only thing we should be ashamed
of, but it is one of those things.
Rosenberg: So you had children in 1952, 1954, 1955, 1957. You adopted three Korean
American children, and then did you adopt two more?

53

Noddings: Well, we had one more--yes, the youngest natural child,
[1:40:59] Yes, we had. And then two more came along and sort of
joined up with the family. They’re listed in our wills, and they are considered
members of the family, but we were never able to formally adopt them
because they had living mothers. We took it as part of our task to help them
get along with those mothers as well as possible.
So while they called us mom and dad and I’m still their mom, we did
do the best we could to help them have good relationships with their
biological mothers.
Rosenberg: Professor Noddings, I know this isn’t the smoothest time to cut off our
conversation, but I’ve held you thirteen minutes longer than I was hoping
to. So maybe we can just pick it up next week here, in the middle of talking
about your early teaching career and the beginning of your life of being a
parent. [01:42:19] And then we can continue through chronologically with
the rest of it.
Noddings: Yes. Because all the interesting stuff on Stanford is yet to come.
Rosenberg: Yet to come. You have a wealth of information to provide. And thank you
so much for telling all of your stories. I know that you might have thought
they’re superfluous, but they’re wonderful and they’re really just really great
information.

Rosenberg: This is Chelsea Rosenberg with the Stanford Historical Society Oral History
Program. Today is May 10, 2016. I am speaking with Stanford University’s
Professor Nell Noddings. We are conducting this interview as part of the
Stanford Faculty Oral History Project. We are on our second part of the
oral history, speaking via telephone. I’m on the campus of Stanford
University and Professor Noddings is at her home in Ocean Grove, New
Jersey.
And Professor Noddings, I’d like to begin by asking you to tell us a
little bit about what you noticed were the effects of the Civil Rights
Movement on your public school teaching in New Jersey.
Noddings: Well, the one thing that is probably worth spending a couple minutes on is
that there was a sharp difference among faculty members and there still is,
by the way. That’s why it’s interesting. [00:00:58] Many felt that we should
not take time out of our regular classes to talk about any of the things that
were going on, even the riots that were going on in the nearby town. And
my closest colleague in the math department said that the best thing to do

55

was to ignore all that and stick right with the curriculum to show the kids
that there was a place of continuity and peace and quiet and all the rest of it.
I felt very strongly on the opposite side that we should talk about the things
that were so important and that the kids were so concerned with, and I
wanted to talk with them to counsel them against getting in the midst of
violence and riots and so forth. So I won’t say any more about that and
about that time except to note that we still have arguments like that in
education where there are teachers who feel that you shouldn’t deviate from
the instructional objective. [00:02:05] You keep everything right according
to the curriculum. And others of us who feel very strongly that discussion,
conversation, listening to one another, particularly on social and political
issues is extremely important. I always had a strong reputation as a
successful math teacher. The kids did well. But I would drop the quadratic
equation in a minute if I felt the kids needed to talk about a social or
political problem.
Rosenberg: Did you have similar conversations about social and political issues with
your children at home?
Noddings: Sure. Oh, sure. Yes.
Rosenberg: [00:02:59] Do you have any particular memories of those kinds of
conversations from the early 1960s or maybe the mid-1960s because your
kids were so young?
Noddings: Yes. Well, for the kids at home, we’d shift to the late 1960s where the first
two of our kids to go to college were enmeshed in all these social problems.
In fact, they both changed schools after their first year because they were so

56

immersed in all this. But neither of them seemed to regret it, and they’ve
both had very successful professional lives, so I guess it was okay. But it
really was a wild time.
Rosenberg: So what was that process like of them leaving schools, and how did that
affect your other children and your family in general?
Noddings: [00:04:03] Well, they did fine. They left the initial schools, to which they
went, and they did just fine at the next place. By that time, things were
settling down a little bit in the public arena. But I think the fact that their
engagement in political affairs was accepted at home--we worried about it
and we counseled them to be careful and we argued back and forth on
things, but they never felt chastised for it or that they were in trouble at
home for taking political positions on campus. So it worked out all right.
[00:05:03] And one of them had gone to a small college just outside
of Chicago, or in Chicago, Shimer College. And after a year there, I guess it
was around the time we moved to California, anyway, so he wound up going
to Berkeley and did just fine at Berkeley. Although, this is kind of a funny
side, when we took him up to leave him at Berkeley, this was in a very hectic
time. I remember driving home. I almost broke down in tears. I said to my
husband, “How could we leave our son in such a horrible place?” Berkeley
at that time, it was in sort of a political uproar.
[00:06:01] But he’d had enough political uproar, and he settled down.
There was no problem there.

57

Rosenberg: Did your children have any expectations from you two or any general
notions about what your generation should be doing in terms of getting
involved or staying out of the way of political and social issues at the time?
Noddings: We just stayed open to conversation and to some light counseling. I mean
both Jim and I were very much on the liberal end of the political spectrum.
So the kids knew we were with them, but also that we had reservations
about going too far.
[00:07:04] And we were certainly always definitely opposed to
violence. The kids knew that. And I think they were, too. So it was a time
that the older kids in the family remember, remember very well, but they
don’t remember it with any resentment because we were on the same side.
Rosenberg: Interesting. So going back a little bit. I would just like to hear what were
some of your favorite memories with your children when they were young
in New Jersey.
Noddings: Oh, gee. If we get on that, we’ll never get onto the-Rosenberg: Okay, maybe just one then.
Noddings: [00:07:57] Well, one thing that all of the kids remember is our Sunday nights
because we lived not far from the grandparents on both sides. Jim’s parents
in particular came almost every Sunday night for dinner and to watch
television, Disneyworld and there was something else that came right before
or after Disneyworld. And I think all the kids, everybody remembers those
very special evenings--family dinners with grandma and grandpa and
watching television programs and talking about them. That was sort of
typical for the family through those years.

58

Rosenberg: [00:08:56] So looking at your professional career then, you served as the
Mathematics Department Chairperson of the Matawan High School from
1958 to 1962. And then the following year began your graduate education at
Rutgers University. So could you please tell me about your National Science
Foundation fellowship and about your decision to leave your chairperson
position and go to graduate school?
Noddings: Well, it was a wonderful opportunity and I wish that the National Science
Foundation would do something like that now because for fellowships, you
had to apply, of course, and qualify, and all that. But the fellowships paid
the entire tuition plus approximately half what your usual salary would be,
half or maybe a little more than that. So you could afford to take the time
off. And I certainly wasn’t going to pass that up.
[00:10:00] So I did that, and I wish it were available for teachers
today. It is not.
Rosenberg: Was there a point in time when you knew that you wanted to continue with
further education or was that process to decide to go for further education
unrelated to longer-term planning?
Noddings: Yes, well, I think through most of my career in secondary education, I was
thinking in terms, perhaps, of going into administration. At Matawan, I did
serve as assistant principal for a couple years.
[00:10:57] I did it with the agreement that I would continue my
teaching, and I wish more administrators felt that way. You don’t just drop
your teaching and become an administrator. So through the years that I was
assistant principal, I always taught two math classes. Even when I started

59

my work at Stanford I was still thinking in terms of secondary school
administration. It was in my first quarter at Stanford that I started to change
my mind. And by the second full quarter, I had entirely changed my mind.
Rosenberg: [00:11:56] So just to clarify, did you need that graduate degree to go into
administration? Is that why you did it?
Noddings: It was not absolutely essential. Remember that we moved to California for
my husband’s work. He’s an engineer and, in fact, was responsible for the
building of a couple of the biggest electronics places out there. So that was
the big thing at the time. I went to Stanford because I had always wanted to
get the higher degree. Up until that time, it was aimed at school
administration. But I began to have doubts about that in my first quarter.
And as I said, by the second or third, I was utterly convinced that I wanted
to do something quite different. [00:12:59] And that was wonderful.
Rosenberg: Before we get to Stanford, can you just tell me a little bit more about what
your graduate program at Rutgers was like?
Noddings: It was all math. There were only two classes that were not, and I liked them
a lot. When I look back on all the years of my education, I guess I would
have the fewest good things to say about the time at Rutgers because math
departments then--and I’m afraid from what I hear from colleagues still
now-- are very, what would you say? Very male-oriented.
[00:13:57] I don’t think there was a woman on that faculty. They were
all men. All sort of contemptuous of women I did find. But it was not the
sort of supportive, encouraging atmosphere that you’d want to put in many
more years with. And as I understand it, the math departments all over the

60

country are still very much like that. Well, you know that. All you have to do
is read the Chronicle of Higher Education, and you hear it enough.
Rosenberg: Do you have any particular memories of Rutgers, of the math department
that informs that statement? If you don’t have any memories of particular
moments, that’s fine, too.
Noddings: [00:14:57] Yes, I think I would just as soon skip that. I did fine, but I was
not sorry to be done with it. Let’s leave it that way.
Rosenberg: That’s fine.
Rosenberg: So after getting your master’s you were a teacher and the assistant principal,
and then you were also the curriculum supervisor of Montgomery
Township from 1970 to 1972. So can you tell me more about your work, as
you were mentioning earlier, as an assistant principal and as a teacher at the
same time?
Noddings: Yes. Well, I won’t say a lot about that. I enjoyed both. Of course, the math
work at Rutgers was enormously helpful in putting together the new
curriculum. That’s worth mentioning.
[00:16:07] This was the time of the new math, and I loved the new
math. I loved it. But a lot of my students did not. And I can remember that
in the first couple years I insisted that at the end of eleventh grade, we did
administer one standardized test. I mean, one. Not the way we are today
with six or seven of them. But it came right from the publishers of the math
curriculum. And I said I thought it would be a good idea to get the one on
the standard math and one on the new math, so that we could assure
parents that the kid weren’t losing out by studying in the new math

61

curriculum. And so we did that, and the kids did well on both.
[00:16:57] So we were okay on the new math. But I learned gradually
and convincingly that while I loved it and that some of my students did, a
lot of students absolutely hated it. When you’re working on curriculum in
the public schools, you have to think carefully and not go whole hog in one
direction or another, but pick the best features of the programs that are
available and build something that’s suitable for the people you’re working
with.
And, of course, I’m writing about that sort of thing now on the
importance of that sort of collegial conversation and work. So you ought
not to pick one program and go whole hog with it and then when that
doesn’t work, drop it entirely and pick up another. It’s a much more
pragmatic business than that.
Rosenberg: [00:18:01] So why did you like the new math better than the standard math
curriculum?
Noddings: Well, there was a great emphasis on logic, and I liked that. I guess that was a
sort of preview to my coming interest in philosophy. I liked the emphasis on
proofs and careful definitions and following through on things. It was just
really quite elegant.
Rosenberg: So what was it like when your family moved to California? Because I believe
after your time as curriculum supervisor, then you moved to California. Is
that correct?
Noddings: Yes.

62

Rosenberg: So when you and I spoke earlier, you described a bit about why moved to
California and your husband’s new work there, but could you just go into a
little more depth about your family’s decision to move to California?
Noddings: [00:19:10] Well, it was entirely, completely for Jim’s work. Nothing else
involved in the decision. But when I started at Stanford, I guess it was
somewhere in the middle of that winter. That would have been 1969-1970
that there was a sort of a temporary electronics depression. Now this
happens all the time in California, but we didn’t know that at the time, and it
scared us because he was going to almost certainly going to have to look for
another job. We both felt that the safest thing for us to do is to go back to
New Jersey where I knew I could get a good job and he would, too.
[00:20:05] And so we left California after being out there for the
equivalent of one school year and came back to New Jersey. And that’s
when I took the job as curriculum supervisor in Montgomery Township.
And he got a job with Revlon. So we both had decently paying jobs, but I
knew at that time that I wanted to continue my doctoral work at Stanford,
and Jim wanted to go back to California, too. So I went out for summer
quarter, and then the following year, we moved back. And then I took up
full-time work, again, at Stanford.
[00:20:58] So that two years as the curriculum supervisor in
Montgomery Township, it was an interim thing, and one of those summers
I spent at Stanford.

63

Rosenberg: Okay. That makes it a bit more clear. Then can you walk me through your
initial decision to take the GRE and to apply to Stanford, and to enroll in
the education PhD program there before you left and realized you loved it?
Noddings: Well, when I started at Stanford as I said, my goal was to get an
administrative certificate and to be either an associate superintendent or a
superintendent of schools. That was the idea. But very, very quickly at
Stanford, my very first quarter there I was enrolled in two philosophy of
[education] courses because there were two were required.
[00:22:10] And I decided I would take them and get them out of the
way. That was the goal. And so I had those two courses, and I also had one
in psychology of ed and one in sociology. Such an exciting quarter. It was
just wonderful. And as that quarter went along, the house started filling up
with philosophy books. They were everywhere. And so you can see I was
converted. By the time we got back and then I had to take winter quarter off
because I had a houseful of sick kids, but in spring quarter when I went
back, I was pretty well convinced that I was going to switch from
curriculum to philosophy. [00:23:03] Which I did.
Rosenberg: So what was the education department like back then? Did you work very
closely with students that were also focused in philosophy, or did different
concentrations all work closely together?
Noddings: I think generally speaking, people did not pay too much attention to
departmental demarcations. And that was something that I loved about my
entire professional career at Stanford. We were free to work all over the
place with whomever was interested in similar work, and we didn’t even

64

think about departmental divisions.
[00:24:03] In fact, I just had an email from a former student a couple
days ago asking about a person who had taught there and he was reminding
me that was before we even thought about departments, that’s right, we had
area groups. One area was curriculum, and one was philosophy and social
sciences or something. I don’t even remember the name of it. But I
belonged to two of those, not just to one. And so it was typical of the
School of Education and of much of Stanford, not just the School of
Education to have these conversations and projects and research efforts that
involved people from a number of places and not just one tight little group.
[00:25:06] Enormously appealing, it’s just something that I always
been grateful for about Stanford.
Rosenberg: How would you describe the culture of the Graduate School of Education?
Or, if you worked really closely with the rest of Stanford, you can
incorporate the rest of Stanford, too. But how would you describe the
culture and the other PhD students and faculty?
Noddings: Well, I know it will sound crazy, but my first quarter at Stanford, I can
remember telling my husband that I thought I had got to educational
heaven. It was just wonderful. I mean the professors were engaged. They
didn’t simply lecture. There was discussion.
[00:25:57] There was question-raising. It was just enormously
supportive. It was the way I had always dreamed education should be. And
here I was now in it and part of it. I will be eternally grateful for that.

65

Rosenberg: Can we go back to how you decided on your work within your particular
field of study? So those two philosophy courses the first quarter drove you
towards the philosophy area group rather than just the curriculum area
group. But when did you start working on your dissertation topic, which
was “Constructivism as a Base for a Theory of Teaching.” So how did that
come together?
Noddings: Yes, this was a time when, oh, probably the most talked about scholar in the
area of education was Jean Piaget.
[00:27:03] I mean everybody was reading Piaget, talking about Piaget-I mean it’s shocking in a way that students do not go off and read Piaget
now. But they do know something about constructivism for which he was at
least partly responsible. I became interested in psychology and the
philosophy connected with it, and Piaget’s work, and so I decided that that
was what I would work on. And that was the title of my dissertation.
Now I wasn’t a loafer. I wasn’t sitting around. I had all these kids and
I wanted to get finished with my work, much as I loved it. I actually finished
my last course and my dissertation in the same quarter.
Rosenberg: [00:28:02] Wow.
Noddings: Yes, I did the whole thing in seven quarters.
Rosenberg: That’s an incredible timeframe.
Noddings: Yes.
Rosenberg: So what was that like? Can you just explain a little bit more about how you
handled your course load, your teaching work, and your caretaking
responsibilities within those seven quarters?

66

Noddings: Well, once I knew what I wanted to do, it was a pretty straightforward path.
You’d read everything you could find on constructivism, think about it, and
get an outline, and write.
[00:29:04] I don’t know what to say about that. I’ve always been
pretty efficient in my scholarly work. I guess I was efficient in that because I
don’t know many people who do that now. I think they could, but there’s
such a--I don’t know what it is. Pressure to stay around in graduate school, I
guess, because there aren’t enough jobs, and so people want to keep an
affiliation and one way to keep an affiliation is to stay in graduate school for
years and years because at least then you’re affiliated with a university.
[00:30:00] But, see, I wasn’t worried about that. To my mind, I
couldn’t hang around all that time. I had to finish and get out. I liked what I
was doing, and so I did it. I was ready to get out in the job market.
Rosenberg: Was it difficult to fulfill the work you had for your classes and on your
dissertation with your children at home?
Noddings: [laughs] Well, I didn’t know any better. I’d had kids at home through my
early teaching years and through the graduate work at Rutgers, and so
through the doctoral work as well.
I do remember at least one funny thing there, and I think this was
during a summer quarter. We were in a class. It was a small class, a
discussion sort of class, one that I loved.
[00:31:09] And there was this noise outside the window. The class
was in Cubberley on the second floor, so this would be looking out in the
direction of the union and plaza and what not. So here was this noise, and it

67

began to worry me a little bit because I thought I recognized the voices. So I
got up and looked out the window, and there was a bunch of my kids
outside the building having a grand time. And so I had to open the window
and kind of half quietly say, “Go away. Go away. Stop that.” That I
remember. So the kids were around; that’s for sure.
Rosenberg: [00:31:58] So did they spend many days with you on campus?
Noddings: Oh, they didn’t spend whole days, but they did spend some time on campus,
sure. No, they didn’t spend whole days. I mean through their regular year,
they had school. And it was only through the summer, though, they could
get away and pester me on campus.
Rosenberg: Do you have any other funny memories of the kids on campus?
Noddings: Just the one I told you. All of them standing outside the window.
Rosenberg: It’s amazing they found you.
Noddings: Yes. Well, hmm. It is, but they did.
Rosenberg: So during those years as a PhD student, some have described Stanford as at
times tumultuous with student-led movements or activism. [00:33:06] Do
you have any memories of student protest or student discord?
Noddings: Oh, yes, sure. Of course, I do. And they were pretty wild. I remember one
evening when I was sort of scared. Then a young man came along and said,
“Don’t be afraid. We’re not here to hurt anybody.” I breathed sort of a sigh
of relief. I knew they weren’t planning to hurt anybody, but it was still sort
of scary. And there was damage done on the campus at that time but we got
through it and in the School of Education as I recall, we made some

68

dramatic and very healthy changes to some of the routines. [00:34:05] And
so that is a positive outcome
Rosenberg: Can you tell me a little bit about what those changes were?
Noddings: Well, they were changes in qualifying tests and that sort of thing. They were
made much more reasonable.
Rosenberg: In those times when the student activism was particularly poignant or
apparent to you, do you remember what students were asking for or what
they were doing?
Noddings: [00:34:57] No. I’d have to go back and rack my brain some on that. What I
do remember is that there was an excellent rapport between students and
faculty, and lots of open discussion sessions. And I think that was all to the
good. So, that by the culmination of all this, the school was in better shape
than it was before it started. And there were no lingering--well, at least none
that I know of--no lingering animosities or that sort of thing. It increased
collegiality, at least in the School of Education, and that’s all to the good.
Rosenberg: Can we go back just briefly to that one memory you brought up where you
said things got pretty wild and that you spoke with a young man who
reassured you? [00:35:58] Can you give me a little more detail about that
event and where were you? Do you remember when it was and what was
going on around you?
Noddings: Well, I remember rioters taking over the student union, for example. And I
remember a lot of us standing around outside, and the lights were off in
there. We didn’t know what was going on. And then the lights came on and
someone came out and declared that the students had taken over the

69

student union. It was that sort of thing. Anybody who’s been through a
public controversy of that sort can remember things of that sort. I couldn’t
tell you exactly what night it happened or anything of that sort.
[00:36:57] I’d be making it up if I did. But with all the riotous
behavior and the attacks on Hoover Institution, for example, and other
things of that sort--we often say the center cannot hold. Well, what
happened at Stanford was that the center could hold, that it brought
students and faculty and administrators together rather than separate them
and create greater hostility. That I can say. You’ll have to talk with some
other people who went through the same time. But I think you’d probably
get roughly the same story. And so most sections of the university I think
felt that they were in better shape after than they had been before, but you’d
want to get another opinion on that.
Rosenberg: Surely. I completely understand that you can’t remember a certain day or
time. [00:38:01] But for me, this is just very shocking. And atypical of what
it’s like on campus, right now. Do you remember this relating to larger
national context or regional context of events going on?
Noddings: Yes, well all of those things were going on, but one of the things that I
remember vividly is that there were classes cancelled, so that faculty and
students could meet together to talk about these things. And at those
meetings, when there were complaints about too many qualification tests for
moving to the dissertation stage and up, a whole bunch of the procedural
kinds of things, they were wonderful meetings.
[00:39:06] The faculty treated students with great respect. So it was a

70

time of rebellion and in some areas destruction. But in the part of Stanford
that I was involved with at the time it was a period of constructive change. I
know that probably sounds kind of odd to you, but it really was. That’s the
way it was.
Rosenberg: You moved around a little bit in the Bay area at the time. What was the
greater Bay Area like while you were here for your PhD, before you left to
go to Penn State?
Noddings: [00:40:02] Hmm, well, I don’t know how to describe it. I was too busy to
notice any details. We lived briefly in that first year in San Jose. We were not
really happy with the San Jose schools. So when we had an opportunity to
move to Palo Alto, we did. That was better. It was better for the kids and
better for me, too, because it wasn’t much of a commute.
[00:41:00] But I don’t remember much of what was going on in the
immediate neighborhood.
Rosenberg: Then wrapping up your time as a PhD student at Stanford, what were some
of your favorite memories from your years there?
Noddings: Well, the intellectual variety--the combination social and intellectual
meetings. I don’t know. I guess that’s really the central part of it, that it was
all whole, so to speak.
[00:42:00] It wasn’t you’ve got this thing you had to do and
something else that was entirely different, and then your social life was
separated from that. It was all somehow unified, and that was wonderful to
have occasional meetings at our advisor’s home where we would talk about
what we were reading and have wonderful discussions. The movement of

71

professors from one group to another to increase the conversation, again. It
was just marvelously intellectually stimulating, and that’s primarily what I
remember.
[00:42:52] I mean I didn’t have time to be running around having
drinks with people at night. I just I couldn’t, you can understand, with my
family. My time on campus was my time at classes and between classes and
that’s about it.
Rosenberg: Who was your advisor? Do you remember?
Noddings: Oh, sure. Of course, I do. It was Lawrence Thomas. He was a philosopher
of education, a Yale man, and he was just an extraordinary teacher,
extraordinary teacher and that’s what got me started in philosophy. Yes.
Rosenberg: Was he the professor of one of those first courses you took?
Noddings: Yes, both of them. He taught both of those courses.
Rosenberg: What was the process like? Did he help inform a lot of your dissertation
study? [00:44:01] Did he help guide you through that process? Or was he
more hands off?
Noddings: Oh, sure. He was my dissertation advisor, as well. But I also had a professor
from the philosophy department on my dissertation committee, and a very
prominent psychologist because I was using Piaget. So I had my dissertation
committee, I had my philosophy of ed advisor who got me started in this
whole thing, and the professor from psychology, and then the philosophy
professor, Julius Moravcsik, was on my dissertation committee as well.
Rosenberg: So is there anything else that you think you would like to talk about from
your PhD years? [00:45:03] Is there anything we didn’t cover?

72

Noddings: I don’t think so because there’s so much to cover from my years as a
professor there. Something may occur to me later. I’ll make a note because
when we spend some extra time if something comes up from those student
years, I will pass it on.
Rosenberg: Of course. Okay. Perfect. Then let’s move into the time you took away from
Stanford. So if you could tell me about what finishing your PhD and
deciding to teach at Penn State, what did that process look like?
Noddings: Well I was very fortunate to get an interview at Penn State. [00:45:57] There
were two men who finished their PhDs around the same time that I did, and
neither of them ever did get academic jobs. One did very well in a research
organization, and the other was a priest, so he just went back to his priest
work. But I had an interview at Penn State. I was delighted to have it and
was hired there so I started as assistant professor at Penn State.
Now, we didn’t stay very long in State College. There’s nothing
wrong with Penn State, mind you. This, again, was a problem for my
husband’s work. Penn State was at that time was quite rural, and he felt that
he had to go back to California to his really well-paid job. And he took one
of our kids with him and left me with all the rest of them.
[00:47:00] So I said, “Oh, God. How am I going to do this?” So I
didn’t stay long at Penn State. One semester, I guess. Then we moved the
whole family back to California. And for the next couple years, I did some
really interesting consulting work with Menlo Park and a number of other
places. I enjoyed that tremendously. But I still, of course, was hoping for a
proper academic job. I can still remember vividly we were living in Palo

73

Alto, and I guess it was a Sunday and I was looking at the New York Times.
And I passed the paper across the dining room table to my husband, and I
said, “Look at this ad.” [00:48:03] I said, “What red-blooded philosopher of
education could pass this up?” It was an ad for Director of the Laboratory
Schools at the University of Chicago. And, of course, the laboratory schools
were founded by John Dewey. It was the center of educational philosophy
for quite a while. So I applied for that and got that job, and that’s when we
moved to Chicago.
Rosenberg: And the whole family went to Chicago. Correct?
Noddings: Yes, we all went to Chicago, right.
Rosenberg: So can you just tell me a bit more about your time at the University of
Chicago, your transition there, and your transition into the lab school work?
Noddings: Yes. Well, I loved it. I had no complaints about it at all.
[00:48:59] I had an opportunity to work with people in the Education
Department. I worked with Phil Jackson in particular. He and I got along
really well. He had been running the lab school before I took the job on, but
it was really an overload. So, again, much like Stanford, the University of
Chicago is a very open place intellectually, and you have opportunities to
talk with people doing all kinds of things from all over the place. So I
enjoyed that year tremendously, and I would have stayed there, and one of
my daughters who did her, I guess it was her sophomore year there in the
lab school, she loved it, too. Both of us loved it.
[00:50:00] But, again, my husband was not happy about Chicago. His
company had given him a transfer, but the transfer required him to have a

74

terrible drive from where we were living in Kenwood, just next to Hyde
Park. Hyde Park-Kenwood. And he had a horrible, horrible commute every
day, and so he wanted to go back to California. So at the end of that year,
we did. We went back to California, again. But my memories of the lab
schools and the faculty and the kids there are almost all positive. When I
first arrived there, the place was in a bit of turmoil because the teachers at
the lab school had formed a union.
[00:50:58] The University of Chicago was very unhappy with that.
And I remember Phil Jackson saying to me, “We don’t have unions in
academic institutions.” He was thoroughly annoyed with them, so there was
a big alienation there between the teachers’ unions and the administration.
However, we got a lot along just fine. I found by watching and working with
them that some of the teachers who had founded the unions were among
the best teachers I had ever worked with. They were just terrific. And at the
end of the year when they came into my office to say goodbye, one guy said,
“We’re just heartbroken.”
[00:52:01] So that was a kind of a beautiful end to it that I had
managed to forge relationships with the union people. Earlier in my
teaching years, I had nothing to do with a union. I was kind of anti-union.
But this was a real learning experience for me. And as I said, they were
among the very best teachers there, so it was a terrific experience.
Rosenberg: Was it sort of unusual in the time during the late 1970s in Chicago to see
these teachers form a union on the campus, or was there a lot of union
activity?

75

Noddings: Well, yes, it was very unusual on the University of Chicago campus. That’s
for sure. [00:53:00] And they were not entirely welcome there. I don’t know
just how it is that I learned so quickly what high-caliber people they were.
But they were, and I could hear that from students, too, that they were
terrific teachers and very professional. They had just made this one move
that the university could not approve officially. They were just, “A union.
Yuck.” [laughs] But it taught me a wonderful lesson and just to be open to
things and to listen to people. That was my first experience, and a positive
experience, with a union. And it was very positive.
Rosenberg: [00:54:00] What was your work like at the University of Chicago, and did it
influence your later research?
Noddings: Well, I guess everything I did has influenced my research to some degree.
Keep in mind, this is administrative work because I was director of the lab
schools, and that’s a compilation of four schools. We had a preschool,
elementary school, middle school, and high school with the principals as
heads in each of those, so there were lots of meetings. Then, of course,
there was the affiliation with the university because we were part of the
university, so there was that connection, too. So it was a busy year, but I
kept up with my professional work. [00:55:00] That is, my academic
professional work.
So all in all, I would say that it was a very positive year. The daughter
who went through her sophomore year there found it very positive. She
hated to leave. She would like to have stayed, but back to California we
went.

76

Rosenberg: How did the rest of the family, including Jim because we know Jim wanted
to go back, but how did the rest of family feel about moving around so
much during this time?
Noddings: For the most part, they were fine with it. One of our sons had a year at the
University of Chicago, but he was a kid who was never really interested in
academic stuff and so he probably wouldn’t have had a second year there,
anyway. He was interested in sports, and he spent some time on that, but he
was just as happy to be going back to California.
Rosenberg: [00:56:05] Just very briefly before we get back to your professional work,
what was life like for your kids during this period of time in the 1970s?
What was it like to be a younger person then?
Noddings: Well, I think you’d almost have to ask some of them. It had to be very
hectic because after all, we had moved from Palo Alto to Penn State, and in
between that we had spent almost two years in New Jersey while I was
curriculum supervisor out in Montgomery Township.
[00:56:54] So they had moved from California to New Jersey, and
back to California, and then to Penn State, and then back to California, then
to Chicago and back to California. It could not have been easy for them and
yet, most of them have good memories about it, or if they don’t, they
haven’t come back to sue us or anything. They seem to have survived it and
learned from it. But it had to have been really, really hectic for them.
Rosenberg: After you left University of Chicago, you went back to the Bay area and you
did some consulting work before.
Noddings: Right.

77

Rosenberg: So what were some of the biggest or most important lessons you learned
from the consulting work, or how did that influence your later work?
Noddings: Well, this was at the time when schools were concentrating on first it was
behavioral objectives, and then it was competencies. [00:58:13] It was the
beginning of an age that we still haven’t climbed out of, and I think it is one
of the most awful mistakes we’ve made in education. We moved to the idea
that teachers should have a specific instructional objective every day, teach
it, review it, test it, and do it again. Education loses vitality under those
circumstances. They were forever telling the students what to do, what they
have to know. They’re not asking them what they would like to know, what
excites them. [00:59:04] It’s so uninspiring, and it was the beginning of that
time.
Rosenberg: How did you see that come to fruition? How did that transformation
happen or was it more insidious?
Noddings: Well, it was gradual and I suppose many of us who were not happy with it,
thought that like most other things, it would go away. But, of course, we
know now that not only did it not go away, it got worse. It got to be
standard procedure. There’s a book that I’m reading now in galley form,
Substitute. It’s by a well-known author. [01:00:04] It’s by Nicholson Baker,
and it’s a long book, but it is a detailed description of working as a substitute
in the public schools. And so every short chapter is a day in his work as a
substitute, and I will write a comment for it because it’s just a shame the
way we’re doing things. The school day consists of long vocabulary lists to
be learned and tested. No opportunities to talk about the deep meanings of

78

any of these words. And then routinized writing, supposedly essays, but
essays that are prescribed exactly from the form of the title to the number
of paragraphs to the kinds of questions that you have to answer in the essay
and so forth. It is depressing.
[01:01:10] Really, depressing. So one of the things I will say in my
commentary is that people should read this carefully and pity the kids and
the teachers who are going through school like this. So it wasn’t as bad in
the 1970s as it is now, but that was the beginning of this whole way of doing
things that is so uninspiring. There’s just no intellectual excitement.
Rosenberg: So in your consulting work, I see that you consulted with the National
Institute of Education and with Policy Settings in Education in New York
and in some other school districts as well.
[01:02:06] So did you try to actively subvert this kind of process? Did
you see comments that you were working with-Noddings: Well, I’m not one to tell people what to do. But I like to raise questions and
encourage discussion, and get people thinking about things. And all of the
groups I worked with seemed to be accepting and interested and
appreciative of it. So these things went very well. But I think at the time,
most people thought that this highly prescribed methodological approach
would go away, and so they were still optimistic.
[01:03:01] Now when I work with Seton Hall--I do a couple lectures
a year with them--in talking with graduate students who are planning to be
administrators, well, they’re teachers. They’re teachers who are now
graduate students planning to be administrators. This seems perfectly

79

normal to them. This is the way schools are. You tell the kids exactly what
to do, when to do it, how to do it. Test it and test it and test it, and move
on.
And I think, “Gee it takes all of the intellectual inspiration and
delight out of teaching.” It’s too bad, but there it is.
Rosenberg: [01:04:01] So just in summation of this period of time away from Stanford,
what do you think moving from your PhD program in Stanford to Penn
State and to University of Chicago, then back to the Bay area doing
consulting work, how do you think these different experiences informed
your later research?
Noddings: Oh, I don’t know. I can’t answer that in any specific way. They gave me a
good grounding in reality so that I knew what was going on in schools and
was still thinking about what should go on in schools, so it encouraged my
curiosity and supported my continuing investigation.
[01:05:07] It was a time, I guess it was somewhere in my early years
on the faculty at Stanford when I was asked to participate in a state
committee. We met in various places around the state, sometimes at motels.
They were pushing for teachers to get more education and to somehow
prove that they had done all this. That’s putting it very broadly.
[01:05:56] I remember at one of the meetings I asked, “Well, what
will you do with these reports from the teachers?” And the man from the
state said, “We won’t do anything with them. We don’t even have room to
store them.” Uh-huh. I quit. That was the last meeting of that sort I
attended. We got so much of that kind of stuff from that period on where

80

you put down rules. You demand this and demand that, but you don’t do
anything with it. You don’t build on it. You don’t make things better with it.
You just add to the pile of stuff that teachers have to conform to. There’s
no evidence that it does a damn bit of good.
Rosenberg: So is that when you decided to try to find your way back into a
professorship role at Stanford?
Noddings: [01:07:01] Oh, I was already in one at that point. Yes, I was already in one.
Rosenberg: Can you tell me a bit about how you got that first job at Stanford?
Noddings: Yes. That’s easy. I was asked to fill in for professors who were going on
leave, and in the first area that I had been working in the curriculum area
with Elliot Eisner, in particular. He was a wonderful guy. So I was asked to
fill in for him while he was gone for, I don’t know, a quarter or two, and
then for another professor while he was gone for a quarter or two. And then
they badly needed someone to run the teacher education program called
STEP, Stanford Teacher Education Program.
[01:08:02] They particularly needed somebody who could help out
with the math work. And so I was hired as an acting assistant professor in
the curriculum area with this particular duty in mind, running the STEP
program. And that was such a challenging job that a couple people who
later became very close colleagues raised objections to it because they said,
“How can a person achieve tenure and do this work, too?’ And so they were
on my side trying to reduce the workload a little.
But, really, what did the trick for me there was, number one, I liked
doing it, so that didn’t seem a burden, and secondly, in the four years that I

81

did it, I had two of the most wonderful graduate students work as
administrators of the programs, Anna Richert and Vicky Leboski.
[01:09:14] Both of them became professors at Mills College, very
successful professors. I have expressed thanks to them publicly. I can’t tell
you how many times, because they sure were lifesavers. So that’s the way
that got going.
Rosenberg: I just want to keep you for a couple more minutes, and then we can take a
break and pick up the rest because we’ve been talking for a while. But if you
could just tell me a little bit more about the origins of the STEP program
and the genesis of it, that would be wonderful, and we can always pick this
up next time, too.
Noddings: [01:09:52] Yes. I can’t tell you much about the origins of it, but it grew very
rapidly before I was director of it. It was at a time when there was a teacher
shortage, I guess, in California, and so I know that the math sections were
huge a couple years before I took it on. It was just a normal sized program
while I was running it. In addition to being in charge of it, I also taught the
math curriculum and practice sessions, and that I enjoyed tremendously.
And in fact, one of my daughters--she was one who had spent the year at
the University of Chicago, and then when I was back at Stanford, she got
into Stanford and graduated there and decided to become a math teacher.
So she came into the STEP program and was one of my students there.
That was great fun.
Rosenberg: When I was reading through different stories about you, I found one that
mentioned that you had in your office something like twelve bottles of

82

champagne all signed from different advisees. So were these advisees from
the STEP program?
Noddings: Gee, I don’t know. Probably not. They were probably my doctoral advisees.
I’d have to know what year the person was talking about. Some of them
could have been.
Rosenberg: You had doctoral advisees and managed the STEP program at the same
time?
Noddings: Oh, yes, sure. [01:12:00] Yes.
Rosenberg: Let’s talk a little bit more about the STEP program. I saw that in 1986, the
STEP program received a grant from the Mellon Foundation and things of
the like that were intended to grow the program. So what was your vision
for the STEP program when you took over?
Noddings: Well, I suppose it was to produce teachers of the sort that I had always been
talking about, people who were highly proficient in their subject matter, but
who were deeply concerned about the full development of students. I mean
interested in the humanities, in the moral and political thought. And when I
look at the courses that I taught at Stanford, I taught social philosophy and
ethics. [01:13:01] I taught moral education, women and moral theory,
introduction to philosophy, a semester-long course on the philosophy of
John Dewey. I taught that several times. I taught feminist ethics, something
called affective education, which is a form of education that pays attention
to the education of the heart as well as the head, so you can see that the
interests I expressed while I was at the University of Chicago have been
central to my entire professional life. And that was true with STEP as well.

83

In everything I taught and everything I’ve ever taught is the large element of
choice as I think that within a relevant range, students should have genuine
choices in what they will study and what they will do.
[01:14:05] And, my goodness, you get so much more work, so much
more enthusiasm from students when you allow that than when you tell
them exactly what they have to do by what date and to what level. So you
can see what my basic philosophy is there. And it has not changed.
Rosenberg: And do you remember the Upward Bound summer program?
Noddings: I sure do because I ran that, too, for a while.
Rosenberg: You did. Upward Bound.
Noddings: Yes.
Rosenberg: I think Anne Reynolds was your assistant director at one point.
Noddings: Who was?
Rosenberg: Anne Reynolds.
Noddings: Oh, sure, sure.
Rosenberg: Can you tell me about that program, because it looks like it left the School
of Engineering and went to the School of Education in 1984, right when
you were taking over.
Noddings: Yes. [01:14:59] That’s right. Yes. It was one more thing, and there, too, I
could not have managed without very good graduate students who did the
actual work for Upward Bound. But we combined some of the work on
Upward Bound with STEP, particularly in the math areas because I had
math people work with the Upward Bound students in math. Heck, I think
I even taught the Upward Bound math one summer. Yes, I’m pretty sure if I

84

dig around in my files, I could find that I did that. And that was partly
because I wanted to stay in touch with what high school kids were expected
to know and to give my STEP students a place to observe and participate
and help and what not. Yes.
[01:16:04] So that’s another thing I was doing as well as Upward
Bound and STEP and all. I’ll have to give that more thought.
Rosenberg: Well, then I think this might be a good place for us to leave off, if that’s
okay with you because I’m hoping for our next session, which will be
shorter because we don’t have as much to cover, and we’ll try to fly through
it. We can go through a little bit more about STEP and Upward Bound, so
it gives you time to think about those things as well as if there was anything
particularly important that you want to cover about your teaching work or
your advising work, or what your work was like when you were-Noddings: Yes. In some ways, these things were all preliminary to my main career at
Stanford as a professor because after that, when I got out from under some
of that heavy administrative work, I became president of the Philosophy of
Education Society.
[01:17:17] I was the president of the Dewey Society, and president of
the National Academy of Education. So a whole new phase of work that
came after that. It’s been fun talking.
Rosenberg: And your publications, a lot of them come out right at the end of this
period. Am I correct?
Noddings: Sure. Well, the first one in 1984 was the caring book, so that was done while
I--

85

Rosenberg: Right in the middle of it.
Noddings: Yes.
Rosenberg: Right in the middle of it. Then if that’s okay with you, I think we can
schedule a time to speak briefly next week and focus on that latter portion
of your career as a professor at Stanford.
Noddings: [01:18:09] Yes. Sounds good.
Rosenberg: Perfect. Okay. And there was one other thing. When I was looking through
old Standards Daily articles and getting more information about that latter
period of time as a professor at Stanford, there was some work you did
moderating teachings and the like about peace education. Do you want to
talk about that?
Noddings: Definitely.
Rosenberg: Okay. So then we’ll-Noddings: Sure. I mean that’s the period of time that I am really looking forward to. I
taught as a lecturer in Peace Studies I guess for about five years, and I
served on the administrative panel on human subjects for four years.
[01:18:57] That was an extremely interesting service project to hear
everything that our fellow professors were doing in the area of psychology
and social education and so forth. Then keep in mind I was acting dean for
a couple years and so was on the cabinet and worked with Gerhard Casper
and Condoleezza Rice. Let me just quickly say there I disagree with Condi
on almost every political issue you can think of, but we got along just fine.
She was wonderful to work with. I think that’s about the sort of thing that I

86

wish more people would understand that you can disagree with people and
still get along with them.
Rosenberg: Well, that’s becoming increasingly less common, unfortunately.
Noddings: I know. It is unfortunate. And part of it is--not all of it certainly, but part of
it is that we’re not doing the right things in education. [01:20:04] We just
aren’t.
Rosenberg: I have one clarifying question.
Noddings: Sure.
Rosenberg: When you were serving as acting dean of the Graduate School of
Education, were you the first woman dean of one of the professional
schools? Is that a fair statement?
Noddings: Yes. You’d have to look into that. Oh, and by the way, that reminds me of
something else. I’m almost sure that I am the first woman to hold an
endowed chair at the School of Education. And that shouldn’t have been
because I can think of people before me who should have had it but they
didn’t. So the first endowed chair, yes and the first acting dean. Yes.
Rosenberg: Okay. Well, thank you so much for your time today.

Rosenberg: Today is May 17, 2016. I’m Chelsea Rosenberg interviewing Professor Nel
Noddings. I’m on Stanford University’s campus, and we’re speaking via
telephone to Professor Noddings in New Jersey.
To start, I wanted to ask you in summation of our earlier
conversation about the STEP program, what do you think were the most
valuable elements of the STEP program?
Noddings: [00:00:27] Well, probably the very close connections with the public schools
where we placed our teachers. It was important to us that they be placed in
school systems that were pretty much on the same wavelength with us and
that we could have a very close relationship with them, and I think that was
probably one of the outstanding features of the STEP program. We didn’t
just send people out and tell them what to do. We wanted to work with
them and the institutions where they were placed.
Rosenberg: What were some of the biggest challenges the program as a whole faced?
Noddings: Well, for a while, it was maintaining our enrollment. Before I was involved
in it, some years before, the enrollments in English education and math

89

education were much larger and they fell off rather dramatically over a
period of time. I suppose that was in part because there was no longer any
government help in paying tuition for people who were planning to teach,
and tuition at Stanford, as you know, is very high, so I think that was
probably the single most important factor in the diminishing enrollment.
Rosenberg: [00:02:36] There was one point in 1993 in an article with the Daily [the
Stanford Daily] that you reportedly said that you wished that the STEP
program, I’m paraphrasing, of course, but that you wished the STEP
program would do a better job of keeping up with the times and needing to
shift their focus more on urban education and the needs of education in
urban environments. In light of that, how did you see the program
transformed during your time at Stanford and what was the direction in
which it was moving?
Noddings: Well, I don’t know that I see it as transformed. I think that even while I was
involved with it, there were signs that things were going in a direction in
public education that I did not like at all with the increasing emphasis on
testing, and accountability for teachers, and a sort of formalization of the
whole process instead of a warm, cooperative, working together on things,
so that was already starting to happen back at that time, and I was not
enthusiastic about that.
[00:04:08] Then they even introduced the requirement that people
who taught in programs like STEP had to spend part of their time in the
public schools, and while I would have endorsed that heartily, I did not
want to take a semester out to go into public schools because, geez, I

90

already had twenty years of experience. And so like so many other rules,
they were put into place with not very much thought and already we were
beginning to see the signs of an over-bureaucratization of the whole
process.
Rosenberg: [00:04:53] Did you see a similar over-bureaucratization with the Upward
Bound program, as well, or was that completely separate?
Noddings: Well, it was completely separate, but yes, we certainly could see some of that
as well. I guess I was somewhat unusual in that I tried to bring STEP and
Upward Bound together and I think that was a big plus. I really do. I think
that our teachers, in preparation, got more from working with Upward
Bound [laughs], even more than the kids got from them, and that was
substantial. So if I were doing this sort of thing again, I would certainly
heartily endorse the close connection between teacher preparation and a
program like Upward Bound where professors and teachers-in-training
would all have an opportunity to work directly with kids and with kids who
really need the help. So that I think was one of the big positives for STEP at
that time.
Rosenberg: Before we move on from STEP and Upward Bound to your scholarship, do
you have any favorite stories or memories from STEP and Upward Bound?
Noddings: [00:06:20] Oh, I’d have to wrack my brain on that. I probably do but
nothing springs to mind.
Rosenberg: Because you got to work with your daughter then, too, as well.
Noddings: Yes, that’s right. Yes, she was in the STEP program. She graduated from
Stanford. I think in fact she was the very first graduate of--gosh, what was

91

the name of that program, that combined logic and mathematics and
philosophy and psychology? It was a terrific program and she was the first
graduate of that program, and then she came into the STEP program to get
her formal preparation for teaching math, and that was wonderful. We had
always had a very close relationship but that made it even more so.
Rosenberg: [00:07:20] In your role as director of STEP and Upward Bound, you worked
a lot in paperwork and administrative tasks. Can you please describe what it
was like to move away from these administrative positions to focus on your
scholarship?
Noddings: Well, it was overdue. It was high time that I had at least some relief from the
administrative tasks and so much as I enjoyed being part of STEP, and of
course I wasn’t finished with administrative tasks because after a while, I
became associate dean and acting dean at the school, still, I was glad to be
relieved of some of that for at least a while and able to concentrate on my
scholarly work.
But that brings up something that in case you don’t ask about it, I
should put out there in emphasis. Over the years of my professorial work at
Stanford, there was a really significant change in the university life for
professors and that change was a change in emphasis from a concentration
on one’s scholarly work to getting grants, bringing money in. I feel so bad
for so many young professors now who are intellectuals obviously, and they
want to concentrate on their intellectual work and they are constantly driven
to bring in money. Sometimes they write papers, publish things that they’re

92

not really all that interested in because it is an opportunity to bring in
money.
[00:09:20] Now in some ways, I was fortunate there because I
brought in money through these outside projects. Administrative work, in
this case, brought in money, because I had grants from Upward Bound and
there was one from an outfit in San Francisco. I’ve forgotten the name of
the outfit, but I brought in money every year but it was not from grants for
my writing. It was for administrative work, and that enabled me to keep that
separate from my writing where I felt that I had complete control over what
I wanted to think and write and publish.
Rosenberg: Can you please briefly describe in more depth, because as a student, it is a
little confusing, can you describe your process toward tenure and what is
that like for you, and do you think it was similar to most other people at the
Graduate School of Education or was it more dissimilar?
Noddings: I think it was probably quite similar. Generally speaking, when you’re hired
as an assistant professor, there’s an expectation that you’ll be reviewed
regularly, and at the end of five years or so, the review will become more
intensive and promotion to associate professor depends very heavily on the
reputation you’ve made in publication. And for me, it was a very smooth
process because I published a lot and because I had a book, the first book
on caring that I wrote, that was very heavily publicized, I guess you’d say,
and inspired a lot of other papers and talks and papers at conferences, and
so forth, so that book and its reviews really made me a shoe-in for the
promotion.

93

Rosenberg: [00:11:48] Can you tell me more about your first work, your care ethics
publication in 1984, and what publishing that work was like?
Noddings: Well, in writing it, I was just completely absorbed in it. I loved it. It was
what I wanted to do and working with U Cal Press was wonderful, too.
They were a little bit nervous because this was my first book-length
publication, but they decided that it was something important and new to
the field, and so while it took a while for them to come to that decision,
when they came to it, it was wonderful.
[00:12:56] So I mean I wish that all young professors could achieve
their promotion, their advancement in their career, the way it was possible
for me to do. I can’t tell you how many young professors I’ve tried to advise
along these lines, and they’re working on and writing papers that they’re
only half interested in in many cases because they have to bring in money
along with it. In working with one young man, he said to me, “Well, when I
get my promotion, then I’ll work on what I’m really interested in.”
I thought, “Gee, what a sad, sad commentary that was.” Well, he
didn’t get promotion where he was then. He had to get another job, and he
has since done very well in the field, but people should stop and consider
what we’re doing to young professors to distract them from their
fundamental intellectual interest in order to bring in money and publish
anywhere, anything, just so they publish, publish, publish. I mean that’s not
what professorial life is supposed to be like.

94

So I was really very fortunate that I could follow my basic interest,
which has been a lifelong interest now, and still get everything else, so to
speak, the promotion and so forth.
Rosenberg: What were the main sources of influence in writing this publication at the
moment you did in 1984? Were there larger events going on that inspired
you to write this, to come to your conclusion about this field of ethics when
you did, or was it just an opportunity in your career?
Noddings: [00:15:04] Well, there were. In fact there was someone interviewing me the
other day on this very question, getting started on it. It has become a central
strand in feminist theory, feminist ethics, and I am pleased and proud about
that, but it didn’t start out that way. The initial influence--well, there were
two.
As far as other thinkers are concerned, the important one was Martin
Buber, the Jewish theologian. His I and Thou is a beautiful introduction to
relational theory, relational thinking, and so that was a prime influence for
me, even though I have nothing to do with Jewish theology in general or
with Judaism. I’m not Jewish, but his work was enormously influential.
Then shortly after getting into that and developing care theory, I was
reminded or advised by I can’t tell you how many people who said this is
central really or could be central to feminist theory, and so then I became
seriously interested in all the work going on in feminist theory. And around
the time that I was writing, in fact just before, Carol Gilligan at Harvard
published In a Different Voice. That came out in [1982] and it came out right
as I was putting my work in for review for publication, and then after that,

95

of course I became enormously interested in feminist theory and its
connections to care theory and care ethics.
[00:17:24] So that’s how that all came about. For me, it didn’t start
with feminist theory but it worked its way into that very quickly and easily
and has developed since in that line.
Rosenberg: Because your work and the work of Carol Gilligan as well has opened up a
field of theory and study within feminist theory-Noddings: [00:17:50] Yes, it really has.
Rosenberg: How have you seen that come to fruition and progress?
Noddings: Well, it has. There’s now a care theorist list, people all over the world who
are working in care theory and who stay in communication with each other.
We keep an eye on influential work that’s coming out in that line. Some of it
worries me a little bit because there are people who are trying to formalize
care theory and for me, that’s a step backward, but it’s another interesting
line of debate among care theorists.
And then of course there are care theorists who work primarily in
philosophy and have very little to do with education and then there are
those of us who are interested both in the philosophy of care ethics and its
applications to education, so you’ve got two substantial groups of people
working in the area.
Rosenberg: Focusing back on you and your career, how do you think the publication of
Caring: A Feminine Approach to Ethics and Moral Education shaped the rest of
your research?

96

Noddings: [00:19:29] Oh, there’s no question about it. No question about it. I mean it’s
a substantial foundation and now that you’ve mentioned the title of the
original book, in the I guess it’s the fourth edition, maybe it’s just the third
but it’s either the third or the fourth, that it came out--yes, I think it’s the
third. I was thinking my Philosophy of Ed text. There it’s the fourth edition.
But in the most recent edition anyway of Caring, I changed the title. It no
longer says A Feminine Approach. It is Relational.
[00:20:14] Boy, I took a beating on that feminine thing. I mean it’s a
word that is held almost in contempt and of course the idea was to draw on
women’s history and tradition and to make it into something vital and
important that everyone should be interested in, not just women. So in the
introduction to the new edition, I talk quite frankly about that and the
reasons that the title is changed.
Rosenberg: I found also when I was looking through material about you online, I found
a letter to an editor in 2004 mentioning Carol Gilligan and saying, “Carol
Gilligan is capable of answering charges of essentialism for herself and has
done so. I would simply point out that not all researchers who have found
gender differences are essentialists.” And you make a couple of other points
along the same lines.
How have charges of essentialism or how have new ideas about
gender or feminist theory shaped the field in which your works have
entered?
Noddings: [00:21:36] Yes, I think most of that criticism that was directed at the notion
of essentialism has pretty much fallen away. I mean I can understand where

97

it came from and that feminist theorists wanted to get away from the notion
that there’s some sort of essential difference between women and men,
males, females, and all that sort of thing. I certainly can understand that
criticism, but I think most of the people who are working in this line now,
including me, we don’t use that word but we still are interested in--what
would you say--in transforming the world I guess.
[00:22:36] I was in fact writing about this just the other day. I mean
we all want equality for women in what is a male-dominated and maledefined world, and so some feminists put all their eggs in that basket and
they measure success by how many women are presidents of corporations
and looking at the average salaries of men and women and so forth. And
then there are those of us who are certainly concerned about that. I mean
there’s no question about that. I mean we’re concerned about it, but we
want more than that. We want to transform that male-defined world into a
more human-defined world and that includes the important thought and
work of women over a period of time.
So it has drawn us to the work, for me, of Jane Addams, Pearl Buck,
who is way too underrated. She did wonderful things, and Virginia Woolf, in
particular, and I think that our drawing on Virginia Woolf kind of opened
things up for us because there aren’t many people working in feminist
philosophy who would pooh-pooh the work of Virginia Woolf. So I think
things have somewhat come together there but there still is that important
difference between working for equality in today’s world, which is a male-

98

defined world, and wanting to transform that world, and for me, that is
extremely important. It’s still at the center of the work that I do.
Can you follow that, Chelsea?
Rosenberg: [00:24:35] I can. I definitely can.
Noddings: It makes sense to you?
Rosenberg: It makes complete sense and I’m wondering whether--did you find or do
you find Stanford to be a place where things like relational ethics come to
fruition more easily or are most people focused on-Noddings: [00:25:05] Yes, well, I can’t answer the question where on what most people
are focused on because I just don’t know at this stage of the game. I’ve been
off-campus for quite a number of years now, but I do think that there are
many prominent philosophers and educators who lean in the direction that
I’m talking about, but there’s still that internal battle.
It reminds me a little, and in fact I wrote about this the other day, the
battle between Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony, and they
were both working for women’s suffrage through their whole lives, working
very hard at it, and then Stanton came up and published something called
The Women’s Bible, and here she was criticizing the whole male Christian
tradition. Now her colleagues didn’t disagree with her really. They knew that
on most things she was right, but they didn’t want her to talk about these
things because it might get in the way of accomplishing women’s suffrage,
and they were concentrated on that.
And I think the same thing might be said today. There are feminist
theorists and writers working very hard to achieve equality for women and

99

when some of us talk about transforming the world, they want to say,
“Don’t worry about transforming it. Let’s just get equality in the world the
way it is.” So you can understand their concern and it’s been there for a long
time, but it is still there.
Rosenberg: [00:27:01] It seems to be constantly there. I mean you saw it with Alice Paul
and the ERA push and the anti-ERA push with people like Florence Kelley
with the National Consumer’s League, so it’s definitely been there and
persists in academic spaces and in activism at large.
In looking back at your career at Stanford, in 1989--so a couple of
years after you began to start publishing works on care ethics and you had
become a professor, moving away from your associate professor into the
professor role--there were controversies of issues of racial hatred on campus
as well as ongoing debates on the merits of free speech. In one instance, you
signed a letter urging President Kennedy to be lenient on fifty-five students
who staged a sit-in in his office.
Noddings: [00:28:06] Oh, I know, I know. This was one of the most embarrassing
incidents I guess in my professional life at Stanford. The kids didn’t only
have a sit-in in his office. They blocked a road or did something like that
somewhere on campus, and I could understand Don’s [Donald Kennedy]
worry and concern about this because in an earlier time, the time that we
talked about in our last conversation, things really got out of hand on
campus, and we wound up with the National Guard on campus and all of
that stuff which you know is part of the history. Don didn’t want anything

100

like that to happen again so he was very tough on it and got it stopped
immediately.
[00:29:01] But I was concerned--I guess I was acting dean at the time.
I know I was on the Faculty Senate, so I was either associate dean or acting
dean at the time, and I questioned him a little bit because I wanted some
assurance that these incidents for which he had the kids arrested would not
go on their record in such a way that they would be unable to get teaching
credentials because I thought these kids were among the best people for
teaching that I could think of.
And so I tried to get that across at the Faculty Senate and I didn’t do
all that good a job at it, but I finally did get an affirmation from him that
that would be taken care of, and oddly enough, he wasn’t too eager to talk
to me after that day for a while, so, oh, well. These things happen.
Rosenberg: [00:30:00] Did you know any of the students personally?
Noddings: I don’t remember. I probably did but not as closely as I would have, had I
still been running STEP, but I had run STEP long enough to know what
kind of people we were dealing with and to care deeply about their futures,
their careers, so I’m not sorry that I spoke up on it, but it wasn’t easy.
Rosenberg: Do you think that any of your research or your work done on care ethics or
on relational ethics influenced how you perceived student activism on
campus?
Noddings: That’s a good question. I don’t know actually whether it’s ever been drawn
on for that purpose. It should be. But, I don’t think so.

101

Rosenberg: Well, I was reading through material, and I found actually a couple of very
nice notes that I might send you of instances where you wrote in support of
students and their desires, and I found a couple of letters to the editors that
are writing in appreciation and thanks for your responses. So students really
cared about it, and it’s probably related to maybe not your research but your
genuine care for your students, so I think that’s very nice.
Noddings: [00:31:47] Yes, well, it is nice. I do remember now you had asked before
about incidents and I remember that while I was associate dean, Mike Smith
at the time was dean, there was some kind of a protest on campus. I don’t
remember what it was about anymore, and we had students in Cubberley, in
the School of Education. They had a table out there, and they were
organized on something. I went out to talk to them and the first thing I
noticed that impressed me enormously was when they looked up and saw
me, they kind of stiffened up and didn’t look exactly scared but close to
scared.
[00:32:38] And I thought, “Oh, my goodness. This should not be.”
And when I got there and actually talked to them, I said I thought they
would have more impact and get more interest if they set their tables up
outside the doors of Cubberley because then they would have students
other than School of Education students coming by to talk to them and
what not.
Well, my goodness, what a sigh of relief, and of course they did that,
and they came to realize that both Mike Smith, the dean, and I were with

102

them a hundred percent, and I think that made a whole lot of difference to
the atmosphere at the School of Education. So that I do remember.
Rosenberg: Do you remember what they were-Noddings: No, I don’t. [laughs] What they were protesting? No, I don’t remember.
God, there’s so many protests at Stanford, and most of them were for good
reasons and I’m sure this one was, too, but I don’t remember exactly which
one this was.
Rosenberg: [00:33:50] Can you speak a little bit more about what serving as associate
dean was like? And I think there were also some major incidents. I think
there was the Loma Prieta earthquake as well when you were associate dean,
unless I’m confusing the timeframe. So were there any major events that
affected your associate deanship?
Noddings: [00:34:17] None spring to mind. I enjoyed doing it. I’m not that crazy about
administrative work, but you’d never know it from my CV. I certainly have
done enough of it. I remember there was some sort of--no, I won’t go into
it because I would want to remember accurately before I speak publicly
about these things.
Rosenberg: Okay, well, if you change your mind, we can also go back to it or speak at a
later time.
Noddings: Sure.
Rosenberg: So looking back at a bit of your research, I was also interested on your work
on networks of care and caregiving. So can you speak a little bit about the
publications or the writing you did on those topics and what influenced that
work?

103

Noddings: Well, if you look at a list of publications, books, and articles, and what not,
they’re just loaded with work on care theory and what caring is like in the
classroom and so forth, and of course I’m still working on that. I mean I’m
working on a book now on critical thinking, controversial issues, and moral
commitment--trying to bring together the intellectual and affective elements
of education. Because our concentration today is so much on--well, they say
the intellectual. I don’t think it is even intellectual. High test scores do not
mean intellectual, but the high emphasis on test scores, on competition, and
doing better than the next guy, and accountability for teachers, and all that
stuff. I mean there are a number of us trying to point out that that’s not the
essence of education.
[00:36:49] In fact in the book that came out last year, A Richer, Brighter
Vision for American High Schools, I point out that our main aim should be to
produce better people. And then people will say, “Well, what do you mean
by that?”
And I say, “Well, let’s talk about it. I’m not going to define it for you.
I can give you some hints but I don’t think we should ever define it
specifically. It should be at the very top of our list for conversations that go
on forever.”
So you can tell from what I’ve just said that I am not enthusiastic
about the trend in education where we say exactly what the kids will learn,
exactly what they’ll do on a test, blah, blah, blah because you can predict
that a few months or years later, they’ll forget it and why shouldn’t they? So
that’s the sort of thing.

104

I’m not alone on this. I mean there are lots of other good
people all over the world, particularly in Great Britain now, where the whole
notion of care ethics has become quite popular. There are a lot of us who
are working on it and deeply concerned about it, sure.
Rosenberg: When you were working as a professor at Stanford, who was living at your
house at the time? Because I believe your mother was living with you, but
did you have children-Noddings: Yes, she did.
Rosenberg: [00:38:22]--at the house as well?
Noddings: Oh, yes, sure. Some of them lived at home while they went to college. I
didn’t have any little children by the time I was a full professor, and acting
dean, and so forth, but sure, there were always young people, kids in the
house, yes, and my mother.
Rosenberg: [00:38:59] Were you a caretaker for your mother, at that point?
Noddings: Well, I don’t know whether you’d say I was-Rosenberg: A caregiver.
Noddings: --a caretaker. Yes, I don’t know. Both my husband and I cared for her, but
she didn’t need physical care. I did go to the doctor’s with her to keep her
company and so forth, but for us, this was just a natural way to live. You
have a family, you live together, you take care of each other and that’s what
we did.
Rosenberg: Do you think that your family life, having your mother move in, influenced
your work or your research?

105

Noddings: No, I don’t think so, really. It was just a continuation of our whole lives. It
was nothing unusual about that at all. It wasn’t like some great civic service
or something. It was just a natural way a family should live, and we lived
that way.
Rosenberg: Then looking back at your schoolwork, can you tell me more about your
favorite classes that you were teaching at this time, if you remember?
Noddings: [00:40:36] Yes, I do, I remember. Well, I taught several courses that were
related to caring and social ethics. I taught a course in Moral Education, for
instance. I taught one on Women and Moral Theory, one on Feminist
Ethics. I taught a course on Affective Education, which was very well
attended and where we had some terrific conversations. And I did a course
on John Dewey and sometimes I did that with my closest colleague, Denis
Phillips. Sometimes he and I did that together, sometimes I did it on my
own, sometimes he did it on his own. I taught a course in Curriculum
Theory, and that’s quite a lot actually when you think about it. I mean Social
Philosophy and Ethics, Curriculum Theory, Moral Ed, Women and Moral
Theory, Introduction to Philosophy, John Dewey, Feminist Ethics,
Affective Education. Yes, and that was after I had done the work on math
education, which I stopped doing when I gave up running STEP.
Rosenberg: [00:42:02] That’s quite a bit.
Noddings: Yes, it’s quite a bit and I guess I won the teaching award three times, so I
must have been pretty good. [laughs]

106

Rosenberg: It’s incredible, and I think you missed some, too, because you also taught in
classes maybe not as formally, but you taught classes in peace education as
well.
Noddings: Oh, yes. No, you’re right there. I think I was involved with Peace Studies
for maybe five years, four or five years, and I was also involved with the
new philosophy course that was required of Stanford freshmen. Now I
didn’t run that but I was a lecturer in that course, and I really enjoyed doing
it. Then of course some of the courses I did were sponsored by the Center
for Women on Research, so I was very active with that organization as well.
[00:43:15] Then the other one, I’m trying to remember the exact
name of it. I can’t remember the name of the engineering professor I
worked with, Jim something. The last name will come to me sooner or later.
But this was in Science, Values, and Technology, and so I was quite active in
that for a few years, too.
Rosenberg: [00:43:34] Can you tell me a little bit firstly about what working with the
Center for Research on Women in those early years was like because I think
the Feminist Studies Department was founded in 1982, so this whole area of
study was rather new.
Noddings: Yes. It was and, gee, I don’t know what I can say about it except that it gave
me an opportunity to participate in the community and still pursue my own
intellectual interests because they fit exactly, so I enjoyed that tremendously.
Rosenberg: Then shifting gears a little bit to peace education, because I think this is also
an instance where your intellectual interest was able to bridge a gap between
purely academics and getting involved in the community with other

107

students, and faculty, and practitioners of the like, there was one instance
when in response to the Gulf War, you signed a letter along with seventytwo other professors urging the United States to move in a different
direction in their treatment of politics in the Middle East.
Noddings: Yes.
Rosenberg: What do you remember of your work in peace education and do you
remember if your work inside the classroom translated into a kind of
bridging the gap between academics and practitioners in the field of peace
and peace education?
Noddings: [00:45:29] Yes. Well, I think it did. I do remember the letter that you’re
talking about, and I remember the keen interest of students in Peace
Studies. We had very large classes, and the ones I was involved with were
lecture sessions, of course, because I was not working with the students
every day. The head of Religious [Studies] was part of it.
[00:46:10] Again, this was one of the things that I loved so about
Stanford. You had people working together in Peace Studies who were not
all from the same department or the same school. They were from all over
the university, people who had something, had a dedicated interest in peace,
but also had something special to contribute because they came from a
specific area. So for me, that was always one of the big plusses about
Stanford, that you could work and work effectively all over the university,
and Peace Studies was a good example of that. Yes.

108

Rosenberg: And before we move on to your acting deanship, when was your earliest
work in the study of intelligent belief and unbelief? Because I think the first
publication I could find was 1993-Noddings: That’s right.
Rosenberg: But did you work on any of that before then?
Noddings: I think I must have had some articles on it before that, and I know I had
correspondence with the person who was pastor at Stanford at the time. In
fact I remember how pleased I was that I got a letter, or an e-mail, or some
communication from him as he was headed to Europe for something telling
me that he had read the book, Educating for Intelligent Belief or Unbelief, and he
was very complimentary. I mean it was really, really nice to get that. So I
remember that quite vividly.
[00:48:21] I guess I must have written some things on the topic
before that, but it’s a sensitive topic that needs a lot more written on it now.
One of the chapters in the book that we’re working on now is on religion
and there we’ve noted a good move is a lot of schools now have courses on
world religions. There are some that don’t and some that won’t even
consider talking to their kids about any religion other than Christianity, and
even there, they have a fight about it. But by and large, at the best schools,
you usually will find a course on world religions.
[00:49:22] So the question we’re raising in this chapter and we’re
handling as delicately as possible is how is it that we don’t bother to talk
about atheism, agnosticism, and deism, even though if you look carefully at
history, you’ll find that most of our first, say, six presidents would fall into

109

one of those categories. It’s just incredible that we refuse to talk about these
things. And so you’re not trying to convert people. I’m not trying to teach
people to be atheists. I’m just hoping that they would learn something about
atheism and its history.
In the chapter on that, we start out by selecting a couple of people,
one highly religious and one atheist, who agree on a whole slew of
important human values. I think kids should know that, and they could say,
“Gee, here are these people who agree on all of these wonderful things.
They just have this one disagreement. One believes that there is a god and
the other believes that there isn’t a god.”
[00:50:40] It’s a fascinating area of study, but as you can well see,
enormously controversial and delicate. You have to find a way to talk about
these things that will be acceptable, and you have to get over the notion that
when you’re teaching something, you’re trying to convert people to it.
You’re teaching them quadratic equations. You want them to be able to use
quadratic equations. Well, and if you’re teaching atheism, that must mean
you want them to be atheists.
[00:51:25] Well, no, see that’s crazy, and of course anyone who has
gone through undergraduate work--as you have--at a place like Stanford
knows better than that, but there are people all over the country who just
think if you’re teaching something it’s because you want people to do that,
be that, and of course that’s crazy.
Rosenberg: Do you think Stanford was receptive of having a conversation about this
sensitive topic or other sensitive topics when you were teaching, or when

110

you were serving as associate dean, or when you were acting dean? Did you
notice that students and faculty were good at having these more difficult
conversations?
Noddings: Yes, I thought they were terrific. I never ran across that kind of clash, you
might say, of teaching values. Any idea that had captivated intellectual
interest in the world was something you could talk about at Stanford. Now
keep in mind, I’ve been, what, fifteen years away now, a few years at
[Teachers College, Columbia University] and a couple of other places, but
still retired from Stanford, but there’s nothing like these notions of trigger
warnings and being careful not to introduce certain topics and what not.
That is so unintellectual that it is hard for some of us to believe we’d even
consider behaving that way.
Rosenberg: [00:53:18] And then I don’t want to push you too much on that, because
yes, you have been away for fifteen years, but do you remember any
moments where there were conversations that might be more similar to
conversations around trigger warnings or free speech today? Do you think
that there were moments when free speech debates crop up and did you
think that was a waxing and waning process or did the university just have a
more open environment entirely during your-Noddings: [00:54:03] Well, I think the best answer probably is the latter, that the
university had this wonderful, open, intellectual attitude. Of course there
were things that got argued about in classes ranging from methods of
discipline to, increasingly, tracking and a whole bunch of other things that
are central to public education. But I can’t ever remember the kind of

111

debate or argument that suggested you shouldn’t even talk about these
things. That is a very, very worrisome move, I think, and so dangerous to
intellectual life that it’s hard to imagine that universities would even consider
it.
Rosenberg: Then looking at your transition into the acting dean role, and I did look it
up. You were the first woman dean of a professional school at Stanford and
you said as well that you were the first named woman professorship in the
Graduate School of Education. And looking at that position, so how did
you make that transition into the role of acting dean?
Noddings: [00:55:42] Well, it sort of happened almost naturally because I had been
associate dean for two years and then the dean, I think he was going to
Washington where he was quite influential, and so I was asked to remain on
as acting dean. Through that period of time, of course, we were trying to
decide how we would handle the search for a new dean, and I had very
mixed feelings about it. I was for a while a candidate for it, but I don’t know
how to put it. I guess my heart was never really in it. I wanted to get back to
my intellectual work. I didn’t hate it, mind you, being acting dean, but I
wasn’t at all sure that I wanted to make that transition to be permanently in
administration.
[00:56:49] Now I should say that in my two years as acting dean, the
president of the university of that time was Gerhard Casper, wonderful
man. You just couldn’t find a better administrator and more generous
intellectual, and his associate, his closest associate, was Condoleezza Rice. I
disagree with Condi [Condoleezza Rice] on almost everything politically,

112

and yet we got along beautifully. She was wonderful to work with. She got
me the best salary raise I ever had [laughs] so I remember that, and I know
she wanted me to hang in there and become dean.
I’m not going to talk about some of the incidents that led up to my
decision there, but in the end, I was glad to withdraw from it and go back to
the intellectual work that interested me so vitally.
Rosenberg: Was a lot of your work as acting dean focused on this search? Was there
also other work? Because I believe when Condoleezza Rice came in as
Provost-Noddings: Provost, I guess she was, yes, right.
Rosenberg: . . . a lot of her work was focused on budgeting and fixing the Stanford,
what seems to be a mini financial crisis at the university. So did that affect
your role as acting dean?
Noddings: [00:58:43] Only in the sense that I was very enthusiastic about it. I think that
she and Gerhard Casper straightened out a lot of things that needed to be
straightened out, and they did it in a very quiet, professional way. I think
they should be admired for that.
Rosenberg: Can you tell me a little bit more about what you mean when you say they
straightened out a lot of things? What was that exactly?
Noddings: [00:59:15] Well, I don’t know. Quite honestly, I don’t know what it was
exactly. I know that there was some confusion over the way federal funds
had been used, and some other things along those lines, and I cannot
comment positively or negatively on it. I just know that something like that
was going on because Don Kennedy and previous administrators had done

113

a wonderful job of bringing in scads and scads of money to Stanford and it
would not be surprising if some questions accompanied that. Gerhard and
Condi worked on it, and took care of all of that, and I think they are to be
admired for that. That was terrific.
Rosenberg: And as dean of the Graduate School of Education, were there any other big
projects, or issues, or day-to-day work that took up a lot of your time?
Noddings: No, I think it was pretty much the sort of thing you’d expect in a deanship,
watching over hiring committees, looking at the relationships among area
groups, and I can remember there were some battles over that. There were
people who were working in the area of minority education and
international education, and there was a fuss over the title of one of the area
groups who were afraid they would lose everything if their title was changed,
which turned out to be kind of silly because they were very good scholars,
and everything turned out just fine.
[01:01:16] But that’s typical of administrative work. I mean
something that seems to be an emergency on February 1, people hardly
remember by May 1 if it turns out all right. So that’s just typical of
administrative work. I can’t remember anything else that was really crucial. I
can remember a few hurtful incidents, and I can remember them quite
vividly, but I’m not going to talk about them.
Rosenberg: So do you think overall that serving as acting dean for you was a positive
experience?
Noddings: Yes, definitely it was a positive experience, sure.

114

Rosenberg: Do you think it revealed that there was a particular role that you liked to
play at Stanford better or worse and did it teach you anything about how the
university worked or what the university was like that you didn’t know
before outside of this deanship position?
Noddings: Oh, I’m sure it did. I mean working with Condi and Gerhard, and on the
Faculty Senate, and then of course as I think I mentioned to you before, I
spent four years on the administrative panel on human subjects, which was
also an extremely interesting assignment. All of these things had their
influence. No question about that, but it isn’t where my heart was.
[01:03:09] In administrative work, you often have to embrace
positions that you aren’t really in wholehearted agreement with. That’s part
of the job, and so there’s a lot of compromising, a lot of assuring oneself
that, well, you’re not giving up your moral beliefs by going along with this.
There’s a lot of that stuff, and we should all be more sensitive to it because
it’s what so many of our people working in government today are up
against. It’s so easy to criticize and condemn, but when you’re in one of
those positions, and you’ve got this divided allegiance, that’s hard.
[01:04:08] So I learned a lot in doing that work. I learned to be more
patient, and tolerant, and understanding of people when things don’t go
exactly right. That would be a good course. [laughs]
Rosenberg: It probably would be.
Noddings: It really would be, Chelsea, yes.
Rosenberg: Leadership and Moral Ethics.
Noddings: Yes.

115

Rosenberg: Do you have any particular stories from your deanship that illuminate those
struggles or would you like to move on to a different topic?
Noddings: No, I think I won’t say any more about that.
Rosenberg: Perfectly fine, but can we go back too if at all possible. You said that serving
on the administrative panel on human subjects was interesting. Can you tell
me more about that?
Noddings: Well, one of the most interesting things on it was the regular, still friendly,
but regular contention between those on the panel who wanted to allow
researchers to do almost anything they wanted to do as long as it wasn’t
obviously immoral, and those on the panel who were more interested in
protecting human subjects. So in the four years that I was on that panel, that
tension was always there, and we usually managed to come to a conclusion
that was satisfactory to both sides.
[01:05:46] But as I said, the contention was always there. By insisting
on a very close protection of human subjects, were we getting in the way of
research or were we doing what absolutely should be done when you’re
doing research on human subjects? And that question, I am confident, you
would find still alive on campus today, a very important question.
Rosenberg: [01:06:17] And then in terms of serving on the Faculty Senate, so do you
have any interesting memories from serving on the Faculty Senate or
anything that you learned that is of particular note from serving in that
position?
Noddings: I don’t think so. It was an excellent learning experience. The one where I
challenged the president on the way he handled the student protestors, that

116

one I’ll never forget namely because it was so painful to me, but aside from
that, I can’t remember any other things that really stand out. The Faculty
Senate is--like so many other organizations at Stanford--well run,
thoughtful, important in keeping Stanford running well, so I was glad to
have that experience.
Rosenberg: Then wrapping up your work as acting dean of the Graduate School of
Education, what was the transition to Richard Shavelson’s deanship like?
Noddings: Oh, that was just fine. Rich and I got along just fine and there were days
when he was having a hard time when he would call me up and he’d say,
“Oh, Nel, goddamn it. Why didn’t you become dean?” [laughs] He was just
so worn to a frazzle with it, but he was a good dean and we got along fine.
[01:08:05] See after I was not involved with administrative work at
Stanford, you have to remember that I took on the presidency of the
Philosophy of Education Society, and then the presidency of the Dewey
Society, and then the one that took the most out of me, the National
Academy of Education, and there I had to preside over moving the
institution from NYU, where it had been located, to Washington, D.C. So
my administrative work wasn’t entirely over, but it was shifted to these other
organizations.
Rosenberg: [01:08:44] Can you tell me more about what serving as the president of the
Philosophy of Education Society and then the John Dewey Society as well,
because you were the president-elect and then the president of the John
Dewey Society for-Noddings: I was president, yes.

117

Rosenberg: Yes, for a rather long period of time.
Noddings: Yes, well, they had me working for them for four years. This was just kind
of nice administrative work. It was an honor. I didn’t have the kinds of
details of administrative work that I had had as an associate dean or acting
dean. There was always somebody else to do that sort of thing. So it was
nice to be able to write letters to the members, and announce meetings, and
engagements, and that sort of thing.
The National Academy of Education was a bigger challenge because
it was a relatively--well, I don’t know how old the organization was--but it
had experienced a couple of changes in administration and having to move
the whole outfit from NYU to Washington was a big job and kept me kind
of busy for a while. But still, I can’t remember any huge ideological
arguments that came up during my time there.
[01:10:32] I worked with AERA [American Educational Research
Association] pretty closely, too. Oh, yes, that reminds me. I chaired the
Ethics Committee for AERA. I’ve forgotten the year on that. It probably
appears somewhere in a CV, but we did write up a code of ethics for
AERA, which of course is the biggest educational organization in the
country. That was an interesting experience, yes.
Rosenberg: [01:11:06] So then before we move into those, wrapping up your time at
Stanford, can you tell me about just more of what your work was like after
you stepped down from the acting deanship role and what those last years at
Stanford were like?

118

Noddings: Yes, well, they were good. I enjoyed my teaching, as I have always enjoyed
my teaching, but then my last couple of years at Stanford, I spent what
amounts to one quarter at Columbia-Rosenberg: I think that was 1994.
Noddings: And then the two quarters at Stanford. As it happened, I could spend a
whole semester at Columbia and only miss one quarter at Stanford, so I did
that for a while. Then I remember having a long conversation with my
husband about it. No one complained or anything, but I said to Jim, I said,
“This isn’t fair to either institution because while I’m doing my teaching and
writing and all the rest of it, I’m not doing the kinds of workman’s work,
various committees and what not that you have to do if you’re a full-time
faculty member.” So I said, “I’m not going to do that anymore,” and so I
stopped doing it.
[01:12:54] But then when I retired from Stanford, then I did go to
TC, so it was a relationship that I valued but it’s something for professors to
keep in mind. When you divide your time between two universities, you’re
not really doing right by either of them.
Rosenberg: So then when you stopped dividing your time, I guess, and right before you
finished your work at Stanford, you, over the course of your years at
Stanford, were awarded a series of awards. You won three Excellence in
Teaching awards. You were a Phi Beta Kappa Visiting Scholar, at one point.
You were president of the John Dewey Society, president of the Philosophy
of Education Society, as we mentioned. You were a board member on the
Project of Youth and Caring, which [was sponsored by] the Lilly

119

Endowment, and a slew of other honorary titles. You were on the editorial
and advisory boards for more than ten journals and served in a number of
capacities and won a range of awards, and I was just wondering if any
awards stand out as the most important to you.
Noddings: [01:14:25] Hm. Well, that’s an interesting question. Obviously nothing
springs to mind immediately or I would just straight out be able to answer
that question. I’m very grateful for all of them and delighted to receive
honorary degrees from quite a number of places. Yes, it’s been very
rewarding.
Rosenberg: Then can you tell me what is the process in which a named professor like
yourself gains an emeritus title? What is that like?
Noddings: [laughs] Well, it’s just a permanent title. It’s something you get when you
take formal retirement. You get a nice letter from the provost with all the
usual traditional thank-yous and what not, and then mentioning that your
title will now be--and of course that’s in perpetuity, that’s for as long as you
live--you are the title with emeritus after it. So you get regular
communications and so forth, so you have a title for life.
Rosenberg: [01:16:11] I was expecting “a big party” was the answer but I guess not.
Noddings: Now that is an interesting question. Just before my formal retirement, I told
Rich Shavelson, he was the dean, that I didn’t want that, and it bothered
him some but he accepted that, and so we didn’t do anything like that. And
of course I hadn’t withdrawn from any of my professional responsibilities in
these organizations that I already mentioned but I didn’t want--I don’t even

120

remember why I didn’t want it--but I guess it’s because so much phony stuff
goes on at those [laughs] retirement banquets. But anyway, we didn’t do it.
Rosenberg: Do you have particular memories of what it was like to leave formally at the
end of your Stanford career?
Noddings: Well, intermittent feelings of loss, of course, but keep in mind that we were
returning to the area in which we had gone to school together, Jim and I.
We had grown up on the Jersey Shore, and we had a summer place there, so
we were returning to our birth area, so that was exciting. And of course I
had the commitment to Columbia, and in between that, I see in my notes
here, that I did spend a term at Colgate, a visiting professorship, and one at
Eastern Michigan, and one in Southern Maine. So it wasn’t the end of my
professional life. I had plenty to do, but it was a move across the country.
[01:18:30] And so, do I miss Stanford? Yes and no. I mean I do but I
keep up with things. I kept my Stanford e-mail, so I get some of the daily
stuff that I would just as soon not get. I don’t know what else I could say
there. I’ve remained very busy.
Rosenberg: Then before we kind of close on your Stanford career, is there anything else
you want to say about what your career was like in totality or your Stanford
experience at large?
Noddings: Well, I don’t know. If something more occurs to me, I could give you a call
and tell you, but I’ve remained very busy. I think I now have twenty
published books to my credit and nine or ten of them have been done since
retirement, so I’ve been able to concentrate on my writing and book
publications, and I still do a lot of reviewing. Just before your call, I received

121

a proposal from my publisher asking me to review a book that has been
proposed for publication. There’s plenty to do.
Rosenberg: In addition to right after you stopped working at Stanford and you worked
at Teachers College, and at Colgate, and Eastern Michigan, did you work in
a similar capacity at Stanford? Were you writing, or were you teaching, or
both?
Noddings: Yes, well, I was teaching and writing but I didn’t have any administrative
responsibilities, and I wasn’t all that active in campus affairs at any of those
places. I taught the class that I was asked to teach, and I continued with my
own writing and professional work.
Rosenberg: So when did you stop teaching entirely?
Noddings: [01:21:24] Hm. Oh, well, teaching formally, I think in 2003. I don’t think I
took on a regular class responsibility after that.
Rosenberg: And what was that transition like?
Noddings: Well, I guess it was pretty good actually because now I could give my whole
attention to--see, I’ve done a lot of lecturing, too, and in fact I was looking
over my CV the other day and I had taken out that whole section on
lectures, and I realized that I hadn’t kept up with it in the last couple of
years and so instead of putting down there that I hadn’t listed anything since
2007 or whatever, I just took the entire section out, which I now think was a
mistake. I should have left it and said something.
[01:22:36] But I still do a reasonable amount of lecturing. This
Saturday, for instance, I will do one at Seton Hall, and then a couple of
weeks later, I will do one in Colorado for the Random Acts of Kindness.

122

And I serve on a couple of boards. So it isn’t like I’m sitting around doing
nothing, but I don’t have any responsibilities for daily lessons.
Rosenberg: And what has your writing been like? So you published the majority actually
of your works after you retired?
Noddings: Yes, at least half of them, yes.
Rosenberg: Yes, at least half of them, so how do you go about your writing process
now?
Noddings: Oh, pretty much the same way I always did. I mean it is on my mind a good
part of the time. I never start to write a chapter, or article, or book without a
lot of thinking ahead of time, and I work from an outline, a pretty well
thought out outline. There are people who don’t work that way. I have
friends and colleagues who start out writing something, and I can’t do that. I
have to plan it out ahead of time, but then the work I think as a result goes
more smoothly, and I don’t have to throw so much away because I knew
what I was going to write before I wrote it.
[01:24:23] I don’t know whether that helps or not.
Rosenberg: No, it does.
Noddings: When you talk to a variety of people, you’ll find that there are different
working styles and so that happens to be my working style.
Rosenberg: And what do you do outside of work now? What do you like to do with
your free time?
Noddings: [01:24:43] Well, I have a big yard and so there’s a lot of gardening, and in
fact there is a lot right now waiting for me. I do have a helper, a guy I have
come in once a week for half a day or so to do some of the heavy digging,

123

but I’ve got a nice vegetable garden started. It’s doing quite well. I’ve got
peas and carrots and beets and onions and cucumbers and green beans and
lettuce and radishes, and I’ve started flats of tomatoes and peppers. I won’t
put them in for another week or so because it’s been so darn cold here. So I
have a big garden, and that keeps me busy.
And I’ll start having quite a lot of company now in the summer
because the kids and their kids like to come in the summer. We’re right
across the street from the beach so it’s a nice place to be in the summer, and
I do a lot of reading. So I have enough to do and I’m living in a big old
house. I mean the house dates to about 1890, I guess, so every time I turn
around, there seems to be something more that I have to call someone in to
look at. That keeps me busy, too.
Rosenberg: [01:26:30] Well, thank you so much.
Noddings: Well, this has been fun, Chelsea. I felt kind of bad about our previous talk
because you were so interested in the riots and student protests and what
not of the early 1970s, and I didn’t feel I did justice to that for you. But you
have to keep in mind that at that time, I had a house full of little kids and I
didn’t spend much time on campus.
I mean I knew what was going on. You couldn’t help but know, but I
even put my classes back to back so that I’d spend as little time away from
home as possible. So my interest, my love of Stanford really then was the
classes, the intellectual excitement, and so forth. I wasn’t involved in the
campus goings-on the way I might have been if I had been an

124

undergraduate, or whatever, or a young graduate student. But I did the best
I could in answering [laughs] your questions on that.
Rosenberg: [01:27:42] I think my interest was also just piqued by how foreign it seemed
from the Stanford that I know. It’s surreal to me to believe that that was
going on while you were here. And I think what was most interesting to me
was just how--not laissez faire you were about it--but how natural it was for
you to mention that was just part of the goings on, which was very
interesting.
And there were certain things you mentioned that you might want to
return to. If there is anything that you remember--you mentioned that there
was some sort of controversy when you were an associate dean of the
Graduate School of Education and there were some other topics that you
thought about but weren’t ready to speak on. If you at any point change
your mind, we can chat again at any point.
Noddings: Sure. Sure. Yes, I will keep that in mind. I mean it would be ridiculous to say
that there were never times when I was irritated, or angry, or disappointed
in some of my colleagues. Of course there were times like that, but not very
many and none that I would talk about. My overall feeling--well, you know
that right from the start. [01:29:19] I mean when I started as a graduate
student at Stanford, I told my husband that I had gone to educational
heaven [laughs] and I never changed my mind on that.
Rosenberg: Are there any last minute thoughts that you have on your career or Stanford
that you want to mention before we end this interview session?

125

Noddings: I don’t think so. I think you’ve done a great job asking questions and I hope
I’ve done a reasonably good one in answering them.
Rosenberg: You’ve done a wonderful job at answering them, and it’s been a very
interesting and eye-opening experience for me to learn about the history of
this institution and of your career. It has been wonderful.
Noddings: Okay. Well, if there’s ever anything I can do to help you, letter of
recommendation or advice, you just give me a call. I’d be glad to.
Rosenberg: Thank you so much, Professor Noddings.
