
Tobey: This is Karen Tobey, and I am here interviewing Marion Lewenstein, who is
an emerita professor of communication at Stanford. Today is March 15,
2013, 10:30 a.m.
Marion, I’m glad we got to meet each other before.
Lewenstein: [00:00:31] Yes, a very good idea.
Tobey: I think it was a very nice time to just chat and get to know each other, but I
didn’t get to know as much about you as I’m hoping to learn as we talk
today. I’d like to start with a bit about your background, where you were
born, where you grew up, and how that early life may have influenced you in
your later career and decisions.
Lewenstein:[00:01:08] I come from Cleveland, Ohio. I was born there on October 15,
1927, grew up in a part of Cleveland where the less wealthy lived. Our family
was hard hit by the Depression, so that I did not get to go to college, despite
having won scholarships to a couple universities. But I was helping to
11

support the family. That started at about age fourteen. I started working
almost full-time after school. After-school work did influence my career,
because I wasn’t aiming very high, thinking I didn’t have the possibility of
getting the kind of work I was interested in – journalism - from an early
stage. When I was a kid, I used to do a newspaper for the neighborhood,
running around.
Tobey: Oh, really? Just for fun?
Lewenstein: [00:02:29] Yes, obviously for fun. In my mind I always had the desire to be a
journalist, but I didn’t know whether I would achieve that.
We moved to California when I was eighteen or nineteen, because my
mother became very upset. I had a brother who was killed in World War II.
Her whole family was in San Francisco, and we had no relatives in Cleveland.
My mother was the head of the household, and I had two brothers and a
sister. My sister was married and living in New York. The older brother was
still in the army. As soon as the war was over all three of us, my mother, my
brother and myself, moved to San Francisco to join the family, which then
helped my mother’s attitude. I then went around to various places trying to
get a job as a reporter. [laughs]
Tobey: And how old were you at this point?
Lewenstein: [00:03:41] By this point, I was nineteen. Of course, nobody was interested in
a nineteen-year-old kid with no education beyond high school. So I took a
job as a secretary in a garment manufacturer, Koret of California, on the
basis that I had—I don’t know if you know what Women’s Wear Daily is…
Tobey: I don’t know Women’s Wear Daily, but I’m familiar with Koret, yes.
12

Lewenstein: [00:04:11] Fairchild Publication was a news company that was in trade
publications, and their major one that was extremely well known was Women’s
Wear Daily, which was a daily paper, tabloid size, about eighty to a hundred
pages a day, and was widely quoted by other mainstream papers because they
broke stories not just about fashion, but also about retail business.
The bureau chief in San Francisco had told me—being nice, I realized later—
“Oh, sure, we would hire somebody who doesn’t have a college degree. Oh,
sure, we might have a job in about a year, but we don’t have anything now.”
So I waited a year at Koret and practically to the day went back and
presented myself again. And no, they didn’t have a reporter’s job, but did I
know how to take shorthand? I said, “Oh, yes, that’s what I’ve been doing.”
They said they needed a secretary, and if I’d like to take the job as a secretary,
maybe a job would open up on the reporting side. So I took a pay cut to
switch jobs, which for me was significant, because, as I said, I was helping
support not only my mother and myself, but I had a sister in New York
whose husband had suffered a stroke, and she had three kids. I was helping
her, too.
I took the pay cut, and in about six or eight months, a reporting job did
open. In the meantime, while I had been a secretary, I’d use my lunch hour
to run around finding stories for Women’s Wear. The poor bureau chief would
correct them and send them through to New York, and every once in a while
a little scrib, an inch or two, would get published.

13

So when the reporting job opened up, she was very kind and said, OK, I
could have the position. That’s how I broke in. I was probably twenty years
old at that point.
Tobey: I see.
Lewenstein: [00:06:46]At Fairchild, as I said, Women’s Wear was the best known of its
papers, but they had four or five other papers, one in the footwear industry,
one in the home furnishings industry, one in the supermarket industry, so
they were all very important and large papers. I worked under the bureau
chief on Women’s Wear for about three years, and I got fed up with fashion. I
had to wear a hat and gloves and dress properly. [laughs]
Tobey: Oh?
Lewenstein: [00:07:22] Because I was calling on retailers, and this was in the late forties
and early fifties. Life was different then, and we dressed differently.
Another opportunity came after about three years. I switched to the home
furnishings paper because the reporter for that one left. That turned out to
be a significant move for several reasons. One, it introduced me to covering
somewhat more technical business coverage, because television had become
an important part of home furnishings, and there were a couple West Coast
television manufacturers that I had to cover. I’ll explain in a minute why that
was significant.
The other significant thing was that I really enjoyed design, covering design,
which you did for the furniture industry. I had to cover architecture, because
architecture affects furniture. I was very enthusiastic about getting that first
job as a reporter, so it isn’t as though I was bored. But this really sparked
14

something in me, and, as a result, the editors back in New York—the
company was based in New York—became aware of me and started sending
me around to cover things in other places, and that built a lot of selfconfidence in me in terms of what I could or could not do.
Tobey: And at this point, you are twenty-three, twenty—
Lewenstein: [00:09:21] I’m getting on towards twenty-five by this time.
Tobey: And you haven’t been to college yet.
Lewenstein: [00:09:29] No. I would always go to night school. When Stanford offered me
a job, and they did a search on how many courses I had taken, it turned out I
was a junior just verging on a senior. [laughs]
Tobey: Oh, is that right? From night courses.
Lewenstein: [00:09:51] From night courses I had accumulated. They weren’t in any way in
a straight line, because they were in different places. Some were at University
of California, some in San Francisco, and some at San Mateo College, so it
was just all over the map. I had some from Cleveland. I had gone to night
school before we moved out to California that year between graduating high
school and moving.
The other significant part that I mentioned earlier, the technical, in 1955,
right around the time that I was getting married to my husband, who was an
electronic engineer, was that the company started a newspaper in the
electronics industry. The assumption was that major news on electronics
would come out of Los Angeles or New York or Chicago, where there were
big companies like Motorola and RCA. In any case, I wanted to transfer to
the new paper because then I’d be in the same field as my husband, and we
15

were going to live down the Peninsula. I wouldn’t have to go up to the city
every day. They said no, they wanted to hire an engineer. That made more
sense to them, or to anybody, I think, to hire an engineer who would
understand the language of these technical companies.
What nobody knew then was this area was going to become Silicon Valley,
that the innovation was going on here in the Bay Area. In any case, they said
no to my request, and I thought, well, OK, I’d keep working for Home
Furnishings Daily. But it turned out they couldn’t hire an engineer who could
write who would also work at a reporter’s salary.
Tobey: I see. And in you stepped. [laughter]
Lewenstein: [00:12:07] They finally said, “All right, you can try it out, and if it doesn’t
work, you go back to your other job.” So I did it, and, of course, I knocked
myself out making sure that I got the story straight, which led to some funny
things, but it also turned out that this is where all the big news came. So I
ended up being on the front page all the time, not because of me, but
because this was where everything was happening. Some of the amusing
situations were because I was always worried about not understanding—
Tobey: The technical aspects, yes.
Lewenstein: [00:12:51] The technical part of it. I would sort of pester whoever I was
interviewing, just again and again, if I didn’t understand it, and I’d just go
over it and over it. I knew I was driving some of my interviewees crazy, but I
felt I didn’t have a choice if I was going to get it straight.
Tobey: Right.

16

Lewenstein: [00:13:11] And sometimes they would ask me, “Do you have a degree in
physics?”
“No.”
“Do you have an engineering degree?”
“No.”
“What paper did you work for before?”
And I would say, keeping my face straight, “Women’s Wear Daily.” [laughter]
They would blanch, and then they would get so worried about what the story
was going to look like that they would take time to really make sure I
understood it, and tell me, “You can call me. Here’s my home number if you
want to call me at night.” [laughs]
I did that for about a year and a half and established a reputation, a good
one. I also became pregnant, and in those days you didn’t work after you
started having children, so I had our first child and quit the company. They
hired somebody else. About six weeks after my son was born, I got a phone
call from the office saying would I like to come back. They’d already fired the
guy.
Tobey: Oh, my goodness.
Lewenstein: [00:14:25] And I said, “No, I’m a mother. I’m not going to come work fulltime.”
It ended up they asked me to at least cover for them for a while until they
found somebody, and I could send my stories up by Western Union, which
was the fast way then, so I could work from home. That eventually led to
becoming a freelancer known for covering science stuff, and it turned out
17

later medical stuff, too, because I worked for a medical magazine. I
continued to work for Fairchild on a part-time basis and then wrote for other
magazines, which I could do from home pretty easily. A lot of interviewing
goes on over the phone, and I could do it from home.
As a result of building up knowledge in the science and medical fields
sometime in the late sixties, I came across a story that seemed as though it
was for the general public. Somebody had told me that Time used freelancers
and that they had a bureau in San Francisco. I called up the bureau chief and
explained who I was and that I had this story and thought it would interest
him, and he said, “Yes, as a matter of fact, can you send me the lead
paragraph, so I’ll see whether you know what you’re talking about.”
I said, “Sure.” I had thought I was going to have to run up to San Francisco.
[interruption]
Lewenstein: The moment he said yes, I thought, “Oh, now I’ve got to find a babysitter.”
[laughs] Because I will have to get up to San Francisco, and to my surprise,
he asked me if I could just do the lead draft and send it to him right away on
Western Union. And I said, “OK, I don’t have to come up to the city?”
He said, “No, just send that to me, and then I’ll call you back.”
So I dashed off the paragraph, ran it down to Western Union, which was on
University Avenue at that time, and twenty minutes later he called and he
said, “OK, you know what you’re doing. Do the story, and here’s how to
head it, here’s how to send it.”
[00:17:03] I didn’t meet him until about another week, and after that first
story ran, he called me back and said, “OK, tell me again about your
18

background. Are you covering science?” He had been looking for somebody
to cover science and the budding electronics industry, and here I was.
So that is what I then did for the next six years or seven years, and one day—
somewhere along the line, a friend of mine, both of us having long wanted to
have a little restaurant, started a sandwich shop.
[interruption]
Tobey: We’re going to start again here. Marion has brought her plaque. Oh, it’s a
menu.
Lewenstein: [00:18:15] It’s a menu of the sandwich shop. We introduced falafel. This was
1970. We introduced falafel to the Bay Area. Not to the Bay Area, to the Palo
Alto area.
Tobey: Oh, that’s wonderful. What an achievement. Look how popular it is now.
[laughter]
Lewenstein: [00:18:29] That’s right. It really fulfilled a longtime wish.
At that point, I had told the then bureau chief that I was going to take three
months to start the shop, and then I was going to see what happened,
whether the shop was successful or whether I’d go back to work for Time. I
think it was two days after we opened, I had been scheduled to cover the
Angela Davis trial. Are you familiar with that?
Tobey: Oh, yes, I am.
Lewenstein: [00:19:04] Well, at that time, any reporter who was expecting to cover that
trial had to go down to San Jose to the courthouse and sign up and get
investigated before they would be allowed in. I was the only one from Time
who had the credentials, because the bureau chief had assigned it to me. And
19

wouldn’t you know, the trial got very delayed--it was six months or more, so
two days after we opened our shop, I got the call from our bureau chief
saying, “Quick, get down to San Jose!” [laughs]
Tobey: What timing, huh?
Lewenstein: [00:19:39] I first said, “I can’t. I’ve got a line of customers. I said I was going
to take three months off.”
And he slammed down the phone. My partner, who had been food editor of
Sunset before we opened the shop, said, “Was that the Time bureau chief?”
She figured it out from the conversation. “Go, go, go. Don’t worry. I’ll take
care of it. I’ll take care of it.”
First, I was reluctant to leave her stuck, but she convinced me, so I called
him back and he still hadn’t found anybody, and he was trying to figure out
what he was going to do.
Anyhow, I went to cover the Angela Davis trial. I never took the three
months off because that trial went on for a long time.
Tobey: What was that like, covering that trial?
Lewenstein: [00:20:28] That was exciting. She had one of the best lawyers I’ve ever seen,
somebody from the South, with names that weren’t particularly famous, but
they were good.
My own personal belief was that she had contributed to the brouhaha that
had occurred in Marin. I think the judge was killed and the prosecutor
maimed. But on the basis of the evidence presented at the trial, I thought the
jury did what they had to do, which was say she wasn’t guilty.
Tobey: Acquit her, yes.
20

Lewenstein: [00:21:07] Yes. And I could be wrong. That was my feeling, sitting there.
Tobey: Did your story then appear in—
Lewenstein: [00:21:14] It went on for weeks, so bits and pieces ran here and there. Yes,
Time was covering the trial.
I ended up continuing at Time and having the restaurant, and after about
three years of this, my partner said, “You know what?” Oh, we were starting
to look for a second place. We’d had people offering us money to buy into
the business and expand it, and we said, no, if we wanted to expand it, we
had made enough to do so. We weren’t making jillions, but we were making a
profit. At that point, my partner said, “You know what? We don’t see very
much of our kids.” The children were still fairly young.
Tobey: And you had the one?
Lewenstein: [00:22:13] By that time I had a second child, an adopted daughter, and my
business partner had three boys. At any rate, she wanted out.
I came home and told my husband that Jan wanted me to buy her share, and
he said, “Look. We never see you as it is. You’re either at the shop or you’re
off reporting, and the kids are young. Don’t buy her half. Both of you sell.
Put it up for sale.” He said, “It’s a good business, and somebody will be
interested.”
It turned out we sold it in a week to one of our customers who was at the
business school here at Stanford. We sold the business, and I was sitting
around feeling as though I’d sold off a child.
Very shortly thereafter, I was approached by some women at Stanford who
were promoting women and jobs for women. They were going to write a
21

book in which each chapter was devoted to a different career, but a career
aimed at women. It was called Second Careers for Women, and they wanted me
to do one on science careers.
I said, “What I’d rather do is one on going into business,” because we had
discovered lines would form for people buying sandwiches, and then we’d
see women giving up their space and going to the end of the line. The reason
this was happening was that they didn’t really want the sandwich so much as
they wanted to talk to us about how we started our business and whether we
had children at home, all questions about women. They were interested in
business.
As a result, I felt that that, for me, women in business would be a more
interesting chapter to write than one about second careers for women in
science. And it turned out that women in business was the chapter in the
book that got the most attention. There were just a lot of women out there
who were interested in their own business.
[00:24:26] This plays a role in my ultimately ending up at Stanford because
some of these women, or I guess all of them, were associated with Stanford
in one way or another. Many of them were faculty wives, but some had
administrative jobs. And it turned out that they talked up my name around
Stanford.
Tobey: Women helping women, inadvertently, maybe.
Lewenstein: [00:24:57] One day I got a phone call from the communication department
asking me if I would like to come in and apply for a lectureship for one year.

22

Somebody had gotten ill in the department, and they were looking for a
working journalist to—
Tobey: And what year would this be now?
Lewenstein: [00:25:16] This would have been ’74, and they were looking for the years ’75
to ’76. It turned out that by that time, in addition to these women, people at
the medical school knew me. I did a lot of medical coverage, so I was known
to a fair number of people there, faculty people, and some in the engineering
field also knew who I was. Apparently they had also submitted my name
when the communication department made it known they were looking for
somebody
But I was unaware of all of this until I got a phone call. When the chair called
me and asked me to come in, I said, “Well, I don’t have the right degree or
proper background for Stanford,” thinking they wouldn’t even consider me.
Tobey: Did you have any degree at this point?
Lewenstein: [00:26:17] No, none. I never have.
Tobey: You just had the courses that you had taken at night school.
Lewenstein: [00:26:21] Right.
Tobey: And so you don’t have—
Lewenstein: [00:26:24] Any kind of finished degree. He said he knew that I didn’t have a
degree. I said, “Well, sure, I’ll come and interview,” thinking it would look
good on my résumé, becoming a lecturer at Stanford.
So I went in and got interviewed, and they said they’d get back to me in a
couple of weeks. They were interviewing other people. Later I found out
they were interviewing forty people, all women. I did not know that they
23

were deliberately looking for a woman, because they’d had no women in the
department except the wife of one of the professors, and she had done some
lecturing and wanted an opening that had occurred. They hadn’t given it to
her, and she was threatening them with discrimination against women. I do
not remember if she filed some kind of lawsuit. I don’t think she did, because
I think I would have remembered that. Maybe she was just making a
disturbance. I later got to know her and her husband fairly well, and I think
she once said to me that my job had come about because of her activity. But
she never said anything beyond that and never tried to fill me in on all the
background, which I never did fully learn.
But, as I say, at the time I did not know that the Women’s Movement was
probably playing a role. So it turned out that they ended up hiring me.
Tobey: And what was that job description? Lecturer?
Lewenstein: [00:28:26] Yes, the title was lecturer, which is the formal title.
Tobey: In the Communication Department.
Lewenstein: [00:28:31] In the Communication Department. It’s a distinct category such as
assistant professor, and that would be for one academic year.
So I asked Time if I could take a leave of absence, and they said, “Yes. If
anything major happens down there, please cover it.”
I said, “OK.” Not having taught before, I said, “I’ll have plenty of time. I
only have to do two courses a semester.” [laughs]
Tobey: Famous last words.
Lewenstein: [00:29:03] Not knowing, yes, how much effort teaching required.

24

At that point at Stanford, our department was headed by a man whose name
was Lyle Nelson, a very “aw-shucks” kind of guy, except when he wanted to
appear differently. He was a chameleon in certain ways. He, I learned over
time, was a big power in the university. He had been, I think, a vice president
in the administrative end and then switched to the department as a professor,
teaching. In a way, he became my mentor. At the time I had been hired, two
young people who were working on their Ph.D.’s were hired also. One was a
male and one was a female. About mid-year, Lyle came to me and said, “We
are going to have an assistant professor opening, and we’d like to offer it to
you. Will you accept?”
And I said, “Offer it to me? What about Diane and Chuck? It’s their whole
career.” At this point I was fifty years old. And he said the department had
chosen to offer it to me first.
[00:30:46] I thought about it for a while. Did I want to give up my journalism
career to become an academic? I had turned out, to my great surprise, to
really enjoy teaching. I did not think I had any special talent for it. I had
taken the job because it was prestigious for me to take, but not because I
thought this was something I really wanted to do. At any rate, I had great fun
teaching, and apparently I was well received by the students, which was why
the department made the offer. So I ended up accepting the job as an
assistant professor.
When I had been waiting around to hear whether they were going to hire me
as a lecturer, I didn’t know then that their, “We’ll get back to you in several
weeks,” typically meant a couple months. [laughs]
25

Tobey: Oh, a long time.
Lewenstein: [00:31:49] Yes. I don’t know whether all universities are as slow as Stanford
can be. But I hadn’t heard, so I just assumed I hadn’t been selected. I’m
going back now to the first offer. It was probably two months after the
interview, and I thought, well, it was all over, I hadn’t been selected.
Tobey: It’s a long time.
Lewenstein: [00:32:14] But I wanted material back that I had submitted or brought in. So
I phoned one of the people who interviewed me and said, “When would it be
convenient to come in and pick up my material?”
And he said, “Oh, we’re down to the last two, you and somebody else.
Would you mind if we kept your material a little longer?”
“Be my guest.” [laughter]
When the chairman, a couple weeks after that, called and offered me the job,
I almost fell over. I was trying to be very professional. He told me what the
salary was, which was very low.
Tobey: Do you remember what it was at that time?
Lewenstein: [00:32:59] Yes. It was $12,000, $12,500. That was just below what I would
have expected. The journalism field, which isn’t highly paid, was better than
that. I didn’t really care what the salary was. In fact, my husband had kidded
around with me before we heard. He kept saying, “Do you want me to call
the chairman and tell him I’ll pay him?” [laughter] Because he knew what it
would mean to me.
I really wanted to hang up and start yelling and jumping up and down, but I
was trying to be professional, so I said that the salary seemed very low, and
26

he said, “That’s the standard salary for a lecturer. I’m not able to offer you
any more because that’s the classification that this job will have for the year.”
I pretended to (be nonchalant) —well, all right, I would accept. [laughs]
Obviously I did. Later, when I got put into the assistant professor job, the
category was different, and my salary went up.
Tobey: Do you remember that salary? Not for sure?
Lewenstein: [00:34:16] Yes. It wasn’t high, 14 or $15,000.
Tobey: So, still—
Lewenstein: [00:34:24] Yes, an increase.
Tobey: A raise but not hugely significant. What did it mean to you to be offered that
assistant professorship?
Lewenstein: [00:34:37] It was unbelievable to me. I couldn’t believe that a university of
Stanford’s stature (would offer me an assistant professorship.). Stanford was
just on the rise then. At that point, people in the East still thought of it as a
good West Coast school, and it was just beginning to be known. The science
and technology departments, engineering, were becoming known. Fred
Terman. . . I don’t know if that name means anything to you. . .
Tobey: I recognize it.
Lewenstein: [00:35:13] Fred Terman was busy pushing out people to start their own
companies. I mean, Hewlett-Packard was his first major one. As I say, I was
there just as the university began to be recognized, and it was an exciting
time. For me it was particularly exciting to think that I was there for real. I
was just very excited.

27

Tobey: You were in this assistant professorship, and you continued with that for a
number of years?
Lewenstein: [00:36:02] Well, I continued six or seven years until the university had to
decide whether I would make tenure. That had been one of the questions I’d
asked Lyle when he offered me the job. By this time, I understood the
system, so I had said to him, “How am I going to make tenure? I don’t do
research.”
He said, “Don’t worry. You’ll learn, and you’ve got six or seven years to do
it.”
I thought, “Well, you know, by that time I’ll be in my mid-fifties, and I won’t
care.” [laughs]
[00:36:38] I obviously accepted. When the tenure time came up, the
committee granted me tenure, to my astonishment. I had started to do some
research and I did other publishing. Instead of making me an associate
professor, which is the first level, the provost said to me that, “Why don’t we
bypass this. They passed you as far as the tenure line goes.”
They had a different category, and I can’t remember what they called it. You
were slightly lower level than a full professor, but you were more than an
associate professor. It was someplace in between. They had a title they used
for people like me who came from a different kind of background.
Somewhere along the line they changed (my title) to Professor of
Communication, and I don’t remember why anymore. I know that I went to
see the dean at his request, and we had a long conversation, and I remember
the then chairman of the department, Henry Breitrose, said something about,
28

well, he hoped they weren’t going to do away with my job. And I said, “Well,
they would or they wouldn’t.” By this time I’d had a glorious career. I was
probably in my sixties by that time. It turned out that they wanted to explain
this change of titles. So I came back and said to Henry “I’m a Professor of
Communication now. The slot is saved.” [laughs]
Lewenstein: [00:39:17] What the chairman was worried about was that they were going to
do away with my slot. There are slots in the departments, and we’ll say that a
department is assigned five slots. Well, they can’t hire a sixth person. They
can only hire those five. What he was concerned about wasn’t so much my
situation, which probably would have just reverted back to lecturer; he was
worried that they were going to do away with my slot, and that would mean
one less person in the department for the future. That was sort of a bump
along the road.
Two things reflecting on Stanford were occurring right around the time I
came into the university, the Women’s Movement, as I’ve already indicated,
was getting active. The second thing was the growth of Stanford in terms of
its stature generally.
At Stanford they were just forming the women’s group, which is now—
what’s it called? Gender—
Tobey: Gender-based studies?
Lewenstein: [00:40:32] Yes, something like that. People like Myra Strober and Eleanor
Maccoby and Elizabeth Cohen — in fact, Elizabeth Cohen, who was in
sociology, may have even been chair at that time, helped start it.

29

While I was still a lecturer, I would go to the women’s group meetings just
out of curiosity to see what was going on, but that meant that I got to know
this whole strata of women who were already established in the university in
various departments.
Another thing happened when I came in that first year when I was only
expecting to be there one year. I acted as a journalist. Out of my own
curiosity, I went around meeting people in other departments. I had no
ulterior purpose. I was just curious how the university functioned and who
all these people were. I’d heard their names over the years and I wanted to
meet them and have a chance to talk to them. I didn’t realize that what I was
doing was building relationships, so that when it came time to approve
whether I should be accepted or not, these people voted yes. [laughs]
Tobey: Great.
Lewenstein: [00:42:07] It helped me establish myself, again, without forethought as to
what was happening. And all this is mixed with the activity and growth of
Stanford in terms of its stature generally. So it was an exciting time.
Everybody was excited, conscious that they were becoming better known,
and attempting to get the best in terms of each department, hiring people
who had national reputations.
Tobey: It sounds like it was a really exciting time to be there.
Lewenstein: [00:42:44] Yes, it really was. And the Women’s Movement at Stanford went
up and down. Sometimes it made some progress and other times it didn’t.
Estelle Freedman was one of the young women who was part of that
movement too.
30

Somewhere I had encountered Jing Lyman. I guess Dick was president when
I came, either that or he just had become—yes, he was already president
when I came in.
[interruption]
Tobey: There was something that you said a little earlier that I wanted to ask about.
As you became considered for the associate professorship and then the
professorship, you said you had started to engage in some research. What
research was that?
Lewenstein: [00:44:15] At that time Stanford was one of the three or four universities that
were asked to experiment with using computers and the Internet. I think they
called it something other than email, but you could be in contact with other
people via your computer. Soon after that, newspapers began experimentally
publishing online, and I began to do research on that.
Tobey: So you were at the forefront of research about online news.
Lewenstein: [00:45:05] Online news and how people used online news.
Tobey: What did you find out about that at that stage of the game?
Lewenstein: [00:45:15] At that stage of the game, people were pretty much reading as they
would read a newspaper; that is, if they normally picked up a paper and went
to the business page first, they would go to business news first. If they went
to sports, they would go there. Some people just started on the front page.
They probably were reading about the same amount of time they spent on
physical newspapers, about thirty minutes But they didn’t know how much
time they were spending online. I was timing them.
Tobey: Measuring that, yes.
31

Lewenstein: [00:45:56] Right. They would leap from one news outlet to another, which
they didn’t do, of course, with physical newspapers, so that was noticeable
very early, and also what people categorized as news was different from
newsprint newspapers. For example, some people would go immediately to a
website from a manufacturer if they had stock in a manufacturer, or if they
were interested in the products as a whole field, they would say these were
one of their news sources. I would label such sources public relations. So
their behavior showed what has certainly turned out to be true, that people
call Twitter and Facebook their news sources. They’re not standard. They are
nowadays, but initially they weren’t standard news providers.
Tobey: Curiously, do you use Facebook and Twitter these days?
Lewenstein: [00:47:10] No. I’ve registered for both out of curiosity, because I feel I
should keep up, but they drive me crazy, because I keep getting these
messages from them.
Tobey: I know. I know. Well, when we got interrupted before at the door, we were
talking about the Women’s Movement and how that influence helped you to
get into the career that you did. I’m curious about how, besides allowing you
the steps that you were able to take in your career, how the ideas of that
movement influenced your thinking.
Lewenstein: [00:47:51] Well, it influenced my thinking mostly, probably, on pay level. I
didn’t feel my pay level was based on being a woman because I felt so
uncertain of myself in relation to my educational level,. I knew that I was
always paid less than others.
Tobey: Than men?
32

Lewenstein: [00:48:20] Well, I don’t know if there was a man who had the same
background I did, you see, so I couldn’t—
Tobey: It wasn’t apples and apples, yes.
Lewenstein: [00:48:29] I couldn’t make a comparison as to whether I was paid as much as
males. At the time probably not, but I wasn’t from New York [Fairchild] and
a full-time staff member, so I couldn’t make a direct comparison. I know
there were other women who felt they weren’t being paid the same, and at
one stage there was a rebellion of women in New York. It was hard for them
to move from being researchers or fact checkers into reporting jobs. I
gathered from things I would hear, the women I would get to know, phone
calls and so on, that they felt they were being discriminated against on the
basis of being a woman. I couldn’t tell whether my salary level was lower,
because I didn’t know the salaries of men who had the same kind of position
I did. I was always very uncertain—and I was always so pleased to be doing
what I was doing, that I felt less torn than perhaps I should have.
Tobey: What pleased you most about what you were doing? The teaching, the
research?
Lewenstein: [00:49:58] The teaching. Both. I mean, just being at Stanford, teaching,
mixing with people who were interesting to be with, who were
knowledgeable in many things.
Tobey: Can you tell me a little bit about your teaching, why you enjoyed it, what it
meant to you, how you were different from other teachers? Because you
must have been. I know you’ve received some awards for teaching that don’t
happen to just anyone.
33

Lewenstein: [00:50:26] I don’t know whether I can break it down. It was fun to see young
people learning. It was fun to exchange ideas with them. That was the
enjoyable part.
Tobey: And what were the courses that you were teaching at that point?
Lewenstein: [00:50:51] I was teaching a variety of classes about straight news reporting,
how to go out and get information, how to write it. And I was also teaching
History of Journalism. In one that I particularly liked, Literature of the Press,
I picked out journalism books or journalism stories that had lasted through
time and that, for me, were particularly telling and good writing. It was a
course on the meaning of journalism and its role in the culture of America.
That would be the best way to describe it.
Tobey: It’s interesting to me that you obviously became a very good journalistic
writer without having had formal training along those lines in college, at least.
But the courses that you took along the way, were they instrumental or were
people or mentors instrumental?
Lewenstein: [00:52:02] No, no.
Tobey: Just a natural talent. [laughs]
Lewenstein: [00:52:05] Well, as a matter of fact, I think it runs in our family. I had a
cousin whom I didn’t know very well, but he was much older than I, who
used to write the Tom Mix—you’re probably too young to have heard that
on the radio.
Tobey: I don’t know Tom Mix.
Lewenstein: [00:52:22] Tom Mix was a Western figure. There would be a program -you’d hear the horse clopping. As a kid I would listen. Initially, I didn’t know
34

it was my cousin who was writing the scripts for it. At some point my mother
said, “Oh, yes, that’s cousin Joe.” Kapshun , I think is his last name.
And two of my grandsons write very well. My son writes very well. Harry, my
husband, had people in his family; one of his close cousins was an editor of a
medical magazine. So there’s a family association with it. That didn’t mean
we were perfect from the beginning, but I started from a good level, and you
can learn writing, certainly acceptable writing. You can learn to improve your
writing both by help from others and from just doing it over and over. You
start writing, and if you’re lucky and have good editors, they teach you.
Tobey: And that happened in your case at the various magazines that you wrote for?
Lewenstein: [00:53:36] Yes, that’s right.
Tobey: So it was kind of on-the-job training.
Lewenstein: [00:53:41] Yes, right. I never took any formal courses. The closest, I would
say, was when I was still in Cleveland and was taking a night course. I took
one in advertising writing, so that may have helped.
Tobey: Sounds to me like you have a natural talent in that area.
Lewenstein: [00:54:00] Well, I had a high interest in it.
Tobey: And high interest as well, yes.
Lewenstein: [00:54:04] I think people who has a high interest in any field are apt to do
well in it, because they really care, whether they are an M.D., a lawyer or
accountant.
Tobey: You cared. Well, you’ve talked a bit about how you got into Stanford and
how you became an assistant professor and were eventually promoted to

35

professor. You also had some other roles at Stanford over the years,
including academic secretary.
Lewenstein: Oh, I always forget about that one. I don’t know why. [laughs]
Tobey: [00:54:45] I’m curious about that particular job and what led to that. Was that
just part of the trajectory?
Lewenstein: [00:54:55] No.
Tobey: Or was there some space between?
Lewenstein: [00:54:56] No. I only knew vaguely what it was. I had been voted into the
Senate once as a substitute. I served, I think, just one year. I didn’t have a full
term. So I knew what the academic secretary was, in a way, but not really.
I got a phone call one day from—I think it was Nancy Packer. She was chair
of whatever subcommittee of the Senate that was picking a new academic
secretary. They voted for me, and she asked if I would do it. And I was
uncertain, because I really at that point liked my teaching and didn’t want to
give it up. So I talked with a variety of people. I remember the then-provost,
Jerry Lieberman, and others, and their opinions were kind of evenly split as
to, “Yes, do it. You’ll get to know everybody around the university,” or, “No,
it’s kind of a boring job.” [laughs] I did accept. It was probably about 1990, I
think, more or less.
Tobey: I think I read ’91 to ’94.
Lewenstein: [00:56:27] Oh, then I was pretty close.
Tobey: Yes, very close.
Lewenstein: [00:56:31] So for three years I was academic secretary, and it was fun,
because I once again got to know everybody across the university, which I
36

found interesting, but I did miss the teaching, so I didn’t give it up entirely. I
would teach one class each quarter and take students on an individual basis.
But once the three years were up, I was ready to go back full-time in the
department.
Tobey: And did you?
Lewenstein: [00:57:04] Yes.
Tobey: So you went back to the communications department as a professor?
Lewenstein: [00:57:09] Yes, for three years. My slot had remained, so that wasn’t a
problem. It was interesting to see how the university fit together, which I
hadn’t fully understood. And Condi Rice was named provost the last year I
was there, so she was fun to work with.
Tobey: Tell me something about working with her. You worked directly with her?
Lewenstein: [00:57:46] Yes. The academic secretary reported to the provost. It was her
first year, so she was feeling her way on her job, too. I found her quite easy
to work with. I don’t remember any particular interactions. There were no
problems to solve. We saw each other and talked over what was going on,
what she had to know.
Tobey: Were there any particular issues that arose in the Academic Senate at that
time?
Lewenstein: [00:58:26] I don’t remember anything at that time. By that time the situation
with Don Kennedy had been resolved, and Gerhard Casper came in. That
last year of my being the academic secretary, Casper was there and Condi was
there. That’s right. Casper was the one who named her provost. So it was
interesting to work with two new people of some prominence. I guess by
37

that time Condi had served her first stint in Washington with the senior
Bush, in security, or something that had to do with Russia and Germany..
Tobey: Yes. She was in security before becoming secretary.
Lewenstein: [00:59:28] Yes, National Security Director. And Gerhard was getting used to
Stanford ways. He found it very confusing that Stanford insisted on
shortening the name of everything. “Mem Chu” [Memorial Church], things
like that.
Tobey: Yes. [laughter]
Lewenstein: [00:59:52] There were various other names which I can’t recall. But he would
keep saying something about, “It’s so undignified.” I’m not sure those were
the words he used, but they were something like that.
Tobey: Yes, a little irreverent, yes.
Lewenstein: [01:00:08] Or Dink for Dinkelspiel.
Tobey: Stanford students have had that reputation for years, haven’t they, of being a
little irreverent.
Can you tell me something about the people, when you look back upon your
years at Stanford, the people that you worked with who really stand out in
your mind, colleagues or presidents or provosts or maybe just students?
People that you think really influenced the university or that influenced you?
Lewenstein: [01:00:45] Well, Dick Lyman, who was the president when I came in, and
Jing Lyman too. I had known Jing slightly from some community work. I
was active in the local community and she was too. She played a part in
trying to introduce women professors around so that they weren’t too
isolated.
38

I remember her having a luncheon to which I was invited, Estelle Friedman
was invited, and a few other women, as well as males. All of us were
relatively new, in our first year or something. That kind of thing makes you
feel you’re part of the organization and you’re respected, so I think she
played a role in encouraging women on campus, and I think she was quite
deliberate about it.
At my retirement party, she and Dick came. I said something to her that
evening about being startled to see her at my retirement party and that I still
remembered that first luncheon. She said, “Yes, that was deliberate. I knew
what I was doing,” It wasn’t just accidental.
Tobey: When did you retire?
Lewenstein: [01:02:37] You know, I keep forgetting the date. I think it was 2000, but then
it might have been the year before. No, it would have to have been earlier.
My husband and I were on a bike trip in Portugal, and that was in October of
’97. He was thrown off the bike, broke his neck, and became quadriplegic
thereafter. That was when I retired, because I wanted to be more available.
Tobey: So you took care of him.
Lewenstein: [01:03:20] Yes, but I wasn’t teaching. I did that first year and then realized
that it was just too tough. I retired sometime between ’97 and 2000.
Tobey: Yes, that’s fine. When you look back at Stanford, how do you think the
university has changed over the years?
Lewenstein: [01:03:48] It’s become more formal, and I say that sounding authoritative,
and I’m not sure I should, because of having left it sometime between ’97
and 2000. But just listening to friends who are at Stanford or are more active
39

in the role of the university now, it sounds as though the university is more
structured, and probably my situation would never occur now. Having—I
guess maybe one could say a maverick, Lyle Nelson, a maverick in a very
knowing and a knowledgeable way, not a loose cannon, helped me.
Tobey: Yes. He took a chance on hiring you, recognizing your experience and
talents, and he mentored you.
Lewenstein: [01:04:54] Well, he took a chance. Maybe in some areas, in some
departments, such hiring still exists, but I think it less likely now.
Tobey: So Stanford is more structured in many ways. Do you see other changes or
differences?
Lewenstein: [01:05:18] I don’t know how well established women are in the university
now. To me, it looks as though they are far more established. I mean, even
the engineering department has a number. Some have been chairs, and
geology and geophysics have had women chairs. But it seems to me that I
still hear secondhand that discrimination yet exists. I don’t know that to be a
fact or whether it’s just a generalized complaint that goes on everywhere with
everybody, male or female.
Tobey: Interesting, though, that you still hear that.
Lewenstein: [01:06:12] Not constantly. So I think progress has been made, but probably
not totally satisfactorily.
Tobey: I’m curious. You’ve talked a bit about women and how you became a part of
the university as a female in a relatively male environment. You mentioned
the salary thing as one way in which perhaps your role was different from
men, but did you feel anything else in terms of—
40

Lewenstein: My department was very good. I had no complaints about my department.
People reached out to be friendly to me, to be helpful if I needed help.
Tobey: So you didn’t feel discriminated against?
Lewenstein: [01:07:08] No, I in no way did I feel discriminated against by anyone in the
department.
Tobey: That’s great. Maybe we could we talk a little bit about your family and how
they impacted your career, and vice versa? You had quite a balancing act to
manage over the years.
Lewenstein: [01:07:30] Well, I was enormously fortunate for having picked the right man
to get married to.
Tobey: Tell me a little bit about him and how he influenced you along those lines.
Lewenstein: [01:07:40] Well, he encouraged me enormously at all times, and every once in
a while, I think justifiably on his part, he would get a little resentful about my
absence, but on the whole, he would take over, if necessary, with the kids or
cooking dinner . From my point of view, his cooking and childcare didn’t
happen too much, but maybe from his point of view, it did. [laughter] I can’t
be sure.
He was, himself, a very early supporter of the Women’s Movement. At one
point he worked at Hewlett-Packard. He was the advertising manager, and he
hired the first woman in as a professional job, not a secretary. That was his
attitude.
Tobey: He gave you a lot of support.
Lewenstein: [01:08:50] Yes, I got an enormous amount of support from him, and I
probably wouldn’t have been able to do it all without that support. I think
41

the one time that was really rough on him, and I did take advantage of his
good nature, was when I was doing the shop and the writing and the kids
were probably about—our son was probably twelve or fourteen, our
daughter five years younger, so it was a time when the kids were around a lot.
Tobey: So he had to take an active role as a dad.
Lewenstein: [01:09:28] Yes. My friend Jan Nix, my partner in the shop, (her husband was
obviously very supportive also), and I ran into something that we still tell the
tales of. The shop had been sort of a lark on both our parts, and we hadn’t
been serious. Then suddenly we got serious and we went ahead and did it.
Tobey: Curiously, what made you want to open a falafel shop? Of all the things that
were possible, how did that occur?
Lewenstein: [01:10:04] It’s a long, kind of silly story. I forget what year, but our son was
ten, and he’s fifty-six now, so whatever year that was, we took a trip to Israel.
My husband’s brother had a sabbatical. He taught at San Francisco State. We
went with our kids for a month to Israel, and that’s when I encountered
falafel. I just fell in love with it. It was street food, at that time at least, in
Israel.
Anyhow, I fell in love with falafel, and when I came home, I thought—I’d
always wanted to have a little restaurant. When I was a kid working in school,
I worked as a waitress, and unlike a lot of young people who become waiters
and waitresses to earn money, I really loved waiting on people and serving
them food. It was just fun, as far as I was concerned.

42

I thought to myself, “Oh, falafel, you could do that in a real small shop, and
that would be fun to do.” It was just something I thought about, but I wasn’t
going to do it.
Jan Nix, who had been a food editor at Sunset, and her husband went to
Japan because her husband’s company sent them there for a couple years,
and when she came home the first time on leave, we lived near each other.
She came to the house and said, “I ran into the most wonderful food in
Japan.”
And I said to her, “Falafel.” I don’t know why, I just said that.
And she stared at me. “How could you pick that?” [laughs] I still can’t
explain why I picked it, except that it turned out her kids were going to
International School, and to raise funds, once a year each family would cook
a specialty of their country, and they would sell it. They had a fair, in other
words. It turned out there was an Israeli couple, and they had made falafel as
their food. Jan, like me, had fallen in love with falafel. We started that day,
while we were together, kidding around about, “OK, let’s start two falafel
stands, one in Japan and one here, and we’ll call it Falafel International.”
[01:12:39] She left, went back to Japan, and I started more seriously to look
around and discovered a little Indian food shop on Ash Street, where they
sold the food through a window, and then people stood in line outside. I
thought about it. The woman said that she was going to be moving soon
because she was going to open a bigger place. I probably wouldn’t have done
anything, but I’d seen it, and to my surprise, early one morning, about eight

43

o’clock, the bell rings and it’s Jan. I said, “What are you doing here?” I had
thought they were going back to Japan.
The company transferred them back to the Bay Area, and she said, “So we’re
moving back,” or, “We moved back.” And then she said, “Did you do
anything about the falafel shop?”
I said, “Well, I found a place.” [laughs] And that started it. Within two
months of her having returned, we were ready to open.
[01:13:45] Well, along the line, we were busy getting the shop ready and
putting in what equipment we needed. Then we realized, oh, we’re opening
in two weeks, we’d better get a telephone. This was 1970, and we called the
telephone company. They said they couldn’t give us a phone.
“Why not?”
“Because you don’t have any records of having paid any bills.” [laughs] Of
course, our home phones weren’t in our name; they were in our husbands’
names.
So we started arguing, “But this isn’t our husbands’ shop. It’s our shop.”
[laughs] And they wouldn’t give us a phone. We were furious. But with two
weeks to go, we were going to open and we needed a telephone, so we got
our husbands to sign the contract. They thought it was terribly funny, both
husbands, who had helped us clean up the shop and had put up signs. They’d
been entirely helpful, but on this, of course, they couldn’t resist needling us.
But they signed and the phones were under their name.
Tobey: That’s such an interesting story.

44

Lewenstein: [01:14:51] Yes. It just seems as though by 1970, things might have improved.
I don’t know at what stage women could get telephones under their own
name.
Tobey: Yes, I don’t either. Well, so, you’re a falafel queen, as well as a journalistic
guru. [laughter] I’m curious, too, about your daughter and son and how you
feel that you influenced them along the way, being a working mom from
early on, really.
Lewenstein: [01:15:35] I had been concerned, when Stanford offered me the full-time
career rather than the one-year lecturer—by this time, my daughter, who
turned out to be troubled during her adolescence, as to whether I should not
do it, and discussed with her. She was about thirteen or fourteen at the time.
Whether she could have known herself what she wanted, I don’t know, but
she told me to go ahead. She showed a type of feminist view at that stage.
[01:16:25] I don’t know whether my career had any influence on her in terms
of her life. She’s an adopted child, and she comes from biological parents and
grandparents, whom we eventually met, who are artists, and she, herself, has
a great deal of talent. Perhaps my not being around all the time was not a
great idea for her. I’m not sure of that, whether things would have been any
different.
Tobey: You’ll never know.
Lewenstein: [01:17:01] Yes, one never knows. My son, I guess, has become an academic
because he saw the kind of life we lived and rather liked it. Because of my
husband’s flexibility, he was vice president of a company for a long time, ten
years or more, and then took early retirement. He retired essentially from
45

full-time work when he was fifty, and we had a chance to do a lot of traveling
because of academia. We spent three months at Oxford teaching there.
Tobey: You taught at Oxford?
Lewenstein: [01:17:45] Yes. Stanford has a program at Oxford, and we spent a whole year
in Florence, where I taught at the Stanford program there.
Tobey: Right. I was there.
Lewenstein: [01:17:58] [laughs] Then you know how much fun it is!
Tobey: Yes.
Lewenstein:

I also got invited to help start an English-language paper in China, so I spent
three months in China, and my husband, of course, worked in Beijing. For a
six-week period, about five years later he did some teaching in Beijing and all
over China.

Tobey: In all of these cases, were you teaching journalism or communications
courses of some sort?
Lewenstein: [01:18:36] Yes, mostly pretty hardcore journalism courses. That was a very
interesting life -- to move around from one place to another, and I suppose
our son saw that and liked it.
Tobey: Was your daughter along with you at that time too?
Lewenstein: [01:18:59] No, but we kept in touch all the time.
[sentences deleted]
Tobey: Tell me a little bit more about how your time in Florence and Oxford and
Beijing. How did you feel about those experiences and how did they
influence you?

46

Lewenstein: [01:19:40] I’m not sure how they influenced me, other than made me more
aware of differences in culture, of course, but speaking narrowly within a
field, they made me aware of differences in journalistic approach.
In Florence, in order to teach Comparative Journalism, I had to do a lot of
research, as I also did to understand how news is presented differently in
Europe and the States. I became aware of what I had known overall but not
in detail. In Europe, political parties are a much stronger influence on
newspapers. Usually a newspaper is owned by a political party. I mean,
political party influence isn’t something hidden.
The incident that I like to recount best is in Italy. There was a strike on one
occasion, and the Communist paper [unclear] said a million workers had
stayed home that day. When you got over to the paper that was the farthest
to the right, a few hundred people stayed home. [laughs]
Tobey: Oh, an exaggeration.
Lewenstein: [01:21:17] Either way. I have no idea what the truth was, but each paper had
a different figure depending on where they stood politically and whether they
wanted to show the strength of the unions or disparage it.
Tobey: Which is a nice example of what you can teach to students about point of
view and how it affects good writing.
Lewenstein: [01:21:42] That’s right, point of view. And you had less interest in
investigative-type journalism in Europe and Italy, although Italians actually
do a fair amount of investigative journalism. Less so some of the other
countries.

47

In China, in 1984, I was helping the paper, the China Daily, the Englishlanguage paper., Of course, to an American it was shocking to see the kind of
restrictions and control that existed, and I kept asking one of the people who
clearly was the political person assigned to the newspaper, (he had a lot of
influence), why they were bothering to get somebody like me over there to
show American journalism when no way could these young reporters use the
information they might dig up, if it wasn’t what the party wanted. He kept
saying, “Marion, you just do what we brought you over here to do, and I’ll
take care of controlling.” [laughs] I don’t think he used the word
“controlling,” but it was, “I’ll take care of controlling the reporters.” [laughs]
Tobey: Interesting.
Lewenstein: [01:23:15] One story that stands out in my mind: there had been a party, I
mean a cocktail-type party, for some event that had taken place, and the story
started out with the list of names of those who attended, “Attending the
party were—,” and this whole list of names followed; then came the purpose
of the party and whatever the event was.
At the session where I was teaching how to organize a story American style, I
said that the purpose of the event would go on top and all this other
information would come later. The last part would be the names of all those
who attended. Their editor looked at me and said, “You don’t understand.
We have to put the names first.” [laughter] I knew I would encounter control
issues. I wasn’t that unknowing, but something like this I hadn’t expected.
[laughs]

48

Tobey: No. No, I wouldn’t expect that either. Well, I guess you’ve probably learned
from your foreign experiences as well as your experiences at Stanford,
although your foreign experiences were also Stanford experiences.
Lewenstein: [01:24:53] Yes, yes, I was always associated with Stanford.
Tobey: But you’ve written quite a lot in the course of your career. Do you have
favorite areas of writing that you look back upon and think, “I’m really glad I
was involved in writing about this”?
Lewenstein: Probably the last phase, the electronic, just because it was all new. I mean,
the whole field was new, and it was fun to get to know all these people that
are now big names.
Tobey: Tell me some of the big names you got to know.
Lewenstein: [01:25:34] Well, Bob Noyce. I’m getting old. I’m forgetting names a lot.
[laughs] David Packard, Bill Hewlett.
Tobey: So you worked pretty directly with David Packard or stories about their
business?
Lewenstein: [01:25:59] Yes, from time to time. The story that I keep kicking myself that I
didn’t keep a copy of was one long interview I had with Bill Hewlett. I must
have been doing a story on the history of Silicon Valley, so I was
interviewing him about his recollections. We must have spent three or four
hours together, in which he was going back and telling me the stories of all
the companies and who moved where and what happened after that. I guess
I was doing it for Fortune. I sent the story off and it ran. But we moved
houses somewhere along the line, and I was cleaning out, and I remembered
looking at that story and thought, “Ah, it’s been published. Never mind.”
49

Tobey: You probably can get a copy of it.
Lewenstein: [01:26:58] Now I could shoot myself. [laughs]
Tobey: I wonder if we could get a copy of it back from some archive.
Lewenstein: [01:27:04] I don’t remember when it was, and it ran a very short version, but
I had all this basic material I had gathered. I didn’t have the good sense to
see that someday I was going to want it. [laughs]
Tobey: It’s hard sometimes when you’re moving. So you’ve written articles for
magazines about the history of Silicon Valley.
Lewenstein: [01:27:31] Yes.
Tobey: You’ve gotten to interview Bob Hewlett and Packard and numerous others.
You’ve really played quite a role in documenting, then, what’s happened in
this Valley over the years.
Lewenstein: [01:27:50] Yes. And something I had meant to dig out for you was a story
that my son ran across. His field is history of science and science
communication. It was a story that I did for a magazine called Innovation, in
which I outlined the history, a different sort of history than the one I did
with Hewlett, of the movement of companies and people in Silicon Valley.
One of his students who was working on a Ph.D. had dug up the story, and
didn’t know I was Bruce’s mother. It was just simply a story that he was
using for part of his research. And my son said it was a shock to realize,
“This is my mother’s story.” [laughs]
Tobey: Oh, for heaven sakes.
Lewenstein: [01:28:39] He sent it to me. Again, I had kept that magazine, I thought, but I
don’t have it, so I guess I threw it out, too, when we moved here. Because I
50

had it online recently, I was going to print it out to give you. I haven’t, but I
can do that.
Tobey: Oh, I’d like to see that if we can easily find it. I don’t want you to go to too
much work to try to dig it out. I read online myself that you actually, besides
doing some writing of these articles, created a textbook on science
journalism.
Lewenstein: [01:29:23] No. I was working on one, but never finished it.
Tobey: Oh, you worked on it. OK.
Lewenstein: [01:29:28] Yes. I co-wrote a straight journalism textbook, nothing special.
Tobey: And has that been used in schools around here?
Lewenstein: [01:29:40] I presume so, because the company was selling it, but I don’t
know where.
Tobey: You don’t know what schools are involved?
Lewenstein: [01:29:45] No. It was nothing special. It didn’t become a bestseller among
journalism schools or anything.
Tobey: And I understand that you also worked at the Democratic Convention in San
Francisco in 1984.
Lewenstein: [01:30:02] Wow. Where are you finding—
Tobey: Oh, this is online. [laughs] Was that an experience to remember?
Lewenstein: [01:30:15] Yes, because I was covering it—I shouldn’t say I was covering it. I
had wanted to get some experience with television, because a lot of the
students, of course, were interested in television, and I had no knowledge of
how you gather information for television versus newspapers and their
general operation. When the Democratic Convention occurred, I got
51

contacted by the Democratic Party because I used to help students get
internships. I suppose they had called the department, and a department
member said, “Oh, talk to Professor Lewenstein. She’s the one who will find
students for you.”
So I asked whoever it was that was doing this, “Is there any chance that I
could do it also? Because I would like to.”
They said, “Oh, sure, wonderful.”
I was like a student intern. I was working the convention. I had to go around,
talk to people, gather information, and find out how they worked. That’s
when I really understood the power of television on the average person. It
was NBC that I was working for. They wanted to find out Point A. I would
go around and talk to people and find out who had opinions about Point A.
Then I would go get the reporter who was on TV and say, “OK, I found a
person.” I would take the reporter over to the person, at which point
everybody would crowd around. And I’d realize that’s not like newspaper
reporting. [laughs] It was useful to me to have a better understanding of the
power of TV, because I wasn’t a TV person myself. I hadn’t fully appreciated
it.
Tobey: So you never got involved in TV journalism.
Lewenstein: [01:32:43] No, no, other than in at a very mild way. If students were doing
something that was also going to be on TV, I would tell them they had to
shorten their article and play up certain aspects, but nothing at all serious.
Tobey: You were much more in the magazine end and newspaper business.
Lewenstein: [01:33:03] Yes, magazine and newspapers.
52

Tobey: I understand that you were also involved in research about how media was
used during the Loma Prieta earthquake.
Lewenstein: [01:33:19] Oh, yes, I forgot about that piece of research. Yes, that was fun.
Tobey: Tell me a little about that.
Lewenstein: [01:33:23] We were sitting around in the office right after the earthquake, and
I’m not sure what we were talking about regarding the role of media. It was
just an informal discussion among a couple of us. There was a grad student, a
Ph.D. student who was saying something, and I said, “I’d really like to know
when people understood at certain points what was happening.”
Any rate, I don’t remember whose idea or what, but the two of us, John, the
graduate student, and I decided that what we could do would be to ride the
trains from here to the city back and forth and interview people. We must
have also ridden in the East Bay too, because we did it in two places. We
asked people when they knew about how bad the earthquake was, when they
knew that the bridge had partially collapsed, when they knew the fires were
going on in the Marina District, and whatever other key points there were at
that time.
[01:34:48] So we organized the research. We got students who were
interested in doing the research, too, and we put it together, and the students
coded it. It was a standard questionnaire. It turned out there was a high
relationship between when people knew events and when they’d first been
emphasized on TV. So, for example, people knew about the bridge collapse
much earlier than we had thought they would know, because it turned out
there had been some very brief mention on TV, and it wasn’t until later that
53

there was full coverage. They knew at that early point, which we thought was
surprising. Our research proved that people were really watching TV, and
they could associate when key events appeared on TV and when they
themselves were conscious of them.
Tobey: So did you write all of that up as a study?
Lewenstein: [01:35:48] Oh, yes. John submitted the material—we were in technical
journals in our field. We both did several different pieces, and I got invited to
give a talk about it someplace. It was a standard academic kind of
presentation.
Tobey: Yes, but still it’s interesting that you were doing that kind of research, and it’s
something that everybody remembers and relates to in this area.
Lewenstein: [01:36:27] Yes.
Tobey: I know that someone named Henry Lowood has suggested that you were
arguably the first Silicon Valley journalist, female journalist, one of the first
female technology journalists in the United States. Do you think that’s an
accurate statement, or could you talk about this a little bit?
Lewenstein: [01:36:56] It’s interesting that he would say that.
Tobey: You know him, I assume?
Lewenstein: [01:37:01] I know who he is. I’ve never met him, to my knowledge. Or if we
have, it’s just briefly. I don’t think I have any idea of whether I was or not.
I’d find it a little surprising. I know I was an early person. I feel confident in
that. But I just don’t know who all the other people were.
Tobey: Maybe there aren’t any. [laughs]

54

Lewenstein: [01:37:27] I think that there probably were back on the East Coast. I may
have been the first out here on the West Coast. I can think of one person.
She worked for The New York Times, also as a freelancer originally, but then
full-time. Her father was a science writer for The New York Times, and she
ended up moving out here and having a child. I remember the first time I
met her she was still breastfeeding the child; she had the child along at the
news conference. I’m pretty sure she specialized in science. She came after I
did, but I don’t know if she specialized in science before or after I did. I’m
unable to confirm or deny that.
Tobey: As we look back on your family and career, I am sure that there are some
really memorable experiences that stand out -- some that are rewarding, some
that are perhaps not. Are there standouts in terms if your career as far as
memorable experiences?
Lewenstein: [01:39:29] People are always asking me that, and there must be something
wrong with the way my memory works, because I find that as I look back, it’s
all a fairly even exciting level. There are some incidents that for one reason or
another stand out in my mind. I don’t know that they’re very meaningful
necessarily.
One early experience when I was working for Women’s Wear, as I mentioned,
the Women’s Wear sounds as though it would be a narrow field, but it was
very expansive. I covered the Japanese signing the peace treaty, which took
place in San Francisco, for Women’s Wear, because it’s an event that affects
world economy, which Women’s Wear covered. And the Russian ambassador
was here for the event, and I had to interview him. I suppose it was to find
55

out what kind of trade policies the Soviet Union was planning. Have you
been in the Opera House in San Francisco?
Tobey: Yes.
Lewenstein: [01:41:07] All right. So you know the northern hallway area and how
enormous it is? There is a big square and the doors come in on the sides.
Well, as a journalist, you had to come in from the main entrance, go up the
steps, and then head off in that direction. Then they had set up a quagmire of
pathways that you had to go around. You had to follow the lines that were
drawn out. The ambassador stood in the middle of that hallway with all these
rope lines leading up to him, and I suppose it was for his safety, but it was
very strange to walk along these lines, turning right, then turning left, then
turning right again. You could see him standing there in the middle until you
got up to him.
Tobey: For heaven sakes.
Lewenstein: [01:42:15] There was an interpreter there, and I asked my questions. He
answered the questions. It was a perfectly polite exchange. And then you
went back along the lines and got out. I was young then. I probably was
twenty-ish, as I mentioned. It just has always stuck in my memory as a
strange experience, because of the way the interview was conducted and the
way he was standing there. So that’s one.
Tobey: Are there others that I’m missing here, or do you think about the evolution
and all the experiences as—
Lewenstein: [01:43:04] Well, another interview I did, and I don’t remember who this was
for, had been in the middle of the Vietnam War, so it might have been for
56

Time. David Harris, it was after he got out of jail. You recall he was jailed
because he—(refused to be drafted into the Vietnam War)
Tobey: He was student body president at Stanford when I was there.
Lewenstein: [01:43:27] Oh, really?
Tobey: Yes.
Lewenstein: [01:43:29] One of the questions I asked him when I was interviewing him
was about the experience of going to jail, what jail was like. It must have
been very traumatic. I guess he was in about three years. And he said—and
this has always stuck with me—that he wouldn’t do it again, that despite his
strong feelings against the war, that he wouldn’t go to jail for it.
Tobey: That’s new information to me.
Lewenstein: [01:43:59] Yes, I don’t think I’ve ever seen it. Maybe he’s written it
somewhere, I don’t know. I haven’t read all his stuff. That kind of a snippet
I’ve always remembered.
Tobey: Yes, that’s interesting. I’ve sure you’ve heard lots of snippets over your
career. [laughs]
Lewenstein: [01:44:18] Covering the Angela Davis trial was an interesting experience, as I
say, hearing the testimony and hearing the way her lawyers shaped what was
presented as testimony, her testimony.
Tobey: Are there particular experiences at Stanford that were really memorable or
remarkable? You have so many.
Lewenstein: [01:44:52] Yes. I’m trying to think in terms of general actions that kind of
reflect the feel for Stanford. Well, obviously they couldn’t all have been on an
even keel, but somehow that’s how I remember it all, as a high. [laughs]
57

Tobey: Yes it sounds like you’re an even-keeled person who was on a career path
there that was very pleasing to you,
Lewenstein: [01:45:31] Yes, it was. Oh, I guess for me personally, a high was getting the
Dinkelspiel Award, which I didn’t know I would receive. I think now they’ve
changed the routine, but at that time they didn’t tell you ahead of time, and it
was only the third year I’d been there. For those first three years, I had not
marched as a faculty member because I felt too embarrassed about the gown
I would have to wear. I didn’t think I could cheat and wear the collars that
you wear for whatever degrees you had, so I would have had to go in an
undergraduate gown, and that struck me as something I shouldn’t do. So I
just didn’t go in the faculty procession.
And the chair, who at that time was Henry Breitrose, said I had to go and
represent the department that year, and I said, “No, I can’t go.”
“Why can’t you go?”
I said, “I just don’t go. I don’t march in faculty.”
He said, “I’m ordering you to go,” which was a little odd. One didn’t order
others around.
I said, “Come on, Henry,” and we argued about it, and he insisted, so finally
I said OK, and I went, feeling absolutely ridiculous wearing the
undergraduate gown, no collars.
[01:47:00] When I was seated, the faculty went in two by two, and then they
parted, going in each direction toward the left or right chairs. I was probably
going to end up in the middle of the right or left section. And the helpers
sort of held me back and said, “No, sit on the end.”
58

And I said, “Why?”
They said, “Because it’ll be even this way.”
So I sat down on the end chair, and when they got around to announcing
Dinkelspiels and then called my name, I couldn’t believe that I was hearing
my name being called. [laughs] I sort of sat there for a minute, and the
woman tapped me on the shoulder and indicated, “Go on up.” I have no
memory of walking up—
Tobey: Oh?
Lewenstein: [01:47:57] —and standing there was Lyman. I think he was waiting for me to
lean over and kiss him, because that was standard practice, but I didn’t think
that was what you did. [laughs] So we both stood there staring at each other,
and then he realized I wasn’t going to lean over and kiss his cheek, so he just
presented me with the certificate.
Tobey: And that’s the award that is given for outstanding teaching.
Lewenstein: [01:48:31] It’s one of—
Tobey: One of several.
Lewenstein: [01:48:32] Yes. There’s a Gores Award. At that time, there were just two
awards: a Gores and a Dinkelspiel. Now I think there are others.
Tobey: What a thrill!
Lewenstein: [01:48:41] Yes. So that does stand out as a highlight.
Tobey: Absolutely, yes.
Lewenstein: [01:48:46] When I came off the stage later, my husband said, “Have you
opened the envelope? How much money did you get?” [laughter]
I said, “What envelope?”
59

He said, “You got an envelope.”
I said, “Oh, yeah, I do.” [laughs]
Tobey: Oh? Was that a monetary award in part?
Lewenstein: [01:49:10] Yes, yes, it was—I think at that time it was about $3,000. Very
nice.
Tobey: Congratulations. I’m sure you deserved it. That was an award voted on by
students or faculty or—
Lewenstein: [01:49:24] Faculty, although I think students had some input.
Tobey: I think you’ve received another important award from—was it the state of
California?
Lewenstein: [01:49:36] Oh, yes.
Tobey: California Newspaper Publishers.
Lewenstein: [01:49:38] Yes. That was voted on by editors. But, yes, that was the California
Newspaper Editors Association.
Tobey: And that was?
Lewenstein: [01:49:50] Teacher of the Year.
Tobey: Was that a different year?
Lewenstein: [01:49:57] I think it was the following year, within a year or two of the
Dinkelspiel. It wasn’t the same year.
Tobey: How nice for you to be recognized in such ways by those organizations. And
the award from the Newspaper Association was then also for teaching, not
necessarily all the journalistic articles that you had written?
Lewenstein: [01:50:23] No, no, it was a teaching award. I had started—well, I didn’t start,
but I sort of enlarged the program getting students internships in
60

newspapers. Also, I was active in the Newspaper Editors Association. I think
the combination of their having my students show up, and Stanford students
being, by and large, pretty good, (they had good experience with students.)
made them aware that Stanford was a place where you get interns. I think
that’s what led to the recognition.
Tobey: It made you unique in terms of your teaching if you were doing internships
in a larger way than other people were.
Lewenstein: [01:51:15] It didn’t make me unique in the state. Other schools were
encouraging internships, too, but Stanford, not much, because Stanford
hadn’t had many teaching faculty who were out in the working world. I knew
a lot of people in journalism, and to me it was just natural to call up and talk
to somebody I knew who was an editor and say, “I’ve got this student who’s
really good and could use an internship experience.”
Tobey: Oh, it really helped that you had all those ties to the journalistic world.
Lewenstein: [01:51:48] Yes. So now the program is really quite large in our department.
Tobey: Now?
Lewenstein: [01:51:55] Yes.
Tobey: So you started that, really.
Lewenstein: [01:51:58] Yes. I mean, they had had internships, but nobody was actively
pushing. It was sort of whatever fell in through the window.
Tobey: So that’s a legacy for you that remains at Stanford.
Lewenstein: [01:52:13] Yes, I would say that that is a legacy.
Tobey: Do you think there are other legacies that you—
Lewenstein: [01:52:19] No, I don’t think so. [laughs]
61

Tobey: Well, that’s a big one. In that you were so recognized in journalism, too, as a
good journalist, what attributes do you think set your work apart in
journalism?
Lewenstein: [01:52:47] I think I probably was very thorough. I took the time to get at
even small sources of information that others might not—that others didn’t.
I did it fairly regularly so that editors knew they could trust me to cover all
bases. There’s something in the editorial world called “parachute artist.” This
means you can take journalists and just drop them anywhere in a parachute
and they land and head straight to the main source, find out the information
that needs to be covered quickly, and then get out and write the story. I think
I became known as a little bit of a parachute artist. They could put me in a
strange place and I’d figure out who was the leader I had to go see.
Tobey: Interesting.
Lewenstein: [01:53:52] Some people do that more naturally than others. Thank you for
your time.
Tobey: Oh, you’re welcome. I’m so glad that I could do this.

Tobey: I am here with Marion Lewenstein, and we are sitting in her apartment. It is
January 20th [2014], Martin Luther King [Jr.] holiday, and we are going to do
our second interview.
So, Marion, I’m glad that you have consented to do a second interview,
and I really appreciate your time. Why don’t we begin? I thought it might be
fun to hear something about your early background. You must have been in
your teens or twenties when you met your husband. Is that right?
Lewenstein: [00:08:52] Later twenties.
Tobey: Is there a story there? [laughs]
Lewenstein: [00:08:57] Well, everybody has a story about how they met. I was living in
San Francisco but had very close friends who were grad students at Berkeley,
and they had, after they got married, rented a house that was more expensive
than they could afford. Part of the wife’s demand before she would marry
was that she had to have a grand piano to practice on. So they had rented this
large house, which at the time was about $100 a month rent. They hadn’t
been able to afford it, so they rented out two of the bedrooms to fellow
students, and on one occasion, both of those students moved out abruptly
63

for various reasons, which left them with the full $100 to pay, and they had
$40 to their name. [laughs]
So they called up and said, “Well, we’re just going to blow the $40 and
have a party.” As I said, we were really close friends. “Come on over early
and help us cook some of the food.” So I borrowed my brother’s car and I
went over early and helped with the food. They had about sixty people, all
students, and one of them was my husband. He was new to the area, had a
friend in Oakland, had gone over to the friend’s because he’d been invited to
dinner at their house. They said when he got there, “Oh, we’re going to go
over to somebody else’s house for dinner. They’re having a party. Come with
us.” So we met, and it turned out we both lived in San Francisco on the same
street, about four blocks apart.
Tobey: Oh, my goodness. Coincidence, yes.
Lewenstein: [00:10:49] There’s a Yiddish expression, bashert, which means it’s set in
heaven that you should meet and marry. [laughs] So it was bashert.
The next day, he offered to drive me home, and I said I had my own
car, which I was driving. He claimed I snippily said that. [laughs]
I was driving down to my brother’s house in the city, because I had just
moved to an apartment there. I wanted to get my stereo equipment, which he
had kept for me while I was looking for apartments, and remembered that
Harry was an engineer when I saw his bright-red new convertible as I passed
by his place.
So I rang the doorbell. Turned out I had his name wrong. [laughs] I
remembered it as, I think, Goldstein instead of Lewenstein. I was told no
64

such person lived there and was then going to leave, when he came out of
the door. It was a boardinghouse—San Francisco had boardinghouses
then—that he was living in, and he saw me. Anyway, we made a date, and
that was it.
Tobey: And for both of you, that was—
Lewenstein: [00:12:13] Well, not instantly, but, I mean, in short order.
Tobey: No, but over time you then got to know each other better and married.
Lewenstein: [00:12:20] Right, and he put my stereo together. [laughs]
Tobey: That’s important. So he was an engineer at the time?
Lewenstein: [00:12:34] Yes, he had an engineering background, but he never actually
practiced engineering. He was always in the marketing end. He was working
for, I guess, probably the first electronic firm down here (in the Silicon
Valley), Lenkurt Electric, which doesn’t exist anymore (it later became part of
General Telephone and Electronics). He commuted to the city because there
were few single people down here (on the Peninsula).
[interruption]
Tobey: We were talking about how you met your husband and how his—
Lewenstein: [00:13:05] The influence, marrying him.
Tobey: Did marrying him have an influence on your career?
Lewenstein: [00:13:09] Well, it did, because at the time we got married, I was working for
Fairchild Publications, as I think I’ve mentioned earlier. I was working on
their home furnishings paper, which included coverage of television, which
gave me a little experience with technical professions, not much -- but some.

65

The company started Electronic News, which in its field then became the
prominent paper, and since all the electronic companies were down the
peninsula, it meant if I worked for Electronic News, if I could switch to that
paper, first, I wouldn’t have to come up to the city every day from the
peninsula, and second, I’d be in the same field as my husband, which I
thought would be fun. He thought it was ridiculous because I didn’t know
how to make the thermostat work. [laughter] He didn’t see how I could
become a reporter on a technical paper.
So there was a certain amount of rivalry there. I was going to show
him. [laughs] So I worked extra hard learning the field and being careful
when I interviewed engineers, and it became a sort of joking rivalry between
the two of us. That did influence my career. I might still have wanted to
change professional directions if he’d been a lawyer, but I think not. I think it
was the motivation. Initially, the company didn’t want to have me change,
because they were looking for an engineer to work as a reporter, but they
discovered, first, most engineers couldn’t write, and second, most engineers
expected much higher pay than reporters did. So they finally gave in to my
hounding and said, “OK. If it doesn’t work out, you’re going to have to go
back to the home furnishing paper.” And I said that was fine, and it worked.
Tobey: Good. Although there was this sort of competitive rivalry, “I’ll show him I
can do this,” was he generally quite supportive of your work?
Lewenstein: [00:15:37] Oh, enormously. Later, as we started to have children, he would
help out. He just couldn’t possibly have been more supportive. Yes, he was.
Tobey: It sounds like you had a wonderful relationship.
66

Lewenstein: [00:15:50] He didn’t always answer my questions about electronics, saying,
“You’re the reporter. Go find out.” [laughs] But aside from that, he was very
supportive.
Tobey: That’s great. So you had a really nice working relationship with him in your
marriage so that you could handle the career that you did, and the children.
Lewenstein: [00:16:14] Yes.
Tobey: I think one of the things I wanted to go into in more detail was the work in
the communication department and just what the communication
department at Stanford was like when you first entered and how it changed
over the period of time that you were there. So maybe we start with how big
it was, where the offices were located on campus, just some physical
description.
Lewenstein: [00:16:53] When I started, the offices were at the far end of what’s known as
Jordan Quad, way over toward the hospital. There were one-story buildings
built during World War II for whatever was going on, and we often were able
to have classes sitting on the grass outdoors, because there was just one
story, very open, and it was just as easy to walk out and sit on the grass as to
go into the classroom.
Tobey: So when you would be teaching, you might be teaching a class with students
on the lawn?
Lewenstein: [00:17:39] Yes.
Tobey: How many students would you have in class?
Lewenstein: [00:17:41] Fifteen, small classes.
Tobey: Oh, so it was very small.
67

Lewenstein: [00:17:44] Yes. I mean, I wasn’t doing it for lecture classes, but I taught a lot
of classes that had limited enrollment. The cut-off was fifteen. I came in ’75,
and it was about ’80 that they were redoing the central building at the top of
the Quad, which had formerly been the old law school. The building was
going to be shared by Sociology and us. We moved there in ’80, ’81.
The communication department moved from the outskirts of campus
to the central part of campus. I hadn’t realized it previously, but it was going
to make a big difference because in the center, when you walked outside for
lunch or a stroll, you bumped into other professors or people from other
fields. So it made it much easier to have interchanges than when we’d been
on the edge of campus and nobody else was around. I missed the ease of
being outdoors. I had always liked that. On the other hand, the new location
was a much better arrangement for interactions with people outside of our
department.
Tobey: So you had more interaction with some of those other professors in other
departments.
Lewenstein: [00:19:22] In other fields, yes, just casually. And there was a little sandwich
shop around the corner, at the back end of the building, so people came to
that and you saw them.
Tobey: Did you collaborate with any of those—
Lewenstein: [00:19:36] No, I didn’t. Some of the other people did. The department, when
I came in ’75, had about eleven people, as I recall. It was divided into three
areas. One was what we called qualitative research, which included people
whose backgrounds had been in sociology and psychology and covered
68

checking on the relationship of voting behavior, how news media affected
voting behavior, what sorts of political communication was effective and
wasn’t effective, what kind of advertising messages worked and didn’t work,
how television ads affected people’s perception of the news -- things like
that. That was one area.
Another area was making documentaries, documentary filmmaking. It
was quite an active department, or area of the department. The third was
straight newspaper, straight journalism.
Tobey: So that was your area?
Lewenstein: [00:21:16] That was the area, yes, that I was in. The total number of faculty
was about eleven. Sometimes somebody temporary would be hired for
expertise in a certain sub-area. We’d have about a hundred students a year
altogether between undergraduates and graduate students. It was a pretty
active graduate group between the film and the qualitative side.
Tobey: That’s a pretty small number of students in the department as compared to
today, right, in that environment?
Lewenstein: [00:21:51] Yes.
Tobey: A hundred students per year with the three sections?
Lewenstein: [00:21:56] Maybe that was just undergraduates. We were not a huge
department, but we weren’t the smallest, either.
All the faculty members in the department were, I think, quite good in
the sense of caring about their students and reaching out. Some faculty
members were almost entirely devoted to the graduate students and some to
the undergrad. I was active with the master’s students in journalism. I didn’t
69

do much with Ph.D. students. Some Ph.D. students who were interested in
news would come to me and work on projects, but that didn’t happen a lot.
Tobey: Your focus was with the master’s-degree students?
Lewenstein: [00:22:51] Yes, and undergrads. Apparently I helped some students in film.
The reason I say “apparently” is I don’t remember doing so, but yesterday,
somebody whom I didn’t recognize came up to me and thanked me for the
help I had given her twenty years ago.
Tobey: Oh, how wonderful.
Lewenstein: [00:23:17] She was in the documentary side. That has happened in the past.
While I remember some of these students in terms of their faces and names,
I do not remember being helpful to them. So at any rate—
Tobey: You must have been.
Lewenstein: [00:23:31] —but I must have mixed with them.
Tobey: You must have been or they wouldn’t remember so positively.
Lewenstein: [00:23:37] But apparently I mixed with them more than I thought I had.
[interruption]
Tobey: So we were talking about the number of people in the department, about
eleven when you came, in three different sections, yours being the journalism
section.
Lewenstein: [00:23:54] Right. In the journalism section, for a long time I was the only
practicing professor with a practicing journalism background. The others had
come out of academia and might have spent one year at a newspaper while
they were graduate students. Then Elie Abel was hired.
Tobey: Is that a man or a woman?
70

Lewenstein: [00:24:29] He was a man. During his lifetime, he was very famous. He was
the first international journalist, I think, on television. I think he was on
NBC. It was one of the major networks. He became very famous because he
was the first international TV. journalist, he was extremely good, and he was
always in the hot spots. For my generation, when you said Elie Abel, people
knew who he was.
Tobey: Right. Like Walter Cronkite.
Lewenstein: [00:25:06] Yes. Exactly. Probably he was, after Cronkite, the second most
well-known name.
Tobey: So he had worked directly with him some of the time then?
Lewenstein: [00:25:21] Possibly. I don’t remember that part. Cronkite was at CBS, and
Elie was at NBC. I mean, they would have known each other, but not
necessarily worked together.
At any rate, he was dean of Columbia School of Journalism, and one of
Lyle Nelson’s fortes was knowing everybody and knowing how to persuade
everybody to do what he would like them to do.
Tobey: He was head of the department?
Lewenstein: [00:25:58] Lyle, yes, for a while. I’ll talk about him after this.
So Lyle convinced Elie, the dean of Columbia School of Journalism,
which is academically as prestigious as you can get, to come be a professor at
Stanford. I still don’t know how he managed that. I think Elie was ready to
move to California from New York, and I think his daughter—his kids were
out here. That probably was the motivation, grown children out here.

71

At any rate, Elie and his wife came out for whatever reason, and Elie
was the most experienced journalist in the department. But we got along fine
and would do things together. We didn’t write any papers or anything, but we
would teach students together.
Tobey: So did he become a friend of yours?
Lewenstein: [00:26:58] Oh, yes, yes, he and his wife. We socialized with them.
Tobey: You did?
Lewenstein: [00:27:03] Very much. People in the department socialized. We were a small
department. We all liked each other. We didn’t have any rivalries.
Tobey: Oh, nice.
Lewenstein: [00:27:10] Yes, we were lucky.
Tobey: So it was really congenial.
Lewenstein: [00:27:13] Yes, we were a lucky department.
Tobey: That’s unusual, I think.
Lewenstein: [00:27:19] I don’t know whether throughout Stanford it was unusual or not.
My impression was that Stanford’s departments were less fractious than was
the case at some schools. I kept hearing about rivalries within departments at
Harvard and Columbia and elsewhere, and either I was oblivious or it wasn’t
happening in our department, one or the other. Our department was very
congenial. Whether that’s remained to this day, I’m less certain. The
department has changed. There’s still journalism taught at the master’s level,
but almost entirely—or I can say entirely—by part-timers, people who aren’t
integral to the department, who aren’t in regular faculty meetings with the
other people. It’s more divisive or divided. And the film section has moved
72

to the art department, so that’s entirely gone from the communication
department. It’s just a different mix.
The people who do the qualitative research now seem more isolated,
and they don’t talk to the journalism people, partly because they’re not
permanent people. It’s just a different relationship than it had been in my
time. I was lucky I entered the department at a very nice time, at a time
before the institution felt pressure to be the Harvard of the West or to be so
prestigious. Stanford was just on its upgrade, and so a lot of things changed.
At the university level, increasingly there was a lot of competition to be
better than anybody back East, to show those eastern Ivy League schools
that we were like them or better than them.
Tobey: When do you think that change began to happen?
Lewenstein: [00:29:40] It began to happen under Wallace Sterling, before my time, but I
heard about him a lot, his stories, all the time. And I think Lyle Nelson
played a role. Lyle was a very interesting part of Stanford, in my opinion.
Tobey: Maybe you can tell me a little bit more about him and your interactions with
him, because he seems to have been integral in your development.
Lewenstein: [00:30:07] Yes. He was Chair, and he was the one who brought me in and the
one who supported me and made the suggestion that I stay on permanently.
He had held a position in the government in the forties and had connections,
when he ended up in academia, with a lot of influential people. He could ask
for favors from University of Michigan, then Stanford, that influential people
in these places were in a position to grant. These connections built up circles
of donors which were important at the university level, and circles of
73

influence in which Stanford professors would become the policy people
because Lyle recommended them. He built reciprocally beneficial
relationships through his connections.
Tobey: So he seemed to know people both outside and within the university and
worked to create good conditions for those he knew.
Lewenstein: [00:31:42] Right. And he would try to promote people. By “promote” I don’t
mean going from vice president to president, but promote relationships
amongst the people that he favored. He would tend to favor people, and they
were lucky. The lucky ones.
Tobey: And you were favored.
Lewenstein: [00:32:02] Yes, I was among them. He was a great charmer in a very
unexpected way, not the typical sort of glad-hander or somebody that you
instantly recognized that had charisma. He was an “aw, shucks” kind of guy,
and he was sort of like a farmer with straw coming out of his ears. Then
before your eyes he could change into this smooth, diplomatic kind of
personality, if that seemed to be what was required. I had not realized that
side of his personality until a somewhat personal incident. As a favor to a
sweet friend who was coming to Stanford with his grandson to check out
Stanford—the boy wanted to go to Stanford—I offered to take them to
lunch at the Faculty Club. Then I learned that this grandfather was quite
wealthy and had made huge donations to UC Berkeley, the hospital, and a
couple other schools.
So I told Lyle about it and said, “You know, you might want to meet
him, especially if his grandson gets in here.” [laughs] So I told Lyle what time
74

I was having lunch, and he said OK, he would show up at lunch and just
“accidentally” join us. So that happened.
Knowing Lyle had his “aw, shucks” way and sort of down-to-earth
style, I was absolutely stunned. Before my eyes as he walked up to the table,
he became this smooth-talking, very professional kind of personality which I
had never seen before. But apparently he instantly spotted that that was the
approach that would work best with this particular guy. I just sat there openmouthed for the rest of lunch, watching him operate. The grandson never
came here, so we got nothing.
Tobey: So Stanford didn’t get a big donor out of that. Are there other stories about
Lyle and your interactions or interactions of others with the department that
you think are interesting to note?
Lewenstein: [00:34:41] He was a very generous person, and he would reach out to help
people, just really out of the goodness of his heart, if there were some
occasion. And his wife played a role in the department too. She was a cookie
baker, and she would bake cookies for the slightest reason and bring them
around and have parties, helping to create this sense of everybody mixing. I
think the department had a congenial attitude to a large extent because Lyle
set the tone for it.
Tobey: How long was he in that position before he was replaced?
Lewenstein: [00:35:23] He was replaced nominally probably four or five years after I got
there, but he was still around. Until he retired, which was probably about
1995, he was the force in the department. There were also other chairs.
Tobey: But he remained behind the scenes, the one who really—
75

Lewenstein: [00:35:54] Yes, made things happen. By that time, probably his influence was
waning because a lot of the people whom he knew had retired, the university
was moving to a more formal kind of set-up, and Lyle didn’t fit the formal
mode. He was an informal kind of operator. So things were changing. I think
it was very hard for him to retire. He did his best to stay out of the way, but
he couldn’t completely.
Tobey: It was too much a part of who he was.
Lewenstein: [00:36:31] Yes. I remember thinking that I wished to be the opposite of him
when I retired. When I retired, I was going to get out of the way. [laughs]
Tobey: Did you?
Lewenstein: [00:36:41] I think I did, yes. Well, I didn’t have a choice, because of my
husband’s situation as a quadriplegic who needed my care. I really wasn’t
hanging around trying to be influential. Whether I would have if there had
been other circumstances, I don’t know.
Tobey: Yes. Right. Some people have a harder time letting go.
Lewenstein: [00:37:03] Stepping back, yes.
Tobey: Stepping back. But it sounds to me like he was an instrumental figure in that
department for many, many years and that you benefitted—
Lewenstein: [00:37:14] Yes, I decidedly did.
Tobey: —from the cordial relationship you had with him.
Lewenstein: [00:37:18] Yes. I don’t know if there’d been a different chair and a more
normal department structure, whether somebody like me would have ended
up remaining in the department. I would have been a one-year temporary.
Tobey: Well, sometimes it takes kind of a mentor—
76

Lewenstein: [00:37:36] Oh, it does, it takes a lot.
Tobey: —and some luck.
Lewenstein: [00:37:40] Yes, something that you can’t control.
Tobey: Just backtracking, you said the university changed somewhat when Wallace
Sterling took over, that there was more formal competition with the eastern
schools like Harvard and—
Lewenstein: [00:38:01] Yes. There was tremendous effort to attract people who within
academia had big names.
Tobey: Under Sterling’s leadership?
Lewenstein: [00:38:10] Under Sterling that began. Didn’t finish under Sterling, but it
decidedly began. He was retired by the time I joined, and Dick Lyman must
have just become president when I joined, and that’s where his wife, Jing, is
important. I’m not sure whether Dick himself could be classified as informal,
but he wasn’t totally formal, either. His wife, Jing. Are you at all familiar with
her?
Tobey: I’ve read her name in various articles, yes.
Lewenstein: [00:38:58] She was a remarkable person. She had been extremely active in the
community in all sorts of ways, and she was particularly strong in the
women’s movement. She took on lots of situations where she could push
women forward, started various groups to help bolster women’s position in
the professional world.
I had encountered her because I was active in community affairs, too. I
didn’t know her well, just somebody in the same community circles. Within
the university at just about the time I joined, which was when the women’s
77

movement was coming to the fore, she was doing things to help promote
women, mostly by seeing that they had their names out there, that they got to
meet people.
In my case, within the first year, or maybe the first year when I was on
the tenure line—I’m not sure it was the first year when I was temporary—
she had a luncheon, and there were both men and women, but a number of
us women who were at the same stage. Estelle Freedman was a pretty big
name on campus, a historian. I can’t remember some of the others. And she
helped give confidence and recognition to a number of women. While it was
nothing specific, it was just her general way of operating.
Tobey: Right.
Lewenstein: [00:41:06] So I don’t know what more I can say about her except she was fun
to be around. She was one of these people who knew lots of things and told
stories well. It was fun to be around her.
Tobey: Can you go any further into Lyman versus Sterling and what it was like at the
university working under—
Lewenstein: [00:41:36] No. Since I really wasn’t on campus when Sterling was there, I
can’t compare.
Tobey: Oh, that’s right. That’s when you said the change started, but you were first
with Dick Lyman.
Lewenstein: [00:41:44] Yes, that’s right. Lyman was a man who was willing to stick by his
principles, whatever was occurring, and that came in very handy in the
seventies when Stanford was under siege by students in the anti-Vietnam
War movement. When a bunch of students broke into the President’s Office
78

and swiped papers and records, and then seized the President’s Office, he
didn’t back down. He wasn’t overly belligerent. This was illegal, you’re
behaving illegally, OK, fine, take the consequences. This is what the
consequences would be. And he managed to rally the university. Those who
were trying to keep peace and keep the university functioning then were able
to solidify behind him instead of everybody going off in different directions
and wringing their hands. So he’s credited, I think justifiably, with keeping
the university together during very tough times. He was a good scholar
himself, so after things calmed down, he could run the university in a more
normal way. He did.
Tobey: Do you know how long he was in tenure as president? I’m not sure. I could
look that up.
Lewenstein: [00:43:25] Quite a while, certainly ten years, and it may have been longer.
Ten, twelve years is what I would say.
Tobey: So a good part of the time that you were there.
Lewenstein: [00:43:36] Yes, a good part of the time.
Tobey: You talked about how the faculty united behind him because he dealt with
this tumultuous situation of the anti-war protests and all in a fair way.
Lewenstein: [00:43:54] Yes.
Tobey: Did you see changes in the student body that you taught, the master’s degree
and undergraduate students, that you taught through these years as the
Vietnam War continued?
Lewenstein: [00:44:14] I came in in ’75. Most of the Vietnam fighting was over. I came in
probably like the last year of the Vietnam War. But, yes, I would say the
79

students got smarter and smarter, because admissions got tougher and
tougher, and Stanford had access to brighter and brighter students who were
beginning to recognize Stanford.
My cousin was a good example. I have a cousin in New York who was,
by my standards, very hoity-toity. [laughs] We’re good friends, but yes, we
had different attitudes about life. She was out visiting on one occasion, and
she hadn’t been out here before, so I was driving her around. We went by the
Stanford campus, of course, and I took her around. We went by the hospital,
which had recently been built by Edward Durell Stone, a fairly well-known
architect, and she said, “Oh, this is quite ‘quaint.’” [laughter] What’s the
word? A diminutive word when you’re trying something nice that you really
think is baloney? I forget the word she was using; she said it about the
hospital. “Oh, it looks like a nice large hospital for such a small community,”
or something like that. I remember saying it was built by Edward Durell.
[laughs]
So, OK, a number of years go by, I become a professor at Stanford,
and she calls me up. Her daughter is now eighteen and applying for college,
and Eva, her daughter, wants to go to Stanford. Do I have any influence?
Can I get her daughter into Stanford? I couldn’t resist. I said, “Oh, this
quaint little college out West?” [laughter]
Tobey: Were you able to have any influence, do you think?
Lewenstein: [00:46:30] No. The daughter ended up wanting to go to Columbia, which she
got into, so that was that. And I don’t know that—I might have. Apparently
the Admissions Office did pay attention.
80

Tobey: To a recommendation from a faculty person, yes. All other things being
equal.
Lewenstein: [00:46:50] Being equal, yes.
Tobey: So you think the student body changed over time, the kids getting smarter
and smarter, the university getting more selective.
Lewenstein: [00:46:59] Yes, because of admissions, yes.
Tobey: Did you notice a difference, too, in the admission of more women, more
minorities?
Lewenstein: [00:47:08] More minorities, no. Women -- there had always been plenty of
women at Stanford. I don’t know. I wouldn’t say always, but I mean in
modern times. I think it’s evenly split.
Tobey: Now it’s evenly split.
Lewenstein: [00:47:18] Yes. I think it was even by the time I was there.
Tobey: Was it?
Lewenstein: [00:47:23] Well, I’m not sure, but I wasn’t conscious of much difference.
Tobey: I know when I applied in 1965, I heard that there were three men to every
female.
Lewenstein: [00:47:35] Yes, I remember hearing that sort of thing.
Tobey: I don’t know exactly when the change began to occur to try to even things
out, but the women’s movement had something to do with that.
Lewenstein: [00:47:48] By the time I was there in ’75, I wasn’t conscious of an overload of
males.
Tobey: You had about even numbers of men and women in your classes?

81

Lewenstein: [00:47:59] Yes, I had about even numbers, and then actually it moved to
more women than men by the time I left, and I think this is still the case.
Some of the master’s classes, an occasional one, we’d have one male to
fourteen women.
Tobey: Wow! What about in the department where you had eleven people? Was that
evenly divided?
Lewenstein: [00:48:18] No, I guess I remained the only woman for a long time.
Tobey: So there were ten men and you in that department for quite a number of
years.
Lewenstein: [00:48:36] Well, you know, I hadn’t thought of that before. [laughs]
Tobey: Did you see that as a challenge at all, being the only woman?
Lewenstein: [00:48:48] No. I had always been used to working with men because the
journalism field was at that time heavily male. So I guess it just really didn’t
strike me. I was used to them. These were friends.
Tobey: And you socialized with them and their wives too.
Lewenstein: [00:49:05] Yes. There were always a few temporary people, and those were
often women, so there would be other women around, but not necessarily.
Women dominated the documentary film section of the department, and so
as long as that was in the communication department, which was always so
when I was there, there were other women. The film section didn’t switch to
the art department until after I left.
Tobey: But at the time you were there, the film department was also run by men,
right, because you were the only woman in the communication department?
I’m just trying to clarify.
82

Lewenstein: [00:49:47] The documentary film, no, they had one male and two women.
There were only three—no, there were four people who were in that end of
the department. Maybe we had more than eleven. I think I wasn’t counting
the documentary film. So there were Henry [Breitrose] and the other fellow,
whose name escapes me, and then [Kris] Samuelson. There were two women
and two men in the documentary film. So I knew there were other women
around.
Tobey: But not in the journalism section of the—
Lewenstein: [00:50:31] Yes, not in the journalism section, except for occasionally.
Tobey: Yes, temporary appointments.
Lewenstein: [00:50:38] Yes.
Tobey: So, going back to the department chairs, Lyle was the most influential and
continued to be the most influential even when other department chairs took
over?
Lewenstein: [00:50:57] Yes. The others might not agree with that. [laughs]
Tobey: Did you have much interaction with the other department chairs?
Lewenstein: [00:51:03] Oh, sure, sure. Henry Breitrose, I think, was the next one up, and
he was also nominally in charge of the documentary film. I don’t remember
that he made any major changes in the general approach of the department.
But, again, everybody got along. Who followed Henry? I guess it must have
been Don. It would have to be Don.
Tobey: Don?
Lewenstein: [00:51:43] My good friend Don [Roberts]. [laughter]

83

Tobey: Any particular stories about when you were socializing with the department,
what that was like, what you all liked to do together?
Lewenstein: [00:52:05] Eat.
Tobey: Eat. [laughter]
Lewenstein: [00:52:08] The men liked to go to the sports games, so I could have joined in
if I were interested, but they would have a tendency to say, “OK, who’s
going to the football game?” Or basketball game. I think basketball was the
favorite sport in the department. Somehow I have that impression.
Tobey: Would they tend to just go together, with their wives in some cases?
Lewenstein: [00:52:33] Yes, I guess their wives in some cases went.
Tobey: But you’d get together to have a meal at people’s homes?
Lewenstein: [00:52:43] Yes, or at somebody’s house. Yes, it would be a social evening.
Tobey: It sounds like it was a very congenial department—
Lewenstein: [00:52:51] Yes, it was.
Tobey: —during the time that you were there and that you enjoyed the leadership
and got along with the various leaders in the department throughout your
tenure there.
Lewenstein: [00:53:02] Yes. New people came in from time to time. [00:53:20] Ted
Glasser, he came in maybe seven or eight years after I was there. And people
like Cliff Nass, who recently died. Byron Reeves. Ted Glasser is quite a good
teacher and really forces students to think about how we gather news, what’s
its meaning in the world, more esoteric. I think he would say that he was a
former journalist. I wouldn’t. [laughs] He started two very ideological
newspapers that lasted for a year or two. He became an important person in
84

the department and headed up the journalism part of the department. The
three departments each had sort of a titular head. After Elie Abel retired, Ted
got hired, becoming head of the journalism section and of the
communication department. Ted was appointed after Elie left.
Tobey: Did you have much interaction with Elie Abel?
Lewenstein: [00:55:34] Yes. His office was next to mine. I’m a very messy person, and so
my desk would always be piled up with stuff, and Elie was pristine. You
walked into his office and it was neat. There wasn’t much on his desk. But he
was always walking into my office saying, “Do you still have such-and-such?”
Because he would throw everything away, and then he wouldn’t have it when
he needed it. [laughs] I would burrow under my papers and hand it to him.
Yes, we socialized. As a matter of fact, we probably ended up
socializing with Elie and his wife more than anybody else.
Tobey: Any stories about those interactions with him?
Lewenstein: [00:56:15] He was known throughout the university, I mean not just in our
end of it, because, well, just everybody knew Elie.
Tobey: Yes, he was famous at the time, really.
Lewenstein: [00:56:27] Yes. And he crossed fields and so forth.
Tobey: With respect to the university, you saw him as quite influential?
Lewenstein: [00:56:59] Actually, no. He was sort of a star who was a star by himself
without influencing other things. I don’t know how to describe it other than
that. It was always a matter of pride for somebody to say, “Oh, Elie’s on our
campus,” in any field. But he didn’t do much across the university to
influence it. He came at a late stage in his career and late stage in Stanford’s.
85

Tobey: So he and his wife were close friends.
Lewenstein: [00:57:40] Yes.
Tobey: Any other particularly close friends in that department or in the university
who had an influence on you and you on them?
Lewenstein: [00:57:52] Well, somebody who probably doesn’t realize he had an influence
on me, and we’re still friends, was Byron Reeves -- and his wife. He’s pretty
well known for research he’s done on the role of technology, done with
Clifford Nass. I don’t know if that name means anything. Clifford,
unfortunately, had a heart attack and died just a month or two ago, at age
fifty-two, I think. He is the one who’s credited worldwide for establishing
that people look upon computers as human beings and respond to them and
interact and interact with high technology on a personal level, not some
mechanical level. He also studied the growth of multitasking as a result of
modern technology.
So Byron, within the narrow academic field, had been known for his
own research on how people react to images, but then because he worked
with Cliff, the two of them wrote a book which was widely read by the
population in general, not just the academics. So I would say he’s probably
well known.
Within academia, almost all the people I worked with in the
department now are gone, and that’s a change. Like the other departments at
Stanford, we were busy hiring people or attracting people who already had
established reputations within their narrow academic field. One person is
well known for showing that if you get people together to talk about and
86

make an effort to learn within a short period of time about issues, that you
get better informed citizens when the voting time comes, and the outcome of
votes will be different. He studied civic issues such as “should we get more
parking in Palo Alto? Should we build a port in Redwood City?” This fellow
has done research around the world. He’s done some in China—it’s called
deliberative democracy—where they’ve used his techniques and then gone
ahead and made decisions about civic activities. Someone’s just been hired
who I’m going to try to get to know—
Tobey: This is now, 2014?
Lewenstein: [01:00:51] Yes, His area is how the physical new technology is affecting how
news is produced and what gets chosen as news. Someone else is well known
in the political field for being able to show how certain kinds of polling will
influence votes in one way and a different kind of polling will influence in a
different way.
Tobey: Sounds like you’re keeping track of what’s going on in the department.
Lewenstein: [01:01:30] No, not really. I’m not spending much time in the department.
Tobey: But you get publications—
Lewenstein: [01:01:36] Yes, I’m on the list.
Tobey: —which you read.
Lewenstein: [01:01:38] Yes. Right.
Tobey: And keep up with what’s going on.
Lewenstein: [01:01:41] Yes. One pays attention to your field.
Tobey: Right. You’ve talked about Stanford and how it’s changed over time in the
communication department as well as the student body. Are there other
87

major changes that you’ve noticed in looking back in the last fifteen, twenty
years?
Lewenstein: [01:02:15] Yes. Something that I think Stanford has led the way for other
universities, according to people from other universities and students, in
collaboration between departments. I think it’s noticeable. If somebody in
our department wants to work with somebody in another department, there
are virtually no barriers but, in fact, encouragement in the sense that you can
get the provost to give you money or to allow you to drop one class so you
can do the collaboration. Thus, you receive encouragement to go ahead and
try collaborating instead of hunkering down and protecting your own little
field. “Don’t come near me.”
Tobey: Then this cross-pollination can occur.
Lewenstein: [01:03:15] Yes, and it has occurred, for example, between the medical school
and engineering. There’s somebody who lives here at the Vi who’s—I don’t
know if I could say he’s a leader in it, but he’s done some major work that’s
resulted in some serious inventions, like the CAT scan and MRI machines,
which require a lot of collaboration between the med school professors and
the engineering people.
Tobey: You bet, yes.
Lewenstein: [01:03:49] At any rate, that’s happened throughout the university.
Tobey: So where is the communication department? What other departments do you
see the communication department collaborating with?
Lewenstein: [01:04:04] Byron and Cliff collaborated with technology a lot. I did some
research which required people who knew a lot about eye-scanning
88

machines, so that I could do research that showed where people’s eyes went
when they read on the computer. My research was about how people read
news on the computer, in the early days when news was just beginning to
appear on computers. It took people from other departments to help me to
do the physical part, which I had no knowledge of. I mentioned Byron and
Cliff, who worked across all sorts of departments, psychology and sociology
as well as technology, in order to do their kind of research on multitasking
and attitudes towards computers.
Tobey: Interesting.
Lewenstein: [01:05:17] Yes, it is.
Tobey: So changes in retrospect: the university has become more formalized in some
of its procedures; interdepartmental cooperation and collaboration has
increased; admissions have become more selective. I’m sure there’ve been
changes just because we are in Silicon Valley. The growth of technology has
affected all who live here.
Lewenstein: [01:05:50] Yes, that’s been an underlying cause of the change. I remember
doing a story on Stanford before I was at Stanford or had any idea that I
might end up there. It probably was for Electronic News. The story was about
who produced more Ph.D.’s in the U.S.? And the assumption, of course, was
Harvard or Yale. It turned out it was Stanford. [laughs]
Tobey: Oh, really?
Lewenstein: [01:06:21] Yes. I mean, at that time, I had, as I say, no affiliation whatsoever.
Tobey: When would that have been?

89

Lewenstein: [01:06:28] Well, it would be before I joined Stanford, so it would have been
the early seventies.
Tobey: That’s a feather in Stanford’s cap, I guess? Do you think that all of these
changes that we’re talking about were due to multiple causes, technology,
leadership, et cetera?
Lewenstein: [01:06:53] Oh, without a doubt.
Tobey: Can you comment a little bit on what you think some of those causes of
change were?
Lewenstein: [01:06:59] Well, a lot of the changes around here are credited to Stanford and
to Terman. There have been endless stories about Terman.
Tobey: Maybe you can talk a little bit about that.
Lewenstein: [01:07:11] Well, Fred Terman was the son of another Terman. He was a
professor at Stanford. I forget what the father’s field was; I think psychology.
But Fred Terman was in engineering, and he ended up being dean of
engineering. He was sort of an entrepreneurial type, and Bill Hewlett and
Dave Packard were his students. Fred is the one who encouraged them to go
start a company to produce whatever—I’ve forgotten; it was a scanner of
some kind—that they had developed as students, graduate students. And we
know the history. Because Hewlett and Packard were so successful and
Terman kept pushing other students, there was this encouragement to get
out there and try stuff on your own. That encouragement attracted engineers
to move here to go to work. This was after the war ended, because they had
started, I think, in the early forties in whatever it was they were producing
needed during the war years. People were moving to California anyway after
90

the war, and technical people discovered there were jobs here, where there
weren’t that many jobs back East. I know, because my husband couldn’t
easily find a job in Minnesota. We came here.
Tobey: And there were many.
Lewenstein: [01:08:44] Yes. That was the early fifties. I forget some of the other
companies that started. One could just go through the list. There are quite a
few. Stanford was a source of supply to a growing technology industry and,
in return, the industry grew because Stanford was here to be helpful. The fact
that it was California and the climate made people wanted to move to
California -- these factors combined. But Stanford was the initiator. I think
there’s universal agreement about that. In fact, that’s why New York wanted
to build its university where Stanford was competing. New York realized that
if you start a university, the technology end of the university will supply ideas
and create companies, to which people will come. That is the cycle.
Tobey: Circular, yes. Well, you saw all of that happen, didn’t you?
Lewenstein: [01:09:58] Yes, yes.
Tobey: In your lifetime, it’s just from zero technology, the old typewriter, right?
[laughs]
Lewenstein: [01:10:06] Right.
Tobey: Which some kids don’t recognize today.
Lewenstein: [01:10:12] My youngest grandson wanted to play with the typewriter. I had an
old one around, and that was his favorite thing, to go run to the typewriter
and play with it.

91

Tobey: Great toy, huh? So you’ve talked a little bit about how you’ve had the chance
to interact with people in pivotal roles. Did you actually ever get to meet
Terman?
Lewenstein: [01:10:50] Yes, briefly. I talked to him on the phone many times. He was
retired already by the time I was around.
I recall an incident which I think sort of explains the difference between the
East and the West. Hewlett-Packard had been run by Dave Packard until he
retired, and I don’t know whether Bill Hewlett took over for a year or so, but
Bill didn’t like being top manager. I had gotten to know both Dave Packard
and Bill Hewlett a little. My husband worked there as advertising manager for
five years.
Tobey: At Hewlett-Packard?
Lewenstein: [01:11:27] Yes. That was when it was small enough that executives mixed
with the hoi polloi. At any rate, as a reporter, I had gotten to know them
both a little bit too. After Dave Packard was going to retire, they picked one
of their young executives, a guy by the name of John Young, to be new
president. Hewlett and Packard set the stage for the practice of giving out
stock to employees so that they would feel part of the company. They had a
general attitude of reaching out to employees and making them all feel like
they were part of the company. People hated to leave Hewlett-Packard
because it was such a good company to work for.
At any rate, John Young was named president, and part of the reason
he was named president was that he had been trained to have the same kinds
of attitudes as Bill and Dave. One of their premises was called walking92

around management. Managers didn’t sit in their office. In fact, Hewlett and
Packard were the first ones to introduce the concept of no separate offices,
no walled-in spaces, even for them as company founders. They believed in
walking-around management. Managers were out there interacting with
employees. They got to know them. Even with their “lowest” employees,
managers got to know names, who they were, something about them. John
believed in these practices and implemented them
Fortune was doing a story about the changeover in management from
Hewlett and Packard to John Young. I was the one out in California doing
the story, and they—“they” being my editors in New York—said, “Well, this
all sounds too simplistic. He’s got to have some other ideas.”
And I said, “Well, that was why he was chosen.”
“No, no. They’re just an adolescent company.”
I said, “Adolescent?” I said, “They’re doing $25 million a year!” At that
point, $25 million dollars was a lot. I was furious at them.
I ended up calling Terman and asked him if he knew John. He said, oh,
yes, of course he did. I said, “All right.” I explained to him what was
happening. Over the phone you could practically see him shaking his head, as
he said, “Helpless New York editors.” [laughs]
Eventually I convinced them to run the story as it was, because they
were afraid that I had just missed something important, that I was making it
up, I guess.
Tobey: Or that this style of management wasn’t enough to make the company that
different from any other company.
93

Lewenstein: [01:14:41] I was back in New York not too long after that, and I think that
was when the editor made the remark about, “Well, they’re just an adolescent
company.” [laughs] No wonder -- these arrogant New York editors. I’d never
thought of them like that before writing that story.
Tobey: That’s a great story. That “adolescent” company has done amazing things in
this world, hasn’t it? It’s grown up well.
Lewenstein: [01:15:08] It showed how the East just had no conception of what was
happening out here.
Tobey: And perhaps it still doesn’t have as much conception. I mean, with the
Internet now, everybody knows what’s happening everywhere, I guess.
Lewenstein: [01:15:26] I think they know it well enough that they’re trying to emulate it.
Whether they will, and put us, everybody, out of business out here, I don’t
know.
But, you know, John Hennessy is an example, probably at the moment
the perfect example. He’s president of Stanford, but he started life as an
engineer, built his own company, a highly successful one. Somewhere along
the line he was a professor. I guess he was first a professor, then started his
own company, then came back to Stanford again as a professor, and now he
is president of the university, doing a highly successful job as president.
Tobey: Right. He’s very well respected, isn’t he, in the business world and the
academic world.
Lewenstein: [01:16:12] Yes, and students like him too.
Tobey: Yes, he’s very well spoken, too, articulate. Have you had a chance to meet
him?
94

Lewenstein: [01:16:21] I’ve met him briefly. He wouldn’t know who I was. Just another
faculty member. The one I guess I got to know best was Kennedy, who lives
and works here. He’s around the corner from me, as a matter of fact.
Tobey: Oh, really?
Lewenstein: [01:16:35] Yes.
Tobey: Tell me a little bit about your interactions with him.
Lewenstein: [01:16:38] He was, I think, part of the reason Stanford didn’t get too tied up
in too many “formal,” hard and fast structures, making room for
collaboration] and cross-pollination. I’m pretty sure he was one of the
initiators of the human biology program.
[interruption]
Lewenstein: [01:17:14] I think we were just starting on Kennedy.
Tobey: Yes, we were just starting on Don Kennedy, who lives around the corner
from you now.
Lewenstein: [01:17:23] I didn’t get to know him socially, but on campus I knew him fairly
well, partly because I was academic secretary during his tenure. I attended
some of the meetings that involved the president.
You know, I was thinking recently that I don’t know why I got to know
Don particularly well, but somehow I did. One incident I remember
impressed my then about-to-be daughter-in-law. I was with my son but
showing her the campus, and it was a Saturday. I was standing between our
building and the President’s Office. There’s a fairly large area there. We were
chatting. Don was apparently in his office working, so he stuck his head out
the window and said, “You’re disturbing me.” He said it in a friendly way.
95

And I said, “Come on out and meet my son and future daughter-inlaw.” So he did. He came out and greeted them warmly and asked my son
what his plans were for the future. That was when my son was deciding
which graduate school he was going to go to, and he was going to study the
history of science. As one of Don’s area of expertise, he had a discussion
with my son and convinced him that it would be better for him to go to
University of Pennsylvania than to Harvard. My son had been accepted at
both places. Don said, “So-and-so at Harvard is going to be on sabbatical
next year, and you won’t even meet him, and this guy is doing such-and-such,
so he won’t be of any help to you. In your particular area of interest, the guy
at Pennsylvania, he’s done—,” blah, blah, blah.
So my son went to the University of Pennsylvania where he got a
scholarship, which he wouldn’t have had at Harvard. My daughter-in-law was
certainly wide-eyed that the president of the university would come out to
talk to us about all this. [laughs]
Tobey: Well, that is unusual, I think.
Lewenstein: [01:19:54] Yes, but Don was like that with people.
Tobey: Oh, was he?
Lewenstein: [01:19:58] Yes. He likes people.
Tobey: Personable and—
Lewenstein: [01:20:01] Yes, very personable—
Tobey: —helpful and—
Lewenstein: [01:20:05] —and interested.
Tobey: —has a lot of knowledge about so many topics.
96

Lewenstein: [01:20:08] Yes, and a very wide array of knowledge, although I think that’s
true of almost all presidents of universities.
Tobey: These days, yes.
Lewenstein: [01:20:14] Or at least those at Stanford. That was certainly true of Dick
Lyman and I assume the others.
Tobey: You mentioned that you got to know Don Kennedy in your role as academic
secretary.
Lewenstein: [01:20:30] Yes. I don’t know if I’ve already said it. He’s the one, I think, who
helped push interdisciplinary cooperation. He started the human biology
program, which includes medical people, biology, chemistry, all of the
sciences. Human biology has been a very popular program.
Tobey: Very popular major at Stanford. Still is, I think.
Lewenstein: [01:20:54] Right. So its success encouraged other collaborations among
various departments.
Tobey: Yes, and it has strengthened departments to have that cross-fertilization of
ideas.
Lewenstein: [01:21:12] Right.
Tobey: So back to your years as academic secretary. Do you remember much about
the issues that came before the faculty?
Lewenstein: [01:21:31] There was one big issue that caused the formation of a group
whose initials are S-C-E-S-S. I was thinking of it. The group doesn’t exist
anymore, but it was a committee. There was a major issue, and the
committee was formed. My memory is not great these days.
Tobey: I think you’re remembering a lot.
97

Lewenstein: [01:21:57] I remember Dick Zare from chemistry was on the committee.
That’s where I got to meet a lot of senior people at Stanford.
Tobey: So do you remember what the issue was about?
Lewenstein: [01:22:22] Well, that’s what I’ve been trying to remember, is what the issue
was.
Tobey: You remember the initials of the committee, SCESS.
Lewenstein: [01:22:27] I just remember the initials. I’m afraid I’ll have to check with the
Academic Secretary’s Office.
Tobey: Basically, that role was one of -Lewenstein: [01:22:42] Administration. I took minutes of the [Faculty] Senate and
produced them, and then acted as glue on the committees. I helped appoint
the committees, sometimes entirely appointed them, so I’d have to sell to
faculty members the idea that they ought to give up some time to be on a
particular committee.
One I remember best was Steven Chu who then was an assistant
professor; he didn’t have tenure yet. The name registers with you? Steven
Chu, he was a Cabinet secretary under Obama the first term. Secretary of
what?
Tobey: One of the departments?
Lewenstein: [01:23:43] Yes. I should remember. And he won a Nobel Prize. In order to
get names for committee members, I would talk to those faculty members I
knew and ask, “What suggestions do you have?”
So Steven Chu’s name had come up, and I said I was going to call him,
and some people said to me, “You know, he’s trying to get tenure. It’s hard.
98

You shouldn’t ask assistant professors, because they should be giving all their
time to their research work.” And others said, “Oh, there’s no problem with
his getting tenure. He’s on his way. Yeah, you can ask him.”
At any rate, I chose to call and ask him and, as expected, he said, “Gee,
you know, I’d like to be helpful to the university, but I’m working, trying to
make sure I get tenure. I’m working on my research.” We chatted a little bit,
and he finally said, “All right,” he would do it. Well, it wasn’t even two years
later when he got the Nobel Prize! [laughs]
Tobey: Do you remember what area his Nobel Prize was in?
Lewenstein: [01:24:57] In one of the sciences. I guess chemistry or biochemistry,
something of that sort. Energy has become a high interest too. He was
Secretary of the Department of Energy. We do have a Department of
Energy, don’t we?
Tobey: I believe so, yes.
Lewenstein: [01:25:31] But, yes, I think that’s what he became. At any rate, he eventually
left Stanford because he was hired to run the Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory, so he was technically at the University of California at Berkeley
for five years and then got picked to be Obama’s Secretary of Energy. Now
he’s back at Stanford. Very nice guy. I knew his wife [Jean Chu]. When my
husband ended up in the Veterans Hospital after he became quadriplegic,
sometimes I would meet his wife at their house, and then she and I would go
for a hike up in the hills from their house. The first time I was there, she said,
“Do you want to see Steve’s Nobel Prize, the medal?”
I said, “Sure.”
99

So she’s wandering around the house looking for it. Steve was home
then, and she said, “Steve, where’s your medal? I want to show it to Marion.”
And he said, “I don’t know where I put it.” [laughs]
Tobey: Oh, no.
Lewenstein: [01:26:45] So it was terribly funny. Turned out to be behind the television set.
He’d put it down for some reason. They eventually found it. She was very
sweet. She went to visit my husband, and she brought it with her so she
could show Harry in the hospital, and all the nurses said, “Wow!” you know,
to see it.
Tobey: And he didn’t know that he’d just laid it down behind the television.
Lewenstein: [01:27:10] He’s a very nice person.
Tobey: That’s a good story too. Well, we’ve covered a fair amount today, I think. A
couple of questions about maybe what you found most and least interesting
in that last job, the job as academic secretary.
Lewenstein: [01:27:33] The least interesting was just doing the minutes, the boring details.
Tobey: Yes, but the most interesting?
Lewenstein: [01:27:40] Was mixing with such a wide range of faculty.
Tobey: You got to meet a lot of the people in that role, and to make some
appointments for committees that were probably instrumental to various
changes in the university.
Lewenstein: [01:27:56] It’s hard to say how effective that part was, but from my
standpoint, it was meeting such a wide variety of fellow faculty that I
enjoyed.
Tobey: Wonderful people, yes.
100

Lewenstein: [01:28:11] The job could be quite boring at times.
Tobey: But how often did you have to actually take minutes? Was that twice a week?
Lewenstein: [01:28:26] Oh, no, no, no. Not twice a week. The formal Senate meetings are,
I think, just once a month, maybe. No, it seems like I was always doing
minutes, so it must be twice a month.
Tobey: But then there was all the follow-up.
Lewenstein: [01:28:44] Yes, then there were all the group meetings, small group meetings,
and so forth. It kept me busy. But I had time, or I made time, to continue
teaching one course, because I really missed the students.
Tobey: And you liked that the best?
Lewenstein: [01:29:02] Yes, oh, by far. I’m not quite sure why I accepted the academic
secretary’s job. I was hesitant about it, but at any rate, I guess I just decided I
would.
Tobey: And I’m sure you did a good job with it. As a person who was involved in
journalism and used to writing, too, they knew your skills in those areas,
right?
Lewenstein: [01:29:33] I tried to add some humor, and I would try to report the
discussions in a humorous way, where appropriate.
Tobey: So people could enjoy reading the minutes.
Lewenstein: [01:29:47] My favorite moment was the Senate discussing faculty tenure and
whether it was really still a purposeful way of working in academia. Some
thought it would be best to do away with it at Stanford. One of the members
of the Senate, a fellow who’s reasonably well known, Herbie Leiderman, in
English, was starting to leave early, and he was up at the top of the hallway,
101

walking out, when somebody said, “Well, maybe we should do away with
tenure,” and Herbie stopped, turned around, walked back. [laughs] It was just
very funny, I thought. I described that in the minutes, and it apparently
amused other people, too, because people would come up to me laughing
and say, “Thanks for that report!”
Tobey: I think we can look back and sum up some of what we’ve talked about here.
I thought it might be interesting to hear about greatest challenges, greatest
accomplishments, and overarching views about what you’ve seen change in
the society and then the university in your years.
Lewenstein: [01:31:17] Wow.
Tobey: That’s huge, I know, but let’s just take it one at a time. The greatest
challenges in your career.
Lewenstein: [01:31:26] At Stanford?
Tobey: Yes.
Lewenstein: [01:31:30] The greatest challenge was to be sure that—I was “thorough,” to
try to meet what I conceived of as the high standards of academia, especially
since I was not entirely clear what they were, not having gone through a
university myself or through having to write a Ph.D. thesis. I had to try to be
super well informed about any areas that I thought I should be. That was my
greatest challenge.
Tobey: That would be a challenge, I’m sure.
Lewenstein: [01:32:22] Yes. I always felt inferior, and still do, as a matter of fact.
Tobey: You’re not. [laughs]

102

Lewenstein: [01:32:31] I presume not. I mean, intellectually I recognize that I apparently
pass muster. Obviously, I must have or I wouldn’t have been kept on. But I
don’t feel that way, basically.
Tobey: So you felt like you worked harder in order to prove yourself, I guess—
Lewenstein: [01:32:55] Right.
Tobey: —as capable of the jobs that you were doing along the way.
Lewenstein: [01:33:03] I always managed to deflect any questions about where I went to
school. The first time I was asked that question, and I wasn’t in academia, I
misinterpreted what that phrase meant. I thought it meant what high school
did you go to. This was at a social party after I was married. When I said
John Hay High School, which is where I went, the people I responded to
thought that I was being funny and thought my answer was hilarious. I was
completely puzzled by why they were laughing so hard and thought how
clever I had been. I told my husband, and I said I didn’t understand what was
taking place.
He said, “They were asking you what college you went to.” He was
always very protective of me because he knew how I felt. After we moved
here, it was one of the standard questions asked when we met people.
Everybody was asking questions to establish some kind of relationship. Well,
that was just absolutely a standard question. Particularly here it would mean,
“Did you go to Stanford or did you go to Cal?”
I had developed great techniques for never answering that question. A
couple of years before he died, I apparently had decided I was just going to
stop evading, and so I said to the person, “I didn’t go to college.”
103

And my husband told me later, “That’s the first time I’ve ever heard
you answer the question at all.” [laughs]
Tobey: I hear what you’re saying, and I think you’ve done so remarkably well.
Lewenstein: [01:34:56] Well, I’ve lucked out.
Tobey: Well, some luck and a lot of talent. So your great accomplishments in looking
back on your life and career?
Lewenstein: [01:35:08] Well, I mean, from a personal standpoint, my greatest
accomplishment is having two nice kids, as far as I’m concerned.
Tobey: Yes, absolutely, I understand that, yes.
Lewenstein: [01:35:18] Professionally, I guess I would have to say becoming a Stanford
professor was my greatest accomplishment.
Tobey: Yes, that’s a big one.
Lewenstein: [01:35:25] Yes, it’s a big one.
Tobey: Want to add any more to that?
Lewenstein: [01:35:32] No, I don’t think so.
Tobey: When you’ve lived a long life, you have lots to remember.
Lewenstein: [01:35:41] I’m doing more poorly at remembering. [laughs]
Tobey: Well, we all do. But what is your view of the overarching changes that you’ve
seen in the society in your time, in general terms?
Lewenstein: [01:36:02] Well, it seems as though there’s less personal interaction, but that
may be just from a narrow slice that I read about, like young people being
more consumed by their technology and reaching out less. I’m not sure that’s
accurate. It’s what I pick up from reading. I see my grandchildren being
highly involved with technology but still very concerned about humanity, so
104

that may be really the more typical thing, and we’re misled by all the
information we get about technology and its effects.
Tobey: I don’t know.
Lewenstein: [01:37:14] Yes, I don’t know, unless I were sort of out there all the time.
Tobey: I know. Certainly technology has changed the way we live—
Lewenstein: [01:37:23] Yes.
Tobey: —the way we go through any given day.
Lewenstein: [01:37:27] But when you go to a restaurant or any public place and you see
everybody with their heads buried in their phones, you think, does anybody
communicate anymore? Yet, they must be communicating, just perhaps in a
different way than we’re used to.
Tobey: Yes, I think you do notice that in every public setting where you go, you see
people using electronics.
Lewenstein: [01:37:55] Well, even friends my own age, as they acquire cell phones, there
they are. Mostly their kids are giving phones to them as presents. [laughs]
Then they, too, become concentrated on the device in their hand. They’re
amusing to watch.
Tobey: I think that’s why I enjoy this, because it’s very seldom that one sits down
and talks to somebody else just for an hour without necessarily—
Lewenstein: [01:38:27] It’s an advantage living here. You do.
Tobey: Talk to people directly?
Lewenstein: [01:38:32] Yes. People don’t haul out their cell phones.
Tobey: But that might be partly because of who the people live here are—
Lewenstein: [01:38:39] Oh, the age level, yes. But they have cell phones.
105

Tobey: Most are retired and aren’t working on their first. . .
Lewenstein: [01:38:47] No, they aren’t first initiators or innovators or whatever the term
is.
Tobey: That’s an interesting observation that perhaps the way we communicate has
changed.
Lewenstein: [01:38:58] Yes.
Tobey: And many people are more tied into their technology. Then at Stanford,
what would you say the overarching changes that you’ve seen there are?
Maybe we’ve summed up this one.
Lewenstein: [01:39:13] I think I’ve stated them before.
Tobey: I guess we’ve really summarized that in saying the structured approach with
the more stringent requirements for entrance has led to smarter kids and lots
of collaboration among departments.
Lewenstein: [01:39:54] Yes. I used the term “formal,” meaning that in the days just before
I joined Stanford, continuing for a short time, a few people could get
together and have an idea about the administrative structure of a university
and that might take place, whereas by now the idea may come up that way
but then you go to the provost or president and discuss whether it can be
done. So I call that a more formal—
Tobey: Formal procedures.
Lewenstein: [01:40:50] Yes. But structurally, I don’t know, in my mind—
Tobey: The better word is perhaps more formalized procedures.
Lewenstein: [01:41:01] Yes, rather than more structured.

106

Tobey: I’m just curious. If you could give advice to future generations of students at
Stanford, what were a couple of the things that you would—
Lewenstein: [01:41:18] I would say follow their interests as much as possible and don’t be
too influenced by adult insistence. [laughter] I think the students had a better
feel for what they wanted to pursue did better than those who said, “Well,
my parents want me to take such-and-such.”
Tobey: So follow your area of interest and not what—
Lewenstein: [01:41:53] And if you don’t know your area of interest, which a lot of
students don’t, take as wide a range of courses as you can. To some extent,
you have to end up choosing something as a major, so you can graduate.
One of my students quite a long time ago made an observation that has
stuck with me. He was a very bright student but not completely sure of what
he wanted to do in life or who he was. I remember one paper he was writing,
whatever topic I had assigned, and he was going along perfectly fine and got
to about the third page and then ended with, “Oh, shit, Marion. I’m not
really interested in this. I’ll stop here.” [laughter] I had to laugh.
I don’t remember whether I gave him a grade or not, but he became a
student with whom I became close, and he dropped out for a while I talked
him into doing an assignment while he was formally dropped out, which he
could then turn in when he returned. I conferred with him as if I knew he
was going to return, even though he didn’t know whether he was going to
return.
He did return and said to me later that only at Stanford could he have
done what had taken place -- where there was somebody around to reach out
107

to see that he didn’t disappear forever and stayed with the university. He said,
“I talked to all my eastern friends.” He was an eastern Ivy League type,
although he had come to Stanford. All his friends had gone to the Ivy
Leagues. He said, “They were all in wonder that I could drop out and then
still come back. They all said they couldn’t do that at their schools.” So that
has always stuck with me as sort of describing Stanford. It wasn’t just me; it
was the whole system that allowed him to—
Tobey: You stick with the students, even when they are floundering a bit at one
point or another, indecisive about their direction.
Lewenstein: [01:44:35] Yes. So I have no way of knowing personally whether a student
could have done this at another school. I could only take the description
from him in terms of comparing.
Tobey: I think Stanford even has a term for that now, and I can’t remember what it
is.
Lewenstein: [01:44:55] Yes, I think you’re right.
Tobey: It’s not dropping out, but it’s stepping out or something that refers to taking
a little time off in order to gather yourself together again.
Lewenstein: [01:45:05] Right.
Tobey: It’s good that you were there for him. It probably made all the difference in
his life.
So now you’re retired, and I don’t think we really talked much about
how you spend your time now and what you think of retirement.
Lewenstein: [01:45:25] I go to committee meetings. [laughter]
Tobey: Are you on all kinds of committees?
108

Lewenstein: [01:45:30] Yes. Between the university and the Vi, there are a lot of things
that go on.
Tobey: Tell me some of the committees that you are active on.
Lewenstein: [01:45:42] Well, there’s Library Committee, and there’s a committee for
reaching out to new people who come in.
Tobey: At the Vi [phonetic]?
Lewenstein: [01:45:49] Yes, at the Vi. There’s sort of a subcommittee of the Financial
Committee and the RAC, the Resident Advisory Committee. I’m on that. I
used to be on the Resident Advisory Committee. I’m probably on too many
committees, because it’s beginning to get hard for me to keep up.
Then at Stanford I’m on the Historical Society Committee, which
means you go to the board meetings and then you have to join two
committees of the board, so then you have those two committees a month,
so three a month just for those. I chose oral history, so that’s extra. And I’m
on the Emeriti Council Committee at Stanford. I used to be on, until very
recently, a foundation that builds accessible housing. It’s up in the city, so I’d
have to go to the city once a month. At any rate, that’s how I fill my time.
Tobey: And then you’re reading for pleasure.
Lewenstein: [01:47:02] As much as I can get in, yes. [laughs]
Tobey: I’m counting, what—one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten
books on your coffee table that you are reading.
Lewenstein: [01:47:15] Yes, those are the current ones. [laughter]
Tobey: So you’re staying very well aware of what’s going on in all kinds of segments
of this society.
109

Lewenstein: [01:47:25] Not reading as much as I had hoped I would in retirement. That
was my goal.
Tobey: To read.
Lewenstein: [01:47:31] To read all the books that I didn’t get to as a young person.
Tobey: You have a list of all those that you wanted to read?
Lewenstein: [01:47:38] I did originally, yes, the Russian novels, Heart of Darkness, on and
on, the standard classic books.
Tobey: So on your “bucket list” are more books. Anything else that you really want
to do besides what you’re doing?
Lewenstein: [01:48:03] No, not really.
Tobey: You’re content.
Lewenstein: [01:48:06] Yes. Traveling to see my kids, but, unfortunately, they’re not local.
Tobey: Yes, New York and—
Lewenstein: [01:48:15] Ithaca, New York, and—
Tobey: —Oregon?
Lewenstein: [01:48:17] Yes, the boonies of Oregon, where my daughter is.
Tobey: So you’re able to travel and can stay for a week or two at a time, and they
come to visit as well.
Lewenstein: [01:48:30] Yes. My son was here for the past week. He’s at Cornell, and they
have a different schedule than Stanford’s. He doesn’t have to teach in
January—about three-quarters of the month of January. School doesn’t start
till the end of the month, so he usually tries to come out in January, and I go
back there in the summer. Whenever possible, he finds places on the West
Coast to lecture so he can come by here.
110

Tobey: What is he teaching?
Lewenstein: [01:49:05] History of science and communications.
Tobey: He’s been influenced by his mom. [laughs]
Lewenstein: [01:49:13] Well, he was probably influenced by his father too.
Tobey: Who was interested in science and engineering.
Lewenstein: [01:49:20] He went to the University of Chicago and he majored in geology
and philosophy, full major. When people would ask us what our son was
taking, my husband would say, “The philosophy of pet rocks.” [laughter]
That was the pet rock craze.
Tobey: I remember it. I remember.
Marion, I just want to thank you very much for sharing—
Lewenstein: [01:49:46] Well, thank you for your time.
Tobey: —all of this information.
Lewenstein: [01:49:50] You’ve done a very thorough job in backgrounding.
Tobey: I appreciate your being as open as you’ve been with me on all these different
topics. The stories are now going to be recorded, and they will be delightful
to read for people who are interested in various aspects of your life, the
communication department at Stanford, and life at Stanford over time.
Lewenstein: [01:50:19] Well, I hope I’ve contributed to that. I haven’t been as specific as I
think one should be, but that’s as much as I was able to recall.
Tobey: I think you’ve done a remarkable job. I hope I can do that kind of a job in a
number of years.
