
Scott: I, Joy Scott, on behalf of the Stanford Historical Society, will be interviewing
Dr. Alice Whittemore about her life and career. Today is Monday, May 11th,
2015. To begin, I’d like to ask when and where you were born, Dr.
Whittemore.
Whittemore: [00:00:19] I was born July 5th, 1936 in New York City.
Scott: Could you tell me a little bit about your experience in school?
Whittemore: [00:00:29] Yes. I went to Catholic schools throughout grammar school, high
school, and college. I was taught by nuns the whole time. [laughter] School
was fun. I always enjoyed it. In high school I realized that I loved science,
and the nuns told me that I was good at science. That was very nice. Then,
when I went to college, which was led by the same order of nuns from the
high school, I decided that I wanted to major in either biology or chemistry. I
loved chemistry. I just loved it. After my freshman year, the beloved

13

chemistry teacher left and a man who wasn’t such a good teacher came and
replaced him. I found him boring.
[00:01:23] Then I fell in love and I spent all my spare weekends at Brown
University with my to-be husband. There were all sorts of parties going on
there. I figured that was the real reason. Since I didn’t want to do those fourhour labs twice a week, I decided the easiest way to do science and not to
have the lab work was to major in math. That was great fun. It was an easy
school. It didn’t challenge me as much as it should have. I would knit argyle
socks for my boyfriends and read novels through class. Then the night
before the exam I’d stay up all night and read the book realizing, “Oh, this is
what it’s all about.” Because, you know, they’d put these big equations on the
board and I had no idea what that was all about. Then it was like a revelation
to understand it.
[00:02:24] I really enjoyed doing a senior thesis in college. We all had to do a
thesis. I did mine on the mathematics of time measurement, which was great
fun. My father died when I was fifteen, and we were very poor. I started
working selling jewelry in a department store downtown in New York. I
realized that it was a hard life being a salesgirl although I was only there
Mondays and Thursdays from four o’clock to nine o’clock, and then all day
Saturdays. It was a hard life. You had to stand on your feet all day. The pay
wasn’t that good. I would see all these well-dressed customers buying this
jewelry, but the people that were selling it led a hard life.
[00:03:17] I realized then that I wanted to be more like the customers and
less like the salesgirls. The only way to do that, I realized--I got a graphic

14

lesson--was to get an education. I was determined I was going to go to
college. Then I continued through college and worked part-time at my job
selling jewelry. Then I fell in love. Back then, the big goal was to get married
and to have a big engagement ring on your finger. Then I thought we were
going to just go off in an ivy-covered cottage and live happily ever after. It
didn’t work out that way. I graduated in June and I got married with a big
fancy wedding, the white dress, the reception, and all of that.
Scott: What year did you graduate from your undergraduate program?
Whittemore: [00:04:12] 1958 and my wedding was three months after I graduated.
Marriage was great fun for a while. Then right away, maybe ten months after
I got married, I had my first daughter. That was big excitement. My husband
and I lived in Newport. Rhode Island, because he was stationed there in the
Navy. That was an interesting experience. Then we came to New York and
we rented a brownstone walk-up apartment on the East Side of New York
City, and I had my first baby. I got sick after my baby was born, and that was
hard. I was in the hospital for three months, before things settled down.
[00:05:05] Then, I guess about seventeen months after she was born my
second child arrived. As a practicing Catholic, I didn’t use any birth control.
Then… I don’t know, things started going badly between my husband and
me. He was working in advertising and he would stay out late, and he was
drinking a lot. I was home alone with those two little girls and I was getting
very bored. There was no real companionship. I decided to go back to school
myself, mostly to get myself out of the house. That was a wonderful thing. I

15

received a master’s in mathematics from Hunter College of The City
University of New York.
[00:05:58] I found that I enjoyed reading the math books and doing the
mathematics homework and everything. Then Hunter College asked me if I
would teach. So I was teaching while I was getting my master’s. I enjoyed
that, too. Then they told me that I really should go on for my PhD. I decided
to do that. They were just opening a new PhD program in the Graduate
Center of The City University of New York at the Graduate Center on 42nd
Street near Times Square. I was one of their first PhD students. There were
some women, and there was even a nun there. I loved my thesis advisor. He
was wonderful. I loved mathematics.
[00:06:49] But it was also a shock to realize that there were people there, lots
of students who were much better at mathematics than I was. At any rate, I
got my PhD. That was a thrill when I did my thesis because you had to prove
a theorem. You had to discover something new about mathematics, which
was quite a challenge. I managed to do that by some stroke of luck. Then I
got my PhD in June 1967. And that September of 1967, my children were
eight and six years old, I started teaching as an assistant professor at Hunter
College. After the first bumps, the first six months or so, I fell in love with
teaching and realized that I could really help people.
[00:07:47] I worked very hard at helping and explaining what graduate
mathematics was all about. I loved that. However my research wasn’t going
so well. It consisted of trying to solve hard problems, and I realized that
there were only three or four people in the whole world who even knew

16

about the problems I was beating my head bloody against the wall on, much
less cared about them. I decided it was time for me to stop being so
theoretical and to become more applied. I volunteered to teach in a brand
new master’s program in statistics in a graduate program.
Scott: Where was this program?
Whittemore: [00:08:27] At Hunter College. I was literally two pages ahead of my class
because I had never taken any statistics classes. I fell in love with that subject.
Then, I started in the summertime after deciding that it was time--I put my
kids in camp--to go off to summer research programs and expand my
horizons in other applications. I went to a summer program in 1972 in
Pullman, Washington at Washington State University. I grew to love the
West on that visit. That program focused on the mathematical applications in
economics, which was fun.
[00:09:11] I had a good time that summer. I enjoyed that very much. I
enjoyed my fellow students who were all teachers, you know, assistant
professors from all over the country. Then the following summer, I got a
summer fellowship to go to Cornell in Ithaca, New York. That, too, was a
real revelation because that was such a lovely campus, particularly in the
summertime. It’s not so great in the winter when it’s snowy. That’s where I
heard about a research opportunity from a member of the Society for
Industrial and Applied Mathematics. He fostered a program to get pure
mathematicians redirected in their research to do something applied and
useful.

17

[00:10:03] There was too much pure mathematics going on, too much
struggling about all these esoteric problems. I was their perfect candidate for
that. I was one of their first. As I mentioned last week, I had a choice of
going with the New York Fire Department or to go to NYU Medical Center.
I had always wanted to go to medical school, even….
Scott: Why did you always want to go to medical school?
Whittemore: [00:10:27] Because I loved biology, chemistry, and I just thought I’d like it.
When my father was ill, we were very poor. He was shuttled into very poor
public hospitals, such as Bellevue Hospital in New York, which is the city
hospital. Conditions there were very depressing. He ultimately wound up, for
lack of a better place…. He had a major stroke, and he couldn’t talk, he
couldn’t walk, he couldn’t move, he had to be fed. My mother couldn’t take
care of him and we didn’t have the money for help. He ultimately wound up
in a New York state hospital for the insane. But he wasn’t insane. He just
couldn’t function because of the stroke. He died there.
[00:11:15] Those were pretty dismal places. I thought, ugh, hospitals are
dismal. I wasn’t sure I really wanted to go into that. Anyway, going to study
at NYU Medical Center seemed like an ideal thing because my kids were in
school and I didn’t want to take them out of school to study in another state.
They were in grammar school. I went for two years to NYU Medical Center,
and that’s where I met my current husband. He’s a very famous,
internationally-known mathematician. He has had hundreds of postdoctoral
students. I fell in love, not only with Joe Keller, but also with cancer
epidemiology, which combines statistics and medicine. When that program

18

ended, we decided to apply for a year’s sabbatical, mine from Hunter College,
and his from NYU.
[00:12:06] We each had a year’s sabbatical, which extended to two years
because we loved our work here. We came out here to Stanford. He had
been here before. I just fell in love with Stanford. I mean who wouldn’t? I
think both our institutions were unhappy that we headed west because I
think they treasured both of us and they didn’t like it that they were losing us.
Joe immediately got a job offer at Stanford. I mean he’s a big shot and he
immediately got one, but what was I to do? I was neither fish nor fowl. I
wasn’t a mathematician anymore. I really didn’t know any statistics. I mean I
knew enough to teach a master’s level course, but I was just too…. new to
the subject. I spent two years, the two sabbatical years in the Statistics
Department.
[00:13:04] While I enjoyed that very much, I really didn’t fit in with statistics.
Then I got lucky because finally Stanford realized they needed to get up to
speed in epidemiology. They didn’t even know how to spell it and they never
heard of it. It was obviously not on their chart at all. They decided to hire a
famous epidemiologist, Ralph Paffenbarger--“Paffy” we called him--had
worked on the Salk vaccine, anti-polio vaccine, and did pioneering, the
pioneering research on being physically active, and how people who were
physically active in college and remained physically active later on had much
lower death rates from every cause, not just heart disease, compared to
people who were inactive.

19

[00:14:11] That really just knocked the socks off the world. He was the one
who initiated interest in physical activity and health. He would run a hundred
miles at a time in something called the Western States 100, running up
through the Sierras for a hundred miles. Imagine that. He was wonderful and
we hit it off. He needed a biostatistician, somebody who was quantitatively
inclined to help him with the research. He founded this huge cohort of
Harvard alumni and followed them through the Alumni Association, and the
University of Pennsylvania. When they started dying off, he knew what they
died from and was able to compare that with the records that they had
submitted when they were incoming freshman to learn about causes of
disease.
[00:15:01] That was a wonderful cohort. We published many papers together,
we had a lot of students together, and I learned so much from him. I mean I
don’t know where I’d be without all my mentors. But then our sabbaticals
were nearing their end. At that time, I applied for a grant without even
realizing I wasn’t allowed to do this.
Scott: Why were you not allowed to apply for the grant?
Whittemore: [00:15:28] Because I didn’t have a faculty position. I didn’t have any kind of a
research position. I had nothing. I was a visiting scholar here. That’s all. The
dean of Humanities and Sciences, who was a friend of my husband’s, gave
me permission. Of course, back then you could get grants easily. I received a
Career Development Award that would support me for five years. I started
off with a Young Environmental Scientist Award for three years. Stanford

20

committed enough to house me for three years. Also, NYU Medical Center
wanted to give me tenure. I had a tenured professorship at… [laughter]
Scott: Hunter.
Whittemore: [00:16:14] …Hunter. Thank you. I was thinking Harvard. At Hunter. But I
didn’t have any faculty position here. Our department, which was called the
Department of Family, Community, and Preventive Medicine, put in an
application for me to have some kind of a position here. The dean of the
Stanford School of Medicine said, “Well, the ideal thing is for Whittemore to
be a research professor,” which means that you bring in your own funds. If
you don’t bring in your funds, you don’t get paid. You’re supposed to be just
doing research, but they also ask you to be on committees and do things like
that.
[00:16:53] That was probably around 1978, 1979, 1980. At that time, my case
went before the dean, and the dean said, “Research professor for her.” There
was a committee--because those research professorships didn’t come
automatically--to evaluate my credentials. The committee came back with,
“She should really be on the tenure track. She’s deserving of more than that.”
But the dean had said I was going to be a research professor, so I became a
research professor.
Scott: At that time, how rare or how common was it for women to be on the
tenure track?
Whittemore: [00:17:36] Very rare. In fact, there was a married couple. Avram Goldstein
was a big shot at School of Medicine in the Department of Pharmacology.
His wife Dody was also a well-known and well-regarded prestigious

21

pharmacologist. She was a research professor. They didn’t give tenure to
women. She heard about my case. For all I know, she may have been on the
committee that evaluated my credentials for the Dean…. In fact, I think she
told me she was on the committee to evaluate my credentials. She took up
my cause. Then a woman in the School of Humanities and Sciences in some
administrative position spoke to the provost because they realized that this
was a problem.
[00:18:34] The provost, who didn’t want to lose my husband, came to the
dean, the new dean here. I was a research professor and I stayed as a research
professor. I got a Career Development Award, so that lasts for five years. I
had my salary taken care of and never worried about my salary. Yet I didn’t
like it. I felt like a second-class citizen. Dody [Dora “Dody” Goldstein] didn’t
like it. Evidently her husband complained or something because they made
her a tenured professor. Dody would scream and yell on my behalf. Then,
once it came to the attention of the provost, the provost knew my husband
and how outstanding a mathematician he was.
[00:19:28] The provost came to the dean’s office to appeal to me for the two
of us. The dean at the time was David Korn, and the Provost asked, “Can
something be done?” David Korn turned a deaf ear to him. Then something
unusual happened. Again, a lucky break for me [laughter], because I really
wanted to stay here. Out of the blue I got an offer of a tenured full
professorship from the Department of Biostatistics at Harvard. They had
asked me to come and give a talk. It wasn’t a job talk. I came and I talked.
Then as soon as I got that offer, and I realized that I would be happy at

22

Harvard, my husband got a job offer at MIT, where he would have been
welcome.
[00:20:28] We would have left. My husband missed the East, he missed his
friends, he wanted to go back. He said, “But I’ll leave it up to you.” I said,
“You know, I just hate to leave this place.” My husband, what came with him
was a house on Cape Cod. He owned a house on Cape Cod that he would go
to in the summertime and teach there. They have a special program for
mathematical physicists and he would go to that. It was connected with the
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute. I realized that I would always have
that link and I would always be able to see my family in the East. But if I left
the West, I would never get back.
[00:21:08] I didn’t really want to do that. I just remembered to this fateful
day, I made an appointment to talk to Dean Korn. I was terrified. I was all
dolled up. He still was not convinced. I said, you know, I explained that I had
this offer, et cetera. Then finally he said “I’ll think about it and get back to
you in a while,” and the interview ended. He started walking down the hall.
Meanwhile, Harvard was calling me every day wanting an answer.
[00:21:40] I said, “But I’ve got Harvard on my back.” He turned around and
he looked at me. Then he went on walking. The next day he created a
position for me. A tenured, full professorship. That was it. No search
committee, no nothing. The provost obviously approved, but it had to go
before the Advisory Board. They pretty much rubber-stamped things. If I
didn’t have that offer from Harvard, I think, and they didn’t have the threat
that they were going to lose the two of us, this never would have happened.

23

It’s different now. It just isn’t the way it used to be. I had two strikes against
me. I mean being a woman really wasn’t the worst of it.
[00:22:41] The major strike was they never heard of an epidemiologist. The
Medical School knew that they needed biostatistics. I was really an
epidemiologist working with Ralph Paffenbarger. They didn’t know much
about what epidemiology is. It was hard at first.
Scott: How did your professional life at Stanford change once you were approved
and had this new position?
Whittemore: [00:23:11] It was hard because I’m shy. I’m not the kind that knocks on
doors and opens the way. I worked largely with Paffenbarger. I’m trying to
think how things took off. It was all very gradual. But then another big break
happened, and that is that Saul Rosenberg, who’s a professor [at Stanford]
and now retired…. He’s an oncologist that treats cancer patients; he formed
something called the Northern California Cancer Center (NCCC).
[00:24:05] That was a collaboration between UCSF and Stanford to do cancer
research. It was largely epidemiological and biostatistical research. When
NCCC was organized, Elizabeth Holly, another epidemiologist from
Berkeley and UCSF, became a new colleague of mine. When she graduated
from Berkeley she came to NCCC. The reviewers of NCCC’s first big grant
realized that I was interested and competent, and they suggested that I
become the first director of the Epidemiology Division at NCCC.
Scott: What year was this?
Whittemore: [00:25:00] I think it was started around 1980. Early 1980s. Elizabeth and I
just hit it off. One year we applied for five grants. I was the principal

24

investigator on two of them, she was PI on three. We got all five. We were
snowed. I mean we were absolutely snowed. We had to hire people like
crazy. The people that we were hiring were literally sitting on the floor in this
one big room. We didn’t even have desks for them. They were sitting with
their laptops working. I mean it was just crazy. Crazy, crazy. We loved it. We
were happy. I got involved and interested in a rare lymphoma of the skin
called mycosis fungoides.
[00:25:51] I don’t know why I got interested in that. I remember Henry
Kaplan, who was a famous radiologist, he died of lung cancer (he was a lifelong non-smoker) from the radiation exposure. He treated and he pioneered
in the treatment of Hodgkin’s disease. Hodgkin’s disease in children and
young adults used to be fatal. Thanks to Henry Kaplan, we now have
treatment for it. He was a wonderful man. He took me under his wing a little
bit, which was good. Then I’m trying to think about how I got involved with
people. It was mostly through NCCC, the Northern California Cancer
Center. I got to know people there by working with people. Then one thing
led to another and I got involved with other people. Then our department
changed.
[00:26:49] Our dean changed our department. It used to be Family Medicine,
Biostatistics, Health Services Research. Those were the three things.
Epidemiology was just sort of emerging. The dean put Family Medicine in
the Department of Medicine, and put Biostatistics, Health Services Research
and Epidemiology together and called it the Department of Health Research
and Policy. That was kind of fun to have this new department. Then I was

25

off and running because I never had to get promoted since I came in as a
tenured professor, which was kind of nice thanks to David Korn and to that
offer that I had from Harvard.
I really have nothing but good memories about my mentors. [00:27:43] They
were male and they were wonderful, all of them. They really helped me and
taught me. I think I don’t have any feelings of mistreatment because I was a
woman, but just because people didn’t know so much about epidemiology. I
was switching careers in my mid to late thirties, yes, my early forties. Maybe
nowadays that’s not so unusual, but I was going from being a pure
mathematician to being a very applied epidemiologist. For a while there I was
doing…. I mean I’ve always been doing both biostatistics and epidemiology,
but I would find that I would go to both types of meetings. The
epidemiology meetings were fascinating. [00:28:31] Fascinating. So lively. So
much happening. So much happening.
Oh. Then a huge thing happened to me, as I was working away at
biostatistics and epidemiology sort of side by side, when one day I just had to
put down my pencil and go out and take a walk, it was so mind-blowing. I
realized that genetics was the way. Genetic epidemiology and genetics were
the way to marry biology and mathematics because genetics is probability
theory, you know. First of all, when you form sperm cells and egg cells, that’s
a random process. Whether you get which chromosomes from your mother
or your father—that’s all a random process.
[00:29:25] And so you need probability theory. I really have been in love with
my work. I want that for my children and grandchildren. I think my children

26

both are doing work that…. I don’t think they have the same passion for
their work, per se. They love working with people. That’s the part that they
like. But they’re both professional women. I think they just love working
with people. I’ve been very happy here. Yes.
Scott: Considering working with people and how that may not be a big role of
yours within the department, how have you been able to work with students
at Stanford, since you mentioned before how much you loved working with
students at Hunter College?
Whittemore: [00:30:16] Yes. Yes. How did that all happen? First of all, when I was
working with Paffenbarger, there were students that were working with him,
thus, they were working with all of us. We were working together as a team. I
enjoyed that very much. It started very slowly. Mostly I was doing research.
Then we developed a master’s program and a PhD program in epidemiology,
because we started expanding. We recruited a friend of mine who was an
experienced epidemiologist. She was chair of epidemiology at Columbia
University and she came here to be chief of the Epidemiology Division.
[00:31:10] She was the one that wanted to start a graduate program. She really
did all the work to do that. I found that I enjoyed teaching in that course, and
I enjoyed working with the students, and I worked with the PhD students.
That was great fun.
Scott: You can elaborate as much as you’d like.
Whittemore: [00:31:34] Right. Right. Yes, Stanford today isn’t like it used to be. I think it’s
a much more open and friendly place for women.
Scott: Do you have any particular experiences in mind when you say that?

27

Whittemore: [00:31:54] One thing that comes to mind was that Condoleezza Rice was
provost here before she became Security Administrator and then Secretary of
State. [sentence deleted] Some of her actions suggest that she was not a
particular advocate for women, because she failed to support a call-to-action
by a women’s research group here. To me, it seemed that she was thinking
“I’ve made it, so why can’t everybody else?” But that is just my impression
without knowing all the facts. I didn’t feel that women’s causes were a high
priority for her. Then, on the other hand, I didn’t feel that I had been
prejudiced against because I was a woman. In fact, other women stood up
for me, but other men taught me, and other men stood up for me, too.
[00:32:45] I mean obviously Paffenbarger did, and the chair of my
department did. And… yes. I mean I have a lot of very nice experiences. It
was just a gradual thing to realize that I didn’t have to feel like a second-class
citizen, that I was doing useful research in my own right. With our master’s
program and our PhD program, I was working with students a lot. Then I
started getting grants. Oh. Oh. I forgot to mention that it was, again, other
men who suggested that I apply for an Outstanding Investigator grant. It was
an award. It was a seven-year full funding for myself and for colleagues that I
could hire. I got one of those. That was wonderful. That was seven years,
and then I got it renewed for another seven years. For fourteen years of my
career, I was fully, generously funded by the National Cancer Institute.
Scott: Out of this funding, what findings were you most proud of?
Whittemore: [00:34:02] Oh, that’s a nice question. I was thinking, there are two things that
I’m particularly proud of. One of them occurred while I was reading a

28

textbook on the analysis of discrete data--it’s a kind of statistical analysis--and
they had a theorem there. But they didn’t prove it because it was a very
applied book. The statement was that a contingency table was collapsible if
and only if certain conditions were met. I could see that the if part was OK.
That if it satisfied certain criteria the table was collapsible in a certain
technical sense. But I didn’t see the only if. [00:34:54] That it was a necessary
condition. So you have “a table is collapsible,” and it’s an interesting property
that you want a table to be. If, and only if. So that’s if, and only if: conditions
C hold. I could see that if C holds, then collapsibility of the table, if the table
satisfies condition C. But I couldn’t see if it’s collapsible, then C must hold.
This is an example. I came up with some very crude simple counter example,
and I showed it to my husband, and the two of us worked on it together. He,
being an expert mathematician, was able to blow this up into something
really wonderful. I wanted him to be a co-author with me.
[00:36:06] He said, “No, no. You should have this as your own piece of
work.” He wouldn’t be that. He wouldn’t be co-author. I submitted it and it
was published in a very prestigious journal. Amazingly, one of my postdocs
told me that they just came across that reference to my work published in
something like 1978, 1979. Somewhere like that. I’m proud of that, because
people would say, “How on earth did you think of that?” But my husband
really deserved a lot of the credit for it. Then I’m also proud of how I figured
out a connection in statistics between a certain property in statistics of
logistic regression, which is a kind of method that everybody uses.

29

[00:36:58] That connection allowed me to get approximate sample size
calculations, to use a formula to figure out how… if you want to test a
certain hypothesis, how big your sample has to be. I published that. That was
published in the Journal of the American Statistical Association. The editor of that
journal was a famous male statistician. He worked with me, the editor did, to
get that up to speed. Then, again, my colleagues, these people that I
respected enormously said, “How did you think of that?” You know, my
husband sometimes would say to me when I would come up with
connections, “How did you think of that?”
[00:37:48] I’ve always been very proud of being able to make these strange
connections that have been very beneficial to me in terms of publishing
papers that people cite and quote. Then, because I was so fond of
Paffenbarger, and so in awe of him, I did epidemiology myself. I did shoeleather epidemiology. Oh, another big thing was that Stanford--this is
Stanford’s doing--they formed an Asian Alliance Group, and they funded it
generously and staffed it well to collaborate with the Asian countries. They
chose me, and Paffenbarger, and Paffenbarger gave me the responsibility for
it, to be a poster child for this joint collaboration.
[00:38:46] They did all the work of collaborating with China and the Chinese
government just when the whole Mao Tse-tung thing was ending and China
was being opened up. We did a five-year collaboration. We got it funded to
study colorectal cancer. I did….
Scott: This is comparing with Asian men in the Bay Area with….

30

Whittemore: [00:39:05] That’s right. That’s right. Asian men and women. That was a
wonderful study. That was a big challenge for us dealing with our Chinese
colleagues, et cetera. It was great fun. We published lots of nice papers for
that. I enjoyed that.
Scott: There was a big reception in regard to the publishing of the papers. I saw a
lot of clippings in the newspaper about it. Once you published this big piece
of work, were there any changes within the department? Did you gain more
respect? Did you feel any different?
Whittemore: [00:39:44] No. I remember thinking at one point, Stanford doesn’t appreciate
me, but I’m getting all this recognition from the rest of the world. Little did I
know that that’s the thing that makes you get ahead in Stanford—it’s getting
world recognition. Because people would say how good I was and how much
they liked my work from everywhere, but not here, you know. [laughter]
Right. Stanford can be a tough place for people. It really can because their
standards are so high. I remember my husband once said about the Math
Department, that they want to get a superstar, and because they won’t settle
for anything less than a super superstar, they have trouble getting anybody.
It’s the trouble.
[00:40:39] I’m trying to think. I did a lot of shoe-leather epidemiology, but I
realized I didn’t love that the way I love doing the statistics and the
methodological work. I found I’ve always been true to what I loved. Yes.
Scott: What research are you currently conducting?
Whittemore: [00:41:01] Too much. [laughter]
Scott: Could you give me a glimpse?

31

Whittemore: [00:41:06] Yes. Right. Amazingly, my colleagues and I applied for four grants.
Believe it or not--in this tough time grants are really hard to get--we got all
four of them. Then a fifth grant from the University of Pennsylvania finally
got funded by the Institute in… I think it’s minority research, or maybe
disadvantaged research. There’s a special center in NIH and they funded this
grant. Suddenly I’m involved with five projects at the same time. Now, it’s
been wonderful because I’ve had marvelous postdocs through these grants.
[00:41:57] The best ever. Ever. I love working with them. They teach me so
much. They’re so good. I have one who is a PhD geneticist, but who also
went back and got her master’s in bioinformatics. She knows so much. She’s
teaching. She’s patiently teaching me the genetics I don’t know, and the
bioinformatics I don’t know. Yes. I’m having too much fun at work. I’m sad
in a way because my husband is thirteen years older than I am and I’m not
going to have him forever. Here I am working, and I’ve decided I’m going to
retire on December 31, 2017, which is still two and a half years away.
[00:42:51] But he’s going to be up into his nineties if he’s still alive. I’m
worried about retiring and then losing him at the same time. That’s going to
be a big transition.
Scott: Considering how much you put into your work, do you feel like over the
course of the years, since you went back to school for your master’s, you’ve
made a lot of personal sacrifices as well?
Whittemore: [00:43:18] Not really. Not really. My husband and I… I don’t feel that way
because the… I sometimes feel very sad that I didn’t have time to spend
more time with my children when they were little. When they were little, I

32

was getting my PhD and I didn’t have time. That part I… For example, I
burst out crying because I realized once that I never took either of them to
fly a kite. I never did that. That part I regret, not spending more time with
my children when they were little. That was before I got into the professional
rat race. I was just getting my…. I was just a graduate student then.
[00:44:03] I’m distracted because I’m thinking. When I was getting my PhD,
I really didn’t want to solve the greatest math problem ever. I just wanted to
be doing work that I found that I was contributing to the world, and that I
was making the world a better place, and be happy myself. My husband and
I, for the last twenty to twenty-five years, maybe longer than that, have been
taking the month of September off, the entire month, and hiking in France.
Yes. We’ve hiked in England, but I like hiking in France better. No work, no
nothing, just fun.
[00:44:50] Just hard hiking all day long with heavy backpacks. I don’t feel I’ve
sacrificed, I feel we’ve had those months together. We’re going to still do it
this year.
Scott: Would you change anything about your time at Stanford, whether personally
or professionally?
Whittemore: [00:45:12] That’s a great question. In retrospect, I wouldn’t have been so
timid. I would have knocked on more doors. I would have reached out to
people more. I can’t think so. I can’t think so. No. I don’t think….
Scott: To change the question a little bit, is there anything that you wish you had
known before starting your academic or professional career that you would
have wanted to know then while you were younger that you know now?

33

Whittemore: [00:46:01] I don’t know. Yes. I learned sometimes I could get really….
What’s the word? Obsessive. Obsessive about solving a problem in statistics,
and beating my head and not giving it up. Not giving it up and not realizing
that I could put it aside, and should put it aside—that it wasn’t the end of the
world if I didn’t solve it. Sometimes when that happens, when I learned to
put it aside and think about something else, then a solution would come. I
could have learned that better earlier so I didn’t kill myself so much about
problems that weren’t all that important to begin with. That’s one.
[00:46:57] My husband has taught me so much. I used to be so shy. When I’d
get invited to visit other universities I wouldn’t want to go. I’d hate it because
I would be so nervous. He said, “No. Just relax and meet people, and talk to
people, and ask them what they’re working on, and what they’re doing, and
what they’re interested in. And you’ll find it to be fun.” Gradually he made
me realize that. I got over some of that shyness and insecurity. I could have
been a lot less insecure and a lot more secure. I could have been a lot better
colleague, I think, for that. At Hunter, before I even came out to Stanford, I
did love teaching, and I won awards for being an outstanding teacher. Big
awards. You know, university-wide awards.
[00:47:55] I knew I had a gift for explaining and helping people, and…. I’m
sorry that I don’t have any sort of dirty laundry to wash out [laughter].
Scott: No dirty laundry’s necessary. For my final question, I will ask you, do you
have any advice for students, female students who may be interested in
becoming a world-renowned researcher such as yourself? What advice would
you give young women in the sciences?

34

Whittemore: [00:48:32] For someone in the sciences. Yes.
Scott: Or young women in general…
Whittemore: [00:48:35] Young women in general.
Scott: …with academic endeavors?
Whittemore: [00:48:38] Yes. In a way, I think I was lucky because I had my children. I did
my childbearing before I started, even before going back to graduate school.
My children were both born and they were young. They were four and five.
There’s something nice about that. On the other hand, that’s a problem
because sometimes you can miss out. My situation was unusual because I
switched careers. You know, I was in pure mathematics, and I was a full
professor of mathematics and switched. But not to be afraid to switch if you
see something that you really fall in love with. Not to be afraid to switch.
[00:49:28] The whole business about childrearing and children and budget
and time management is really hard. It’s really hard. It bothers me and it
worries me that so many women drop out of the workforce to have children.
They feel somehow maybe that it’s an either/or kind of thing. Because the
academic life is brutal. Let’s face it. It’s because you’ve got so many demands
and you have to prioritize, and you have to budget, and you have to be
fiendish about that. That’s very hard. So marry somebody who’s supportive
of you and doesn’t mind doing housework. That helps. Get a supportive
mate. That I would say if having children is important, it needn’t be
important to everybody. To some people it isn’t.
[00:50:37] If it is important to you, do it while you can. When you’re young.
And have your husband help you with the childrearing. See, I was divorced

35

when my kids were little. Fortunately, I had a mother who was living nearby
and who would help me with the children and take them. The children
adored her and she adored them. That, plus plenty of high school babysitters
got me through. It’s tough. It’s tough.
Scott: Is there anything else you’d like to add before we conclude the interview?
Whittemore: [00:51:18] Follow your muse. Follow what you love to do. You can give no
greater gift to yourself, no greater gift to your mate, and to your children than
being happy.
Scott: Thank you so much, Dr. Whittemore for sharing your story in regards to
your life and your career.
Whittemore: [00:51:38] Yes. Yes. It’s lovely to talk to you. Yes. And lovely to meet you.
Scott: Thank you.
