
O'Donohue:

Mrs. Bark, you have such an interesting combination of

experiences at Stanford-- as a student, as a staff person, as

a woman who is married to a faculty member, as someone who has

worked in the community, both as a paid person and as a

volunteer. I wonder if you could tell us something about that broad perspective.

®ar-^:

Do you mean what I think most vital or most important

about the various activities, phases of my life that you mentioned?

O'Donohue:

Yes, if you could touch on the varying perspectives that

those roles represent.

Bark:

That's a very hard question. I hadn't thought about it in that way.

O'Donohue:

When did your association with Stanford begin?

Bark:

Alright. That's easier. It began when I came to

Stanford as a freshman in the fall of 1931. I had had one

semester at UCLA, so I was in a rather odd state, in between

two classes, although I'm classified as the class of '35.

That's when I arrived at Stanford, however, my association

with Stanford began earlier because I was in highshool in

Glendale, California, in a big high school of over 2000

students. I had a teacher in my freshman year who had

received an MA from Stanford in English in the previous year,

and who was a very enthusiastic partisan of Stanford. She and

I became friendly. I did a lot of writing for her and writing

2

was something that interested me most. I wrote all kinds of

things like wildly lyrical poetry, essays and sketches of my grandmother and all this kind of thing. At any rate, she was

Lillian Bidwell and her name is nice to put in this record

because her parents had both gone to Stanford and her father,

along the way endowed two Stanford scholarships which, many

years later, I came to be involved with when I was working.

All the way through high school Lillian took an interest in me and told me that I certainly should go to Stanford. But I

really never expected to do it. This was all in the latter

part of the Depression years, of course, 1926 to 1930. It

seemed like a dream that I couldn't achieve. Now the reason it was difficult for me to think of this goes back to my

family. I don't know whether I should jump back.

0'Donohue:

Of course.

Bark:

I am the last of eight children of my father's. My

father was married twice. He had four children by his first

marriage. His wife died and then he married my mother, who

was 21 years younger than he. I was born the eighth in line

when he was 62 years old. When I was 7 he had a stroke, not

one that absolutely crippled him, but he never was able to

support his family after that. My brothers were 17 and 15

years older than I and my sister, 12 years older than I. Of

course my half brothers and sisters were old enough to be my

parents. But this changed my life, this episode--the fact

that I was born when iry father was so old and the fact that he had a stroke.

In due course my brothers, vrtio were responsible for the

3

family, really, from then on, came to California to Glendale

and got well-established quite soon. Then my sister, my

mother and I followed. Very soon thereafter my father, who

was at that moment visiting his daughter in Montana [joined

us]. So when we came to Glendale the head of the family were

the brothers. We did not have financial difficulties but we

were certainly not able to do as much for me as had been done

for my brothers and my sisters. So early on I worked on

school vacations. When I graduated from high school I was so

unsure of what I was going to be doing that I worked all that

summer and all that autumn and then went to UdA for a

semester.

O'Donohue:

What kind of work did you do?

Bar^:

Mostly selling in a small department store, although

sometimes library work. Also, when I was in school I was a

cashier in a cafeteria. I did all kinds of things. It made

perhaps an early independence. At any rate, when I finished

that semester at UCLA Miss Bidwell insisted that X apply to

Stanford, which I did. She assured me she was certain I would

get a scholarship, which I did. So I came to Stanford.

O'Donohue:

What did you have to do to apply then?

Bark:

They were mostly concerned with my high school record,

which fortunately was excellent and I had a great string of

activities. We had to take an aptitude test in those days,

which was something different from what students do nowadays,

I think. I passed that one with very high marks. My UCLA

record was perfectly adequate, it wasn't straight A but it was

good. So that was it. And then recommendations from various

4

people.

O'Donohue:

Were you very excited about coming to Stanford.

Bark:

it makes me breathless almost to think about how excited

I was. I couldn't believe this was really happening. I don't

know if any girl from my high school within memory of anyone I knew had ever gone to Stanford. Ttoo or three athletes had,

boys, but no girls. It was an unknown quantity, really. I

had never even read anything about it. I only had the

glamorous recollections of iry friend Lillian Bidwell.

O'Donohue;

it sounds like Lillian Bidwell was something of a

heroine to you.

Bark:

She was very remarkable. And not only did she encourage me in this way, but she also offered to lend me money if I needed it, after I had gone through what my brothers could

provide and what I had saved. I did borrow money from her.

And I'm not the only girl she helped, that's one of the

interesting things. I think I was the first--I must have been because she had just graduated. But I know that she had helped others. She was a very generous kind of person.

She was an English teacher as I said. This didn't

particularly make me want to be an English teacher, but of

course it was my field of interest.

O'Donohue:

She encouraged your writing.

Bark:

Yes.

O'Donohue:

What were some of your interests? You mentioned a long

string of activities.

Bark:

me see. I did a little bit of acting. I worked on the school newspaper and the yearbook and the various

committees. I debated--that was fun and exciting. I didn't

play sports--I played a lot of tennis but I didn't care much

for sports of a competitive nature.

O'Donohue:

How did you manage all that, especially working as you

did?

Bark:

Well, I didn't work that much during the [high school]

school years. It was the summers; a little bit though, such

as Christmas vacation and half-time new and then. I guess I

became fairly orderly and organized. At the same time I

belonged to a dancing club--ballroom dancing. I used to get

my mother to let me stay up late two or three nights a week to

listen to Bing Crosby from the Cocoanut Grove, although when

he sang "I surrender dear" my mother felt it wasn't very

appropriate for a young lady. I can't remember what other

things I did...yes, I was a counselor in a girl scout ramp for

a couple of weeks for three summers. I'm sure there were other things.

O'Donohue:

Did your family encourage you to go to Stanford?

Bark:

Oh, yes. My brothers and my sister all had had not a

complete four years, but quite a bit at the University of Iowa

and Iowa State College and it was always anticipated that I

would go to college somewhere. Of course they were pleased

that little sister was going to Stanford.

O'Donohue:

When you set out for Stanford, did you have any special

goals in mind for after graduation, when you "grew up"?

Bark:

I think I probably thought most of being a teacher

because it seemed, with the interests I had, a more obvious

choice than anything else. And of course, at that time,

6

unless you had particular talent or strong bent, the

opportunities for women were not very much. It never occured

to me that I would care to go into department store work, for

instance, although I had done this in my high school days.

O'Donohue:

What did some of your friends do? What kind of goals

did the other undergraduate women have?

Bark:

At Stanford, you mean? Well, one of them actually was

one of the first civil engineering women graduates at

Stanford. She became a traffic engineer, quite an

accomplished one and did it all her life until just a few

years ago. There were a couple who wanted to be doctors and

became doctors. I'm trying to think if there were any special

talents among them. One of the girls wanted to be a poet.

She married a doctor and never had a job of any sort. I don't

think that she was brilliantly talented as a poet.

O'Donohue:

From what you've described, it sounds as if there were

some talented women and that there was a rather open

atmosphere for them. Was that true?

Bark:

I think there was. My friend who wanted to be a poet is

interesting because she raised 4 or 5 children and she lived

in a small town in California. But she never stopped writing

poetry. She had the kind of drive that you need to succeed in

any creative profession--perhaps in any profession, but I

think particularly people who want to be writers or singers or

musicians of some sort, or painters. She sold poems to

reputable places over the years. I didn't see any of her work

for many years, but in recent years I have seen two booklets--

I call them, they were 25-30 pages. But they were published,

they weren't "vanity press" publications, they were commercial publications. While they were not really remarkable, they were good poems and her satisfaction, I'm sure, has been tremendous.

This is the kind of drive that writers, particularly, have to have. I never had it. I wanted to be a writer, but I couldn't face what it involved.

O'Donohue:

Did this friend stay in the area in California?

Bark;

she ras born in this area and actually lived in the town in which she was born. Her husband was a doctor and her father was a doctor too.

O'Donohue:

Did you pursue any writing at Stanford? What kinds of

things did you do here?

At Stanford I had what was a very fortunate encounter. As a freshman I had the standard freshman English course,

which was mostly a composition course, with Professor Yvor

Winters, who was even then, as a very young man, not quite having received his FhD, well-known as a poet, as a critic.

He became more greatly known later on. He was a very famous

man ultimately in literary circles in this country and a very

controversial one. He was very outspoken and some people

admired him enormously and others found his barbs too difficult to endure.

O'Donohue:

Tell me, this was during the Depression, and yet there

was this rather open, creative atmosphere. It sounds like

some pretty big ambitions for women. How do you account for that?

Bark:

1 don't know how it was in other universities, but I

8

should say that there was quite a lot of encouragement for

women at Stanford. One of the reasons was that we had a

remarkable Dean of Women, Dean Mary Yost who was herself a PhD

in English and had taught. She was a Vassar graduate,

Virginia born. A woman of great charm as well as intellectual

gifts. She talked to the girls about doing things. She had

little gatherings at her house to a couple of which I went. I

remember when I was a senior being at one of these gatherings

and she was complaining sadly that the Stanford women and

women in general had not made as much progress in the previous

four years since we had entered as she had hoped for.

O'Donohue:

How did you react to that comment?

Bark:

1 think we were interested. We were seniors and we were

so excited about being seniors that I don't think it troubled

us, more or less at all, really. I don't knew who the other

people were who were in that group. I wish I did--to see if

they remember it as well as I do, and if I remember it

correctly--that's always a hazard, of course.

Also, I think that Professor Winters, for instance, was

very encouraging. I had the opportunity to work on what was

called independent study, vfriich was something that was

peculiar to Stanford at that time and a very Important part of

my education. The smaller group that was on independent

study, Professor Winters paid a lot of attention to them and

encouraged us. He invited us to his home. His wife was also

a poet, she still is. She is a very famous person? Janet

Lewis is her writing name. All of this was heady.

O'Donohue:

This was the era of the "500" and it was also an

9

era when sororities were allowed. What was that like?

Bark:

That, of course, is one of the most interesting things

to think of in contrast to today. There were nine sororities,

500 women? almost half of the women lived in Roble hall and

the rest of them were divided among the sororities, although

there were perhaps some graduate women in that 500 who were

off campus. At any rate, the social life of the

university....[pause in the tape]

0'Donohue:

will you elaborate a little bit on the sorority life and

also on this open life?

Bark:

When I came to Stanford--partly because of my financial

situation--I did not expect to join a sorority. Moreover, I

happened to knew that my friend Lillian had not been a member

and she really took a rather dim view of sororities. So did

Miss Yost, to whom I became not close, but I knew her right

from the beginning because Lillian had been a favorite of

hers. So I rather dismissed the idea. I did not pledge my

first year and I expected to stay on in Roble Hall with friends.

Bat by the end of autumn quarter of my next year, I

found myself really lonesome because better friends, closer

friends were on the Row. So at the end of autumn quarter I

did pledge a sorority and move in after Christmas. The life,

of course, was very different. It was a small group, and the

kinds of activities they had within the house--parties and

other things were associated more closely with the sorority.

They also did good works of various kinds. Most of them had,

as you know, a national priority, or I should say projects. I

had heard about those from my sister who was in a sorority,

and had [a project] in the Appalachians. I enjoyed the

sorority very much but one painful thing hurt in a way. As

soon as I had pledged and moved into the house after

Christmas, rushing began. So there I was, thrust immediately

into the side of sororities that has received so much

criticism. And it was painful, it really was. I couldn't

believe some of the attitudes that were expressed, vjhich were

commonplace, I'm sure, among all the sororities. They weren't

peculiar to mine. And the kind of narrow-mindedness, I

thought, or lack of tolerance.

O'Donohue:

Do you think that was true for the men too?

Bark:

Not so bad. My husband was in a fraternity.

O'Donohue:

Was he here at Stanford?

Bark:

I didn't know him. He was here as a graduate student.

As a matter of fact, by the time I had joined a sorority he

had already left for Cornell to do his graduate work. My

first year he was here, but I never knew him. But he has

talked about men's rush and we used to compare notes on that

many times. The opinion he expresses is that it wasn't

anything as bad as the way the girls operated. He feels, I

think as many men do, that the worst of women's traits came

out when they were involved with things like that. I'm not sure I agree with him.

O'Donohue:

When there were 500 women, how many men were on campus

in the years that you were in school?

Bark:

About 3000. There were about 2500 to 3500 and that was

one of the great charms of Stanford. When you arrived you

were overwhelmed. Here were all these men. The men, however,

were supposed to look askance at Stanford women, who were

supposed to be what used to be called "bluestockings" and not

nearly as attractive as the girls at Mills. However a good

number of them married women from Stanford as it turned out.

0'Donahue:

How do you suppose they got that reputation?

Bark:

Because it was so difficult to get into Stanford.

01Donohue:

Because of the quota?

Bark:

Because of the quota. Oh yes. It was very, very hard

to get in and they had many applicants. But for the men,

things were not as stringent.

01Donohue:

Were they happy years for you?

Bark:

Yes. In my house [sorority] when I was a senior, the

agitation began for removing sororities. One of the girls in

my house and one in another house up the Row were among the

ringleaders of this movement. This made my life very

difficult because the spring quarter of my next to last

quarter in school, because I graduated at the end of autumn

quarter in '34--this was the spring of '34 and I had been

elected president of my sorority. This agitation about

getting rid of the houses had reached the national ears,

partly becuase a faculty wife at Stanford was an officer of

the national group. I had to justify--not justify, I couldn't

justify, but I had to write weekly reports to the national

group explaining what was going on and, if possible, why.

0'Donohue:

This was your national chapter, rather than Panhellenic?

Bark:

Yes.

0'Donohue:

What do you think about it today? We've had a kind of

12

rebirth after the years that sororities have been gone.

Bark:

I haven't any feelings against it at all, although a lot

of people that I know who belonged to sororities at Stanford

do, and never wanted to see them come back. I don't really

have much contact with them. I could, but I don't. When we

were asked whether or not we would support the return of our

own chapter, I did not respond that I would. What they wanted

was funds from us and I simply didn't feel eager enough for

them to come. But on the other hand, I think it is inevitable

that people will have groups where they want to make their own

choices. I don't think you can possibly make them all into

egalitarians, which, of course, is what some of the critical

material would espouse.

0'Donahue:

How do you feel things are for girls at Stanford now,

graduates, compared to your era?

Bark:

Well, I actually made some notes about how different

they are in that respect. Of course the amount of freedom

they have is incredible. When I came to Stanford I don't

think I had ever heard the words "in loco parentis" but that

was what Stanford was in those days. No girl could live off

campus unless with relatives--I should say women, because even

then we were assured that we were women and we must not call

ourselves girls. No woman could go away for a weekend to stay

with a friend and her family without signing out and

explaining very carefully lere she was going and when she

would return and so on. There were strict rules about how

late you could stay out and what the penalties were if you

failed to come home on time for one or two or three times.

There were judicial bodies in every dormitory or every house and in every aspect of our communal life.
We had rules about dress, by the way. Not what you wore, but you could not go beyond the post office, which was about where Dinkelspeil rehearsal hall is now, in shorts. You wore long stockings on the campus, not bobby socks. You could not ever go to the Library in shorts. I don't think anyone ever wore pants. I can't remember that anyone did. One of the funny things too, customs that certainly was different from now is that in the sororities in rushing, the girls danced with the rushees, much to hilarity of all the men, I think, of course. The objective was to cut in as fast as possible and assure the rushee that she was somebody who was really wanted. They thought it was fun, I'm sure. I did myself vtfien I was on the other side of it.
But in important ways the differences are, I think, that they have more freedom, much more freedom than we had. I have heard criticisms that they have too much in the sense that they have freedom without responsibility. That's perhaps a moot point. The status of women's sports has changed enormously. There were lots of opportunities. I counted ten different sports activities, including archery and an embryonic polo team that were available when X was a freshman at Stanford, to women. But they did not compete except on a class basis. They competed with Berkeley and Mills but it was the Junior classes of all three. Nowadays there is so much emphasis on women's sports that it presents financial problems for the university, so that they don't draw audiences to any

great extent and yet their costs are very large. They are

raising money as much as they can, but the athletic budget at

Stanford has been in terrible disarry the last two or three

years. One reason is that they offer scholarships to women

athletes, which is something they never had to contend with before.

O'Donohue:

How did they fund the programs and the activities

themselves, the sports activities[ earlier]? You mentioned that there were several.

Bark'-

They were siirply intramural and they were under the

auspices of the Physical Education program so that their costs were minimal.

O'Donohue:

And what if you went over to Mills or Berkeley?

Bark:

That was only an annual and maybe semiannual event.

They never traveled. They conducted an archery contest, I was

amused to read, by telegraph with 80 colleges all across the

country. It's like chess.

0'Donohue:

Exactly.

[END OF SIDE ONE]

[BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO]

O'Donohue:

What other activities went on? What was your living

arrangement like?

Bark:

our living arrangement at the dormitory was crowded

because they had let in more girls than the original plan had

called for, but we had a woman who "manned" the desk

downstairs all night long, I guess, or at least until the last

person who had signed out--you had to sign out every time you

15

went out at night, if you were expecting to be out after

10:30. Although on weekends you had 12 o1clocks and you had a

certain number of optional 12 o»clocks and one o»clocks, or

maybe even a 2:30 if you went dancing in the city that you

could use in the course of a quarter or a month. Those, of

course, had to be very carefully spaced out.

O'Donohue:

You mentioned that the dormitory got crowded. "When you

were here, did the 500 rule change?

Bark:

oh yes, indeed it did. That was a very dramatic event

that occured in 1933.

O'Donohue:

You spoke about the Depression years being the time you

came to Stanford. Also during the time that you were here,

some of the problems were beginning to erupt in Europe. What

impact did those two historical events have on campus life?

Bark:

On campus life, they changed a great deal of the habits

of operating, I think. Many students, of course, worked.

Some of them had jobs, like handling the laundry for a

corridor in the dormitory or the boys did all kinds of

things: they worked in cafeterias downtown or worked in food

services at Stanford. The most useful thing that was

initiated at Stanford in those years was something called

hashing, which was waiting on tables in University dormitories

and living groups. This amounted to quite a tidy sum of

savings and these hashing jobs were handed out upon

application before new students came, as part of the

scholarship, in a sense. Girls had them too, although the

girls at that time did not have them in the sororities, but

they had them in the dormitory when I arrived. I had one of

16

them.

The sororities, the next year, also bent to necessity

and initiated the employment of their own members, which

socially was not a happy event because they had always engaged

the more glamorous men they could find who were in need of

jobs to work in the sororities. Bat there was a lot of talk

and a lot of concern about the effect the Depression was

having on the country on the part of teachers and

administrators. Although, I think, unless you really were

terribly hard up, the girls and the men were so self-absorbed,

astonishingly so, considering what was going on in the

country. As I look back on it, I really can't remember being

very much concerned about the Depression until I got to be a

Senior and had an eye-opening course that made a great

difference in my outlook.

O'Donohue:

What was that eye-opening course?

Bark:

It was called Labor Problems and it was taught by a very

lively young man in the Economics department and he spent a

great deal of time discussing the structure of unions, the

need for them and the situation, not only in big steel and

things of that sort, but also in the agricultural situation in

California at the time, in which many, many fieldworkers were

getting very lew wages. It was felt by a great many people

that they really were being oppressed. This was something

that particularly impressed me because he suggested that if

any of us really cared to see what this was like, we could go

to Mountain View, where there was going to be a meeting next

week, of the peapickers union. Ihey would welcome us, be glad

17

to have us come, and would hope, of course, that we would be enlisted as helpers in their cause.

I did go with two or three other people and we were very

much impressed and rather awed by the whole situation. The

Union leaders asked if we would take some petitions back to

our living groups and get some signatures which we would then

return to them and they would send them to an authority of the

State, vtfiich was dealing with their problem. I took one of

these petitions back to the sorority and I passed it around

and nobody would sign it. I told this to a friend of mine the

other day, who was a wife of a very wealthy industrialist in

this valley, and she was in my house. She said she couldn't

believe it. Hew in the world could it be that nobody would

sign it. She was one of the people who hadn't signed it.

O'Donohue:

Why do you suppose it was? Had they been in the same

course?

Bark:

No. I think most of them came from backgrounds

where--or many of them did--what they knew of unions was, if

anything at all, something perhaps unflattering. I know that

many of them came from wealthy families and perhaps their

fathers were businessmen who had union trouble, or maybe they

were ranchers down in the valley whose troubles with housing

and health care and all that sort of thing that we hear so

much about new, and which you didn't hear very much about

then. It was beginning. If these girls came from backgrounds

like that, it's not surprising that they would think this was

perhaps far out left. I don't knew.

O'Donohue:

What about the rumblings of war?

18

Bark:

Nobody in those early 30s, as far as I knew persons,

ever thought much about it. We didn't think about Hitler.

I'm sure there were people who were teaching on the campus

then Who did and whose students probably did, but I didn't

know anybody who did. But my husband tells me that he and

some of his friends in 1930 went to see All Quiet on the

Western Front and of course, they were appalled. For them, it

looked like a future that would perhaps be a war and they

would be in it. They talked with each other about it a

little, but I don't think it went much beyond that. Maybe

they all talked to each other.

O'Donohue:

When did you meet your husband?

Bark:

I met him in 1937 on January 4. I had been working in

San Francisco for two years after my graduation and he had

come back for his first teaching job after gaining his PhD in

ancient history. There was a very remarkable course at

Stanford in those days, called History of Western

Civilization, which doesn't survive, except in a very odd kind

of form. There were 12 or 14 instructors in this course and I

had just, out of the blue asked if I'd be interested in

leaving iry job in San Francisco and coming back to Stanford to

work as a secretary for this course.

I came down and was interviewed and was offered the job

and came. This was my first day in my job. He came in and

asked me where Professor Bark was. I said, "I don't know, I

don't think he has come in yet this morning."

O'Donohue:

Did he own up to being Professor Bark?

Bark:

Not right away. It was a big room with a desk for each

of the instructors with a glass wall between it and my desk

outside. After I had been struggling with a few new things on

my desk, a girl student came in and asked for Professor Bark,

and I said, "I'm sorry, he isn't in this morning." He heard

me. It was a long time before I forgave him for that.

O'Donohue:

Does he maintain that sense of humor?

Bark:

He has a wonderful sense of humor and sometimes it's

what the kids call far out.

O'Donohue:

What was your life like after that? Was this love at

first sight?

Bark:

Not quite. However, we were married eight months later,

in August. Then, of course, I was a faculty wife at the age of 25.

O'Donohue: So you had been a student, a staff person, and now you were a

faculty wife, all within a few years.

Bark:

Yes, that's right. It was pretty exciting. We were so

close in age to some of these students that we enjoyed them

immensely. We went to parties, we went to the fraternity

functions of my husband's fraternity, and we chaperoned and

went there for dinner. Sometimes my husband went out and had

a beer with the boys, you knew. We did chaperone in many

other functions in the univer-sity, too.

O'Donohue:

Where did you live in those years?

Bark:

We lived in very interesting quarters. When we were

first married we lived up on the side of the hill on the

corner of Fortola Road and Alpine, where there were no houses

except one that an aged woman lived in. There was a water

tank up there. There was a summer house of some people in the

20

City who rented it to us. We were only there for 6 months,

though, because it was surrounded with poison oak. We had to

move. Then we lived in another romantic sort of place called

Perry Lane. Do you know the street in Menlo Park?

This was a collection of little houses that had been

built for renting by two or three people who lived out there.

It was right across from the golf course, across the creek

that goes along the road that was then called --I can't

remember what it was called.

It was in a little area off Sand Hill road along the

edge of the golf course and near what was called Roble Bridge,

which extended across the creek just down the road from where

we lived. This was often called "Sinville" because very avant

garde people were supposed to live out there in ways that weren't quite proper.

O'Donohue:

Including faculty like yourself?

Bark:

Well, I guess so. A very famous man had lived out there

in a very famous house-- a great economist who certainly had

problems with his wives and that was why that started, I

iinagine. [Ihorsten Veblen]. At any rate, we lived there for a

year and a half and our landlord was the wife of a faculty

member and she took a great interest in all of her tenants.

She saw that they met each other and she had an annual party

in which she served alcoholic raspberry sherbert [?] that she

made. She was Mrs. Bettsinger. Her daughter was Olivia

Bettsinger Byler, who for 23 years was the scholarship

secretary of the University and is a very well-known person

here. We lived in that place and had two dogs and had a

wonderful time until in the spring of 1940 we left for Lawrence College.
There was a policy in the History Department which applied only to the History of Western Civilization course, which, by the way, all Freshman had to take. The policy was that after three or at the most four years, an instructor must move on. He would not be integrated into the History Department, even if there were an opening. And of course, there rarely was, although people who taught in the course represented many different fields of history.
But my husband's field, ancient history, was actually taught in the Classics Department at Stanford. But he was virtually a medievalist since most of his work was in the early middle ages. They did have a medievalist in the History Department. He was there and he wasn't about to leave. So it was necessary to look for a job someplace else.
I don't remember haw he happened to apply to Lawrence College, but he did. It is in Wisconsin, the middle of the state, and a very attractive place, as it turned out. This was a very exciting undertaking, just the application and then waiting. He was funded by Lawrence to come back there and make a visit in the early spring and I even wrote to him there, X was so excited about what was going on there. He was there about four days, met the President and most of the faculty and they had a very remarkable old man who was retiring there--that was the reason there was an opening. To make a long story short, he was offered this job as an assistant professor. The men in the History Department, of

course, were instructors only, so we went. This was late summer.
We had an interesting experience before we went. We were written to by a family, a doctor and his wife in Appleton, the town, and told that they had an apartment for rent and that it had been occupied by one Nathan Posey, who had gone to Scripps College from Lawrence. If we would like to, we could write to the Puseys and they would tell us about the apartment. I don't know if Mr. Pusey's name is familiar to you, but he was ultimately the President of Harvard. So we did and we got a glowing letter from them about this. That was a very nice way to start out. The apartment was in a beautiful old house on the banks of the Fox river and the people who were our landlords occupied the first floor. They simply adored having young faculty in their house. The doctor was 75 and his wife, I think the same. She had been one of the first women students to graduate from Boston College in the 1880s. They were remarkable people and Dr. Jim had been secretary of the Lawrence College Board of Trustees for 45 years.
As you can imagine, we had an entree to the life of that town, the like of which nobody else would have or could have provided for us. When we got there, it was hot. It was terribly hot. That bothered me, but Bill was used to Cornell and it wasn't so bad. Anyhow, there we were in our apartment and received with open arms.
Lawrence at that time was a college of about 700-800 students. An old, old college--it was founded in the 1860s,

23

perhaps even earlier, and the town itself was in some ways

quite like a New England town in some of the structures, the

layout of the town, the beauty of the setting with the trees,

and the old buildings of the college. It was also a very

social town. There were four young faculty, including the

Barks, who came that fall. We were called on by a vast number

of the faculty, with white gloves and cards. Then we were

invited to dinner, and to all these functions, parties. It

was incredible.

O'Donohue:

Was that formality in contrast to what you had

experienced at Stanford?

Bark:

Yes. Oh, iry yes. And that made it very intriguing.

Just a side note, also, is that the college had a past of

fairly close affiliation with the Methodist Church. On the

face of things, the Church --the school--disapproved of

drinking. At the faculty parties, there was drinking. I

don't mean excessive drinking, but there was drink. The young

people pulled down the shades. I don't think that was really

necessary, but it made it much more diverting, of course. At

all of the parties everybody dressed quite regally.

O'Donohue:

How long were you at Lawrence?

Bark:

I was there five years. Both our sons were born there.

My husband, in the fifth year, had a post-doctoral fellowship

at Yale and that was in 1945. There was no housing to be had

for me and small babies in New Haven, so I stayed in Lawrence.

O'Donohue:

In the meantime, the war, of course, had occured.

Bark:

Before we left Stanford, my husband was very much upset

about the war. Even before the war was declared, although he

24

was a medievalist, an ancient historian, he had very, very

strong interests in all kinds of international and national

affairs and always has had. I can remember a night before we

left, when he listened at 4 o'clock in the morning to one of

Hitler's most famous speeches--I've forgotten which one it

was, and it really was a cause for deep depression on our part

for some time. He knew students at Cornell, German/Jewish

students who would not stay in the United States, even though

they had an opportunity, because they were confident that nothing would happen.

One student's parents came to visit him. They did not

regard themselves as Jewish people. They regarded themselves

as Germans. Of course probably their parents had been there,

citizens of the German Reich long before.

O'Donohue:

Now that you did became aware of World War II, with your

husband's involvement as a professor, with these students.

Does it contrast at all to your Stanford experience, in terms of the war?

Bark:

My Stanford experience--as a student, you mean? I

wasn't--we weren't aware of what was going on in Europe, at

least I wasn't and my friends, as I think I said before,

althouogh surely Hitler was well on his way in the 30s and

people who really kept in touch with world affairs must have

been very much alarmed and must have anticipated as we did

not. I didn't really became concerned about the war or a war

until 1937, when I came to my job, because it was then that I

encountered the horrors of the Spanish War and the Abraham

Lincoln Brigade and Ernest Hemmingway and all of the people

25

who went over there to fight for the Republican side.

O'Donohue:

Was that through the History Department?

Bark:

That was because Professor Max Savell, a very well-known

man, then and afterwards, was married to a Spanish woman who

was actually the daughter of a Spanish general. I don't know

what his position was, but X know what hers was. She was very

much concerned and upset. Max Savell spearheaded fundraising

for the Spanish cause at Stanford. There was a very warm

response to this, and of course, a great deal of talk and

discussion and lectures about it. Since that was followed so

soon thereafter by the breaking out of the horrors of the war

in Europe and the various things that preceded it, we were all

very much aware of those. From then on, the ineptitude of the

British handling of....[phone interrupts conversation]

O'Donohue:

Beyond knowing students who had this situation to go

back to in Germany, was your husband involved in the war at all?

Bark:

When we went to Lawrence, that was 1940 and we were not yet in the war. But very shortly after, we did became involved. He and a colleague went down to Madison to

investigate the possibilities of getting into some form of the service, the military service. However, at that time, already

had in mind setting up a series of what they called B12

programs in universities and colleges, which were to provide

advanced education for young men who had already done their

duty and were out of the war. It may have applied only to the

Navy, I'm not sure, but at least the B12 program which came to Lawrence was a Navy program. The people to whom he had

applied for active service said it was more desireable that he

teach in the B12 program. The interesting thing about it was

that he taught American History, which, of course, he had

studied, but never expected to teach. It was an experience

for him which he enjoyed very much, teaching American

History. It was interesting, too, that the Naval students who

came to Lawrence, still dressed in their Navy garb. They all

lived in one dormitory and they used language, terminology for

their dormitory just as if they were on a ship. Ihey were in

charge of a Naval officer. Ihey were a very bright, interesting group of students.

O'Donohue:

It sounds like you were involved with students all the

time during your faculty wife years.

Bark:

Yes indeed.

O'Donohue:

Did you like that part?

Bark:

I loved it and at Lawrence it was especially fun in a

way, because it was such a small school with so much going on

and so many events in which it was obligatory that the faculty

participate. At Stanford, for instance, nobody obliged you to

do anything and you could take your pick.

O'Donohue:

Was that true when you were there? Do you feel that was

always true at Stanford?

Bark:

I'm speaking of the faculty participation. I think that

there's a great variation in the amount in which faculty

wished to participate in student activities.

O'Donohue:

And there was no coercion to do so?

Bark:

No, I don't think so. It's too big.

O'Donohue:

What was it like for you to be separated from your

27

husband when he went in the B12.

Bark:

It was painful. I minded very much, but I was almost in

the bosom of my family in Lawrence, especially with these

marvelous people in whose house we lived.

O'Donohue:

But you had two young children.

Bark:

That was a boon, as a matter of fact, because if ever

anything happened and I was worried about one of the children,

this dear doctor would put on his white jacket and his

stethoscope and run upstairs to see whether it was something I

really needed to be worried about and should call a doctor.

Also my mother came and spent four weeks with me, which was

very nice. Bill came home for Christmas and I went to Yale

for ten days in the spring, which was, of course, a marvelous

experience, because I never had seen Yale and it was

beautiful.

O'Donohue:

Was that your first time going to the East Coast?

Bark:

No, I had neglected to mention along the way that the

second summer of our marriage we spent in Ithaca because my

husband went back to do some research and we had a beautiful,

but absolutely horrible summer as far as I was concerned,

because I found the heat just absolutely devastating. But

it's a beautiful place and there was much to do and it was a

lovely summer. We went up to Maine in the process.

O'Donohue:

Cornell had been where he got his PhD.

Bark:

Yes, and he had good friends there among the faculty and

even some fellow PhD people who were around there, so it was

great fun.

O'Donohue:

When did you come back to Stanford?

Bark:

We didn't come back to Stanford until 1947 because we

spent two years at the University of Chicago. After the Yale

experience, Bill was offered two or three opportunities to go

elsewhere. By this time Nate Pusey was President of Lawrence

and I had became well-acquainted with them in the year Bill

was at Yale. His wife became the godmother to our older son.

[END OF TAPE]

OIA C]ftQ5

5|lji>l' MCle Pr

SOHP Interview: Eleanor Bark with Joanne O'Donohue Interview 2: May 1, 1987

O'Donohue:

Mrs. Bark, the last time we talked we did such a little

bit on the impact of the Depression at Stanford when you

were there as a student, I wonder if you would like to say any more about that?

Bark:

Yes, I think so, because I don't believe I mentioned or

gave enough attention to the general situation at the

University. The financial situation of the University, of

course, was almost perilous at that time and they had to

take many strong measures to account for the drop in

tuitions, which resulted in the drop in enrollment, which

was caused by the financial straits the families found

themselves in. The University went to great lengths to try

to help students. I know I mentioned their instituting

hashing for women students for the first time, but also, one could take out a tuition note if you had a budget that

showed that you weren't able to make ends meet; you simply

didn't pay your tuition and it was a future loan to be repaid to the university.

There were many devices of that sort which the

university initiated to help students. The other thing was

that the faculty salaries were all cut by 10%. In fact, in

1947 when my husband first began to teach at Stanford as an

instructor, he was getting $1800 a year less 5% because by

that time they had restored 5% of the salaries.

The atmosphere was very friendly at Stanford and I don't

think very many people felt distressed because they weren't financially very well off--there were so many of them they consoled each other and the unviersity was very much aware of this and President Wilbur at the time said that he believed that there was a new spirit that was very good for Stanford and for all the people involved, because they were required to make sacrifices--I think that's possibly what he had in mind. They were required to think about what was important more than they in times when money was freer and people were not required to think much about it. There was one other thing that didn't have to do with the stringencies of the Depression but something that I wanted to go back to because it was part of my days at Stanford at that time, that I forgot to mention before and that was that there was a women's debate team at that time, in fact there was great interest in debate all those years, which is not so in our day at all. There were two rather significant debate topics that the women debate team considered. One of them was: Resolved that present alimony laws are unfair to men. 0: That was ahead of its time. B: And the second was: Resolved that the United States should enact legislation providing socialized medical services. Which must have upset the medical school, because we had in those days, as we do now, a very strong medical school and many people in the faculty thought that far too much of the university budget was allocated to the medical school and I'm inclined to think that it probably was

3
thought that it was felt, particularly by the people I knew. One other thing I wanted to say was that it was easy to borrow from the university and of course the tuition note was part of it, but it was painful too, because it would mean that you were going to wind up with a debt and that was something that really hung over me because I did wind up with a debt. 0: We're talking new about your years as an undergraduate up until 1934-35. Something else that occured in the Depression in 1933 was the 500 rule change and you mentioned last time that had a dramatic effect. Could you say a little more about that? B: Yes, its first dramatic effect, I suppose, was the appearance on the campus, because this initial change occured in May of 1933 and a year later the number of women had doubled. So that the discomfort and at the same time the social enthusiam that the 500 felt when they arrived as freshman with all these men around them, certainly changed. But it caused some troubles too, mainly in housing. There simply was no housing for women at Stanford except for Roble Hall, which originally was supposed to have held about maybe 200 women and it was certainly holding close to twice that many, probably. So the lengths to which the university had to go were really grotesque. They put women in the Union building, which was a very substantial building which is now called the Old Union. It had never been used for housing. They put them in three old wooden structures on the campus.

they rented houses for them, they even fanned some of them out to private places downtown at the Harper School, which was a prep school. Eventually there were so many women students that they ousted the men from Branner Hall, which had been built for them many years before. Why was the rule changed? How was it explained to you as students? It was explained that the ratio, which was a term ·ngevj constantly, of men to women was really out of line--the men had always complained about this, as matter of fact, it was so difficult to get a date. That was, of course, a very minor consideration. However, it was partly a need for more tuition, which was an anti-Depression weapon, so to speak. Then, the problem was how to do this because Mrs. Stanford had originally set the limit at 500 women. I think I may have referred to this earlier. You did say that the change had a big effect and you did mention how nice it was to come to campus and find all those men, but I don't recall your saying anything like that. Well, this was a legal matter. It was written into the original protocols of the university, the figure. It was determined by the Board of Trustees and by legal advice that what Mrs. Stanford had in mind was a proportion, that she did not want the women to out-man the men, so to speak, in numbers. When they reached 500, which they did before her death, she was appalled. She thought it was going to go on and on and there would be more women than men. It was

really astonishing to the university, really, about how many women came right away. The word got around and women, I guess, were passionate for higher education at that point.
And Stanford was one of the few universities to accept women as openly as they did.
I suppose so. It certainly was one of the few universities on the west coast. And of course in those days, almost the students who came to Stanford were from the west coast. It was a long time before the easterners or even middle-westerners ventured out here in large numbers.
Were there many in your class, do you remember, from other states?
Well, in my corridor, there was a girl from Alaska, there were several from the middle-west, one from Chicago, there was a Japanese girl --she was not from Japan, she was Japanese American. There were several from Honolulu; in fact, in those days at Stanford you never spoke of Hawaii you always spoke of the Islands, because there were so many Hawaiian-home students around there that we picked up their own terms of reference, and some other things too, such as the attempt to go barefoot from time to time. What other places? Stanford had some ties from the beginning to other parts, the southwest, to New York and Connecticut. I think we had quite a few from the urban areas.
But still primarily westerners, Californians. Was any of the housing alleviated by sorority life?
No, because sororities had already had a very large

portion of the students housed there. There were nine sororities and they were crowded. They, however, were a problem, as far as the administration was concerned and more of a problem as the women increased because more women wished to join and there was no room for them in the sorority houses. The Dean of Women, who herself had been a sorority women in her graduate years at the University of Michigan, did not approve of sororities, although she never made any overt attempts to have them abolished. But she felt there was a lack of democracy in the institution. This troubled her greatly. There were, of course, instances of girls being disappointed--not tragically so, perhaps, but very seriously so. The thought was raised we should have more sororities and that would take care of the problem, but as it turned out, when they began to examine it they realized that the pressure for entrance to sororities was limited not entirely, but somewhat, to pressure to join a certain group of the sororities, four or five of them, and that the others always had a bit of a struggle to fill their quotas. It was thought that if other sororities were brought in which were not familiar to the campus or at least to the region, they would not be successful--why would they be any more successful than the four that had been there for years? And therefore, that was a bad idea, in addition to perpetuating a system which many people disapproved of.
It was odd, but the four sororities who had been at Stanford the longest were the ones which attracted the most

rushees and other sororities had as many opportunities as they did, but it was one of those psychological things, I guess. Those particular groups had a strong following in southern California and do to this day, so that when girls came up from southern California they were looking for their own type, as far as that was concerned.
So some of these factors led to the fact that they were banished from campus some years later.
They did indeed, and that was an entirely student project, you might say. There were groups of students among the women who wanted to abolish sororities. There was another group which wanted to keep them. There was a group of alumnae who came in and wanted to keep them and a group of alumnae who wanted to abolish them. There was another group which consisted of the senior sponsors in the women's dormitories. By the time there were 1500 women--I don't know how many there were by 1942, but there may have been more than that, because even more came in at the beginning of the war when men were scarce--at any rate, the sponsors were very strong in their opposition to sororities. All of these groups together appeared before the Board of Trustees to consider this issue and as a consequence, after a vote was taken of the whole student women it turned out to be in favor of abolishing sororities, the Trustees elected to do so. So it was no surprise and it was not a fiat from on high, vtfiich many people thought it was, outside.
Yes, that's interesting. It goes along with Stanford's

profile of having many things initiated by students, many projects.
Are there any other things that you would like to talk about regarding your student days before we move on to where we were last time in talking about your experiences as a faculty wife?
Just one other thing I'd like to mention which is really apropos of the Depression and that was the opportunity that I and maybe two dozen Stanford students had to work in the summers at Tuolomne Lodge. It was a beautiful place. We had a wonderful time and regarded ourselves as very fortunate and I think we were. In my own situation it had the extra advantage of introducing me to the mountains, which was quite new to me, and which has become a lifelong pleasure. Now, one of my sons has a house on lake, which I never expected would happen.
That's wonderful, so you get to go back to a favorite place.
It's so nice that he wanted to. Yes, that's lovely. Did you have a very long experience on the staff at Stanford before your marriage? We last time about how you happened to meet your husband when he played that trick on you when you were secretary to the department. No. I met him after I had been out of college two years, which I had spent in San Francisco. When I graduated it was in December, 1934 and I needed to have a jcb; in fact

w family in southern California had told me that if couldn't get a jcb in six weeks after I graduated I really must come home. They didn't think it would be safe otherwise. So I first worked for the SERA, Social Service arm of the government. I worked in San Jose for six weeks as a social worker. They were desperate for people in those days and they would take anybody with an AB who seemed to have the personal qualifications and personality. I hated it because it was a painful thing to be involved with. There were mostly Mexicans living there in trailers and so on. At any rate, I was offered a permanent job for six weeks. In the meantime I had applied to the Emporium as well as other places for a job in the city and I got one. I was in the trainee program in personnel work, which was a very interesting job. I probably would have stayed there indefinitely if I hadn't had the surprise offer to come down to Stanford about two years later. So I didn't work on the staff--to answer your question a long way around--until I came down in 1937 and met my husband quickly. And that was, as I think you said earlier, you were married eight months later, so you were just in that position for that long. You told me in your last conversation some of your conversations when you were at Lawrence during the war when your husband taught there in the B12 program and subsequently went for a year at Yale leaving you behind with the little boys. Tell me something

about your experience as a parent and the kind of education you wanted your boys to have.
As parents, we were anxious for them to enjoy many aspects--we were interested in reading to them, particularly interested, I would say, in developing a taste for literature in them. We read to them a great deal. We often read poetry to them, some of which was over their heads, but they had a certain abiding recollection of it as a pleasure. We wanted them to have outdoor experiences, in fact, I guess we wanted to have them have the kind of learning that was available at Stanford and actually would have been available at Lawrence, had we stayed there. But it certainly was hard to come by if one lived in Chicago.
And that's where you went after his year at Yale? That's right, so that in Chicago it was hard to do the things that we wanted to do with them, and that was partly because of the climate, it was also partly due to the fact that we came there at the end of the war when housing was very difficult and we had an apartment which was as desireable as I could find, but after our beautiful place on the banks of the Fox river, it was a terrible comedown. There were things in Chicago that were marvelous for young children if you had the time and the ease of getting to them, such as zoos and museums, which we enjoyed very much and the lake. But my recollections of the lake are not happy ones because the summers were so frightful. The second summer was the hottest Chicago summer in 50 years.

We lived not very far from the lake but by the time we took the little boys up to the lake and let them get cooled off and then by the time we got back to the apartment we might well just have not gone. However, there was a good public school near us and our older boy went to kindergarten there. We also joined a church in Chicago, which we had never done before. That was a resource that we enjoyed.
How long were you there? Just three years. And did you come to Stanford from Chicago? Yes. I think we certainly could have stayed longer, but there were a few other aspects of Chicago that were distressing, that had a good deal of influence on our coming back. There was a lot of crime. A terrible mrm-nj^r had occured in our neighborhood and it had been ccmmited by a University of Chicago student, as a matter of fact. The atmosphere in Chicago, perhaps in any great city at that time, about fear of the atomic bomb and the consequences of its discovery, was very oppressive to me. I remember thinking that Chicago was one of the prime targets--it could be, and I wanted to get out of Chicago. This was really an emotional reaction which I sometimes am surprised to think that I had. But I know I did because I wrote a letter to my mother about it and I have the letter. It was probably not unique to you; surely there were others in your peer group feeling the same fears. No doubt there were. Of course, Chicago was where they

split the atom. Chicago, however, in other respects, was very pleasant. We were welcomed very warmly. We already had a friend there who some years later became the Chancellor of the University of Chicago, so we met people. It was surprising to me to be in a great city and in a very large institution and to be received so warmly. And there were many things to do there for the faculty wives that were interesting too. I joined a play group and things of that sort. But there was always the lure of California.
It had never seemed so strong when we were in Appleton, but that second summer in Chicago when we were visited by various Stanford dignitaries going through town and questioned about whether Bill would like to come back to Stanford, we didn't say yes right away, but pretty soon.
He shared your feeling about wanting to come back? He did, although Chicago was very generous to him and very anxious to keep him. I have sometimes thought that he wouldn't have come if it hadn't been for me and maybe I shouldn't have been so persuasive. Do you think either of you regretted it? Not really, although there were some opportunities there that were different from those at Stanford, professionally. So, that's water under the bridge. When did you come back and what was it like to come back to the campus? Was it different from the campus you had left? Oh, quite. We came back in the autumn--the first of

September we left Chicago in 1947. It was a long trip. We drove and a friend of ours who had no children had persuaded us to camp on the way west and we had never done any camping, so it was a trip that was fraught with difficulties. I had to buy camping equipment at a war surplus store and things leaked. We went west by Appleton to see our old friends to say goodbye forever and we camped on the lawn of'this wonderful old house to try out our tent that night. We had two of them. They were two-man mountain tents. These had been developed for mountaineering by the soldiers. I recently saw a TV program that showed them in those very tents in the Alps. They had a long vestibule and we didn't want to buy a whole lot of camping equipment because we might never use it again, so it was very makeshift. These two little boys had to crawl into there every night and of course they had to get out in the middle of the night. The little one, who was three would come out every morning and say, "Is this California?" Well, that's beside the point.
Anyway, we made a long circuitous trip and it was very pleasant, on the whole and a marvelous experience. When we got back to Stanford, Stanford had the same housing crunch that had been a cross to bear in Chicago, but the solution was much pleasanter because there was out across from Ladera on Alpine Road an old private school that was on Stanford property and which had recently been vacated. It was being made available as housing to young faculty. We had a friend

who spoke for us so we were able to go and live there We lived in a house that had been the library of the school. In order to make it into two apartments they had arbitrarily cut it in two so that one side had the front door and the other side, which we got, was approached by way of one of the bedrooms. So it was rather awkward. But it was also a pretty building and we were surrounded by green fields, nad trees, animals and birds, and it was ecstatic. Quite a change. Icvely, very nice. We lived there for two years and then the Frenchman's house at Stanford, which is an historic building and the first house that was occupied by President Jordan when the university opened, became available for rent. We had been married in it. That's what made me a historian, living there. Friends of ours had lived there at that time and since it was still almost Depression, at least, and we were feeling anti-clerical at the time, we decided [on being married in the Frenchman's house]. That was and is a house of 11 rooms with a huge, huge kitchen, a long 65' hall from the bedroom up to the livingroom and not a paradise as far as housekeeping was concerned. But a beautiful area with horses being kept on the next hill. On Escondido Road. It's on all of the early maps as the house of an expatriate Frenchman who came here in 1875. And that was Peter Coutts. That's right. So of course we learned all about the house and as time went on, gave amateur lectures to all the

15
students who came to see us there. Immediately Stanford had changed in very many ways.
Some buildings had been put up during the war that were new to us. Of course, our situations were, because my husband came back as chairman of the course in which he had been an instructor seven years before. That gave us a different kind of approach to living as faculty people. He had a staff of 12 to 14 instructors and they had meetings constantly --weekly--to discuss the course. This was a remarkable course, as I mentioned earlier and all freshmen had to take it. The staff were an interesting group of young men and women. One of the things we did was a lot of entertaining in those days. We entertained the staff as couples and there was a group of the women who also met from time to time and we entertained a bit with students. In addition to being chairman of this course, Bill taught a section for the entire time he was chairman, which was for 13 years. He taught one course in the middle ages, and he had an assistant in the administrative work. He taught more of his own speciality. The university was still quite informal and very friendly, I would say. I got involved in the faculty women's club right away and three years after we had moved into Escondito College I was president of the club.
We had a lot of activities which involved faculty wives and most of them were not working in those days. That has changed, as you know, dramatically. There was a newcomers

group which I had a special interest in, having been newcomer in two places....END OF SIDE ONE
BEGINNING OF SIDE TWO

6fVRKQ6 on 37V Q%'

w

BARK, side 2

O'Donohue:

You were talking about the newcomers club, was that

strictly confined to Stanford caitpus?

Bark:

Yes, and it was very different from the newcomers club

new, too, because most of the people expected, or hoped to

stay on the Stanford campus and so they took a deep interest

in the university and developed a strong loyalty. Nowadays,

the newcomers group is composed chiefly of people who are

here as visitors--their husbands are here for a year or six

months and they come from all over the world. Partly that's

because there is not a place, as there was in those days, for

young people to come out on the faculty. It is harder to get

O'Donohue: Bark:

a place now. It's a difficult profession to go into now. But there is still a newcomers club? And there are still some people in there who come with

the expectation to be here long term.

O'Donohue: Bark:

When you came here your boys were about five and three? And they, the older boy, of course wanted to go to

kindergarten at the canpus school, which is part of the Palo

Alto School system. The younger boy went into a play group

in Palo Alto which was set up by the school system also, and

run by a very remarkable teacher who for years and years did

this sort of thing. The parents--at least the mothers--were

involved in it. We went to this with our children and while

our children took naps we discussed what had gone on in the

morning and how Jared had gotten along with Dennis and this

kind of thing and who had hit whom and why it was done. This

was very useful, of course, in bringing up children, the most

useful thing I:ve ever encountered. Jared, who is actually

my younger son, was in this group for two years until he was

old enough to go to kindergarten. We kept very voluminous

notes at this organization and I kept them all and I gave

then to him five years ago. He new has two little boys of

his own. I'm sure he finds them useful.

01Donohue:

I wonder if he sees any parallels? at was rather unusual

to be doing, wasn't it, it was something like a little

informal study in education.

Bark:

It was indeed. Well, the woman who taught it, who just

died this last year in her 80s, had been trained as a

psychologist and a teacher--she had taught for years in

elementary school and had children of her own. She had

actually studied in the Jungian institute in Zurich for a

year. This group evolved after our children left it, into a

group for the mothers, who discussed family problems with

this woman. If anything was ever brought up that she thought

she couldn't handle, she discussed it with a very well-known

psychiatrist in San Francisco and brought back their wisdom

the next time we met. It was a fascinating experience and

the most interesting thing about it to me was in thinking

back, I never knew any of those women intimately--I can't

remember their names, except for one or two and I wouldn't

know them if I saw them on the street. And yet we discussed

really serious problems in some cases, that would have been

difficult to discuss with other people and probably useless

to discuss with people you knew well.

So it was a kind of therapeutic session that was valuable for

all of us.

O'Donohue:

I should think so, it sounds like the modern idea of the

support group.

Bark:

Exactly. It was before its time, I think. This was in

the early 50s, actually it began in 1947 when I first put

Jared in the school and it was a generous and useful thing

for the city of Palo Alto educational funds to support. Of

course, we were welcome because we were part of the Palo Alto

School District, although we lived at Stanford.

O'Donohue:

Were there any professionals taking notes on these

things, other than those you mentioned?

Bark:

No, we never had anybody. Once in a while a father who

was free would come. It really was fun.

O'Donohue:

I'll bet.

Bark:

After that, of course, both the boys went to elementary

school and we did a lot of outdoor things--picnics and we

went to the beach a lot. When they were a little older we

startaed taking them to the city, to the zoo and the museums

and there were lots of activities on the campus that was

interesting to them. They could swim--they learned to swim

in Stanford's pool. They learned a little to box because as

they got older my husband thought it would be a good idea to

learn about how to defend themselves. He had a friend who

was a boxing coach so he undertook to give them training. We

were not very strong for competitive sports. I don't mean we

were opposed to competition, but it was so demanding of the

parent. You were always having to spend a lot of time going

here and there and building your life around the team sports,

and so our boys never did as much as some others, although

one of them wrestled for a while in high school and played

both football and baseball and he was pretty good at both of

them. But they never played in high school, except for the older boy, vftio played water polo, which, of course, is a very

strenuous sport indeed and full of rough stuff too. I found it was appalling to watch.

O'Donohue:

But family life sounds like it was pretty comfortable and

very supportive on the campus.

Bark:

CSh, yes, I think it was. Yes, the faculty had many

priviledges and also there were many events to go to that

were fun. The children were allowed to sit free in the end

zone at football games, except for the ones that were sold

out. There were musical events, opera and things like

interesting speakers. I remember that we took the boys to hear Robert Frost among other people, when they were older,

and to some opera. And they learned instruments in the Palo

Alto School too, although neither of our boys took very much to music.

O'Donohue:

Did you see them following in your footsteps or in your

husband:s footsteps? Did you try grooming them towards an academic life?

Bark:

Not at all. In fact there were two things that were

quite a blow to me. I thought our older son was going to be some kind of a geologist. He was alwa

Bark:

The other thing was that the other boy, much to our

astonishment, turned out to be a historian.

O'Donohue:

And he is at Stanford now.

Bark:

He is a senior fellow at the Hoover Institution. He got

a FhD in German history and politics in Berlin after

finishing his AB at Stanford.

O'Donohue:

Did both the boys attend Stanford?

Bark:

Yes. Dennis had a year at a small college in the

middle-west and then he transfered but Jed went all the way

through.

O'Donohue:

So Jed is the artist and Dennis is the historian. So he

did follow in his father's footsteps.

Bark:

He did. Jed, on the other hand, is also a very

successful businessman in New York, which was an astonishment

to us.

O'Donohue:

And you stayed involved in a lot of the children's

activities. Was there a point at which you went to work

yourself?

Bark:

Yes, I went to work in 1956 and this always interests me

because I think of it in terms of re-entering, as women are

talking about it nowadays, and how I made my re-entry, and my

means of networking. I wanted to get a job at that point, a

half-time job, and I took a civil service examination. I

couldnt't think of any way to get into anything right away.

I qualified very quickly. It didn't take them very long. I

was offered a job in employment, which I felt was the only

area in which I could really claim experience that was

viable. I worked, then, for the California State Enployment

office in Palo Alto on a half-time, probationary basis. At the same time, I had been offered--a little before--a job as the Palo Alto city historian, partly, I think, because I lived in the Frenchman's House and had an interest in local history. An elderly man who had been informally the city historian for years had died and they wanted someone to come in and go over his materials, which involved a filing system known only to him. This was in the basement of the Palo Alto Library. In the course of the next three years, I worked for the Palo Alto city as Palo Alto city historian and in the employment office, at the same time. At the end of that time, or shortly before that, I was offered a permanent job. I had long before been offered a permanent job in the employment office, but decided not to take it. The historian's job I deserted when I was offered a job at Stanford. The historian's job was a great joy, and I had a lot of fun talking to groups and showing pictures and helping people who came in with projects on the newspaper or any organization that wanted to know what its beginnings in Palo Alto were. I put on exhibits and really loved it. I think for me had it begun earlier and had I been in a position where I had enough training, I could have done that as a career, that kind of thing. Once upon a time later, I was offered a similar job at Stanford and if I had taken that it would have developed into something by now because, of course, nowadays, with permanent archivists and their big staff and wonderful facilities and so on. But that's beside the point too, I guess.

0: Well, not really, I think it's an intersting evolutionary point. What lured you to the job at Stanford and away from this Palo Alto Historical job.
B: The Palo Alto Historical job would never have developed into anything because they had no money and it was just a function of the library, really, and that's what it became after I left it. It is now housed in the big library and the man who is the city historian now does exactly what I did. He works three afternoons a week, so there was no future. But at Stanford, the job I was offered was as secretary for graduate awards in the scholarship office, as it was then called, so that I would be working for the scholarship office, but actually reporting to the Dean of Graduate Division. My entry into the job situation at the age of 46 was made so much easier by the fact that I knew the incumbent in the job and she was an old friend who was leaving her job because her husband had just been appointed President of Mills College. I also knew the woman who handled the scholarships for undergraduates, whom I mentioned earlier in this interview. So it was a happy place to be. I worked for Dean Albert Bocker, who later went to UC Berkeley and to New York in very important jobs. In New York he is the head of the New York City College. Then I worked for another dean vtfio came in, Virgil Whitaker, who was, as it happened, an old friend. He had been a classmate of my husband's at Stanford. Then, when he retired, I worked for a third dean, professor Lincoln Moses, a statistician, whom I had never
know at all, ntil I retired when I was a little over 60 in 1970.

When you were doing this new work at Stanford, was this on a half-time or a full-time basis.
No, it was not on half-time basis. In order, really to get the job, I had to agree to full-time. At the same time, we had just started to build a house and it was a rather frantic time for us. But I did want the job and I agreed. I worked full-time until after we got the house built and then I had a real hold on the job--I mean I felt I was accomplished enough in doing what I was doing so that I could work 3/4 time when they would let me. First they let me reduce by one hour and then about a year later it became 3/4 time and remained so until I retired.
Did you enjoy being part of Stanford's staff again? I loved it, oh yes, there was not question about that. The dean was an interesting man and a very good man to work for. He gave me lots of responsibility and what I did was to handle the records and applications for all graduate students except the graduate school of business and law and medicine. I kept track of the amounts of money that were available for the departments to spend. Each year there would be an allocation of university general funds and then a record of the money available in restricted funds given to me and I would discuss them with the dean and he would make the decisions about the general funds. Then I would report to the departments what they had to spend for the ensuing year. Of course, we kept records of all the applications for all of the departments and sorted them and kept a file and sent them to the departments.

There was a great deal of talk back and forth between the scholarship chairman of the department and the head of the department, frequently, and of course, I worked in a big office--well, at that time I worked in a rather small office in the Registrar's office so that students didn't flock in there as much as they did later. Later on we moved across the Quad into larger quarters in the Old Union and there was a lot going on because all of the undergraduate scholarship programs were handled there in this very big office. But anyhow, there was lots of student contact, lots of foreign students coming there looking for money. Also we had at that time, by 1964, when I began to work with Virgil Whitaker, we had enormous new developments. Stanford had something called the PACE program, which raised a great deal of money and the fund was over-subscribed, as a matter of fact. The Flood foundation had offered a very generous fellowship plan in the humanities and social sciences for PhDs, a four year support plan for each student with good stipends and full tuition. We had to have matching funds for it and we achieved it with the PACE program. So that program began and it was really a joy to have that to deal with, because we had so much to offer that we were able to attract a great many important young people--important in their future lives.
The other thing was that the government was providing great sums of money for graduate fellowships in the sciences and we had very important programs for a long, long time. They were mostly outright gift programs like the Ford Foundation fellowships, although they did not guarantee support

for four years, it had to be re-applied for. But they did not require any work. Then there was another program for research assistants, which were also offered to incoming students as financial support for their graduate work. And Stanford, of course, then as now, was able in the sciences to attract the very best. We administered that program, that is, we handled the paperwork in our office and we informed the departments what were their applications and prepared materials that had to be sent into Washington on these students. We dealt with Washington, which was a terrible headache. We dealt with the National Institutes of Health, the whole scientific establishment in the education agencies in Washington.
So you're talking roughly between about 1956, 57 and 1960 to 65. How long did you stay in that position? What year did you retire?
I retired in 1970. I was a little over 60, so I worked there for 13 years. I really enjoyed it all the time except that toward the end it was less satisfying to me because we were in not so rich--the Ford Foundation grant was gone and the government was beginning to cut down on funds in 1970 and we were really scrabbling around for graduate funds. It seemed to me that I was spending most of my time preparing statistics to prove what we needed or how much we deserved what we needed. That was never a field in which I had any training and I found it arduous.
Whereas earlier, you had all these gifts coming in and all these projects, and it was probably very exciting

to match the money with the students who needed it. Exactly. And I didn't do the matching. The matching was
done in the department. On the other hand, I had lots to do with the students. In those days we used to, the whole office went to the basketball pavillion where we did registration and then later to Maples and we handed out the checks on the day. That was a wild scene. But it was fun too, for us. It was fun to deal with these students and to help them when they had troubles. Then I did have the option, often, to refer students who came in to talk me about their problems to people in the departments who could help them.
I had a real advantage in this job, the fact that I had been a Stanford student and I knew hew tough it was, as far as scholarships were concerned, and also that I knew lots of faculty and in many of these departments, they were old friends that I could deal with, talk with, or refer students to. The reason I quit in 1970 was because my husband had the third opportunity to teach in one of the foreign campuses. I had six months leave twice from my job in order to go with him to Florence and I did not have the courage to ask for another leave. I wanted to study German before we left because he was going to the German campus.
Hew many overseas campuses did you visit? Just the two. We visited some, actually. We went to visit the French campus but only the German campus and the Florence campus were the ones at which we stayed. What years were you on the German campus?

We were there in 1971. The stint which one served in those days was almost always two quarters, six months. We went either to Fall and Winter or Spring and Summer. It is much more flexible now. Some of the faculty went for three months in those days, but not very many, because they did want the continuity.
What about Florence? Was that earlier? Yes. We went to Florence in 1962, that was only three years after I had came to work in this job, so I felt it was quite generous of them to let me go. What about your boys? Where were they in school? In 1962 Jed was just graduating from High School--he graduated that spring vftiile we were in Florence. His brother had finished two years of college. So they stayed at Stanford when you went? No. Jed stayed at Stanford in the spring. They both came to Florence in the summer and stayed there part of the time and traveled part of the time with the students or with other friends. Then we went again in 1968 and that time Jed was in New York, out of college and he was working. Dennis was in Berlin working for his PhD. The Florence experience was especially attractive because this was only the fourth group of Stanford students who had come to Florence. It was very early in the program, so it was all very fresh to everybody. It was wonderful, the things that we did with the students. We loved being with the students in this intimate relationship. There were about 60 students, I think. They

all lived in a 17th century villa which had been adapted for this kind of living by the religious order which owned it. I would say this was the beginning of the germ, perhaps, for housing in which both men and women lived together. Co-ed housing. The thing was that the university discovered that this worked very well. It was like a family, really. It was very interesting to see that often they went on weekend trips and three or four girls would go off with one boy who wanted to go on that particular excursion and the boys had a real sense of responsibility about these girls. There was a lot of dating, but there was a lot of non-dating. There were two or three romances, that turned out to be important. But it was an occasion for close friendship and that has been the case in many of the co-ed dorms.
Do you think it was a forerunner to having faculty live in the dorms, as they do now, or was that always done? Was there anything like that when you were a student?
No, there wasn't, but I think that it had begun before the foreign cairpuses.
It sounds as though you really enjoyed that overseas campus experience and the closeness with students.
Yes, it was fun. I even went out on trips by myself with some of the girl students, when we were in Florence, once to Ravenna, where I really acted as a chaperone, to my surprise, because it is a city that doesn't see very many six foot American girls with long blonde hair and purple capes, which one of these girls was. And we were followed by packs of beys. I used all my authority and what Italian I possessed

to discourage them. However, we enjoyed the trips with the students. They were very well-run. We thought that the overseas people did a marvelous job. We went to Venice with them on a study tour. We went to Greece--and we did this twice. We went to Rome with them also, of course, and shorter trips. The students, I think, got a great deal out of it. Many of them did not get as much as they might have because they were not diligent enough to be using the language. Others became intiinate with the Italian families and it changed the course of their studies in and it changed the course of their study in future years. Same of them had relatives in Italy whom they visited. One young man had a family way, way up in the northern Appenines whom he had never met and it certainly made a marvelous experience for him. He did a lot of work on the Italians when he returned. And of course, it helped the Italian department. These European centers were very important to the language departments, which is one reason why the language departments are very much upset now with dome of the changes that are being suggested. 0: How do you feel abouat same of those changes? B: I think they are unfortunate. I think that all of the centers have built up cores of language teachers, for instance, who are very good and very familiar with the Italian center. The suggestion ohas been made by the head of the committee on--or the director of overseas centers, who is a man from the law school, a very much-traveled man, apparently a very fine linguist, I don't know him at all, but

he has suggested that the students in the Italian center go to Italy prepared to do graduate work in an Italian university, which is really impossible, it's a dream. If they don't have enough Italian, they should go to Berlitz in Florence and pick it up. in other words, he has made some really unworkablke and I think absurd suggestions. I don't mind being on the record on that. Fifty years from now we'll see what happens. As far as other suggestions he has made, he wants to make the work over there much more of a practical, not cultural--he's not nearly so much interested in cultural history as the founders of the programs were and see the necessity or use of it as much as they do. [END OF TAPE]
