
I: I’m interviewing Mary Schofield for the Stanford Oral History Project. [tape pauses twice] The
date is April 21st, 1987. [pauses and inaudible remarks as microphone is positioned]
MS: Father … [inaudible] My retirement … [inaudible, adjusting microphone] … this really was
very …
I: I should tell you we have in our biographical file this little article that was from the Times
Tribune; it gave me a little bit of background.
MS: There are several articles in various papers, I had one in the Chronicle under California
Living; I’ve got some copies of that.
I: So you grew up in Palo Alto; no?
MS: No, not really. My parents met in Indiana, and the reason they came to Stanford was
because – don’t worry about that. Jordan was president of Indiana University, and he came
here to be the first president of Stanford, and my mother attended a year at the University of
Indiana. And so my father wanted to get started in the West, so when Dr. Jordan was elected
president of Stanford, they decided to move and come out here. So my mother stayed back in
Indiana and supported him at Stanford for a year while he got his -- it wasn’t a Masters, but he
got his teaching certificate for California. And then …
I: What subject did he teach in?
MS: In Latin and English. [phone rings]
I: Oops! [tape stops] … to get his teaching credential. Did he teach at Stanford?
MS: No. He organized the first high school in Lassen County at Susanville, and was there for
seven years. Is this on now?
I: We’ll watch this little light; that tells us.
MS: And my mother came out and went up there. She’d always lived in the Middle West; she’d
never seen the mountains, so she came across through the Rockies, moved from the very flat
land in the Middle West to the high Sierras.
I: Quite a change. Did you have brothers and sisters?
MS: No.
1

I: Did you come out then, to Susanville?
MS: Well, I didn’t come out to Susanville, because I wasn’t born. [laughs] I wasn’t born for
seven years after they were married. And my mother came down to Palo Alto to have me
because she wanted to get the best care, and as luck would have it, I was injured at birth, so my
right side has never been good; that’s why I am in a wheelchair now. I walked, though, for just
until a couple of years ago, but I can’t walk any more. And … let’s see …
I: What hospital were you born in? Were you born in a hospital?
MS: I was born in a little house that’s been torn down, right across the street from here.
I: On Channing?
MS: On Channing, and then my mother – when I was six weeks old, she took me by train to
Reno and then went across the mountains in an open horse stage, when I was six weeks old, to
Susanville.
I: May I ask in what year you were born?
MS: I was born in 1905, so I’m 82.
I: Congratulations.
MS: [laughs] And then -- she had graduated from a little college in Indiana, Franklin College,
graduated in music. When she wanted to – and attended the University of Indiana for a year
after that – but she wanted to get a really good degree, and so after I got older, and she could
handle things, she would bring me down to Palo Alto and we would take an apartment, and for
three months at a time, and then she would go to Stanford for three months, and that’s when
they had …
I: She was a special student then? How did they register her?
MS: No, she was one of the five hundred.
I: But she just went to school for three months at a time?
MS: Through the semester; they had a semester arrangement, and no tuition. [laughs]
I: And your father was still teaching in Susanville?
MS: He would be wherever he was, living in towns where he worked; he was in Susanville seven
years, and then Willits three years, then Sonora three years, and Lakeport three years, and then
he came and taught in San Francisco for the rest of his teaching time, mostly.
I: Now, when your mother was in school, they had a separate residence, then, during that time,
during that semester?
2

MS: Yes, he’d be up there; she didn’t worry about him. She let him cook for himself, or board,
she didn’t care.
I: Who cared for you while she was in school?
MS: Well, we got along together, and she would take me on Saturdays out to the old library; it
was on the front of the Quad.
I: Where the Business School is now?
MS: No, no, the Business School is in another building. It was made into the Law School, I think,
eventually. We’d go on the streetcar; Palo Alto had a streetcar, maybe you’ve …
I: I’ve seen photographs.
MS: So we’d go on the streetcar, for six cents, I think. And I sat there on a bench, right by her,
and I would take my paper dolls with me, play paper dolls while she was studying, and …
I: How old was she when she entered Stanford?
MS: Well, she was graduated in 1915, when she was 47, and I was ten.
I: How many years did she take to finish the courses?
MS: Well, I think every fall for …can’t remember; must have been, six, or eight, or nine years
she did that.
I: That seems, to me, very unusual. Was it then?
MS: No.
I: No?
MS: Well, I guess it was, really, a little unusual, in any time, for a woman to leave her husband
and let him fare for himself, by coming down. And then she’d go back and be there from
Christmas, after Christmas, until the end of the year.
I: Did she work on campus to earn a living?
MS: Oh, no. There was nothing ... no, it was cheap, because there was no tuition.
I: What was her course of study?
MS: Well, she studied history and education. I think she got her degree with Dr. [Elwood P.]
Cubberley in the Education Department. And Dr. Cubberley had come from Indiana, and that
was another drawing card. Have you ever heard of him?
I: I’ve heard of his building, and him, yes. Tell me why, what were some of the reasons why she
waited until that time to finish her education; was it family responsibilities, travel?
3

MS: Well, as I say, she graduated from college in music, at that little college in Indiana, and then
she got married and taught for a year or more, in Dunkirk, Indiana, and then went to University
of Indiana for a year, and that’s when my father courted her, by mail; I had all the letters at one
time.
I: Oh, really!
MS: But I don’t know what’s become of them now; they were very, very interesting.
I: What do you remember -- if you were around ten years old, what do you remember about
Stanford at that time?
MS: Oh, I remember a lot.
I: Tell me about the environment or the people that you met.
MS: We went out on the streetcar, as I said, and you see, there was no … the library hadn’t
been built yet, because they were … and then another thing that was very interesting, that on
the second floor of this building that was used for the library, was beautiful ironwork, all along.
And what became of that, I don’t know: all along the corridor on the second floor. And then
there were three beautiful stained glass windows: Thomas Aquinas, Moses the light of the w …
Moses receiving the law, and then Jesus the light of the world. And they were really beautiful.
And nobody to this day has been able to tell me what became of those. There’s your job for
you.
I: Do you remember these as a child, or later too?
MS: Later too.
I: So you played with your paper dolls. Did you have books that you read?
MS: Yes, I read books, but not very much there. What I remember now is the paper dolls.
I: Were they paper dolls that you made, or were they …
MS: No, I got them from the Ladies’ Home Journal.
I: Are they part of the collection that Stanford has?
MS: Yes, they’re in there.
I: I didn’t get a chance to go through Special Collections, but I looked up the listing that said
among the ephemera were paper dolls and some figurines, and quite a number of items; going
to be happy to look through those, maybe tomorrow.
MS: Well later on, several things there too that I gave that I’m sorry I did, because I guess
they’re not doing anything with them. I have some beautiful creches that I got in France later
on, when I traveled; they’re there somewhere.
4

I: Well, you should give a call someday; maybe we’ll take a day trip, and look at the materials
again.
MS: Yes, that would be nice, if you have time.
I: Sure, some day. So when your mother graduated, what were her prospects?
MS: Her prospects were to be a housewife; and every town that we were in, she wanted the
ladies to learn. And so she organized women’s clubs. And the club in Sonora was called the
Aronos Research Club that she organized, which is still going, was Sonora spelled backwards.
I: OK. I lived in Nebraska, and they had Knights of Aksarben, which was Nebraska spelled
backwards. [both laugh] Was your mother a suffragist?
MS: No, no. But she and my father were very opposed to liquor, so they worked hard for
Prohibition. And we got it, but then [inaudible]
I: What was your mother’s maiden name?
MS: Nickerson.
I: With a K?
MS: N-I-C-K.
I: And she was born …
MS: Born in 186- [hesitates] born in 1868, in Ohio.
I: What part of Ohio?
MS: Well, in western Ohio, near Cincinnati, or near Dayton, rather.
I: I lived in both places. I’m from Ohio.
MS: Oh, are you?
I: Was your father from …
MS: He was from Missouri.
I: “Show me.”
MS: And he … an interesting career, in a way: he was born when his father was sixty five years
old. And they had two more children after that. [chuckles]
I: Those were the days. [laughs]
MS: And so my father first kind of shifted around, because his mother was gone long before
that. And he just couldn’t – he set off to an aunt in New York, and after that, got out and got his
5

education, graduated from Ohio University, I think, at Athens and you may know where that is,
and they met at Dunkirk: my mother was teaching and my father had been elected principal at
this funny little town of Dunkirk, Indiana. Have you ever been there?
I: No, I don’t think so.
MS: Do you know much about Indiana?
I: No, I’m afraid I don’t.
MS: Well, it’s a pretty interesting state.
I: Was it still pretty ‘pioneering’, for them to come out West?
MS: Well, I think it was, kind of. I don’t know - you might check the records and see how many
students there were from far away, so called, from Stanford at that time. I don’t know how
many there were. There was a woman who was about my mother’s age, maybe not that old,
who had a little boy about my age, and her husband was a professor in the Psychology
Department at that time, a special branch of psychology – I’ve forgotten what it was now, but
anyway … Speaking of psychology, that was the one thing that made a permanent impression
on my mother’s life, on my life, and several people that I’ve been associated with later, was Dr.
Lillien Jane Martin, who’s – I’m sure that there are far many professors or full professors who
graduated from the university of someplace in Germany, PhD, I am sure there’s almost no
women professors. [MARTIN, LILLIEN JANE, Professor of Psychology, Emeritus. A.B., Vassar,
1880; M.L.A. and Hon. Ph.D., Bonn, 1913. At Stanford, 1899-1943. Emeritus, 1916.]
I: Was she a professor of your mother’s? Your mother studied under her?
MS: She studied a course that influenced her whole life, and mine too. It was called The
Psychology of the Fine Arts. And I don’t know whether they have anything like that in the
Psychology Department now, or not. But she had a set of pictures, and I loved the pictures …
I: I can see.
MS: So my mother told Professor Martin about me, and I look up to her. I think she should be
mentioned in the Centennial, because I think she was one of the, there just must have been no,
very few women professors.

I: I recall there was a researcher doing some work on her, and she designed some laboratory
space in the Psychology Department. I think we have some of her sketches. So she was very
forward looking.
MS: Well, anyway one time my mother took me one time to visit Dr. Martin, because she had
told her that I liked the pictures so much. I was about seven or eight. And I looked out there,
and Dr. Martin said, “Well, I understand you enjoy the pictures,” and I said “No, I don’t.”
6

I: Typical child. If I can go back, you mentioned the women’s club that your mother started
that’s still going.
MS: My mother started everywhere a women’s club. And instead of doing investigation on the
local scene, she determined to have them know about Shakespeare and all that. So it was
particularly unfortunate that she didn’t do something at Susanville, because there was an
Indian reservation right out of Susanville, and she had Indian help and an Indian washerwoman.
I had forty baskets that she collected in Susanville that the Indian women had made. But she
wanted the women to know all the classics, and the same at Sonora. And if she had only
realized it, when we were at Sonora, 1914 to 1917, there were many of the pioneers left that
were still living, and she could’ve interviewed them and have had a really interesting account.
But she was determined that they were to … but the club was very successful because it’s still
going.
I: Marvelous. Were you a charter member of the club?
MS: Oh, no, I was just a child.
I: Just for the women?
MS: But I went to the club; that’s when I learned … I was about nine at the first, the beginning
of Susan, Sonora. I learned all about Roberts Rules of Order and all that, how to conduct a
meeting, and so on.
I: You attended Stanford as an undergraduate, yourself?
MS: Yes, I started in the fall of 1922, graduated in 1929.
I: How had things changed since you were ten years old, and when you were … I presume you
were in your twenties when you started?
MS: Well, no, I wasn’t; I was seventeen.
I: Seventeen.
MS: The fall I started at Stanford I was seventeen.
I: Did you apply to other schools, or …?
MS: No, I was to be enrolled in Stanford since the time I was born. [laughs]
I: I can imagine. What was your preparation academically to go to Stanford? How were your
courses?
MS: I graduated from Palo Alto High School, and my mother was very much interested in
history, and so I majored in history. And I majored in Medieval Renaissance history. And doctor
– I guess he wasn’t a doctor because he only had a master’s degree – his name was Edward
7

Maslin Hulme, [HULME, EDWARD MASLIN, Professor of History, Emeritus. A.B., Stanford,1897;
A.M., Cornell, 1902. At Stanford, 1921-51. Emeritus, 1937]
And he was a wonderful teacher. And he gave a course called -- what was it called? – European
Thought and Culture – and I learned about a lot of important people that I hadn’t heard of
before, and learned to like Italian poetry and so on. He was really very, very good. We learned
Francis Thompson’s Hound of Heaven – do you know that?
I: No. Can you recite some of it even today?
MS:

“I fled Him, down the nights, and down the days;
I fled Him, down the arches of the years;
I fled Him, down the labyrinthine way
Of my own mind and under running laughter.”

And that’s the beginning of it. It’s a wonderful poem.
I: I regret that in my education there wasn’t more reciting, learning of poetry, Classics. There’s a
debate on campus now about Western culture: how to expand the coursework to include nonWestern accretions to our culture and contributions of women …
MS: Oh, I think that’s important. My mother was very forward-looking in her course; she took,
there was a – did you know that Stanford was the first institution of higher learning in the
United States that gave courses on the Far East?
I: Really? That’s a long tradition for Stanford.
MS: I think the earliest professor was Dr. Treat, and he – she took a course from him on India,
and she worked so hard she didn’t take those other courses they gave on other Oriental
countries. She liked that course on India quite well. [TREAT, PAYSON JACKSON, Professor of
History, Emeritus. 750 Dolores, Stanford. A.B., Wesleyan, 1900; A.M., Columbia, 1903; Ph.D.,
Stanford,1910; L.H.D., Wesleyan, 1931. At Stanford since 1905. Emeritus since
1945.]
I: What kind of advice did she give you when you were setting off to Stanford?
MS: She didn’t give me anything; I just took what I wanted to. And of course we had then
something called Citizenship, and that’s what the Western Civ has turned into.
I: Was Dr Robinson teaching at that time? Edgar Robinson?
MS: Yes, and I took a lot of American history from him: Edgar Eugene Robinson, and he was
another wonderful teacher. [ROBINSON, EDGAR EUGENE, Margaret Byrne Professor of
American History, Emeritus. 654 Cabrillo, Stanford. A.B., Wisconsin, 1908, A.M., 1910, LL.D.,
1942. At Stanford since 1911. Emeritus since 1952.]
8

I: I’ve just met his second wife, Lisette Robinson.
MS: She must be very old.
I: She’s pretty spry.
MS: I know she lives over at that Channing House. She was his secretary for ten thousand years,
and I think they loved each other then. [chuckles]
I: Did your mother suggest some teachers that you might want to take courses from that
inspired her, or did you remember her talking about any?
MS: Most of her professors were gone by the time I came along. There was another who taught
European history and he was very good, Edward Kriehbel; and then she took, who … my father
took a year off from teaching 1913-14 and they both went to Stanford. And they took a course
on Chaucer from Ewald Flugel, who was one of the early greats. [FLUGEL, EWALD, Professor of
English Philology. Ph.D., Leipzig, 1886. At Stanford, 1892-1914.] He was from Germany, and he
knew Chaucer so well, my mother said. It had no accent, and he said it was silly to have an
accent if you really worked on it. And oh, they thought that course was wonderful. Let’s see –
then they took a course on evolution from Jordan [i.e.Vernon] Kellogg and that book Evolution,
there was something in evolution.
I: I’m going to keep close to you so I can pick you up here and follow you around the room.
MS: And Kellogg was a very important professor too.
I: By the time that you came on campus …
MS: Kellogg wasn’t there.
I: No, he wasn’t on campus. Who was the president of the university?
MS: Wilbur, when I got here.
I: How would you compare your experience as a female student to what you recall your mother
talking about: classes and social life?
MS: Oh, I think it was just about the same.
I: Of course, you would haven been more with your peers in age, your cohorts.
MS: Oh, that didn’t bother her a bit, no, that she was older, but see, she got in on the Five
Hundred business, and I was on the Five Hundred all the time I was here. Now there’s no limit,
is there?
9

I: Correct. I think that was removed in the ‘30s.
MS: Was it?
I: What were classes like? Describe to me, if you can, maybe an average day of your studies,
from getting up in the morning and eating …
MS: When I was, started, I took the streetcar.
I: So you lived in town with your family?
MS: Yes, I never lived on the campus, ever, no, until after … after my mother went, I lived in
Kingscote Gardens for fifteen years.
I: Oh! It’s a lovely place. I think that’s where I remember reading the first article about you, so
many years ago, about your children’s books, which I saved.
MS: Well … the streetcar was six cents, and I walked several blocks to get it: either go down to
Waverley or to University, what we did. You know how they followed, how the streetcar went?
I: No.
MS: It went down to the station, and then it crossed and went along the highway, and over, up
through the eucalyptus, and then along that way, and up through a lot of private homes, and
ended up at the other end of the Quad. It ended up high above the Quad.
I: It went between what is now the History Corner of the Quad and the art museum, in that
area? Where did it enter campus?
MS: That’s where it ended, down at the highway.
I: Where El Camino is now?
MS: Yeah; right where the stadium is. All those old houses are gone; and then came up, and
there was a little wooden place up at the end of the first stop, where Papa Ernest had a little
bootblack stand; he was there, a Negro man, and he was there for several years. And then the
streetcar went on to the end of the Quad, but it wasn’t down where the. By the Quad, it was up
above it.
I: Like where Tresidder is, that area?
MS: Well, it was on the other side, there.
10

I: How early did you go to Campus in the morning? Were you there all day, most days?
MS: I went … sometimes I had an eight o’clock [inaudible] I would get off at Papa Ernest’s stand
when I had classes down on that side of the Quad.
I: Who was your favorite teacher?
MS: Well, I think this Professor Hulme, Edward Maslin Hulme, because it was really … because I
majored with him, but I enjoyed Robinson very, very much.
I: Did you have women faculty, teachers for your courses?
MS: I had one, Edith Mirrielees, for a course on English literature, which was very interesting,
one prepared especially for freshmen who didn’t know much. [MIRRIELEES, EDITH RONALD,
Professor of English, Emeritus. 622 Salvatierra, Stanford. A.B., Stanford, 1907. At Stanford since
1909. Emeritus since 1944.]
I: Can you tell me a little bit more about her: how she taught, or what you remember?
MS: Yes; she was quite an enthusiastic person; she was, she wrote several books; Stanford
Mosaic I think is one of them. And that gives you kind of a picture of how it was when she was
teaching.
I: When she first arrived.
MS: And I think … isn’t one of the halls now named for her too?
I: Right.
MS: She was Edith Mirrielees, and her sister was Lucia, I think, Lucy. And they lived along
Alvarado there, where all those old houses are gone now, I’m sure. That’s where my French
teacher Dr. Johnston, who was head of the French Department – he lived along there.
[JOHNSTON, OLIVER MARTIN, Professor of Romanic Languages, Emeritus. A.B., Mississippi
College, 1890, A.M., 1892; Ph.D., Johns Hopkins, 1896.At Stanford, 1897-1953. Emeritus,1932.]
I: Did many students like yourself live in town and come in on the streetcar?
MS: No, I don’t think so; oh, a few. Well, yes, I think maybe more did in those days.
I: What was the social life like?
MS: Well, I really didn’t take much part in the social life; see, I was lame and kind of a little bit
hesitant, and very shy, so I didn’t do any …
11

I: Were you walking with a cane then?
MS: No.
I: In a chair?
MS: No.
I: Were you walking alone then?
MS: Yes.
I: Was Clelia Mosher, Dr. Mosher, on campus? [MOSHER, CLELIA DUEL, Professor of Personal
Hygiene, Emeritus. A.B.,Stanford, 1893, A.M., 1894; M.D., Johns Hopkins, 1900. At Stanford,
1893-96, and 1910-40. Emeritus,1929.]
MS: Yes, she was head of [laughs] … she was so ugly and cross, and nobody liked her. Clelia
Duel Mosher: she was the bane of my existence.
I: Really! Tell me about her.
MS: She combed her hair just like a man; she’d be wearing pants now. She had her hair all up in
a little bun, a little tiny bun on the top of her head; wore a man’s collar and shirt. A very stiff
shirt, long … I can just see her now.
I: Great.
[tape A ends]

12

Tape B: bg598tg6338_125_b_sl

MS: And I still didn’t …
I: Did she, they make accommodations for you, to …
MS: She … [coughs] Helen Masters Bunting was the head of … she was just kind of the doctor of
the whole business, I mean Dr. Mosher, but Helen Masters Bunting was the boss of the Physical
Ed.
[BUNTING, HELEN MASTERS. Assistant Professor, and Director of Physical Education, Graduate,
Department of Hygiene, Wellesley College, 1912. Instructor in Physical Education, Centenary
Collegiate Institute, Hackettstown (N.J.), 1912-14; Director, Physical Education for Women,
University of Colorado, 1914-19. At Stanford since 1919.]
I: I’m just going to check the sound … [tape stops]
MS: Funny; I’ll tell you why I resent my treatment, because in high school I had a very forwardlooking, really good teacher and under her, I learned to play tennis. So when I went to
Stanford, I signed up for tennis; they wouldn’t let me do that.
I: Why?
MS: And they put me on a … for six quarters I had, I was put in a, off by myself with a, not a
regular suit on but kind of a sweater thing, and had to pick up pins with my right hand, for six
solid quarters! Oh, I’m really … I resent that, up to now. I resent that. And they could have let
me learn swimming. I could have …
I: Or other sports.
MS: Maybe I couldn’t have done tennis there, but I could have done swimming, I could have
learned swimming – lots of lame people learn swimming. But I look back on those six quarters,
of picking up pins. Pins!
I: Pins! Who dropped them?
MS: No, they were just out on the … there, and I picked up pins for six quarters to strengthen
my hand. That is so silly.
I: So boring.
MS: Not only boring but silly, because that didn’t help my hand any.
I: You don’t have fond memories of Dr. Mosher.
13

MS: Well, it wasn’t Dr. Mosher – it was Helen Masters Bunting– now, is that on the tape?
I: I can … what I do after these are done is I transcribe it, and you can say “Let’s edit that out.”
MS: Well, I guess it doesn’t matter.
I: Or, you can decide …
MS: I really feel …
I: Those are your honest feelings, sure.
MS: … the thing about the pins should be in, because I think … they have a very different
attitude now toward disabled people. They do everything they can to make them …
I: Were there any special accommodations to help you, other than the phys. ed. class?
MS: No, no.
I: No. You just made your own way.
MS: No I made my own way. But did you know that at that time, the swallows nested all along
the Quad, up under the eaves of the Quad?
I: I heard there was an eradication program at one time.
MS: And it was terrible, the poor things, the way they were treated. After I was working there,
one time my mother and I came out from the Church; we were walking in the main Quad there,
we went under the eaves, and a couple of little swallows had fallen out of the nest. And so we
picked them up and took them home, and my mother knew how to feed them, and so that’s
what she did. One day she went out in the chicken yard and got sixty seven flies.
I: Now, there’s where your pin picking up exercise would have helped, picking up the flies.
MS: And then – the part of the fly, that white part, have you ever …
I: I’ve never looked real closely at a fly.
MS: Well, the white part is nourishing. So, that’s what she fed them.
I: Oh, my! [laughs] Have you tried to capture any swallows here?
MS: Well, no, there are none. So now there’s not a swallow on the campus.
I: Just pigeons.
MS: They nested everywhere: under the eaves, around the Church, almost everywhere. And the
German Department had a very fine woman who was, loved animals, and so she made it that
they wouldn’t pull the swallows’ nests down. The German Department was a very dirty place.
14

I: Did your mother enjoy – did you talk with her about your school day when you went back?
MS: Oh, not particularly, no.
I: What were your aspirations? You said your mother returned to be a homemaker, inactive.
But what were your aspirations with your education?
MS: Well, I supposed I would be a teacher, as my parents had. And that’s another thing I will
mention: that I had a very unfortunate situation arise. They … I took all the education courses in
order to prepare for a teacher, got my certificate and everything. And then when I was ready to
apply for a job, the man who was in charge of teachers, teacher preparation, and so on, said, “I
can’t recommend you because you’re lame.” Those were his very words. And those were his
very words.
I: It wasn’t a requirement of a teacher to do handsprings?
MS: I suppose I had to be normal physically at that time. Now they don’t care, I don’t think;
they wouldn’t do that to me.
I: What was your graduating class year?
MS: ’29.
I: So your hopes to be a teacher were disappointed. ’29 wasn’t a very auspicious year, the
economy. What did you do?
MS: No. What did I do? Well, I went back and took my master’s in ’30, and then I went to the
Berkeley library school, prepared as a librarian. I thought, “Well, can’t be a teacher; I can be a
librarian.” So I did – my father did get me a job in a town, Ventura, for a year, helped me get a
job there. But I didn’t like it, so I came back and went to library school and got a library degree,
in the spring of ‘33, and in the fall started to work at the library.
I: At Stanford?
MS: Yes.
I: In the main library?
MS: Yes, but I always worked – the Hoover cataloging was done in the main library at first. With
my language preparation – see, I had French, and Spanish, and Italian and German [tape stops]
I: Let’s see – I was going to ask you: when did your interest in children’s literature start?
MS: That came from when I went to library school at Berkeley. We had to take the whole
course, and we couldn’t choose and specialize in what we were going to that way I got to take a
course in children’s literature, and that’s when I got started, interested in that.
I: As a child, were there favorite stories that you had that were an important part of your life?
15

MS: Somewhat, but not overly.
I: So it was more as an adult that you began to be interested?
MS: The course for children’s literature had a very good teacher, a woman from the Oakland
schools, and then a very famous woman in children’s work, Frances Clarke Sayers, came several
times. She was one of the big wigs in children’s work, and so when I started to go to Europe
after I had got a little money in hand, I began to collect. So my collection has German, French,
Spanish, Italian, and Danish and Swedish and Norwegian.
I: What was your first book that started the collection?
MS: That I collected? I really don’t know.
I: In the article, it said it was a collection for adults that you hoped would be a research
collection.
MS: That’s … well, I like Kate Greenaway [coughs] Excuse me. I stopped -- on the first trip to
Europe, well, I guess, even before that -- I went to Sessler’s – do you know the great bookman
of the East? -- [Charles] Sessler’s Bookstore in Philadelphia. I went there and collected quite a
bit of Beatrix Potter. I paid something like three hundred dollars for a first edition of Peter
Rabbit that had been published, or issued before publication. And so that’s in …
I: That’s in Special Collections?
MS: Yes. That was … I bought that at Sessler’s in Philadelphia. Now Sessler was one of the
important bookmen of that time, because Henry Huntington patronized him, and the
Huntington Library down south is the result of …
I: How did you afford to collect on, I’m sure, a modest salary?
MS: Well, I did anyway; I really spent more than I should, but I enjoyed it, so.
I: Did you start out intending to be a collector, or you just bought books that pleased you?
MS: I think I did; I think I wanted to be a collector. And, well, I think my first salary at Stanford
was something like twelve hundred dollars.
I: So a three hundred dollar book was rather rich for that budget.
MS: That was long afterward, 1933; 1953 when I first went to Europe, I was earning more.
I: Oh, I see. What year did you start to collect, then: In the fifties?
MS: Well, no, I think I collected some before that.
I: Where are your books?
MS: They’re in the Special Collections.
16

I: Most of them, they’re all in Special Collections.
MS: One of the interesting things that I have in the collection is the first edition of Rhymes for
the Nursery by Jane and Ann Taylor, which in that was the first time that Twinkle, Twinkle
[Little] Star was ever printed. 1803 [i.e. 1806]
I: Oh, really? Now did you make a study as you collected of different stories in different
cultures?
MS: I had a lot of reference books in different languages.
I: Like Little Red Riding Hood; is that a German fairy tale? Does it turn up in Italian children’s …
MS: No, I think it started with [Charles] Perrault in France. He’s really the first great, worldrenowned author of children’s, of fairy tales. But they weren’t prepared for children, you know.
I: Yes, they’re not very Walt Disney; they’re not as gentle as …
MS: No, no; but Walt Disney is certainly not very gentle.
I: But I mean, Little Red Riding Hood was eaten by the wolf, wasn’t she, in the original?
MS: In the original, but I think by the time she got out of the German, out of Grimm, she was
modified a little bit, and that version exists in many languages.
I: Do you have a favorite children’s story?
MS: No.
I: If I were to have trouble falling asleep tonight, what would you tell me?
MS: No, no, I don’t think so. Well, there’s so many good, modern things that I like too. Do you
know Tasha Tudor?
I: No; Tasha Tudor?
MS: She was a wonderful illustrator, and she wrote many books; you’ll have to read her
sometime.
I: Tasha Tudor; what nationality?
MS: She’s American.
I: Contemporary, or … ?
MS: No, a little ... she’s getting a little back. [1915-2008] Her first book was published in 1925,
years ago, so …
I: Are you a storyteller?
17

MS: No; I don’t like to hear stories, either.
I: But you like to collect them; what is it that intrigues you about …?
MS: Well, I like to read them. But I sure don’t like to hear people tell a story at all; that’s not my
dish. But it’s strange how many things you can find: in small collections, small bookstores, and
out of the way places, you’ll find things.
I: Did you take a lot of trips? Were you able to travel?
MS: Well, I went to Europe seven times, and I went all over the east coast and the Middle West,
where my parents came from: I visited there a lot, and collected … I would like to have collected
more folk tales in the Middle West and things like that, than I … my… and then becomes
everything, you know.
I: Do you maintain a correspondence with any collectors that you met, or booksellers?
MS: No, no; I think they’re all dead. [chuckles]
I: Well, tell me about your first job at Stanford: you were in the main library?
MS: In the main library.
I: And who was president at that time?
MS: You asked me that before.
I: Wilbur, when you were a student.
MS: Wilbur was still president.
I: We have his desk in the archives.
MS: You do?
I: Pete Allen; the News Service, Peter Allen.
MS: Oh, my heavens, yes.
I: He’s now a volunteer in the archives: helps us go through the photographs.
MS: That’s right.
I: Do you have photographs of you at Stanford?
MS: Well, I have one I thought you might like.
I: You know, it’s about ten of two, ten of three. Maybe we should look at some of the
photographs you pulled out.
18

[tape stops]
MS: My mother’s grandfather was a …I think, maybe I ought to take this to the History
Department.
I: Well, maybe someday, if you wanted me to, I could come out and we could make a list of
things …
MS: Fine.
I: … and we could ask -- George Knoles is a volunteer at the archives too. Do you know him,
from the History Department?
MS: Oh, yes.
I: Tell me a bit about the pictures. Who’s the baby?
MS: That’s Mary.
I: Framed. This is you, Mary?
MS: Uh huh.
I: That’s wonderful; look at the dress. I’ll pick stuff up.
MS: Put this over here. That wasn’t in the pile.
I: This pile here?
MS: This was my grandfather’s group … that’s he.
I: His regiment? He’s at the top, middle?
MS: It’s not a great picture of my family.
I: Well, I should maybe … I think probably what’s most interesting to us would be a couple
pictures of you at different times, to go along with the oral history. And then any Stanford
photos.
MS: What became of that picture I showed you, when you first came?
I: These two, here? Yes, I have those; those would be very nice. We could, of course, copy them
if you didn’t want to part with the original.
MS: Well, I think I don’t. I don’t mind with Dr. [inaudible]; I think I don’t want that one. I’d like
to have another colored one.
I: OK, but probably what we’d do is we’d copy black and white for the archives, we usually copy
black and white, and then just give you your original back. That would be nice.
19

MS: You don’t want the color in the archives?
I: Yes, the quality fades after time.
MS: Oh, does it? That’s 1973, so … That is the high school class back in Dunkirk, Indiana, where
my father …
I: Where your father taught?
MS: Graduation; I don’t know what year that was, in the education department.
I: Well, let’s look at these, what is this class picture?
MS: That’s another one, back in Indiana.
I: Oh, that’s wonderful. I like it because it shows the desks and the …
MS: And this is …what does that say on the back?
I: Let’s see -- Susanville, Lassen County, 1904.
MS: That was his first year. That is the whole school.
I: And where is your father?
MS: Let’s see – that could be him.
I: I really like this one. I had study hall desks in the school I was in that were like this, the
wrought iron and they were attached on a track, all together, and had the ink wells. There are
several mature-looking individuals: in the back here, there’s a mustached …
MS: That’s my father. Right up there.
I: On the right? That’s really nice.
MS: That’s the whole school.
I: The entire school. How about if I put them down, after we go through them?
MS: And this was back in Indiana; interesting for …
I: And that’s your father?
MS: No, this one. That’s a boy. No, this is a teacher.
I: On the left; OK. And that says “Class of 1902, Dunkirk High School, Indiana.”
MS: And this is me: my parents with me, when I was about thirteen …
I: That would be very nice to copy or have.
20

MS: They were both Stanford graduates. There’s his name; does it say when?
I: Let’s see; oh, yes.
MS: Summer of 1918.
I: Berkeley; that’s a lovely picture.
MS: You can take that, and then return it to me?
I: Sure; make a copy of it and then … OK. We’ll just put this aside, temporarily. Your mother?
MS: I was thirteen. This is my mother when she was teaching in Indiana. I think it’s interesting
from the point of view of costumes.
I: Aren’t they lovely blouses, and the hairstyles.
MS: These are some of my father. Maybe you don’t want all of them.
I: Well, I’ll see. I guess the most interesting ones are of family, group shots, and that one of the
school. Ah! Who’s this?
MS: That’s me.
I: “Three years. Could not yet stand alone.”
MS: I didn’t walk until I was two.
I: And you again? Oh, lovely. I like this one, particularly. “Little scholar.”
MS: “Little scholar.” And then this is kind of cute. That’s the same, only I’m sitting and standing.
And then I think the next one is the cutest.
I: Oh, a little bit younger. How interesting, the image is on the back, here.
MS: And these are now a few … those are my grandmothers.
I: And you father, again; was he in a fraternity?
MS: No. Well, an education fraternity. What was it? Men’s, it was in education, I’ve forgotten
the name.
I: I was in a …
MS: I belonged to Pi Lambda Theta, which was a women’s education fraternity, but I didn’t
keep it up.
I: Do you want me to put those on … and then these pictures you were just sorting through. Are
those also of interest?
21

MS: No. I didn’t look very hard.
I: These look like more class pictures.
MS: These are Susanville, I think.
I: Ah, yes, another picture of the class. Doing geometry.
MS: These pictures are probably interesting.
I: Oh! Now, what is this?
MS: This is my grandfather and his two sisters and his brother, on a farm in Ohio. He taught
country school for forty years. So my mother went from a log cabin – she was raised in a log
cabin in the country – to Stanford.
I: And her daughter. These are mostly family. I was thinking … I didn’t bring my calendar – oh,
yes I did. What I thought I would do would be see how this little tape recorder works out with
the sound [pause in tape]
MS: I think faculty, I was given faculty rank, oh, maybe ten years ago.
I: And I wanted to talk about the Hoover Library, and the ceremonies that opened the tower.
MS: I better not talk about that [laughs]
I: Why not?
MS: Oh, I just can’t stand Mr. [Hoover Director W. Glenn] Campbell.
I: If you want to be frank, it’s the time to be frank.
MS: We had real scholars at the head of the Hoover when I was working: [Ralph Haswell] Lutz
and [Harold Henry] Fisher. And all of the great collections are due to them. Lutz collected in
German; had a wonderful German collection. And Fisher collected in Russian history and so on.
And they were such great scholars. And now it’s all economics and …
I: Well, it’d be interesting to have you talk about how the collection changed over time, or the
researchers who used the library, how that changed.
MS: We had a lot, a big variety. There was a man and his wife, came from Turkey, and another
one, two, I guess from Turkey. And one man came from Arabia. And now it’s all – you know
how it is. I won’t say any more, because you know how it is. [laughs]
