
Lewenstein: All right. Today is Wednesday, February 16th, 2011. I am the interviewer,
Marion Lewenstein, and I am interviewing Eleanor Maccoby.
Maccoby: [00:00:19] Hello, Marion.
Lewenstein: Because you gave one of the talks at the Emeriti Council, and you so
succinctly put together the history of your movement through psychological
research, I think rather than starting with your personal history of your
academic career, we will start with your Stanford experiences. I know that
you came to Stanford in either 1957 or 1958.
Maccoby: [00:00:59] '58.
Lewenstein: And I'd like you to talk about how you came to be at Stanford and how you
found your department. That's what's lacking from our history of you. How
you found the department and how you moved through the department. So
would you like to start there?
Maccoby: [00:01:19] Sure. Bob Sears brought me to Stanford. He and I had been
working together at Harvard in the Laboratory of Human Development
there. When he came to take the chairmanship at Stanford, he established a
Laboratory of Human Development here at Stanford and raised some money
11

for it. And he wanted me to be part of that, and also to join the Psychology
Department and teach there. We had jointly written the book, Patterns of

Child Rearing, which had been very well received. And so he knew
something about my research style, what I could do, and what my limitations
were.
Lewenstein: When did you write that book together?
Maccoby: [00:02:07] After he and Pat moved here, but while I was still at Harvard. We
did all the data collection in the early '50s. The people we were interviewing
and whose children we were measuring were in nearby Newton and
Watertown. We included 400 families in our study -- by those day's
standards a very large-scale study. Nowadays people have thousands of
cases, of course. And we also introduced ourselves to the new machines for
data analysis. We had an IBM tabulator, which was the state of the art
machine at that time.
Lewenstein: I remember those.
Maccoby: [00:02:54] It was big enough to take up practically a whole room. We were
very proud of it. I think Bob saw me as being up to date when it came to
technology. Turns out I wasn't entirely.
Bob and Wilbur Schramm (a Stanford specialist in communication theory)
were doing a joint project on parents’ utilization of information concerning
child-rearing, and they invited my husband, Mac, and me to come out for a
sabbatical year to work on the project with them. We arrived at Stanford
with our little girl who was almost three. Our baby boy arrived in that first
year that we were here.
12

Bob asked me to teach the introductory Developmental Psych class that first
year. When I attended the first faculty meeting in the Psychology department,
I couldn't help being somewhat awed. There were people there who were
already of considerable stature nationally in psychology.
Psychology itself was a fairly new field at that time and in some universities
still hadn't split off from philosophy. But it had been an independent
department for quite a period of time at Stanford. Developmental
psychology had its roots there in the work of Terman--that is, not the
provost Terman, but his father, who had developed the American form of
the Binet Intelligence Test. That's what we were known for more than
anything else. Bob Sears was nationally prominent because of his work
translating psychoanalytic concepts into behavioral concepts, and he had just
finished his term as the youngest president of the American Psychological
Association. Ernest Hilgard was also very well known in the field. He had
written an important textbook and—
Lewenstein: And Hilgard was here at Stanford?
Maccoby: [00:04:40] Hilgard was here at Stanford. Farnsworth was here. Not as
famous, but certainly very well regarded. Quinn McNemar also had a
national reputation. If I remember rightly, I was the only woman present at
that first faculty meeting. No, Edith Dowley was probably there. She was
the director of the nursery school, which was available for developmental
research projects. That was before Bing Nursery School had been built. The
little nursery school was located next to some Quonset huts where returned

13

veterans who came back to Stanford to school were housed with their
families.
My office was in Owen House, which is where Bob Sears had organized his
Laboratory of Human Development. In those days the Psychology
Department was, I'll have to say, ill-housed. Its headquarters, its main office,
were in Cubberley Hall, which was the Education Building, of course. But
most of the senior psychology professors had their own little bailiwicks.
They would have a house somewhere out around the main campus. Bob's
was Owen House; Hilgard had a research house nearby.
[00:06:13] And I know that the few people doing animal work had their own
laboratories away from the psychology building. We did do much of our
teaching in Cubberley, however.
That first year that my husband and I were here, we were supposedly here
just on a one-year sabbatical from our Boston and Cambridge jobs, working
with Sears and Schramm. We hadn't realized that they had invited us to look
us over for faculty positions, but that became clear fairly soon. Bob got me
started teaching in the Psych Department immediately, because as it turned
out, Lois Stoltz, who had been teaching the large introductory Child
Development class for undergraduates, had just retired. And so her spot was
open, and I began to teach her course.
Lewenstein: For continuity, let me interrupt and ask you what your husband's position
was. Was he a psychologist, too?
Maccoby: [00:07:38] Yes. Mac was a psychologist. We both got our PhDs in
psychology at the University of Michigan. And he had been head of the
14

Psychology Department at Boston University while I was working at
Harvard. So when we came here, the awkward part about any possible
appointments was that there was a rule that husband and wife could not be
part of the same department at Stanford. It was obvious that I was going to
go into the Psych Department because I was needed for that developmental
slot, and there was no opening available for Mac because at that time there
was no Communication Department at Stanford. But Provost Terman had
made up his mind to see that one was created. He thought it was needed.
[00:08:29] And so he talked with Schramm and my husband and asked them
to establish a Communication Department, which they did quite soon.
Lewenstein:

When you were hired, both of you, were you full professors?

Maccoby: [00:09:11] No. My tenure status was rather ambiguous because that first two
or three years that I was here, since I had such young children, I asked to be
only on half-time. There was no such thing as a tenured professor on halftime, I think, at the whole university at that time. Bob was willing to do
anything I wanted in the way of trying a part-time appointment, except he
wanted to make sure of one thing, that I would continue teaching the Child
Development course. Oh, and the second year I was here, he asked me to
teach Psych I, which is, of course, a great big course, and it's a big
responsibility. You have a cadre of teaching assistants to help with it, of
course, but you give the lectures.
[00:09:59] And I agreed to do that, too. And he said if I would do those
teaching chores, that he would let me off of any committee assignments or
anything else that might be considered part of the job to be a faculty member
15

in the department. So as the kids got older, I spent more and more time as a
faculty person and—
Lewenstein: But you were tenure line.
Maccoby: [00:10:23] I was tenure line and—
Lewenstein: You were assistant professor?
Maccoby: [00:10:25] No, associate. But there was some ambiguity as to whether I was
on tenure for associate. It was—that's peculiar. But anyway, I got a formal
letter about three years later saying, yes, you have tenure. [Laughter] It's
funny. I didn't really worry terribly much about all of that at the time. We
were so busy, you can imagine, and very happy in our work, I must say. I
loved the Psychology Department. I was very proud of it, proud to be a
member of it.
[00:10:57] I knew that everybody in it was a very well-regarded person
nationally. And I guess, even at that time, we were considered the leading
department. No, we were second to Yale in psychology. But we were a very
good department, and came to be for many, many years considered the top
psychology department in the country.
Lewenstein: How many people do you recall? Approximately how many professors?
Maccoby: [00:11:25] Well, seven or eight when I came in, and of course, that number
increased. Fulltime equivalents. Isn't it? We grew to twenty-two or twentythree by the time I became chair in the '70s. So I'm not sure—I'm thinking
of how many people were sitting around that table when I went to faculty
meetings. But it occurs to me that in those days, assistant professors didn't
come to faculty meetings. It was the tenured people who did. [Laughter]
16

Lewenstein: I'm astonished. [Laughter]
Maccoby: [00:12:03] Well, I think I have that right. [Laughter] But that changed, of
course.
Lewenstein: You were talking about working with Sears. He was chair. Am I correct?
Maccoby: [00:12:15] Yes, that's right.
Lewenstein: Okay. And you were working with him.
Maccoby: [00:12:18] That first year when we came. And then after that, I remained a
member of his Laboratory of Human Development. We never did any joint
research after I came to Stanford though. When I came here, he was just in
the middle of conducting another study of parents’ child rearing methods
and their effects on kids. But it had much more sophisticated methods than
we had used for the Harvard study. Although the book, Patterns of Child
Rearing, was very well received, it was entirely based on the parent interview
work that my group had done, because the assessments of the children that
he and Pat Sears had done together didn't pay off and—
Lewenstein: Pat Sears was his wife?
Maccoby: [00:13:08] Yes. And she had an appointment in the School of Education. It
was a bitter disappointment to him, and to all of us, that we couldn't find a
really good story to tell about relationships between our parental measures
and the measures that he and Pat were taking of the children. And as we
reassessed that whole thing, I think most of us came to the conclusion that
either the theory was wrong, which is what I really thought, but what Bob
really thought was that the methods of measuring the children's
characteristics had been much too weak.
17

[00:13:44] So he had started a new study when he came here to Stanford
while I was still at Harvard. He had a smaller sample of families, but much,
much more detailed and interesting measures of the children, and he used
behavioral measures instead of the projective measures that they had used at
Harvard. And I thought, too, this ought to be a very much stronger test of
the hypotheses.
Lewenstein: Can you explain the difference between projective measures and behavioral
measures?
Maccoby: [00:14:11] Well, projective measures are the ones they use for doll play,
where they would give the children a little dollhouse to play with, and they
had a father doll and a mother doll, a little boy doll, a little girl doll, and a
baby doll, and a dog. And one hypothesis was that if the parent interviews
revealed that they were very, very strict about any shows of aggression on the
child’s part, the child, during the doll play, would displace their anger and be
angry or mean toward the baby or the dog. Didn't turn out to be true in the
projective test of doll play. “Projective” meant, in that case, that the kids—
they were five years old—would project upon the toy dolls in the dollhouse
their own feelings.
Lewenstein: And you're saying that didn't prove to be true?
Maccoby: [00:15:04] No. That is to say the hypotheses didn't work out.
Lewenstein: Okay. And the developmental methods that were being used at Stanford?
Maccoby: [00:15:15] Would be much more behavioral. So that, you would want to get
a measure of children's guilt, for example, because the hypothesis was

18

children would develop strong senses of guilt if they were punished by
withdrawal of love.
Lewenstein: And how could you measure a sense of guilt?
Maccoby: [00:15:34] Well, that was just what his interesting innovations were. He
would ask--the research assistant would ask--a child to hold a mouse, a live
mouse on its lap and take care of it while the researcher was out of the
room. And everybody knew from testing it ahead of time, no child could
keep that mouse on their lap. [laughter] And the mouse would get away and
then the child would feel terrible because they'd been asked to hang onto it.
And you saw how they answered, how they dealt with guilt. Did they lie
about what had happened, which some of them did?
[00:16:14] There were several little behavioral tests of that kind that elicited
presumably the behavior that they were interested in seeing. Resistance to
temptation was another one. There would be an opportunity for a child to
cheat on something, and you would see whether they did when the research
assistant left the room. I might add that those hypotheses tested--the way he
tested them--also didn't work out. The book that he and the two people that
were working with him at the time wrote on that study was marvelously
written, as everything Bob wrote was. [00:16:56] He had been a lit major at
Stanford. He was a very good writer. And it was a wonderfully written
book, and it just practically made me weep when I saw how weak the results
were. And he understood that. There was this hypothesis that boys who had
been strongly punished for aggression by their fathers would become
aggressive to their peers. And what they became instead was scaredy cats.
19

Well, I think Bob was working almost entirely with psychoanalytic
hypotheses. And that was, in my view, what was wrong from the start. But
that's another story. [laughter] In any case, I went off working on a different
set of problems entirely.
Lewenstein: Which were?
Maccoby: [00:17:45] Well, I wasted two or three years on some studies of differential
abilities, kids who were very good at math and very bad at verbal, or vice
versa, to see if I could find some of the antecedents--why the kids would be
like that. And I couldn't. As I say, I wasted time on that. We wrote a big
report which actually was never published. But I got accustomed to the
Stanford environment, and I was doing a lot of teaching and a lot of child
rearing at that time. So—
Lewenstein: When did you have time for research? [Laughter]
Maccoby: [00:18:24] That is a good question. And the fact is I didn't publish anything
during that first three years.
Lewenstein: And still Stanford considered you seriously and put you on—
Maccoby: [00:18:34] Yes. They liked my teaching. And I had a very good publication
record before I came here from Harvard days.
Lewenstein: What was your position at Harvard?
Maccoby: [00:18:44] Lecturer. I was not on a tenure track. I was very easily
dispensable by them, except they never did replace Bob after he left. They
had asked me to teach his courses for one year until they got somebody else.
And they never did, and so I taught his courses all the time—well, seven
years until I came out to Stanford.
20

Lewenstein: How were you treated by the other people who were already in the
department?
Maccoby: [00:19:13] At Stanford?
Lewenstein: At Stanford.
Maccoby: [00:19:15] I think they were kind of ambivalent. That is, they knew I was a
good teacher, but they knew I wasn't publishing, and they thought—they
didn't have very much respect for the kind of research I had chosen to do.
And they were right. But then I got into several other lines of work which
turned out to be much more interesting, more useful. I turned to studies of
differential auditory attention. The people who were studying perception in
those days almost universally studied vision. They were interested in visual
illusions.
[00:20:00] Well, you can imagine all the things, the focus of the eyes on a
particular thing. And I thought, well, we do an awful lot of attending with
our ears, and particularly in parenting. We have our ears tuned all the time to
where a little child is and what they're doing, and if there's too much silence,
we immediately go into action to find out what they're up to. [laughter] Or
we listen to what the child is saying and answer them while we've got our
back turned. And you get very peculiar dysfunctions of parenting when a
child is deaf and the mother doesn’t know it, which will happen in the first
year and a half in some families. And she just thinks the child is willful,
won't listen to her, and so on, gets very angry, and the relationship really
develops badly until she understands that she has to be face-to-face with the
child in order to communicate.
21

[00:20:59] Anyway, all of that hadn't—I'd learned some of those things while
studying parenting as we did in the Harvard study. I wasn't studying
parenting when I was studying listening, but I was asking kids to—I would
put earphones on them and put two different messages into their ears at the
same time, one in a man's voice, and one in a woman's voice.
Lewenstein: And how old were the kids at that point, more or less?
Maccoby: [00:21:27] These kids were now—how old were they? Seven, eight, and
nine, something like that.
Lewenstein: And you were putting the headphones on them.
Maccoby: [00:21:36] Yes. And asking them, "Tell me what the woman's voice said."
And they had to ignore what the other voice was in the other ear. And then
after they told you what the woman's voice said, you asked: "Now, can you
remember what the man said?" And so you have to—you can measure
whether they can hold one message in their mind while they're producing
another one. And we actually did one study where we were comparing
children, preadolescent kids with young adults with elderly folks. I think the
oldest person we had in our old age sample was eighty, and at that time, that
seemed to me to be absolutely the end of a life [Laughter]—
Lewenstein: Quite old. [Laughter]
Maccoby: [00:22:21] —which it doesn't now. [Laughter] So—
Lewenstein: Are you willing to tell us how old you are now?
Maccoby: [00:22:27] Yes. I'm ninety-three. [Laughter]
Lewenstein: All right. [Laughter]

22

Maccoby: [00:22:30] And what we found then was that there—everybody believed that
old people were more distractible. And we found they weren't. That is, they
could easily ignore one message while reporting the other one. What they
couldn't do was report the second message. And so we thought, oh, well,
they can't remember the second message that long. It's a short-term memory
problem. But it turned out it wasn't, because we did a control condition
where we asked them to simply wait.
[00:23:06] They got two messages in their ears, and they had to wait, what,
ten seconds before we asked them to report one. And just waiting did not
cause them to lose either message. What caused them to lose a message was
saying the other message. And after I got that result, I was so surprised I got
in touch with professional audiologists. And they said, oh yes, that's
destructive readout that you've found. What? Destructive readout? I never
heard of it. Yes. Reporting one thing—the act of saying it wipes out the
memory of the other.
Lewenstein: Oh, yes? Was that true of the children, too?
Maccoby: [00:23:49] No, not as true. That was the thing that was the defect for older
people.
Lewenstein: What did you learn from the part of the study that dealt with the children?
Maccoby: [00:24:02] I got big age changes in the ability to concentrate and not be
distracted by the second voice. And so we compared several ages. We have
a monograph on this. So that was interesting work. And the rest of the
department really respected it more because it was experimental. And all the
stuff that is just simply correlational between what parents do and what kids
23

do left them very cold, for the most part. Psychologists are deeply
experimental. That is, the scientific side of psychology.
[00:24:38] I'm not talking about clinical now, which is an entirely different
thing. I might add that one of the issues that our department went through
not too long after I came was the question of whether we should continue to
have a clinical psychology training program in our department. We had one
when I arrived. And after maybe—when was it? I came in '58. I suppose it
must have been the late '60s that we decided to abandon our clinical
program. It was a big issue and it meant—we had only one tenured
professor in clinical psychology. And what had been happening was that we
had hired one after another, two or three a year, assistant professors in
clinical psychology. They never made it to tenure because they never
published.
[00:25:30] They really weren't researchers in any way that our department
respected. That was the first problem. And then the other problem—well, I
remember Al Bandura, at that time, was head of the clinical psychology
program. And he said he kept going to the airport to meet an incoming new
assistant professor in clinical, and then a few years later, driving the person to
the airport to leave. He was really tired of this revolving door. He said
you're telling me we have no clinical program, really, and you are the head of
it. [Laughter] He said I don't like this position at all. But there was one
senior tenured clinician that was a problem for us in the sense that he would
be—if we abandoned the program, he had tenure, and he would stay on

24

essentially with no role in the department. There's no point in going into all
those ups and downs and how the—
Lewenstein: Well, but in fact that's part of what is wanted with this oral history.
Maccoby: [00:26:34] I believe he left. And I'm just trying to think what his name was,
but you don't need that. So that was a big issue. The other reason why we
wanted not to have a clinical program anymore was that we realized, with our
very empirical point of view in the whole department, we spent the first year
of our clinical students' training explaining to them how the Rorschach was
an invalid measure. It doesn't work. The second year we spent teaching
them about the TAT—what the heck is that?
[00:27:14] It's another projective test—and how it didn't work. We trained
them on the weaknesses of all the existing measures that clinicians used, and
then patted them on the shoulder and said, here's your degree, now you're a
clinical psychologist. [Laughter]
Lewenstein: Was this a master’s program, or an undergraduate program?
Maccoby: [00:27:31] No, no. It was a PhD program.
Lewenstein: Oh, it was a PhD program.
Maccoby: [00:27:34] And they weren't doing good research because none of their
professors knew how. Their theses were disastrous, many of them, and
people laughed when they were sitting on the committees working with these
students. It was totally unfair.
Lewenstein: Can you describe why—since the Rorschach test is so well known by
laypeople who might be listening to this in the future, can you explain why
the Rorschach test doesn’t work very well?
25

Maccoby: [00:28:04] Oh, gosh. I wish I could remember any of that research. It's
plentiful.
Lewenstein: Okay. I just thought—
Maccoby: [00:28:12] It's just that—well, for one thing, two different clinicians
administering the Rorschach to the same person on different occasions
would come up with completely different conclusions about the person's
characteristics.
Lewenstein: Okay. That's good enough.
Maccoby: [00:28:30] That's one reason. [Laughter]
Lewenstein: So the clinical department was done away with—what—maybe within five
years of when you joined the department?
Maccoby: [00:28:39] I just don't remember the timing. It might have been a little
longer than that. Probably was.
Lewenstein: Is that when you started to add more research psychologists to the
department?
Maccoby: [00:28:48] Yes. Yes. There was a gradual shift over to—well, first of all—let
me think. There was a good deal of research of the Skinnerian sort when I
first came dealing with animals. And they were studying something that I
had studied as a graduate student for my own thesis, different schedules of
reinforcement. Suppose you starve an animal and then feed them if they
perform a given response (like pressing on a lever). Or, you could give them
food for every fifth response instead of every response. If you do that, you
build up a habit in them that's much more resistant to extinction. Meaning
when you stop giving them food altogether, they will keep on pressing the
26

lever much longer than if you had been rewarding them for every press.
And then you can do random reinforcement schedules so that the animals
can't tell when the reinforcement is coming.
[00:29:47] That very much lengthens the period before they stop responding
altogether. And those kinds of issues about reinforcement schedules were
still in everybody's mind because when I moved to Stanford, the dominant
theories in psychology were behaviorist learning theories. And that gradually
changed. It was partly in response to input from linguistics where children's
learning of language just simply can't be understood or explained in those
behavioral terms. You can't think of a word as a response of the sort that a
rat is giving when it presses the lever. Right? [Laughter]
[00:30:31] So it wasn't very long before the rat labs closed up entirely. We
had a joint professor from the Psychiatry Department, Karl Pribram, who
was running a monkey lab. And, well, I don't know how to put this.
[Laughter] But this turned out to be a big pain in the neck for the
department. I guess I don't want to go into the details of why Karl was our
problem child. But it certainly led us to feel that we didn't want those joint
appointments any longer. And I remember somebody saying our department
is full of courtesy, but out of joint. [Laughter]
[00:31:23] We were willing to make courtesy appointments across
departments. Now, Bob Sears had a joint appointment both in psychology
and education. And there was one man, Jim Marsh, who had an
appointment between psychology and the Business School, if I remember
rightly. But those joint appointments became frowned upon.
27

Lewenstein: But from your history that I've read previous to this interview, you personally
started--and maybe others in the department, too--began doing a lot of work
with people from other departments, joint work.
Maccoby: [00:32:07] Yes, we did. We did. And this was another—Bob Sears was an
institution builder. He knew how to put together a structure where things
would get done. He started, as I say, the Laboratory of Human
Development. When he was promoted to dean of H&S [School of
Humanities and Sciences] where he had the job for at least seven years, I
think, he said, I want you to take over the Laboratory of Human
Development. I didn't know what that meant. I had never raised money for
a research institution. I didn't know how to do it. I didn't do it. And the
laboratory pretty much just quietly went out of existence. That was the time
when our new building was built. And at 1970 we moved in to the building
that the department now occupies.
Lewenstein: At the front of the campus.
Maccoby: [00:32:57] Yes. Jordan Hall. So I was really a failure in terms of running an
institution like that. But Bob, meanwhile, had joined with some other people
to go and talk with the board of Boys’ Town [Boys Town of Omaha]. And
Boys Town, the board at that time decided that they wanted to support some
research. And they put up a very big chunk of money to establish an
interdisciplinary center for child study at Stanford [Stanford's Center for the
Study of Families, Children and Youth]. And I got very active in that, and
jointly—that's when I did my joint research with Wald in the Law School—
he and I began to teach.
28

Lewenstein: I've forgotten his first name. Was it Bob?
Maccoby: [00:33:49] Mike Wald.
Lewenstein: Mike Wald. Yes. Okay.
Maccoby: [00:33:51] I later worked with Bob Mnookin, you're thinking of from the law
school. But Mike Wald and I taught a joint symposium on Children and the
Law for—what—ten or eleven years.
Lewenstein: When was that? Over what period? 70s? 80s? 60s?
Maccoby: [00:34:11] Late '60s and '70s, I believe. And both of us enjoyed that
enormously and learned a lot from it. What else did we do? Well, the Center
for Child Study was plugging along very successfully. We had people from
sociology, people from linguistics, people from anthropology came in there.
It was a little bit unstable in the sense that a full professor wanting to bring in
money for his research felt the pressure to bring it in through his department
rather than through the child study agency, which was not a department.
[00:35:04] There was a kind of a centrifugal force, I guess you would say,
toward departments, because if you brought your grant in through your
department, you were able to support a graduate student or two and some
secretarial help. Now, you should understand, in those days, we all had
secretaries. [Laughter] This was before the days of the personal computer.
Lewenstein: [Laughter]
Maccoby: [00:35:26] And a number of people, whose names I won't mention right
now, never learned to type and couldn't use computers. So it was necessary
to raise enough money to support those functions in your department. If
you put your money through the Center for Child Study, Children and
29

Families I guess it was, that deprived your department. Now, I did that on a
couple of occasions, and when Bob Mnookin and I developed our big study
on divorce and its effect on kids, we put that through Child Study, the center,
rather than our departments, and were frowned upon for that reason.
[00:36:20] So I came away with the understanding that actually creating and
managing interdisciplinary stuff is very hard to do. I've been very impressed
with the program on Human Bio [Biology], for example, which attracts huge
numbers of undergraduates. But getting it funded and keeping faculty in it
when they are all members of other departments to whom they owe
allegiance is not easy. And I have heard recently from somebody who was
very active in that program that it wasn't until a new dean came in that they
recognized Human Bio as worthy of support from the central office and
raising some money to support it specifically, because it was completely
running out of resources in spite of the fact that it was enormously successful
on the campus.
[00:37:13] They had huge numbers of kids who got major awards and who
went on to brilliant careers and so on, more so than most other departments
at Stanford. But they were struggling.
I loved interdisciplinary work. Still do. And I recognized that problem.
Now, where were we? Let's see. Back in the department.
Lewenstein: I'm not sure you had gotten to who you were working with in the
department, but did you tend to work with certain people more than others?
Maccoby: [00:37:49] Not among my department colleagues. No. My closest—what—
after I became chair, I was busy in recruiting another senior
30

developmentalist, and was successful in recruiting John Flavell to come to
the developmental program. But his interests were completely different from
mine. He had been the—he'd written that wonderful big book on Piaget,
and he was interested in stages of development.
Lewenstein: Excuse me for interrupting. Could you spell Piaget? It's P-I-A—
Maccoby: [00:38:22] P-I-A-G-E-T.
Lewenstein: —G-E-T. Okay.
Maccoby: [00:38:26] Bob Sears was completely contemptuous of Piaget's work. And
so when I started teaching his courses at Harvard, I sort of started with that
bias, but I began to read Piaget and I got very interested in those theories of
cognitive development. I think Bob's interest really focused on social
development in kids, how they develop relationships with other children,
with their parents, and so on.
Lewenstein: And the cognitive development focused on when children learn certain
behaviors, or certain attitudes?
Maccoby: [00:39:02] Well, most cognitive people have been interested in how they
learn, people who study developmental linguistics, for example. How is it
that children are able to come out with sentences that they've never heard
anybody else speak? It turns out to be quite obvious quite soon that they're
not learning just by imitation. And people had assumed that's how they did
it. So you'd get somebody—a child running in from outdoors and saying,
"Daddy, would you please higher the swing", because they knew the word
lower.
Lewenstein: I see. So they now wanted it raised. [Laughter]
31

Maccoby: [00:39:48] That's right. So they were generalizing into categories. What
categories? Well, you can imagine how interesting and intricate that whole
thing can become.
Lewenstein: And John Flavell was in this area.
Maccoby: [00:39:59] Not exactly. He was mainly interested in age changes in what
children know, what they assume, how they interpret situations. He would
compare three year olds and five year olds, or three year olds and four year
olds. And he was extremely inventive in thinking of things to study. He was
particularly interested in how kids understand other people's minds. How do
they know what other people intend, or expect. How do they know how
much somebody else knows already so you don't have to tell them things?
[00:40:40] And he did wonderful little experiments on these things. I just
was lost in admiration of what he did. But it was totally different from what
I was doing, obviously. We never collaborated. We didn't need to. There
was no purpose in it. But we were very good, close colleagues all those
years.
Lewenstein: Was it a collegial department in general?
Maccoby: [00:41:01] Totally. We did not have the crossfire. I know some departments
at Stanford where graduate students were at terrible risk if they worked with
one person, then the other person was going to flunk them, or come to their
PhD oral and try to see that they didn't pass it. I mean really awful things
like that that happened. We never had that kind of crossfire, and I was so
proud of it and felt so fortunate in being in a harmonious department.

32

Lewenstein: How did you get to be chair in the sense of how did you progress through
associate professor?
Maccoby: [00:41:36] Well, for one thing, our chairmanship rotated. And I had only
one four-year term. It was my turn. Now, it was well understood that there
were certain people who shouldn't ever be asked to be department chair
[laughter] because they couldn't administer, they couldn't fight their way out
of a paper bag when it came to getting things done smoothly.
Lewenstein: Were you a full professor by the time it was your turn?
Maccoby: [00:42:03] Yes. And I have never quite understood how we did choose the
next chair. I know when I was chair, I had a little executive committee as the
leaders of the different sub-programs in our department, and they would
know as a group who could and couldn’t do the job of being chair. Now, at
that time, we had very strong department administrators. The chief person
in the secretarial office, you know, who understood the budget better than
most of the chairs did. Now, there were some chairs who knew the budgets
up and down and were very, very good. I ran the money of the department,
its financial side, very much like I would run a family budget.
[00:43:00] I wasn't going to promise that I could establish a new
professorship in this or that if I didn't have the money. Now, Dick Atkinson
was one of our most successful chairs. You know who he is?
Lewenstein: I know the name but I didn't know him personally.
Maccoby: [00:43:15] He became chancellor of the whole system of universities for the
state of California. And he was a good administrator, [Laughter] as you may
guess from that. He moved from our department up to the deanship, and so
33

on, which quite a lot of people from Psychology had done. It seems to me
we—
Lewenstein: That's true.
Maccoby: [00:43:36] We produced good deans. [laughter] So Dick always spent more
money than we had because he knew that by bringing in a very strong
person, he could raise more money, and we would have enough money then.
I would never take such a risk, and that was foolish on my part.
Lewenstein: You said that you were chair for seven years?
Maccoby: [00:44:03] No, only four.
Lewenstein: Oh, sorry.
Maccoby: [00:44:06] And that was my rotational obligation. Now, some people stay on
for a second term if they're asked to. Now, if they're asked to, who does the
asking? Well, officially—
Lewenstein: That's usually the provost, doesn't it?
Maccoby: [00:44:21] The dean.
Lewenstein: Or the other deans?
Maccoby: [00:44:23] The dean is the person who's supposed to really make that
decision. And it's usually engineered quietly by the people who are known to
be the leaders of the department, some of whom are more influential than
others, and deserve to be.
Lewenstein: You've said that Stanford at the time you joined it, the Psych Department
was number one or two in the nation. How was it rated within Stanford
itself?

34

Maccoby: [00:45:03] Highly. But I can't tell you whether other departments were rated
more so. I know that the dean would sometimes—when Bob Sears was
dean, he picked out a couple of departments that looked to him to be
extremely weak. One of them was the Drama Department. And he brought
in some big stars from elsewhere to do different kinds of functions for the
Drama Department. He put resources into a poor department and built it
up. People always treated our department as though we should be treated
well, but we didn't have to be singled out for improvement.
[00:45:42] And we pretty much got what we needed and what we wanted.
We were very pleased with our new building, and had enough space,
although, I must say that now that the neuroscience side of psychology has
become so dominant, that has required lab facilities that are over and above
what the building was ever planned for.
Lewenstein: Are the lab facilities there in the building now?
Maccoby: [00:46:08] I believe they are. When we wanted to do CAT scans and PET
scans, we did originally have to go over to where there already were existing
machines to do that. I'm quite sure the department now has them.
Lewenstein: What were the other—well, currently, you said neuroscience is becoming a
strong component of the Psychology Department.
What I was going to ask you is if you could go through the progression of
what were the strongest areas within the department through the years you
were associated with it.

35

Maccoby: [00:46:49] Well, after the decline of the behaviorist approach to learning
theory, I think the strongest part of the department has been ever since our
cognitive program.
Lewenstein: That started before John Flavell came?
Maccoby: [00:47:09] Yes. Oh, yes. It's one of the reasons that they were happy to
have him as a choice. Roger Shepard was one of the people who was very,
very good in that. And we were very fortunate to be able to hire Amos
Tversky. Tversky and Kahneman, you may have heard, won a Nobel Prize in
economics. I mean, there is no Nobel Prize in psychology. [Laughter] But
their stuff was so good and so important, and it permeated—permeated isn't
the word—it grew in psychology. But then its implications spread out into
other disciplines.
Lewenstein: Could you describe it from a psychology point of view just briefly?
Maccoby: [00:48:17] Yes. I wish you'd asked me this ten years ago, Marion.
[Laughter] I've been so out of psychology for quite a few years now. Let me
see if I can say that.
Lewenstein: What did Tversky study?
[Interview paused and resumed]
Maccoby: He was interested in the way people make decisions. And one of the
important things they discovered was strange varieties of risk aversion so
that, for example, you would say to somebody who was sick with a particular
problem, "If we treat you in the way that we need to treat you, you'll have a
ninety-five percent chance of survival. Are you willing to accept this
treatment?" And lots and lots of people will say, well, sure, of course, if I’ve
36

got that big of a chance. Now if you say instead to them, "There's a five
percent risk that you will not survive it," far fewer people will accept the
treatment. It's the same risk in both cases. But it's the question of how you
frame your question in terms of what the good chances are versus the bad
chances. And that people make their financial decisions in exactly that way,
making that same mistake all the time.
Lewenstein: Yes, I've seen some frequent references.
Maccoby: [00:50:36] Okay. That's the kind of stuff that permeated to economics very
quickly, as you can see, because it certainly complicated the assumptions that
very many people made when the economists had always thought of the
consumer as a kind of a rational weigher of benefits and costs of just about
anything. I know I talked to Amos one time when I learned that he was
working for the Office of Naval Research and asked him what sort of work
he could do that was relevant to the Navy. And he said, “Well, of course, lot
of it is classified. But I can tell you, I have been working with people
concerned with submarine captains and how much leeway they should have
to make a decision as to whether to make an atomic attack.”
[00:51:27] They're carrying atomic weapons, after all, these submarines. And
what kind of chain of command does there have to be. We have to be
prepared for the possibility that the naval office in Washington is going to be
wiped out with the first strike. What kind of decision capacity do we want to
leave with the captains of the submarines? And I thought, Amos, I don't
think anybody could solve a question like that. [laughter] But that's exactly
the kind of heavy and difficult issues that he got himself involved in. I
37

thought he was one of the most admirable people because he had a very deep
social conscience in addition to being so incredibly smart and very creative,
inventive in terms of the way he would formulate issues. I just thought it
was marvelous.
Lewenstein: And he was in the Psych Department.
Maccoby: [00:52:20] Yes, he was. And he died quite young. Another very important
person in our department for many years has been Gordon Bower. He came
as an assistant professor. And I think he's probably the best teacher of
graduate students I have ever seen in action. Gordon can—he's a speed
reader. He taught himself to do that. So he gives a graduate student
assignment, wants him to write a short paper on X, Y, or Z. And he's
supposed to bring it in and give it to Gordon. The student arrives and hands
him the paper, and says, "Here it is. I'll come back." And Gordon says,
"No, no. Stay right here." The student sits down, Gordon reads the paper,
one page, the second page, the third page, and he knows what's in that
paper. And then he starts grilling the student. Students are scared to death
of him, as you can imagine. [Laughter]
[00:53:15] But they learn. Oh, my word, the number of wonderful
psychologists that have come through his hands and out into the big world is
really quite astonishing when you think about it. So this is one of the reasons
I'm so proud of our department. And I know that our cognitive program has
been exceedingly strong all these years, and it has not only changed with the
temper of the times in terms of what's important in psychology, it's been one
of the places where those changes have their roots because that's where the
38

research has been done that has brought those changes about. Next
question.
Lewenstein: [Laughter] Since you've been at Stanford, what do you think have been your
greatest contributions to the field?
Maccoby: [00:54:09] I don't think my contributions to the field have been so
enormous, to tell you the truth.
Lewenstein: Then why are you so well-known?
Maccoby: [00:54:17] I'm overrated. [Laughter]
Lewenstein: How nice. [Laughter]
Maccoby: [00:54:23] Well, part of it is accidental in the sense that a young woman
walked into my office and she wanted a post doc. She'd been trained at
Brown by somebody I knew and so I had agreed to see her. This was Carol
Jacklin. And she and I began to chat about things that we had recently read,
and we both were kind of outraged about some of the claims that were being
made about sex differences--women were from Venus, and men were from
Mars. Actually, that book [Men Are from Mars, Women Are from Venus]
came out after she and I started working together. She came in the late '60s,
just a new PhD (with a new baby, by the way). And we started talking about
who had found this about gender differences, and who had found that.
[00:55:11] We said, wasn't it time for us to begin putting together a
compendium to see if we could add up all the research we could lay our
hands on and find out what it really added up to. Now, I had actually started
this kind of thing before Carol came into my office because I'd been part of a
Social Science Research Council work group on that subject.
39

Lewenstein: On the subject of—
Maccoby: [00:55:36] Of sex differences and how well-established they are, and that
kind of thing. So I'd already put out one little book of readings on that and
was trying to go ahead when she brought this up. And I just had one
question for her, which is, suppose we find something that we don't like?
Women turn out to have a certain weakness that has been confirmed or
something, what would you think we should do with that? [Laughter]
[00:56:09] I said this because I had been challenged by another member of
our department whom I will not name, that if anybody found out anything
that was detrimental to the interest of women, they should not publish it.
And I had a very strong contrary opinion. And so what Carol said was,
"Well, the truth shall make us free." And I said, "Okay. You're the one for
me." And we started working on that book, The Psychology of Sex

Differences.
Lewenstein: But she wasn't with the department officially.
Maccoby: [00:56:39] No. She came in as a post doc, and she didn't have any other kind
of an appointment except my post doc. And we jointly raised the money to
do the work and hire research assistants and whatnot. So that was a big
enterprise. It took quite a long while. We delved through the existing
literature and we found a real problem with the so-called file drawer problem,
which is, you do a study, you test for sex differences, there aren't any, so you
put that part—that computer printout into a file drawer. Nobody ever
knows that you didn't replicate what somebody else had claimed to be true.

40

[00:57:24] So we did—I know we couldn't have been thorough about this,
but we tried hard. We would look at the literature. We would know that
somebody could have made a test for sex differences in this particular thing,
and if it wasn't reported we'd call them up and find out did you test for it?
“Yes, we did, but we didn't find it so we didn't publish it, because the journal
editors didn't want to publish non-replication.” So we found out a lot of
instances of non-replication. I remember one particular thing that was so
striking. There was one report on this little test called the prisoner's
dilemma.
[00:58:02] The prisoner, if he confesses, he's going to implicate his partner in
crime. If he and his partner both remain silent, they can be safe. But if one
of them speaks up and tells the truth in order not to go to jail, his partner will
go to jail. So it's that kind of thing. Will you sell out your partner in order to
save your own skin? And the first report was women would do that more
readily than men would. We found something like twenty-eight replications
that did not find that and that hadn't been published. [Laughter] Isn't that
weird?
Lewenstein: That's very weird. Yes. [Laughter]
Maccoby: [00:58:42] So our book came out mainly as a myth buster. It was a big seller
I have to say, even though it was dense. And the last third of the book is all
descriptions of studies, little abstracts that formed the foundation of the
conclusions we came to, which were that the only things that were really
substantiated was that men were more aggressive—boys, too, and that
women were not passive. The two sexes were astonishingly similar
41

intellectually with one little exception. There's a test of spatial ability where
you have to think about the ways things move.
[00:59:33] Like sets of gears. You turn this gear this way, which way will that
one turn? [laughter] You know, that kind of thing. And men were better
than women on that. Now, it's interesting that these two things have held up
very well. We argued at the time—now let me think. How has this gone?
The verbal differences, that certain of them, have stood up. One of them is
that girls talk more than boys do, particularly with each other. But on the
whole, our message was all these things that have been said about the
differences between the sexes, that most of them are nonsense. They're not
really there.
Lewenstein: You've done a lot of research involving young children and sex differences.
Maccoby: [01:00:28] Yes.
Lewenstein: Were you a leader in that field?
Maccoby: [01:00:32] Yes, I suppose so. We certainly weren't the only ones doing it.
And one of the interesting things about a career, as you get some name
recognition, you get onto groups who are interested in the same issue. And
you go to conferences together, or somebody organizes a consortium on this
or on that and you meet, you go to other people's universities and whatnot.
You find that you get chances to build the reputation of young people
coming along that you see as promising, have done a really good piece of
research and you make sure to cite that and write letters of recommendation
when they are trying to get a research grant. That kind of thing.

42

[01:01:20] And you form a very strong network of colleagues who are pretty
much at your level. Some of my wonderful friends—I just got a letter
yesterday of one of them who's having a Festschrift and wants me to come
to Texas. Sometimes they still come here to talk to me, which is a great thrill
when they do. But these professional connections are deeper really than
things that were within my own department for the most part. I love that
part of my career.
Lewenstein: How did you end up towards the end of your career at Stanford? What were
you working on?
Maccoby: [01:02:07] Well, the last thing that I did was that joint research project with
Bob Mnookin in the Law School on divorce. Now, here—this was kind of a
throwback really to my very early life when I was doing survey research, and
to the work that we did on the Patterns of Child Rearing book where I was
responsible for interviewing the parents and quantifying what it is that they
told me.
Lewenstein: That was the study with Sears.
Maccoby: [01:02:36] Yes. And we were doing that again. We had a sample of eleven
hundred families who filed for divorce within a particular one-year period in
this area.
Lewenstein: In this physical area, the Bay Area.
Maccoby: [01:02:53] This physical area. And we took the eleven hundred families—
yes—they were all families who had children under the age—what was it—
ten—no, eleven at the time the parents divorced. And Bob Mnookin, his
interests was in conflict resolution. And he was interested in how it was that
43

people worked out the division of authority, or I should say custody
between—for the children. This was in a period of time when there was a
big press for joint custody. And people were saying, well, is this good for
children, or isn't it? And we hoped to be able to get some answers to that.
[01:03:39] So my interest was in the effects of custodial arrangements on
children. And Bob's was in the process whereby they arrived at their custody
agreement. So the first book that we wrote, called Dividing the Child, was
on that process of choosing custody, mostly on that. Then there was a
follow-up for each year for three years. We interviewed the parents again —
and did some assessment of the children themselves. As they were growing
older, they were more able to answer questions and be interviewed. And
then that second book, I did jointly with Christy Buchanan. Who was our
third author? Sandy Dornbusch.
Lewenstein: Oh, Sandy Dornbusch, did you say?
Maccoby: [01:04:34] Yes.
Lewenstein: And where was Christy Buchanan?
Maccoby: [01:04:37] She was a post doc.
Lewenstein: Oh. Within the department.
Maccoby: [01:04:41] Yes. And she actually took the lead in writing that book. So she's
the senior author of it, Effects of Divorce on Adolescent Kids I think is
what it's called. Most of them were preadolescent. So in other words, what
I was doing was turning my interests more toward issues of social concern
instead of the more theoretical issues in psychology, which I had been
interested in when I was studying auditory perception, for example.
44

Lewenstein: What sorts of social concern?
Maccoby: [01:05:23] Whether you should have joint custody or not.
Lewenstein: Oh, I see. Within the study with Wald—oh, with Mnookin.
Maccoby: [01:05:30] With Mnookin. That's right. And I developed those interests
during these long years that I was doing the seminar with Mike Wald. And
for that seminar, we invited in family judges, family court judges. One of
them came and took our course, as a matter of fact, and contributed
enormously to the discussion. This was so fascinating.
Lewenstein: You were teaching graduate students, or undergraduates, or a mix?
Maccoby: [01:06:01] All graduate students.
Lewenstein: All graduates.
Maccoby: [01:06:03] And some of them—most of them were law students, but quite a
few would come from sociology and one or two from psych. So that was an
interdisciplinary seminar.
Lewenstein: Did you have other interdisciplinary seminars? You know, in other areas?
Maccoby: [01:06:22] Well, when I taught my graduate course in developmental
[psychology], students would come to that from the School of Education and
from the Department of Communication. Henry Breitrose and—
Lewenstein: Don Roberts?
Maccoby: [01:06:45] Don Roberts. Exactly. He's the one I was trying to think of.
And of course, he went on to do work on the effects of media on children.
So I consider him a really good interdisciplinary product of that course.
Lewenstein: You retired in what year?

45

Maccoby: [01:07:11] 1987. I was—is that right? Yes. I was required—I was one of
the last people where you—there was mandatory retirement at age seventy.
So in 1987 I was seventy.
Lewenstein: But you continued doing some research or writing, did you not?
Maccoby: [01:07:33] Oh, yes. We published the second book. Well, let's see. The first
book, Dividing a Child, came out in 1992 after I was retired. And the next
one came out about two years later. And then my book called The Two

Sexes I wrote and published in 1998.
Lewenstein: Describe that book a little bit.
Maccoby: [01:07:59] Well, up until that time, I had been pretty much the darling of the
feminist movement because they liked the message that there really aren't
very many differences between the sexes, and they felt that I had let them
down when I came out with this book. And they knew beforehand because
I'd been giving papers about it. But in that book, I found a very solid sex
difference that people had just simply not paid any attention to. And that is
the way kids behave in groups. And the very strong tendency there is for
kids when they're playing by themselves outdoors—I don't mean by
themselves—playing among other children, segregate themselves.
[01:08:47] You see it on school playgrounds astonishingly strongly, where
boys play with boys and girls play with girls. And Carol and I had done one
experiment where we brought in 92 kids, each of them thirty-three months
old, all of them. They were within two weeks of that age. And we chose that
age because we wanted kids who hadn't really yet firmly established much
knowledge about what boys and girls were expected to do or be—they all
46

knew what their own sex really was. Although when you asked them about it
intellectually, they couldn't talk about it very much. But if you say to a little
boy of that age, "You really are a girl," he'll stamp his foot on the floor and
deny it.
[01:09:39] Anyway, they're on the verge of a lot more understanding about
sex roles, but they don't have it very strongly in their minds at age thirtythree months. But they are old enough to play interactively with other
children. Younger children tend to play either by themselves or side-by-side,
you know, where they're doing parallel play but not really interactive play. So
we brought in either two girls together who had never met each other before,
or two boys, or a boy-girl pair, and put them in a playroom. And then we
would have a series of things. Like you would bring in two exactly similar
toys and give one to one child and one to the other. Or you'd bring in one
attractive toy, like something you could ride on, and then they had to take
turns, or fight over it, or something in order to decide how to play with this
toy.
[01:10:39] And we watched what happened. And it was simply astonishing to
us how much more interaction there was in same sex pairs. When you
brought in a boy and girl who'd never met each other before, quite often the
girl would stand off at the side of the room and watch the boy play with
things. She never grabbed—or I won't say never—very seldom. She would
go over and stand next to her mother. And the mothers were there, but they
were instructed not to interfere unless something was necessary. Stand next
to her mother and sometimes cry when her partner was a boy. In fact, boys
47

cried more often when their partner was a boy than when she was a girl.
[Laughter] But for girls that was most outstanding. Two boys might each
grab hold of it and pull against each other and do tug-of-war, that sort of
thing. They were also—their activity level went right up.
[Interview paused and resumed]
Maccoby:

So, in that last book I was focusing on a real sex difference which doesn't
appear really when you assess kids one at a time. This is a social
phenomenon. And apart from the work on sex differences, the last research
I did before I retired was part of a longitudinal study where we had three
cohorts of children whom we started working with the day they were born.
We gave them tests on how well they could hold up their head to see how
strong they were, that kind of thing. We measured strength. We measured
all kinds of stuff as they grew older, and repeatedly saw them in interaction
with their mothers. Occasionally, at certain ages, we got fathers in as well.
[01:13:18] And we were trying to trace development and to—we had sex
differences in our minds, but in addition, I got extremely interested in how
interaction between mother and child changes over time, and in what way
each person influences what the other will be doing six months down the
road. And I became firmly convinced that that is very difficult to measure—
when you watch a parent-child operating together, to measure the
characteristics of either one, because what you get is a picture that is a
function of both of them. Each one is responding to what the other just
did.

48

[01:14:08] Now, I have to put that against the backdrop of the fact that if you
were measuring people, as we were doing every five seconds—making a
checkmark on certain aspects: what was their affect? Were they happy?
Were they crying? Were they—so on. And other aspects of what they were
doing. If you measure instant by instant, you find that the best predictor of
what anybody's going to be doing at this particular moment in time is what
they were just doing the moment before, because most of our behavior is
continuous over much longer time spans than five seconds. But there is also
an input from the partner. And what we were finding was that the way a
mother behaves when the child is eighteen months old does depend upon
the nature of their interaction six months earlier.
[01:15:03] So if that child was resistant to being taught at twelve months old,
the mother wasn't doing as much teaching effort when the child was eighteen
months old. She'd sort of begun to give up on trying to influence this kid.
And if the mother, however, at twelve months was a strong, well-focused
guider of something the child was trying to learn to do, it turned out that the
child was more task-focused six months later. So you could see over time
each person was influencing the nature of the interaction that they would
have, that each person would engage in, how they would engage in it six
months later. Now, these get to be very complex things, those over time
things, because you've got growth, you've got developmental change in the
child, that even if you weren't concerned with the role of the mother in all of
that, you would have to take that into account because there's going to be
real change.
49

[01:16:11] So it got to be very intricate kinds of analysis that you had to go in
for, but I found it fascinating, and I became very much concerned and
convinced about the role of each in influencing the other. And I always hate
it when people focus right in on the mother's responsibility when the child
gets to be like this or that. Well, you all know that the older stuff about the
schizophrenogenic mother who wasn't very nurturant toward the child, it
turns out you can't be nurturant with a severely autistic child because they
just will not let you hold them close or anything like that. So I came away at
the end of my research career as far as—over and above concern with sex
differences and other intensely social issues like divorce—I came away with a
focus on how parents and children influence each other over time.
[01:17:13] That became the focus of my intellectual interest during the last
part of my career. I had some wonderful interactions with other people, and
some of my former graduate students who contributed, I thought, really
quite wonderfully. Mary Rothbart at Oregon became the nation's leader in
assessing temperament in very young children, and finding out how that
influences their interactions with others as they grow older. So to my mind,
social contexts are the name of the game. And so that's why people have
said, oh, she's in social development. She's not in cognitive development.
[laughter] I think cognition has something to do with it.
Lewenstein: Would you say that your active research career ended in about 2000?
Maccoby: [01:18:07] Yes.
Lewenstein: Okay. So you were busy doing your research and working well into your
eighties.
50

Maccoby: [01:18:15] Oh, yes. [laughter]
[01:18:50] Marion, there's one thing you didn't go into that I expected you
to. And that is my role in the university outside the department.
Lewenstein: You're right. I did not. Do you have the time to do that now?
Maccoby: [01:19:03] Yes, I do.
Lewenstein: Go ahead.
Maccoby: [01:19:07] All right. When you got tenure as woman in those days, that puts
you in a rare enough category, and the university was getting very sensitive
about the fact that it didn't have very many women in tenured positions.
They over-utilized us, shall I say. I got a little bit of notoriety around the
campus because I was the first person, as far as I know, the first woman to
teach in slacks rather than in a dress or a skirt which was—
Lewenstein: That's an intriguing one to be first in.
Maccoby: [01:19:45] Yes. My statement of something or other. But they began to
appoint me to university committees. I was appointed to the committee on
assessment, I remember, because I knew something about test taking and test
making. I was on a committee to deal with the people who had been accused
of—the faculty members who had been accused of sexual harassment,
mostly with their graduate students, or with some younger faculty member.
That was, to me, an absolutely fascinating thing.
Lewenstein: [Laughter] To learn about your fellow faculty members, yes.
Maccoby: [01:20:26] Yes. And the thing that struck me was that the men who were
accused were absolutely unable to believe that their advances had been
unwelcome. And they had a kind of quality of ego [Laughter] that was
51

remarkable to see in action. I was also on a committee to look over the
salaries of lecturers. And many departments had come to use lecturers—I
think this was often—maybe more often, too, in the—
Lewenstein: Language?
Maccoby: [01:20:59] —humanities than in the sciences. What were you saying?
Lewenstein: Frequently in the Language Department.
Maccoby: [01:21:03] Yes. Yes, in the Language Department—but other humanities
departments, too. The freshman English courses and so on. And these
people were abysmally treated, really. And also, there were women who had
appointments as research professors, let's say, or big time research associates,
who had fully the kind of publication record that the regular faculty had, but
simply weren't being considered for faculty appointments. Partly it would
happen when they were the wife of somebody who was a prominent person
in a field. And they were getting passed over for faculty appointments who
were absolutely well-qualified and already sometimes had been functioning in
the role of teaching in the department. So there was a committee that was
set up to try to rectify these things. I think one of the main locuses of that
kind of problem was in the Med School. And we handed over to a
wonderful Med School committee of women—of whom Doty Goldstein was
one, to see to it that these differences were ironed out. And we succeeded in
getting promotions for deserving women at the time. [01:22:35] This I found
to be a very rewarding activity, I must say. There was one funny aspect of
being a member of university-wide committees—oh, I know another one
that I was on, was what should be the fate of the Hoover Institution.
52

[Laughter] There had been a previous episode in which SRI, Stanford
Research Institute, had been more a central part of the university and was
split off. And this I believe, if I remember rightly, was because they wanted
to take contracts in which their research results would be classified. And that
was against the rules of Stanford. I think rightly against the rules.
Lewenstein: And there had been student demonstrations against Stanford because of that.
Maccoby: [01:23:25] That's right. There had been. And so the answer was to split off
SRI. It was no longer to call itself the Stanford Research Institute. It simply
used the initials SRI, which I thought was kind of a funny solution. But
anyway—
Lewenstein: If you drive by that building now, just in the last couple months it once again
is called Stanford Research Institute.
Maccoby: [01:23:46] It is?
Lewenstein: Well, the sign is there. I'm very confused by it.
Maccoby: [01:23:50] I'll be darned.
Lewenstein: I haven't asked anybody about it.
Maccoby: [01:23:52] Well, the committee that I was on was the faculty committee made
up of people from several departments, it included David Kennedy from
History, included Sandy Dornbusch. And that was a fascinating enterprise to
me because I learned things about the Hoover that I had never learned
before. One of the things that they were the most proud of and said was
their great contribution intellectually to the university was their library, which
had a collection of documents about the inner workings of a number of
communist countries, states. They were particularly interested in those
53

things. And so we interviewed people who knew what the library had in
these things. And it was a big eye-opener to me.
[01:24:46] One issue concerned appointments. Hoover people kept saying
they are AT but not OF Stanford, and they make appointments without any
consultation with the departments who might be concerned. And then when
they appoint somebody, they want them to become a joint faculty member in
the department. And some departments rigorously refused to take these
people, and other departments accepted them happily. So it came to be a
question of whether appointment through the Hoover then into the
departments could be a kind of a channel that would in any way distort the
nature of appointments, because the Hoover was offering a lot of goodies to
support an appointment that was going to be partly theirs.
[01:25:35] And they would offer big computer possibilities, and summer
institutes, and goodness knows what. So we saw some issues there. In that
particular instance, the funny part that I've noticed in my other committees
wasn't present. The other committees, they wanted always to have one
woman on one of these university committees, one tenured woman, and one
tenured black person. And there weren't very many of either. [Laughter] So
Jim Gibbs became the token black. I became the token woman. And when
we'd walk into the first meeting of a committee, we'd look at each other and
burst out laughing. And the funny thing is, too, that we were both fellows at
the Center for Advanced Study for Behavioral Science up on the hill the
same year. And they elected a group of three to represent all of the people
who were there that year and do various planning for events. And who
54

should be elected but Jim Gibbs and me, [Laughter] and one other person
who was a wonderful legal scholar from Harvard. So we felt that we were
tokens. We were. But that was part of our duty in a sense. Yes. So you had
to do it, even if it interfered with other things you wanted to do in your life,
it was necessary to be on those events, those things. And for some of them,
you felt you were no more useful than others. But it had to be done, and we
did it.
Lewenstein: That's the end of your tale of participating in the greater university?
Maccoby: [01:27:21] Well, are there any others? Can you think of anything you could
ask me about that?
Lewenstein: No, in terms of relations, what I had concentrated on was your doing
cooperative research, you know, with Mnookin and Wald. And I hadn't
thought about administrative university-wide activities.
Maccoby: [01:27:44] Oh, I meant to say the one thing that came out of the Hoover
thing that surprised me the most was to learn that ninety percent of the
budget for the Hoover Library came from the general fund at Stanford.
Lewenstein: Hmmm. I didn't know that either.
Maccoby: [01:28:00] It was one of the things that had come up when we entertained
the thought that maybe Hoover should split off in the way that SRI had
because it had its own agenda and it wasn't subject to the rules of tenure and
appointment and all those things that applied through the rest of the
university. It was at Stanford, but not of Stanford at that time. I think the
links have become closer since that time.

55

Lewenstein: Yes. There were, as I recall, a time when Don Kennedy was involved and got
the rules changed in terms of faculty appointments.
Maccoby: [01:28:35] There have been some changes, yes. Yes, there have been.
Lewenstein: That's my memory anyway.
Maccoby: [01:28:40] Right. But this was before those changes. And maybe some of
them came out of our committee report. I don't know. But the Hoover
people would always say, if the very idea of a split came up, you would lose
our library. We would take that with us. And then we suddenly realized,
wait a minute, we've been paying ninety percent of the budget, why don't we
just keep your library. [Laughter] That didn't go down very well.
[Laughter] Okay. End of story.
Lewenstein: All right. We are now ending this interview. [Laughter] You can't think of
anything else I neglected to pursue? [Laughter] All right. Again, thank you,
Eleanor Maccoby. This is Marion Lewenstein.
