
MarkdaSilva: Let’s begin. We will focus on you in relation to Stanford and your husband,
of course, but also we will establish the basics of where and when you were
born and what led you here in a general way, and your time here. Then we
move into your work at Cowell Health Center and at Bechtel International
Center, and a little bit about your time at Stanford in Florence and Hillel.
So where were you born?
Siegel: [00:08:45] Boston, Mass. I am a Bostonian who became a Californian.
MarkdaSilva: And when was that?
Siegel: [00:09:01] I was born on November 28, 1919 but came to California in
September 1947.
MarkdaSilva: Can you tell me a bit about your educational background?
Siegel: [00:09:12] I was born and brought up in Boston, Boston as a
generalization.
MarkdaSilva: Was the town actually not Boston?

13

Siegel: [00:09:27] Yes, but in those days, one moved up the scale. You were always
moving up. My dad was born in the United States, but my mother came
from a Russian shtetl--little village--and she came when she was eight years
of age. She came with her brother two years younger, and they came to
their parents. My grandparents had come on first to try to find work to do
and a place to live. So it was a part of Boston that accommodated many
foreign people from different ethnic backgrounds. My mother is quoted as
saying, “Well, we can live here now in this old flat, but it’s not a place we
can stay. We have to keep going up.” And “going up” was part of the
immigrant attitude, and my mother was fierce about that, always wanting to
go up and help her family to do it.
[00:10:43] We migrated in the city of Boston to different parts of
Boston that depended on your income and the steadiness of your father’s
work, so we went through many different parts of Boston. The push was
up from lower to more pleasant, better facilities, better school systems and
so forth. So I lived my life in a town outside of Boston called Brookline,
and this was a town on the rise Many immigrant-background people and
people who had been there for generations, whose families came off the
Mayflower; a mix of people. Excellent school system, a short streetcar ride to
downtown Boston to the museums or to the symphony, available in a very
easy way so that you had a sense of cultural opportunities. And
geographically, near the ocean, an easy drive out to the hills, which I
thought as a grown-up, were the mountains!

14

It was an excellent grammar school, and by this time we were a group
that went on to high school. High school was principally for those of us
who had academic interests. High school was a training ground for going
to college. It was a training ground for passing the college boards with high
A’s, we were very busy marching along and marching up. There were
graduations, A Division, B, and so forth. So the aim was to be in A
Division and pass the college boards brilliantly, and go to the college that
you desired. My parents were part of that whole group who had never had
the benefit of higher education themselves, and who incorporated it as
their first ideal for their children.
I remember I was visiting friends at the beach when my mother
called me from Brookline and said, “There’s an envelope from Smith
College that’s come for you.”
[00:13:38] I said, “Is it fat, is it thick, or is it thin?”
She said, “It’s very fat.”
I said, “Oh, boy, I’ve been accepted at Smith.” So that was my dream
of dreams.
I found in college a whole new world experience that really shaped
my whole future. First, we were so over-prepared academically, just sort of
floating along in that first year, we knew everything already, but got
academically serious in my second year. Taking a sociology course, I
suddenly came to understand that I was more than a kid from this small
town adjacent to the larger city of Boston. I was Jewish by background, so
that was a set into which I belonged, but I was bound by business. My dad

15

had his jewelry diamond store. You were bound by the dreams of your
parents in the ladder going up. But I suddenly found for myself, I got this
kind of revelation that I was more than that. I belonged to a much bigger
world, because I understood in my sociology course for the first time that
the world was diverse and big and full of different values and ways of life,
and I belonged to it. I wasn’t just out of Brookline. I belonged to the
world, I needed to find a way of being active in the broader world. That I
would do in my life some career that had to do with helping human beings
in stress areas and maybe I needed to find how I was going to have a
career, but that I was going. I was leaving.
[00:15:56] It’s interesting, because I wrote to the President of Smith
College a couple of years ago saying “I just want to put it down in writing
what college, Smith, meant to me in which I had this revelation. I
remember someone else in my dormitory was in that same sociology class,
and she just broke up, broke down emotionally. She was from an ardent
Catholic family. She couldn’t tolerate having fixed boundaries broken
through in sort of no-man’s land. She had to leave Smith for a while and
find herself before she could really continue with her education”.
But, for me, it was inwardly a thriving point. I was alit with life! I was
going places in the world, and so that just took over. I In senior year,
talking about what are we doing next, where are we going next, I said, “I’m
going to do graduate work in social work. I’ve got to find my place in the
larger world.” It was a bit unusual. I graduated in 1941 from Smith College,
so it was a bit unusual to know so definitively what I was about.

16

My family was not just a stable entity. My parents were not well
matched, a lot of difficulty in their relationship. But college-bound, yes,
they wanted that for me. Then any more specific ideas of heading toward
specific areas of graduate work, my dad just didn’t enter into that, and my
mother thought very negatively about a career in social work for me. She
said, “One more do-good kind of person, little brimmed hat on, flat-heeled
shoes, no lipstick, eventually no marriage, is that a future that I brought up
my daughter for?”
[00:18:14] I said, “It seems that you did, but I have a different view of
who are the social workers and how they combine with other social
scientists and how they make an impact on the world.” I said, “I’m going.
I’ve applied to the University of Chicago.”
My friend at Smith guided me there, because I said, “Well, I’ll
probably stay in Boston,” and she said, “Well, why? Why Boston? The
world is yours. The University of Chicago has got a fantastic reputation.”
So I got into Chicago, and I knew that I had to fight my way to get
there, but I did, because I was a person with a mission.
[00:18:56] At the same time, I came home for the summer and saw
that my parents’ marriage was in very poor shape, falling apart; I looked at
my one brother, my one sibling, Bob, sixteen, high school student, and I
thought, “My dad has left, at least for now. My mother is distraught with
anxieties,” because it was a new phase in my family life, too. With the
business failing, my mom really had to make a significant move in her own
life and see herself as a working person. And because she was emotionally

17

distraught, I felt, “What kind of a life is my brother having? How can I go
off to Chicago pursuing my own dreams and know that he’s in this
unstable situation? My mother’s distraught. My father isn’t there.”
[00:20:04] I t came to me one morning while I was finding my way
with my mother. I said to my mother suddenly, not that I was consciously
planning, but obviously I was getting ready, “Mom, how would it be for
you if I took Bob to Chicago with me?”
And she broke into tears and she said, “You’d do that for me?”
I said, “I’d do it for you and I’d do it for my brother. I think he needs
a different kind of home as a junior in high school for now, and you’re so
overwhelmed with responsibilities that you’re facing. I think that I could
help Bob have a living place and a little piece of life, especially if we
structured it for a year. Let’s see what a year would bring.” I don’t know,
I’m full of zeal about going on in my career, but I don’t know yet. Am I
equipped? What? So I asked my brother, and he wanted to go with me, and
we set out.
My dad was temporarily in Chicago at that point; no longer in
Boston, so I said to my dad, “How would it be, not only am I coming to
Chicago but I’m bringing Bob too?”
And he said, “Oh, wonderful, my two children are going to be here.
That’s so great. I’m going to the University to find out where a graduate
student like you could live, bringing your brother along with you. I don’t
know if there’s a dormitory or what.” So he went out to the University and
found out living places and chose.

18

[00:21:58] In a big city like that, some students and some graduate
students, lived in houses run by people who ran a house for graduate
students That’s what my dad found: a place, a very interesting family,
people who were brought up as children of missionaries in China, who
finally came to Chicago and bought a house and set up a way of life. So
that’s where we lived. We had a place to live.
[00:22:41] The scene at the North Station in Boston with all of our
friends and flowers and goodbyes, and we felt as if we were leaving for
Russia or something, because Chicago to Bostonians, it’s no-man’s land. I
mean, you might go as far as New York, but no further. So we set off.
My dad met us at the other end, and we began a new life. Now, many
friends have said to me subsequently, and certainly when we came to
Stanford, “What? You went for graduate work bringing your brother
along? Wasn’t that awfully hard?”
And I said, “I think it was, but it had to be done.” And we had good
luck along the way, certain fortunate things.
Chicago High School is a big old beat-up brick building. We came
early to Chicago because of high school registration. I thought, one of the
reasons I could take my brother is that he’s a very outgoing person, and
makes friends easily. I got that from seeing him when I came home from
Smith on vacations. I’d go down to the restaurant where Bob worked after
school, a restaurant that had an ice cream station in the front, Bob and one
of the high school kids served ice cream cones. I’d find my brother there,
and long lines of kids waiting to get their ice cream cones. I said to one of

19

the kids, “Look at this line that you’re standing in. It’s so long. Why don’t
you go over there to where the other boy is? It will be much quicker.”
More than one said to me, “We only have our ice cream cones from
Bobby, because Bobby is so fun and so sweet and so caring.” So I knew
that Bob had these qualities that could make it a possibility. Nevertheless, I
thought, “Where is he going to find kids to be friends with?” I hadn’t really
worked that out in my mind, that it was a transfer to a huge big city, urban,
mixed groups of people. I thought, “This is a very serious occasion,” and I
was r for the first time wondering if I could really make this happen.
[00:25:28] But then good luck. As a transient person from one city to
another, I had my notebook full of Boston friends who I could have their
phone number and give them a call if I needed something, anything. And
in those days, no computers, not easy—no. Instead, you wrote a letter. So I
had all the names and the phone numbers. Here’s a cousin of my best
friend in Boston who’s a family doctor, and I thought, “I’m going to call
him. Maybe he has some ideas or there are some groups of adolescent kids
that need something where my brother could tangibly have some
outreach.”
So I called him, and he welcomed me and he said he would like it
very much if my brother and me—and my dad was in town at that point—
come for Sunday night dinner. And I said, “Thank you.”
In his living room were his two children, boy and girl, age fifteen and
sixteen, in the same high school where I had registered Bob. I mean, that
was just pure luck. Adorable, loving, bright-faced kids who just took Bob

20

into their circle, and waited for him, because he got a job at a drugstore
after school. Waited for him to take him out to the field where they were
playing football or whatever they were doing. He just had an instant group
life, and that was like—I couldn’t have done it on my own. I didn’t have
the wherewithal. It had to be through someone else, and it worked out.
MarkdaSilva: Yes, but you did that on your own.
Siegel: [00:27:32] Yes.
MarkdaSilva: You found that someone else. But you’re right, yes.
Siegel: [00:27:36] So I no longer had to worry like that. In occasions, I’d get a call
from the principal, who needed to talk with me about something, and one
time was very serious. He had to tell me that Bob was failing his civics
course, and he wanted me to know. I said, “Well, this is new information.
Bob hasn’t told me anything about it. But what can we do?”
By this time, I’m getting steeped in my profession. I’m a social
worker. I’m having an interview with a principal of the school who seems
to be presenting the issues but he wants something from me. He’s not
saying, “And so this kid is not able,” or, “He’ll have to shape up,” or,
“He’ll have to get a tutor.” He didn’t give any follow-up, but he was sort of
waiting for me.
I was learning an early social work point of view, let the client speak,
let him define it, don’t do it for him, especially till you know what’s on his
mind, because he’s not coming forward with “And so he’ll have to leave
the program.” He wasn’t saying that, and he didn’t want to. He seemed a
kindly person. So I’m waiting for my clue, for him to give me a clue, and it

21

came when he said, “And so the important point of this discussion is that
in order to graduate from this high school, you have to pass the civics
course”.
[00:29:26] I thought, “So that’s it. It’s a requirement for graduation,”
and then I knew where to go. And I said, “But, you know, it’s not defined
at all whether Bob will be graduating from here, because we are here on a
one-year trial basis to see if our lives and Bob’s life works out here. So it
may be, and it probably will be, that he will be returning to Brookline High
School for his senior year. We were testing this principle of can it work,
and so far it’s going well. But with a requisite passing a course like this, it
seems like that’s a block to him progressing.”
I knew I didn’t have enough money to set up a tutoring situation for
Bob. I just had a very tight budget for managing. I had begun a relationship
with Bernard Siegel, anthropologist, working on his Ph.D., but I felt I
couldn’t ask Bernard to take on the tutoring. I didn’t know him well
enough and I didn’t want to burden our relationship with that.
I said to the principal, “Well, it seems, then, that if he fails this civics
course, he could easily take it in his senior year back in Brookline, and
maybe civics could be related to a Bostonian, where he’s going to be living
in his life. So that offers the possibility that it might be a very wise thing for
him to go back for his senior year.”
And you could just see the relief on the principal. He didn’t want to
fail the kid, but he wanted me to rescue him somehow or other. So we did
that, and that was great.

22

It was not totally great for my brother, because he loved his life in
Chicago, he loved his companionship, and he loved having me as his sort
of pseudo mom. His life was so much more steady and tranquil, and absent
was all the stress that he was living with in Brookline. So we just let that be,
that the shape of the plan was he’d be returning to Boston, and we didn’t
have to worry about that now, but we had a plan.
So it was I did act as his parent in several ways, but he joined in and
made his life work, and his friends helped him to make his life work. So it
was a growth of the connection between Bob and me, and then Bernard
came more and more into the picture.
MarkdaSilva: Shall we move in that direction, about how you met Bernard?
Siegel: [00:32:47] Yes.
MarkdaSilva:

Let’s move into Bernard Siegel, I knew we were headed in the right
direction.

Siegel: [00:33:02] So, Bernard. I had this month before the University opened after
I got Bob into high school, so I picked up some volunteer work at the
University. I was unassigned waiting to start my own career of graduate
student, with a certain amount of anxiety. Was I going to make it? Was it
going to work? Were my dreams going to be possible?
So I looked at the notebook for people whom my friends in Boston
suggested that I make contact with if I wished. I saw “Bernard Siegel” and
I thought, “You know, I’ve been so busy seeing if we can get Bob’s life
launched here, I really should have a friend. I need a friend here, so I’m
going to give this guy a phone call.”

23

[00:34:04] I did, and he said, “Oh, I’m so glad to hear from you. Gita
wrote to me about you,” Gita, my friend at Smith, his cousin. They both
come from a very small town in north Wisconsin, and close families. And
he said, “Gita wrote to me about you and told me many things, that you’re
coming here now as a social work student and you’re interested in music.
I’m so glad that you called me. Would you be free for lunch tomorrow?”
I came down the stairs from where our rooms were upstairs, and
there was a parlor on the first floor, and Bernard was waiting there. As I
came down the stairs, Bernard said to me afterwards, “I looked up and saw
this charming young woman looking so together and organized and
darling.” He said, “Since I’ve been twelve, I’ve known I’m going to be
married someday. My own parents have had such a beautiful marriage,” an
arranged marriage, another-world marriage. But he just felt he’s ready to be
married. He’s going to be married sometime.
Interestingly enough, at an Anthropology gathering, he was talking
with a very well-known Anthropologist from Columbia University, and in
the course of their conversation, he said, “You know, someday I’m going
to be married. Whom do you think I should marry?” he said to her.
And she thought for a moment and she said, “Marry a social
worker.”
[00:35:55] Bernard said, as he repeated this to me, “What is she
saying?” He was doing his dissertation study from ancient tablets from
Mesopotamia, that he was in the basement of the archaeology area
translating this ancient script into something that like writing that we could

24

read, and it took a lot of dusty, grimy work, and it was quite a special
project. He said to himself, “What would a social worker do with me? I
mean, it’s absurd. I won’t think about that one again.”
But he recalled it at that time, because I think he always knew he was
going to be married. He loved his cousin Gita, who was my friend. He
loved her very much. They were very close, the family was very close, but
that was not like having a girlfriend. But they would play together a lot. The
families were very close.
He was engaged, sort of, to someone who was, like him, a music
student and studied with a very special teacher in their small town, and they
were kind of engaged during all of his Harvard years as an undergraduate,
but he dated and she dated.
But what happened in the summer before I met Bernard, his father
had died. Bernard was the youngest of four sons, so his parents were old
when he was born. As part of being home with his family for his father’s
death, he and his fiancée, as it were, spoke to each other and said, “What
are we carrying on here? We’re dating, we’re going out in the world, but we
think we’re engaged. We’re not going to really put our lives together. We’ve
grown each in our own way.” So that had been resolved before I had met
him.
But marriage was there in Bernard’s thinking, and as he wrote after
he met me, he said, “This is the girl I’m going to marry.”

25

[00:38:36] But for me, no. I’m for my career. I’m building a career.
This is going to take me into important pieces of life work, and the last
thing in my life was commitment to anybody. I needed to be a free agent.
So we developed a relationship. We enjoyed each other very much.
Yes, music. Yes, anthropology. I had taken some anthropology and knew
something about it, but he opened the door to anthropology, took me into
their department and let me share so much of his life. So we were closer
and closer. This was just pre-World War II, September.
MarkdaSilva: Because you graduated from college in ’41, so you must have come in ’41
to Chicago.
Siegel: [00:39:36] Yes, September ’41. So those were such disturbed times and
what was happening and what was true yesterday was no longer true today,
and things were racing ahead. We just knew that we were growing very,
very close and ultimately we wanted to build our lives together. So that’s
what took place that year, and that defined in a way my Chicago experience
with Bob in Mrs. Mills’ house was coming to an end. I mean, it was just a
financial thing.
My brother would have liked to have stayed on in Chicago, he loved
his new life there, but he also recognized that we’d had this special time
and new paths were opening.
MarkdaSilva:

Within that year you went from just wanting a friend and really having no
interest in commitment, to realizing that Bernard was going to be the man
you’d be committing yourself to?

Siegel: [00:40:48] Yes.

26

MarkdaSilva: That’s a beautiful year. That was the end of ’41 into ’42. How did you get
from there to 1947 when you came to Stanford? Was he asked? How was
he asked?
Siegel: [00:41:27] Luck and being at the right place at the right time. Bernard did
not get claimed by the army. He was very, very shortsighted and very
asthmatic, and they said, “Those are two qualities that we don’t need in the
army.”
So he was invited to come to Yale where a project was launched by
the U.S. government wanting to develop with Brazil a closer connection.
Our resources for rubber were shriveling up as the war went into the
Pacific Islands, and we need to know that there were other resources.
Bernard, an anthropologist, speaking the language of Brazil gathered as a
group at Yale. We were there for two and a half years during the major part
of the war, and it was very meaningful because Bernard was increasing his
connection with Brazil and this part of the world and doing something that
was useful to the war effort.
When we went to Yale, I took my first job. I completed my
fieldwork, my agency work, in Chicago, but I had left dangling a final
paper. It wasn’t really a thesis, but a significant final paper. Bernard was
now at Yale, I was there in Chicago, and I thought, “Oh, certainly I can do
this final paper over there. We’d just got married. What am I doing with my
husband over there and I here? This is a hard piece of life.” So I said, “I’m
not going to get finished here. I will take the paper with me and go to my

27

first job at New Haven Hospital,” my first clinical job as a social worker.
So that got us launched there at Yale for a couple of years.
MarkdaSilva:

When is this? What year did you get married?

Siegel: [00:44:05] May ’42.
MarkdaSilva: And then?
Siegel: By September we were at Yale for a couple of years. Bernard got a
teaching job at Brooklyn College, and we moved to New York.
But, first, in the evolution of young people trying to build careers,
you’re working hard, because you work on your job, but then you have
something else that you’re trying to complete. Bernard’s dissertation was
not finished and my master’s degree was not finished, and it was a very
busy, engrossing time. To be at war, everything was topsy-turvy and
building new values, new life.
So it was there that perhaps Bernard finished his dissertation and was
awarded his degree from Chicago in that period at Yale? I did not finish. I
was just swept up by being a practicing clinician and this whole new life. I’d
joined my life with somebody else, whom I loved, and who loved me. I was
swept up into the young couple looking to a future and knowing that this
was temporary. He got a job at Brooklyn College to be on the teaching
staff, and that was certainly a next step.
Now, Stanford got into the picture, he was awarded his Ph.D.
somewhere in that year.
MarkdaSilva: When he was at Brooklyn?

28

Siegel: [00:46:11] I think when he was at Yale, but in that period of time. But I
can’t get us back to Chicago.
MarkdaSilva: About three years.
Siegel: [00:46:30] Anthropology meetings were in Chicago. Perhaps that was it. We
were back in Chicago for that. Bernard was giving a paper on the work that
he was doing there in the basement of the Archaeology Museum. He said
to me afterwards, because I wasn’t there at that moment—oh, we were
then at the University of Wyoming for just one year. And Bernard said to
me, “There’s a man who came to hear my paper and who came to talk with
me and seemed very interested in me, and he’s from a place called
Stanford, from California. I’ve never heard of Stanford, have you?”
I said, “Oh, no, you know, we’re Easterners. What is that Stanford
thing?”
He said, “Well, he seems very interested in me, and he wants to meet
you, and he’s invited us for dinner tonight.”
Now, this man happened to be the “selected person”. He was an
anthropologist from New Zealand, and he was here at Stanford, but there
was no department, as they had now, through the humanities. There was a
lot of pressure that how could Stanford be anything without a Department
of Anthropology with sociology and psychology? And a decision had been
made and a grant had been received to pay the salary of a young
anthropologist for two years to see if he could make it happen, it could be
a department. It’s necessary in this age now.

29

Felix Keesing was the guy who was appointed, “You go out to
meetings across the country and meet the young anthropologists who are
coming up, and let’s have some candidates.”
Siegel: [00:48:44] That was Keesing’s business, lining up anthropologists who
might be open for a job. Now this was after war. Universities were starting
to prosper, people coming back from the army, going back to school.
Suddenly, there’s a whole new academic thrust going on.
Bernard was invited to come out to Stanford. We were at the
University of Wyoming that year. I remember he went out and came back
and said, “You know, it’s another world. I can’t even describe it, the train
taking us over the mountain pass and bringing us down into this valley of
lush fruit trees blooming. It’s unreal. It’s unreal out there, but wonderful
people. It seems like a great job.”
[00:49:41] He was offered the job because Keesing was going to
different campuses and a number of them were invited to come out here,
and they made a first choice of asking Bernard. So we were suddenly
thrilled because the University of Wyoming was a great bridge to whatever,
but we did not intend to stay at Wyoming for a long time. But on the other
hand, we were grateful to have an academic post.
I remember we had long talks about “you take a two-year position,
two years the grant was, and then what are you? You’re out on the street?
It didn’t work? How can we be out on the street?” Then we said, “But
we’re only twenty-two and twenty-four. So what if we’re out on the street?

30

We’ve got youth. We’ve got anthropology. We’ve got social work. We’re
going to make something. We’re going to take the chance.”
It was a very exciting two years coming here, under those auspices.
Particularly, the humanities were very welcomed. Bernard was situated in
the humanities department, and that’s why first being at Stanford was with
the people in humanities, and that was very good. Bernard was a very
broad interested anthropologist and that was a good fit. He worked very
well and very hard, and by the end of two years, he had an anthropology
department assembled, and they wanted him to stay. “Now build it. Make it
happen.” So that became our life story. Stanford for our whole future.
MarkdaSilva: The next set of questions are about being a faculty wife in general.
I’ve read that said things like, “The role of faculty wives is to bake
cookies for the department,” and entertain. I know that entertaining was
part of it, but in a bigger, more important context.
MarkdaSilva: So can you talk about this role as his wife? Here he is, starting this
department,
Siegel: [00:53:10] With Felix Keesing.
MarkdaSilva:

I imagine it must have been such a creative time, as you said, Felix Keesing
wanted to meet you too. I imagine you were brought into the fold to some
extent.

Siegel: [00:53:23] Oh, yes.
MarkdaSilva:

I wonder if you can talk about how you helped Bernard at that phase of
his career directly and indirectly.

31

Siegel: [00:53:32] Yes. Bernard would be the first to acknowledge, and he certainly
has acknowledged along the way and in memories of talks given and life
lived, from his point of view having of a partner, me. He came to say,
“That anthropologist was right. It’s a good thing. It’s a good thing to have
a social worker as your partner, because they know how to interview.”
When I came to Chicago and called him and we first met, he said, “When I
was meeting her, I failed to see what a social worker might contribute to all
of this, but when she called me out of the blue and informed me that she’s
entering social work at Chicago, I suddenly thought this was Ezekiel’s
prophecy come true. And when I learned of her background in music, her
intelligence, liveliness, capacity for hard work and general good sense, all
attributes that I lack in abundance, I made up my mind to marry her then
and there. What I didn’t know,” I love this sentence, “and came to
appreciate and enjoy was her love of exploration of last frontiers, both of
them, mine and of all mankind. She would put herself, as I have, in Robert
Redfield’s words, squarely on the side of mankind and wish mankind well.
I’ve come to know what Dr. Benedict meant. As a clinician, Charlotte is a
keen and insightful observer of the human condition. In the course of
subsequent sojourns in many parts of the world, she felt perfectly at
home.”
[00:56:07] I was interested in mankind and the well-being of
mankind, and so was he, and there was a coming togetherness of values
and of life ways. You know, a lot of anthropologists’ wives in the old days
had really suffered because they were not comfortable to go out and live

32

for a year in a hut at the edge of a village that the husband is studying. They
didn’t want to be far away. They didn’t want to have their kids out over
there, when what’s the matter with Palo Alto and its good and your doctors
are here and stuff.
But that was never, in my respect—we were always going together,
and when Eve had her first birthday, it was in Brazil. We were on our way,
and it was tough, because in those days there were no paper diapers. I
remember the ship that we were on, going down into the ship. Our
stateroom was a little square with lines across and wet diapers hanging
hopefully to dry. Lots of tough issues. I’ve got to find some ways also of
being meaningful on this scene, sort of like in the Indian village down in
New Mexico.
[00:57:53] But I had a big curve in learning the language. Bernard was
fluently operable in Portuguese, but I was a learner, and you struggle as a
learner. And you have a one-year-old baby and you haven’t been a parent
before, you know, a lot of learning. So I just put aside in any formal sense
that going to Brazil I was going to carry on my career in any way, but I was
part of an anthropologist family.
So my connection with the young Brazilian woman who worked for
us became vital material for helping to make an entrance into a new world
or to make a connection to what this young fourteen-year-old girl thinks of
us. What does she think? What does she feel?
MarkdaSilva: Was that something that was helpful to Bernard’s studies, or did it just help
you be fully a part of being there in Brazil, developing this connection with

33

this young girl who sort of opened the window into the culture for you?
Did it help him in his studies, or did the fact that you were so engaged
simply help family-wise?
Siegel: [00:59:37] The fact that I wasn’t falling to pieces with all these new strains
and paths that I’ve entered into being a newcomer in a new society, I
wasn’t a burden. I was an asset to him, because we seemed like a family.
This is the notion that we brought with us. We’re a family.
People would say, inviting us to their home, “Well, certainly, you have a
car.” And we said, “No, we’ll take the bus to get to your home.”
We were sort of unusual, because the Americans who were there out
of Saõ Paulo, like the person who owned the property that we lived on,
where she had built some apartments at the bottom of her garden, her
husband had been the representative of Singer sewing machine in Brazil. I
mean, wealthy businesses, so we had to make our entré into that part, too,
because they were our landlords and lovely people and, again, reached out
to help us meet people we wouldn’t have on our own. So I was
comfortable in outreaching and comfortable in being a new mom, though,
that was the scariest part perhaps. When she got very sick, we regretted we
had been so courageous as to take a one-year-old on a huge trip.
[01:01:17] I think, the role of the wife of an anthropologist in
entering into new places, whether it’s down in New Mexico or outside of
Florence, Italy, out in the countryside, or what, that you add something,
not taking away. Some wives who’ve gone reluctantly or been depressed,

34

this is a burden. I was not going to be a burden. I was going to help as I
could.
And also, I was willing to—I didn’t have to be—it was as if I was
taking a break from my clinical experience, which had mostly taken place at
New Haven Hospital. When we had been at Wyoming, I got myself a
position in Red Cross, and I could be working on my own stuff. But there
in the field, wherever the field happened to be, I was able to do what I
think partners should do, namely be part of his— his project right now,
and we’re trying for him to get as much ease in exploring as is possible. I
was a helper to him, and I was just part of him and part of my exploration
too. What are these people? How do the mothers of this village manage
their lives? What do they do? To moving on, not particularly in my own
field, but to use some time then to be what I was, an anthropologist’s wife
and family member.
[01:03:27] When we came to Stanford, interviewing took place
January, February, and it was 1947. That connection with Felix Keesing at
the Anthro meetings took place, so Bernard joined Stanford in September
’47, came here. Bernard had gotten a grant to do some fieldwork down in
New Mexico. The grant came from here. Some wealthy lady had been in
love with New Mexico and had left a sum of money, and in Bernard’s
coming here, he was able to be granted money to help him start
interviewing Pueblo Indians. He started with Taos, in the summer before
we came to Stanford. It was en route that he was into that work, and that
was a gift from some faithful alumna that gave him a chance to get to Taos.

35

I was saying my goodbyes to Boston, to my family, I wasn’t here with
him, but then I came out to New Mexico, where we spent a few weeks and
then drove on. First time I’d ever been west in the United States.
Siegel: [01:05:20] These were mountains that we were crossing. I always felt I lived
in the mountains of Massachusetts, little pin hills. My whole perspective,
it’s a big world and I’m going to climb mountains, and there suddenly they
were.
We got to Stanford. First, I want to say I got off the train out of
Taos. The train came and Bernard was there to meet me in a whole square
full of Indians, whom I thought would be dressed in native woven
beautiful clothes. One was in pink and the other was in blue, Montgomery
Ward blue or pink checked cotton blanket wraps I thought two things.
“This is disappointing that they’re not showing themselves.” And the
second was, “How could anyone ever distinguish one person from another,
except one is in blue Montgomery Ward and one is in pink?”
So Bernard picked me up and hugged me, and I said, “Bernard,
you’re greeting a couple of people. How do you know whom you’re
greeting?”
He said, “Charlotte, that’s my work. If I can’t separate out and know
that this is Joe Blow and over there is somebody else, I mean, how could I
be an anthropologist? How could I be anybody? These are my people that I
am trying to find out about- why they’re so alcoholic at this pueblo and
why things are going down. This is stuff that I’m going to be working with

36

over these next years.” So I could see then this is an anthropologist in the
field, and this is what makes him be able to do that kind of stuff.
[01:07:19] So we came to Stanford and the drive was through a hot,
hot September day over the mountains from the coast, over the mountain
into this browned-out hot, dry awfulness. I said, “Where are the flowers?
Where are the green?” In New England we have lawns and flowers. Now I
wanted my New England back fiercely, and it wasn’t to be. We were in this
new land.
MarkdaSilva: That’s right.
Siegel: [01:07:55] And the Keesings had asked us to come right to their house.
They would like us to have supper together t, and they would help us be
looking for a house and had temporarily signed us up for something to
stay. But it was a very hard time, 1947, for housing; there weren’t many
rentals, a lot of new faculty had been assigned to where an army hospital
had been, but we were too late for that because all those flats had been
taken. There was just nothing to rent. They weren’t renting yet.
MarkdaSilva: Did the houses, what we call now the old campus, were those houses built
at that time?
Siegel: [01:08:43] The old campus had long been built, in the twenties.
MarkdaSilva: But not Pine Hill II, where you ended up living. That had not been built
yet.
Siegel: [01:08:50] No, not yet. So what happened was we had to confront the fact
that we had to have housing. There was nothing to rent. We were going to
have to think of buying, and we thought, “Buying? Yes, we have a little

37

money.” Bernard’s mother and father had left certain funds, but other than
that, we had our salaries.
This was not a town that felt like an eastern city where there were
long-term Family Service Association agencies or agencies in a hospital
where social workers would be employed. I was having that, “Who am I?
Where am I? Where am I going to get a job?” And we’re buying a house.
Now, it’s true that the house that we bought cost $10,000, which is like a
bit of a fortune to us people.
MarkdaSilva: Do you remember how much Bernard was earning at the time when he
came?
Siegel: [01:09:55] Not quite, but modest. The stipend that he was brought in on
was modest. That, he knew. But I can’t remember how modest. I really
don’t know.
MarkdaSilva: You don’t have a ballpark figure? Because “modest” nowadays is
completely different.
Siegel: [01:10:18] Yes. Eight thousand? But that must be somewhere, but I don’t
know.
MarkdaSilva: Yes, I’m sure it probably is somewhere.
Siegel: [01:10:29] But modest is modest. This $10,000 house, Eve and Bill
[daughter and son-in-law] bought a house that was a replica of that
Spanish-style house in Berkeley twenty years later for $190,000, you know.
It was a very modest thing, but modest was the name of it.
They didn’t have a law that forced you to have a clearance of
possible infestation, and they knew that the house was infested with dry

38

rot, and they sold us the house as perfect condition, and it wasn’t. We not
only paid $10,000, but we had to add a couple of thousand to have the
house totally inspected and restored.
MarkdaSilva: This one was the one —
Siegel: [01:11:28] In College Terrace.
MarkdaSilva: I didn’t think it sounded like the one on Pine Hill II. So it was on College
Terrace.
Siegel: [01:11:34] Yes, which was a place where young faculty and graduate
students lived. That’s very adjacent to the university, wonderful location,
and a lot of young couples and singles trying to get started in making a life
happen, and it was all full of beginners who were giving each other
wisdom. One person gave Bernard a ride to the campus one day. Bernard
said, “My wife is having a very hard time finding a job.”
And he said, “My wife had that, too, but she’s a clinical social worker
and got to the V.A.”
And Bernard said, “The V.A. We never thought of the V.A.”
He said, “Go there and apply. They have jobs over there.” So that’s
what got me started in my career, word of mouth, because there was not
yet a whole system of social agencies devoted to the proposition of people
need help and specific kinds of help.
[01:12:41] We knew that we had to buy this house, and we did, and it
was a very modest rate that you had to pay. Everything was very modest at
that time, what we could put together, the package. So that was our first
house and we loved it. We were almost destroyed that our grand piano,

39

which had been his mother’s piano, was sitting on material that had no
substance. It was just rotting underneath. But we got it in time. The whole
understructure had to be repaired, and it cost quite a bit of money, but we
managed.
It was our first house, and we’d only lived in apartments before that,
and that was very exciting. We felt at this time, since there was two years
ahead, it’d be time to start a family, because we’d been married for about
eight years or so. I felt, “Before I’m thirty, I want to have my family.” So
that was a project in there, too, and all these things like newly married
people.
But newly arrived people at the university, you could just feel it’s
growing, it’s going big places. This is the end of the forties, the big growth
in industries came in the fifties, and in this area surely because in the fifties
Stanford started investing, bringing in people from around the world, and
making it a far more prominent place on the academic scene.
MarkdaSilva: Is that how you felt —that was a wonderful thing that you just said, that
you could just feel that it was going places?
Siegel: [01:14:47] Yes.
MarkdaSilva:

You gave an example of their bringing people in from all over the world to
be on faculty. Were there any other indications, any other ways in which
you could feel that it was going places?

Siegel: [01:15:01] Except for Bernard loving his work, there was Felix Keesing and
Bernard Siegel, and they were able to bring in one other person, and then
George Spindler. People were being invited to come into a growing place,

40

so it was a sense of a beginning. Anthropology was really beginning. We
were attached to sociology, and we had our offices together there at first.
It was a meeting with the sociologists and, the humanists, and it was
exciting, fertile ground.
I was thinking, so what about the women? What about the faculty
wives? What are they doing? Where are they? Then was started the open
invitation to come to the faculty wives’ meeting. Next door to us was a
couple from the English department, a very well-known professor whose
name I cannot begin to remember. My sense was two things. This was a
very exciting new place, but you really have to get into what’s it all about,
what’s the culture of this place.
I’m meeting new wives, I’m meetings wives of other professors, and I
ask them about their work and what they’re doing. Well, they’re not
working. They’re very busy typing their husbands’ work, and they all
somehow had background skills in typing and very useful combination for
the producing papers faculty, who had some assist, clerical assist, but not
enough.
MarkdaSilva: That’s interesting.
Siegel: [01:17:20] I could hear the wives at the typewriters. They weren’t saying,
“Oh, how miserable.” No, no. “I’m very busy with my husband’s work.”
That was acceptable. This was late forties. It was acceptable to be doing
your husband’s work.
MarkdaSilva: And fulfilling to them. They weren’t feeling that they’re missing the boat
somehow, that this was demeaning in any way?

41

Siegel: [01:17:44] Not then, that was too early, but the seeds, I think, were
growing.
We were here ’47, our daughter was born in ’48, and at the end of
that year, Bernard had an opportunity to have a paid position in Saõ Paulo,
and that’s when we went, taking this baby person, with the ups and downs
we struggled. We found a wonderful thing, though, that was a suitcase that
opened up to be a playpen and we would have it on deck so Eve would be
out in these beautiful tropical waters. Many people on the ship would stop
by and hug her and give her little conversations, and that was really quite
lovely.
Upon arriving in Brazil at the end of an eight-day trip, the captain
said, “Those of you who are going to Saõ Paulo will be exiting at six-thirty
in the morning. You’ll be on the shore where the boat docks, and then
you’ll be taking a train up to Saõ Paulo later.” I remember feeling so
impressed with my husband, who was having some sort of a very difficult
fight with the Customs people, “When we see a person from the United
States getting off of a ship with three or four cases of baby food and
bottles, then we know he’s going onto the black market. That’s what you’re
doing with this, and we’re not going to permit it. We’re going to put a
heavy tax on it right here, because this is illegal.”
Bernard said, “There is no way that this is going to be sold. She’s one
year old. The food is since we don’t have a home yet, we have to know that
we have a food supply for her.”
MarkdaSilva: That’s right.

42

Siegel: [01:19:53] And brilliantly in Portuguese, he was holding his own, and I just
said, “Oh, my god, I’m married to a hero person.” [laughter] So that got us
started.
So coming back a year later, having this baby, and if we were having
two children, I wanted to have them fairly close together. My brother and I
were five years apart, and in the early years of our life it was a big distance,
five years. So we came back and Paul, our son, was born, and suddenly two
children in a two-bedroom house on College Terrace was very very tight.
Bernard had no place to have a study, and we just knew we were going
upwards; we have to have more space. The campus houses that were
available at this time were these big beautiful houses on the hills, up the far
hills, the hills over campus, beautiful Spanish style, large maid’s rooms,
big—
MarkdaSilva: This is old campus you’re talking about.
Siegel: [01:21:14] Yes, old campus was all that there really was at that point, old
campus, and requiring a status or a style of life that fit. I just felt, “We’re
not old campus, big houses with a maid’s room kind of people. This is not
for us. I cannot see us doing this. We have to keep looking.”
So a realtor took us over and showed me a house in Los Altos. We
had no intention of going to Los Altos, but it was the house of our dreams
and we moved there. Our children’s growing-up took place in Los Altos.
Always had thoughts we’d like to get back to campus living, but it was
before the big building on campus and Pine Hill and everything, and we
just couldn’t do it. Los Altos was very meaningful. It was lovely to be part

43

of a small town, but then you traveled to campus back and forth, a bit
awkward. But it was our children’s lives, and it was a great twenty-one years
I think we lived there.
So the status of women became clear.
Siegel: [01:22:49] So we were commuters. But the status of women. We’re now in
the fifties, 1950s, and a whole change is coming about. We were going
national, international. It wasn’t just the beginning time of San Jose
sprouting. Everything was developing there and the whole industry,
prosperity, a new President who was very outreaching. There was a whole
attitude, and somehow in there, we went from a small college in the West
to a university of the world. You just felt the difference.
But the women were still working at home for their husbands and
doing community work, adding strength to some of the well-being of
community, giving to the community, built a place for children who had
disease “x”, or culturally well-being, healthfully well-being. Women were
always doing that. They weren’t just doing their husband’s things, and some
of them who were artists or something managed to carry along something
of themselves, but it was not yet okay. Some of the anthropologists were
“couples” of anthropologists.
MarkdaSilva: Like George Spindler, the Spindlers.
Siegel: [01:25:10] Very close friends they became, because they were the first
couple, I think, that was hired in the new emerging department that
anthropology was becoming.

44

MarkdaSilva:

But she was also an anthropologist, but was it only he who was hired, or
were they both hired as anthropologists, do you know?

Siegel: [01:25:33] He was the hired person, but she had a status. She was given a
status, but I can’t remember what. She was given research. They were
inextricably one person, almost, very, very close. She was very much a
functioning anthropologist, so she was a professional woman.
MarkdaSilva: One of few, it sounds like, at the time.
Siegel: [01:26:06] At the time, but beginning to be, because new people were
coming with different traditions, and there was emerging women, “Come
on, claim yourselves.”
But when I went back to—let me see if I can construct. I had this
dangling degree from the University of Chicago which was getting in my
way, the dangling, all of it. I always felt during these early years of the
children that I needed to be at home, kids, life getting started, buying our
dream house in Los Altos. We fell in love with that house and stopped
looking on the campus and just made a life in Los Altos happen. It was
good all around, but Bernard and I still had a longing to get onto the
campus, but we weren’t able to make it happen until much later, since the
children were living away.
I want to stay on the point with women’s attitudes. Bernard and I
talked a lot, and he said, “You know, since the moment I’ve known you,
I’ve known a person who’s going to have a career in clinical social work,
who’s had a lot of training, but who hasn’t finished her degree. She does
not have the degree in hand.”

45

“And what is happening in the world is social workers no longer out
of agencies run by laypeople. It’s becoming more and more a business. You
have to be licensed, the place that you work has to be licensed, or you have
no future. So this is a time for you now to think about are you going for a
degree, to finish this up, to give you your authenticity, or are you not going
to be pursuing this? You have to think about it now, because now, when
the kids are coming back from Portugal,” I think, “the kids are both going
to be in school. I will give you every support possible in making sure that
my class is taking place in the morning so I can be free in mid-afternoon to
come home. But you have to make up your mind that you’re going to
pursue the degree or not. It’s up to you. I will give you all the support, but
you have to want it and go for it, and it’ll be a big thing to be a commuter
to Berkeley, because you’re not going to go back to Chicago to finish.”
MarkdaSilva: And when was this?
Siegel: [01:29:06] I went back to school in the early fifties, with much resistance on
the part of my friends. My friends at that time— by this time you have
friendships going and the department was growing, and we were not just
totally in humanities, but we had Latin American interests and lots of
interests. So my friends would say to me, “Well, you’re going to go back
and finish your degree, it’s really quite well known that children really
suffer when the mom leaves the home.”
I said to myself, “She’s my friend and she’s telling me that. I mean,
what is a friend anyway? What is this?” Or they would say, “Marriages

46

often break up, you know. It’s just an influence that just wrecks the home
to have the mother out of it.”
I felt, “I’ve only really got one friend here, and that’s Bernard, in this
respect, who, if I am going to make a decision to get this final training, he’ll
be with me on it.”
[01:30:34] And I had one friend, the wife of a sociology professor,
the only friend who said, “Charlotte, you’ve got a lot of energy, a lot of
zeal, and interest. Go for it. Take it out there, get that damned degree, and
be sufficient to pursue something that has so much meaning, that you’ve
worked at for such a long time.” She was the only friend.
But, I was going, and Bernard was enormous help, went up there
with me to find the route and how I would do the transporting. I’d never
driven on Bayshore before and kinds of heroic things like that, but I was
determined, and Bernard was there with me.
So in the fifties, I was commuting back and forth, but I soon found
after I got there to Berkeley that there were other commuters, and I could
work out a little commuting deal. I had a fieldwork assignment, which they
happily got started just that year, and with me in mind, I did here, at the
Children’s Health Council. I needed a practicum, and that was so easy, just
right here in town.
Things were made easier for me, but, nevertheless, as an
anthropologist’s wife, as the mom of two kids, as a person who had her
own interests, many of them enjoined with Bernard’s. Nevertheless, here’s
a new piece, and I was determined if I’m going to be out of the house a lot,

47

then there will be food in the refrigerator, in the freezer, that they will be
able to get. And I’m not going too suddenly—they’re not going to have
home-baked cookies. I will bake the cookies on Sunday when I’m home.
You know, I had to be a good mom, in my words. You had to be, because
you were sort of proving something.
MarkdaSilva: To yourself or to others?
Siegel: [01:32:40] To yourself, and I had to solidify my own doubts. Maybe they’re
right, and I can’t let that happen.
So that was the setup, and so I was away a lot but manageable. Thirty
miles away, we could do it, and everybody got into the spirit of it, and it
worked. We have friends in Berkeley with whom I had an open invitation,
like if I was having an early morning exam, I could stay at their house
overnight and be there for the big finals.
My friend over there in anthropology at Berkeley said he
remembered the morning when the final oral finals were taking place, and I
had been studying all night and not able to sleep and all that. He said, “The
way you walked out of our house, Charlotte, it was as if all knowledge was
crammed into your brain and being, and you couldn’t move too rapidly to
the right or the left. Just go straight with all that knowledge to the exam
table.” And it was how I felt also.
I thought when I went back to finish that degree at Berkeley, of
course, I was missing some of the courses, so I didn’t have to repeat them
all, but then I might have missed something that was going to be an item

48

on the exam. But I did spot it, so I had sort of prepared myself for that.
You had to be on the alert and ready.
I felt, “Well, when I go back now, I don’t have to hustle to be an allA’s student.” You know, that was my life, all my life. “I don’t have to do
that. I need to have the courses finished for the degree that I’m seeking,”
but, you know, it was not true. Once you get onto the Berkeley campus and
into the department, I wanted those A’s just like everybody else wanted the
A’s.
The people at home still typing their husbands’ papers, they were
leading a different life. I was a student and with that entire student push in
you. It worked, I got my degree, and I applied for my first job in Palo Alto.
Family Service Association was just branching out with a new director.
MarkdaSilva: What year was this that you graduated from Berkeley?
Siegel: [01:35:24] 1948.
MarkdaSilva: No, I think it was in the fifties, ’58.
Siegel: [01:35:32] Fifties, ’58. And it had a new director and it was just branching
out, and a board had given it a new building, and it was a fresh start with a
whole new director. She was in L.A. about to come up here, and the
president of the board said, “Go down there and speak to her, because
she’ll be hiring, and if you think you want a job there, be first on the list.”
So we were on our way to the Southwest to the Indian pueblo, and
we stopped in L.A. where I had my first interview. Bernard and I, you
know, it was easy to do because we had the same goals: get what you need
to lead the life that you want to have satisfied.

49

MarkdaSilva: Did you feel like a pioneer? I mean, now that we look back, I think there’s
really no doubting that you were a pioneer among women.
Siegel: [01:36:29] Yes.
MarkdaSilva: But at the time, did you feel like that, or did you just feel sort of the
shedding of certain friendships or listening to the typing next door and
thinking, “Hmm. That’s not really my life”? I think now your perspective
must be much different than it was at the time. Did you feel like a pioneer
at the time?
Siegel: [01:36:47] I felt like a determined person who was going to get the
equipment she needed to build a career. We had many friends among
faculty, and I’m thinking of a faculty person who lives here now, [at the Vi
retirement residence] who I’ve known for years, a well-known psychologist.
She was always a professional psychologist, and her husband got the first
position here. He was also a psychologist but turned it into another area.
There couldn’t be two people from the same family in the same
department.
MarkdaSilva: You’re welcome to mention names.
Siegel: [01:37:41] It would be right, because Eleanor Maccoby has known me. We
were friends, colleagues over the years. And now that we’ve both been
living here for a long time, it isn’t as though we are the closest of buddies,
because we’ve each found our own way of functioning in this new life. But
we remember the struggles that women had and also that the fifties were
not the forties. The fifties were people seeking to be part of this buzzing
scene and to get some recognition and that it was okay, and you weren’t

50

doing something awful to your children or yourself or your husband’s
work. I mean, there was a move for independent building of a life, and it
was very exciting.
Another thing that was very exciting for me at the Stanford level is
that I was moving along in my profession. I did work at Family Service for
eight years. This was the training session. This was taking all of the theory
and all of the background work into practice. Here were the people of a
town called Palo Alto needing help and coming for help in all sorts of
ways, and we were growing and learning and building our skills. I had a lot
of responsibilities there.
Just in looking at my own notes, I see the reference that the head of
the agency gave when I was moving on. I thought I should work for the
government for a bit and that after eight years in Family Service, I should
move on. I mean, she had such glowing things to say about me. I was a
very highly energetic learning, building kind of a person, and so there was
room for her. In the early forties, it was much harder to find space for me
to be, but in the fifties, women were claiming something of their own. In
the late fifties, by the time I got my degree, these women who told me I
was shattering my life were all starting to go back to get their degree or
their work or to seek other goals, and it was okay.
[01:40:16] I was a pioneer in that sense, and among my own old
friends from grammar school, high school, a rather tight group of us from
this Brookline place where we lived, I was definitely a pioneer. They were
all going to Wellesley, Smith, and Simmons. I think some of them started

51

training, but their husbands were in the army, and they were going here or
there. Their training was not work oriented as clearly as mine was. I mean,
they feel I was some sort of a pioneer who early on saw a future.
But I, myself, it’s as if how could you do that sort of thing of taking
your brother and being responsible for you brother’s well-being? Well,
there’s something in me that says it had to be done. I could not live with
myself and start a bright new life thinking of where he was having his high
school life was awful. So there’s something in me that said, “Move on.
Yes, you can do it. . You’re not going to be stopped right over there
because you don’t know how to drive the Bayshore. You’re going to have
to learn it. It’s going to be scary, but you can do it. If you have other goals,
you’re going to do it.” So I have that quality that’s helped me not let myself
get tramped down by other concerns. I was able to persevere with my
goals.
My troubled parents, of course, left me with a lot of room in that
way. I could see my mother, who came from Russia when she was eight,
was determined to make a life, but she never had the opportunity to make a
formal education that she saw that I had. I was empowered somehow to
say, “This is where I’m going to go. I have to work hard.” I was never
afraid of working hard, and I loved what I did, of course, so that was a
great coming together for me. But in the fifties we became a group of
people who could claim a space somewhere where they could put their
talent to work. It was okay. It was a whole different environment, and it
was a pleasure to be part of this newly emerging environment.

52

Siegel: [01:43:33] All of this is background, because the real intent here is—I’m
giving you the feeling of what Stanford was like.
MarkdaSilva: Yes.
Siegel: [01:43:45] It was growing and developing, and so by the time I got here—I
worked at Stanford from 1970, twenty years, to 1990, we had become
Stanford people in the meanwhile. When I could, I joined Stanford
women’s groups to get a feeling. I didn’t want to not have any comradeship
with other women, but I didn’t have too much time either.
MarkdaSilva:

I’ll be interested to know whether those were made up mostly of stay-athome women or if they were professional women the people in these
Stanford women’s groups were the missions of these groups were.

Siegel: [01:44:38] Yes, I think that is good, and the climate of this society. Beyond
Stanford, there’s a community called Palo Alto, Menlo Park, a place in the
world that Stanford was assuming more and more. A good example of that
was the number of people who came here who were developing social
work psychologist practices. They became a lifelong support system. To
this day, we have a clinical society that meets once a month, and I am
grateful to be part of that, because it’s part of the real world now in
planning what our program will be over the year. Coming up right now is
very meaningful, because it means I am involved, and not only involved
here in this place where I live, but I’m involved as an elder clinical
professional person. There’s a place. So some of my closest friends are
people who are professional people like me, and so that goes on, and a lot
of that takes place in the community as well as right here at Stanford. I’m

53

now a retiree, and we have a retirees’ group that is very large now, that we
get together and have meetings in the course of the year.
MarkdaSilva: Of clinical psychologists or the Stanford emeritus group?
Siegel: [01:46:33] Stanford emeriti. I’m an emerita, and so there are ways of
belonging that come to you by being a Stanford person. Of course, we
didn’t understand that when we first came here, because we didn’t know if
we were going to be here for two years and goodbye or what. It’s been a
growing life, and my children are the children of Stanford people, and so
they have these associations which are theirs. And, of course, both of them
went to Stanford as well, so mixed different life experiences. It’s as if we’re
Stanford people in that nicest sense.
MarkdaSilva: And I’ll ask you, what that means to you and what it’s meant over the
years, because, as you say, it’s changed. At first you didn’t even know you
were a Stanford person. In fact, even if you’d known, what would that have
meant? Stanford was such a different place.
Siegel: [01:47:49] It was a place where you were beginning with the future totally
unknown, because one of Stanford’s greatest building times was the fifties
and beyond, what the whole computer industry has meant to us and the
good parts and the worrisome parts, and it’s just become a way of life, I
think, to a lot of us here at Stanford, so it’s nice to remember that.
MarkdaSilva: Yes. And here at the Vi. Is that how you pronounce it?
Siegel: [01:48:36]. Vi as in life.

[End of interview of Charlotte Siegel, August 20, 2013]

54

STANFORD UNIVERSITY

PROJECT:

STANFORD STAFF ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

INTERVIEWER:

MAGGIE MARKDASILVA

INTERVIEWEE:

CHARLOTTE SIEGEL

DATE OF INTERVIEW:

AUGUST 26, 2013

MarkdaSilva: This is Maggie MarkdaSilva, here with Charlotte Siegel. Today is August
26th, and this is the second of our interviews. Last time you referred to the
idea that you are really a Stanford person and your family is a Stanford
family. Could you talk about what that means?
Siegel: [00:00:37] Well, Bernard [Siegel] gave a paper at the anthropology meetings
at the University of Chicago in 1946. Later he said to me that an
anthropologist from Stanford was very interested in the paper that he
presented and came to talk to him afterwards. He said the anthropologist
wanted to meet me and was coming down the next day or so. Bernard said,
“He seemed very interested in me.” I said, “Oh, that’s exciting, because
we’re in the market looking for where we’re going next, now that you’ve
completed your degree and so forth.”
So indeed he was interested in Bernard. It turned out that this man
was Felix Keesing, the only anthropologist that was here at Stanford and an
anthropologist from New Zealand. He and his wife had been here from
Hawaii for several years, but the point had come where people in the
humanities and others interested in the social sciences felt that Stanford

55

was falling behind with not having an anthropology department. They
received a small grant to bring young anthropologists here on a two-year
basis to see if the mission would be to establish an anthropology
department.
[interruption]
Siegel: Felix was the scout going around to different universities seeing young
people in the field, young because the stipend was rather small and it
seemed like young people would be very suitable for this kind of a mission.
That was the nature of his contact with Bernard, and indeed he was
interested in Bernard as a potential person to take this stipend and come
there.
But, of course, we were eastern people. Bernard was a Midwesterner
who went to Harvard and then to the University of Chicago. I was Bostonbrought-up, went to Smith College. We were eastern, but met at the
University of Chicago, which was a nice kind of happening. But Stanford?
What is Stanford? What is California? We knew nothing. Nothing waved
little hellos to us, but nevertheless, it was appealing because this man was
distinctly interested in exploring this with Bernard and meeting me.
An offer did come. Bernard was asked to come out to Stanford to be
interviewed and to see, himself, there was a reality, there was a university,
there was a place that wanted to grow. It was very exciting.
I remember talking with Bernard, though, about a two-year contract.
What does this mean? In two years, you could be unsuccessful in getting a
department going, and what would happen? We’d be out on the street.

56

That was not good. On the other hand, we said, “We’re twenty-two and
twenty-four. We’ve got our whole future out there somewhere. So if this
should not work out, we will have the resources and the equipment, the
degree in hand and so forth. We’re going to do this. Of course we’re going
to do it.”
[00:04:30] Bernard’s mind was blown away from the first California
experience. You know the old Stanford motto, “We interview in February
when the trees are blooming with blossoms and this place is at its most
beautiful.” And coming by train through the mountains and arriving in this
wondrous locale engendered a very positive feeling.
And, of course, the job was offered to Bernard, and we took it. We
arrived in the heat of early September 1947. Bernard had already started an
attachment to Stanford because he was interested in doing some fieldwork
with North Mexican Indians, Native Americans, and there was a fund here
left by some wealthy woman that would fund a psychologist or an
anthropologist to do some exploration in the Southwest. Bernard was able
to tap into that, and we were in New Mexico for a couple of months on
our way to California.
I had no expectations because I didn’t know it at all. It was an
extremely hot September afternoon when we drove over the mountains
into this brown, brown world of hot summer, early fall, and I thought,
“Where are my flowering trees?” They say they’re here later, but for now
I’m a New Englander, and there are no flowers, no green grass and a
barren, barren feeling.

57

The Keesings had invited us to come right to their house when we
arrived, and we had supper together, and that was a wonderful feeling.
There were people here who wanted to help us because they knew how
hard it was to get settled. It was very hard to find housing.
Stanford had developed some housing for new faculty people. All
those spots were taken. There was very little to rent. The houses on old
campus in 1947 were so beautiful, but so massive. Four bedrooms and a
room and bath for a maid, and so beyond our humble selves that we
couldn’t imagine that for us.
MarkdaSilva: Where had they started building faculty homes at that point, aside from the
old campus?
Siegel: [00:07:30] Nowhere. Nothing was being built. 1947, no. That came a little
later. This was it. It was a small dusty town and a small university.
Beautiful. We were overwhelmed by the beauty and the ease of
conversation and the ease with which you could drop into the President’s
Office. There was an ease of communication that made it very agreeable.
MarkdaSilva: And who was president at that time?
Siegel: [00:08:05] As you speak, I suddenly can’t remember. I cannot remember.
MarkdaSilva: I can look that up.
Siegel: [00:08:11] Yes, would you, please? I would like to know that too.
It became very clear that we would have to buy a house. But this was not
the intent of the plan, so there wasn’t a lot of money ready. On the other
hand, Bernard’s father had just died and we had a little sum of money that
made us feel somewhat secure. However, there was no thought that this

58

would enable us to buy a house. We didn’t want to buy a house. We were
here on a two-year contract, but we couldn’t find anything to rent. We
engaged a realtor and bought our first little house in College Terrace, a
piece of land highly developed by graduate students and newly arriving
young faculty, small houses that were rentable or buyable, financially
possible. It was a great little community.
We found a small house there, our first house, and it was terribly
exciting. The Keesings helped us through the process of buying. However
we had bought a house that was full of dry rot and bugs, and we hadn’t
known that. Now it would be illegal to do that. We had to face that ordeal
and put $2,000 into the repair.
Our Steinway piano, part of Bernard’s heritage from his mother and
full of importance to Bernard and to us was just sort of sitting on little
sticks that were eroding below us. So it was a very traumatic thing, but part
of a learning curve and getting wiser and smarter, rather than these
innocents abroad kind of a thing. People were very helpful, other faculty
came through and gave us good tips and welcomed us as newcomers. It
was a lovely beginner experience, a total new piece of our life. It couldn’t
have been a more agreeable and welcoming circumstance.
Bernard had special training in Portuguese because he intended to do
research in Brazil, so that was already in his mind when he was hired. We
were now approaching our thirties, and in our checkered student life we
had no plans of having a family, but it seemed now was the time. I felt
strongly that I wanted to start a family before I became thirty, so that was

59

proceeding at the same time I was searching for work. This was not an east
coast or Midwest kind of city where social agencies are flourishing. It was
just not so. It was years behind eastern or Midwest social services, both
places where I had trained.
MarkdaSilva: May I ask you something? Because as I recall, and please correct me if I’m
wrong, but I think the first sort of several jobs that you had were not
Stanford-affiliated, and then it wasn’t until 1970 or so, that you came to
work at Cowell Student Health Center. Is that right?
Siegel: [00:12:38] My first job at Stanford was not at Cowell. It was at the
Department of Gynecology in Stanford Medical Center. There’s a vast
history. I’m just trying in my mind -- to focus and sort of give the flavor.
We were a Stanford family. Well, you can see our issues were, how do we
make a life happen at the same time the work for Bernard was developing,
especially with the folks in the humanities, who had been the most vocal
but not alone? There was interest in developing it.
MarkdaSilva: It seems to me you could be an excellent anthropologist but not necessarily
be a very creative person as far as developing a department in an up-andcoming university. But if you’re both, then that would have been the most
exciting thing to do. I mean, what a project. What a dream come true.
Siegel: [00:13:53] Awesome, awesome.
MarkdaSilva: Is that how it felt to him or was it overwhelming or maybe both? Do you
think he was creative?
Siegel: [00:14:00] Bernard was very optimistic, a centered person, and he took on
this mandate with the thought, “What if it doesn’t work? What if it’s too

60

much? They’ve never done it. How am I going—?” But Bernard was very
solid. I mean, he was a very secure person. He was not hopelessly secure,
but optimistic. He grew up in a very secure family in a little town on the
northern border of Wisconsin. He was the last of four sons. His family had
been immigrants to this country. The early days of going from nothing,
selling off of a little wagon in the villages of the northwest and finally
putting aside enough money to start a business in this small town, were
over. Bernard was at this end of the family. The family was quite solid by
the time he came along.
[00:15:22] He was a very positive person because he had known
security. His parents were delighted with his dreams and only wanted to be
as helpful as they could be. So he came with a lot of inner security to this.
And, on a personal level, this was great for me, because I certainly didn’t
come from a family background of security. Rather, I was a self-made
person who had dreams that I was going to try to actualize. But, no,
Bernard brought along with him a sense of this is a piece of work and how
to go about it. He was consulting with people who wanted to see
anthropology grow; the president, whoever. It was a ripe position by the
time he came along. He didn’t have to build the interest. The interest was
there.
He immediately made contact with his colleagues at UC Berkeley and
at other universities where anthropology was known and growing. But
we’ve got to remember, in 1947, anthropology was also very new on the
scene, and so you had to be able to go beyond yourself to what makes a

61

structure happen. He knew what he wanted to see as the structure and he
knew that it was a beginning. We’re not going to create a finished product;
we’re going to try to build a floor on which growth could take place. So
with that in mind, he just proceeded with the logical steps that get others
into it.
One of the things that he had had to confront was his father, because
when Bernard went to Harvard as an undergraduate, he was entering as a
premed student. He was to be the doctor in the family. Two elder brothers
were to be the lawyers, the third brother was to carry on the family
business. So Bernard went as a premed and had the good luck to have a
fellow in his dorm at Harvard who came to him and said, “I’ve just had the
most wonderful experience of my life. I went to an Anthro course, and it is
the most exciting thing that has ever happened to me. Take that class,
Bernard.”
And he did, and he came out and said, “I know where I have to go in
my life, where I want to go.”
MarkdaSilva: Wow.
Siegel: [00:18:27] He was uncertain as to how he was going to communicate this
to his father, but his father, who had died the summer before I met
Bernard, said, “Bernard, you have to follow your heart, and where your
heart is, is your path. I don’t know anything about anthropology, but you’ll
teach me and we’ll believe with you and support you.”
MarkdaSilva: Oh, what a special man.

62

Siegel: [00:18:54] Yes. But I’m just saying this to kind of establish the kind of
person Bernard was, “Here’s a job. I have to do this job. I want to do this
job. I know how to go about it. Maybe I won’t be successful, but I know
how to make this work.”
So it was happening. Every week there was a call or a conference or,
“Let’s get together,” or, “Could you send me that paper--the building of a
foundation?” His Berkeley colleagues, and a few sprinkled here and there at
Cal State and UCLA, were very helpful. “Remember this. This is going to
be an important item that you have to get into the scene.” It was truly an
administrative building plan.
MarkdaSilva: If you remember any names, feel free to mention them, any of his
colleagues in Berkeley, for example.
Siegel: [00:20:00] I’m so poor at names. I’d have to do some—
MarkdaSilva: That’s all right. You don’t need to do any research, but—
Siegel: [00:20:09] No, but I have names in the back of my mind, but I just—they
were splendid and very helpful. We were very close in those early years to
our Berkeley comrades, because they could teach us. “Look at this, there is
a gap in here that you have to be able to have in place.”
MarkdaSilva: So Berkeley already had a Department of Anthropology?
Siegel: [00:20:32] Yes. We had anthropology meetings, and people came. It was a
very small society, and they intermingled. They knew the Margaret Meads,
the Ruth Benedicts from New York, Columbia. It was such a small group
that it was easy to converse. This was before computers. I mean, you typed.
You had a secretary. You typed letters. You made communication happen.

63

But all of this was a new world for us. The Keesings were very
important because, as we did have two children, they became the uncle and
aunt of my children. She is the child of a minister. Where did I say she was
from? Not Australia but—
MarkdaSilva: New Zealand?
Siegel: [00:21:50] New Zealand. And Felix came in another way. They were
established with their beautiful house and garden and their beautiful selves
and were in a wonderful position to welcome us and open the doors. Even
in buying a house, we were untutored in that. We had lived hither and
dither across the United States on our life path.
This was a whole new chapter. I say we’re a Stanford family because
that was a time like birthing something new. The department is being built,
and you’re the people who are going to help it. Faculty wives were reaching
out to new people. We had a society of faculty wives where I’d be
welcomed to a tea and meet other people.
MarkdaSilva: Was that just to help you feel comfortable, or was there more of a mission
to the groups of faculty wives?
Siegel: [00:23:01] Oh, I think there was more of a mission. We planned events
where new faculty wives were welcomed and encouraged to contribute.
The community had a long history, but you could be very lonely if there
weren’t some outreach within the community. Stanford wives were not
primarily career women, although some were licensed in their own fields.
But the drift was women were at home. They created a Welcoming

64

Committee on the campus, and they looked to the community for
resources.
I remember one group of friends, thinking of Leah Chodorow, who
was a clinical social worker, but absolutely no longer on the career path.
She now had children and was a volunteer in the community. One project
was a facility for children who had been injured at birth. We needed to
have a place, a special school, and other support. It was these faculty
women who came together and said, “If we ask this and that and ask for
small contributions, maybe we can help it to grow into a facility.” They
were very instrumental in building the resources. This was not just a
beautiful piece of land and scholars and all that. It was people who made
the community more than a barren social psychological place. They helped,
because the men and some women faculty were busy creating the academic
experience.
MarkdaSilva: You were more responsible for developing the community aspect of it.
Siegel: [00:25:16] We saw a need, and that’s what women were doing. It made a
difference in the fabric of us as a Stanford family, that people were noticing
what was missing. How can we try to develop that? Over here—that’s on
the academic level—what’s missing? Where do we need to go? How should
we specialize, or should we specialize?
The whole situation was ripe. It’s going to develop and be something,
or this is going nowhere.
MarkdaSilva: Yes, but you didn’t want that to happen.
Siegel: [00:26:20] Of course not.

65

MarkdaSilva: You mentioned an organization for children who were hurt at birth. Was
that the Peninsula Children’s Center? Do you remember any particular
organizations that were founded then?
Siegel: [00:26:42] Yes. The one that I have in mind is very special. I can think of a
classic instance of the quality of a faculty wives’ life. A childhood illness
needed attention, it needed a special school. Marv Chodorow was a
professor of physics, and his wife, Leah, was a trained social worker from
the East in New York. She had had a very lively career but no longer
wanted that. She wanted to be a faculty wife building a new life here. I
remember being at her house one morning with other women who were
interested in developing this resource. While she talked, she was at the
kitchen sink working on a dinner for twelve. Some of the guests were
people with money who might be interested in giving to a good cause.
She was a fabulous cook, and only she could somehow be plotting
how to build this at the same time a dinner for twelve people was going to
take place. She did this with ease. You were in a win-win situation if you
were invited for that dinner. Isn’t that a lovely example of the strength that
women had? It was a bit too early for women to really be going out to
work, and many of us had small children. It felt like a time when we
weren’t free to leave the home, but we were very interested in the
community growing.
MarkdaSilva: It does not sound like an unfulfilled time for the women here at all,
between even just typing their husbands’ papers and raising children,
certainly—

66

Siegel: [00:29:15] And building a social life. You know, women do the social life
thing.
MarkdaSilva: Right, for the whole family, not just for themselves. [laughs] Absolutely.
And then, as you say, building community. Unless there’s some sort of guilt
associated with it, which there clearly was not. I think nowadays it might be
a little different or maybe not, but it sounds very fulfilling.
Siegel: [00:29:38] Yes, it was, and it was also fulfilling to be able to extend your
husband, and that’s the family feeling. Then you’re having children for the
first time in your life, and they’re growing up. Part of their social life is
Stanford events or just going to the Frost Theater in the morning and
running up and down the hills of the Frost Amphitheater and being with
other families who were running up and down the hills, you know, claiming
the land and seeing that we had some stake in it to grow.
We also had the shadow of a two-year contract. We did not imagine
we are going to be here forever. We didn’t know. But it didn’t matter,
because you got involved in growing and being and attaching. It always had
a family feeling, those of us who came at early points in our professional
lives and the children were little or just being born.
I remember maternity clothes that you’d lend to another newly
pregnant woman, who you would then call and say, “You know what? I
lent you those clothes, but I need them back now.” [laughter] But there
was a sense of being far away from our own families, because many of us
had eastern backgrounds or came from other countries.

67

The Stanford Accelerator brought new people, but the main impetus
to growth of the university was happening out at San Jose and the whole
computer industry.
MarkdaSilva: Even then in ’47?
Siegel: [00:31:39] No, no, no, mid-fifties. But what started in the late 40’s was a
sense of, “We need more. We need to fill in empty places.” In the fifties, it
was, “This is a first-rate university. We have to bring in more and more
people.” We came at the edge of the starting to grow into a major
university period, and that accelerated in the fifties.
Also in the fifties, women were starting to have permission to return
to work, the kids were launched and going to school. I wanted to work,
maybe part-time, in my profession. I did not get much support, except
from Bernard, who was very, very interested in women moving ahead,
making a full life happen. Marriage, children, career, he identified with all
of this for his students, for his family, for people.
[00:33:31]
As the university family got bigger we lost something too. We lost the
intimacy of a smaller campus life, but that had to go. If it weren’t the
computer industry and the common goals and work in that, it would have
had to be something else. We couldn’t exist anymore in the educational
world without some major growing and strengthening of the university.
MarkdaSilva: Particularly if you wanted to attract topnotch people, which was clearly the
goal.
Siegel: [00:34:56] Both students and faculty.

68

MarkdaSilva: Yes.
Siegel: [00:34:59] We were growing bigger, and, the only formal aspect was the
outreach for bringing in more connections and more faculty, more
students, more women.
MarkdaSilva: More women as faculty?
Siegel: [00:35:36] Yes.
MarkdaSilva: Do you remember when that happened?
Siegel: [00:35:38] No, but along in there, in the fifties and onwards. All of these
were developing threads which meant you belonged to more. The family
was a bigger proposition, but gently also. It wasn’t like we turned a page
and everything just bloomed. No, no. It was hard work, an attitude of
growth, and it was exciting to be part of, it really was.
Anthropology developed. Bernard was able to plant the seeds there
of a viable department, and he joined with Felix Keesing to be the leader. It
was a joint plan with sociology at first until it became clear that we were
strong enough and attracting enough new faculty to be independent.
MarkdaSilva: Your own department?
Siegel: [00:36:51] Yes, but that was evolving. The department grew, and suddenly
there was physical anthropology, there was medical anthropology, and
other subspecialties. My husband always preferred the University of
Chicago model that if you’re an anthropologist, you are competent in all
the fields of anthropology. You have a global sense of it, even though your
specialization might be cultural and someone else’s medical. We connect in

69

medical, growing a medical framework of interest in education and
eventually dissertations develop more broadly.
[00:37:48] Once the department was established, it had a lot of
opportunity to grow, because veterans had returned from the war, were
going to school and seeking careers that hadn’t been in existence before
World War II. It was a growing time for many universities.
MarkdaSilva: Across the country, postwar.
Siegel: [00:38:41] Yes, right. In our circumstance fieldwork opportunities became
very important. You applied for Viking Fund or other funding groups out
of the East Coast for a project that you wanted to start.
Bernard had a theme of cultural growth that he was very much
involved in. What happens to societies when something happens like a new
road is built from a small village up in the mountains above the city of
Parma, Italy? What happens? It isn’t just a road and how nice that is. It’s a
road that gives that village new meaning. They can get to Milan in an hour
and a half now by bus where it used to take three and a half hours by train.
That means that kids growing up in the village are not just going to become
what their fathers had been, namely, makers of cheese. Up to that time, this
is what the kids in the family did. They took over the prosperous work that
their father had started in doing, because making cheese is an all-day, allnight affair. The milk gets delivered at four in the morning and you are out
there. It’s twenty-four hours. Can’t get away on weekends unless you can
develop some system where somebody takes over for you.
MarkdaSilva: You would get these funds from outside the university?

70

Siegel: [00:40:46] Sometimes inside and outside. There’d be funds within the
university, but not enough to sustain you for a couple of months or six
months living over there, and that’s why outside funding agencies were
very useful and very helpful.
So Bernard was interested in that theme of what happens to an intact
society when something that is totally new, like a road, changes lives.
Young people of the village wanted to go work in the factories of Milan.
It’s an opportunity to work independently, to make cash, and to sign off at
five o’clock in the afternoon, and you’re free.
MarkdaSilva: So the character of the whole town changes and the future of the children.
Siegel: [00:41:35] Yes, it changes, but also they have to discover that all is not beer
and honey, because where do you live if you’re now living in the city? Some
awful little room that you’re going to rent somewhere? And what are the
social ramifications? You’re sort of free with some money in your pocket,
but what are you privy to? Society shifts and changes, the first step was
going to the city and then living with the reality that you lose out and,
therefore, maybe you’re not going to do that forever. Or farmers
themselves have to adjust—“My son is gone, my daughter’s gone, too, and
how am I going to manage it?” So he studied that in many places of the
world.
MarkdaSilva: Was Brazil one of them?
Siegel: [00:42:25] Yes, Brazil was one. Italy. Yes, of course, he started with Brazil.
It was a theme also in a different kind of way with Pueblo Indians
who were lured to the big city, disturbing the intact society and finding it

71

was tough in the city, and maybe having to return or going back and forth.
It interrupted life systems. So it was a fascinating theme that he really
pursued all of his anthropological life and had some very interesting data.
So wherever he was, he was looking at that theme.
[00:43:14] Another opportunity for developing the Stanford family
feeling was when Bernard was invited to be a faculty on the overseas study
program. We started out with a group that was going to Italy, to Florence.
Every trip that we took was an intermingling with students, and we saw
how they experienced Italy on their own. Maybe earlier or later they had
gone with the parents to Europe, but this was their own time, and we were
the people they could turn to for helpful hints or open doors. Just the
living together with Stanford students was profoundly interesting.
MarkdaSilva: Did you tend to see that experience anthropologically? I mean, now you
had a chance to observe this subgroup from within.
Siegel: [00:44:37] It became a different kind of experience because Bernard was
sampling and knowing Stanford students from a classroom, and as students
got into an anthropology major and you were their thesis advisor, you
knew students more intimately, We had never lived—some faculty lived
as—
MarkdaSilva: Resident fellows.
Siegel: [00:45:00] —resident fellows, but we had not done that. So this experience
of living with students, there was a theme there that you had to have in
mind. The theme was Stanford was not developing a plan of living in other
parts of the world to open up doors so that you can live in a lovely old

72

castle or old villa. We did stay in a villa. Well, first, it was a priest’s house or
something, but eventually there was a villa.
MarkdaSilva: Which villa was it? Was it Il Salviatino?
Siegel: [00:45:46] Yes, Il Salviatino. The point was, how do we help? How do two
of our faculty help that process of getting to know a new society? They’re
not going to know it well enough by sitting around a villa and going to
classes. They’re going to know it as they are willing to engage, going out.
[00:46:33] So Bernard’s course that he was teaching was placing a
certain number of students with a farm family. They went out to the farm
and got to know the family, and then they would be invited to come back
for a holiday and an engagement would happen. It was a little bit daunting
to go out. There was a requirement for a certain level of Italian, but it was
an opportunity to grow.
It was an opportunity for minority students. I remember once we had
about a dozen black students and Hispanic students out of a group of sixty.
They were having just one heck of a time finding themselves in Italy. First
of all, it was a time of the hairdo.
MarkdaSilva: The big naturals?
Siegel: [00:47:47] Yes. And that was big, because—well, let me tell you this little
vignette. One day a group of us was going to a museum downtown,
because our co-partner from the art department, Matt Kahn, was teaching.
We had Italian faculty especially to introduce us to the art and the
literature, the beauty of Florence. So, anyway, we were going to an exhibit
downtown, and it was raining and we were waiting for the bus at a little

73

store where you bought Coke and you waited for the bus inside when it
was raining. So there are a group of us, including a couple of the black
students, and we noticed that the proprietor of this place, a man about
fifty-five, small Italian guy, was going around. The group was standing
here. Some of them were having a Coke, some of us were just waiting.
[00:49:01] I noticed that this little proprietor, small but determined,
kept going around the student group, centering on one statuesque, very
attractive young black woman with a huge gorgeous afro, and he kept
circling closer and closer to her. Now, these students often stopped in this
little store, waiting for the bus. And she spoke up at one point, and she
said, “It’s okay. You may touch my hair,” she said to him. And all of a
sudden, ecstasy broke out on his face. And I thought, “Wait a minute.
What have we got here? He’s allowed to touch her hair? Is that it, and it’s
an understanding between them, or is this a come-on kind of thing?” You
know, I’m here as a clinical person, the student health monitor. I’ve got to
be aware of ripples that are going on.
So the bus came then, we got onto the bus, and I had the opportunity
to speak with that student, and I said, “Boy, you were awfully brave in
reaching out to that guy’s wishes, but were you comfortable in it, or did it
place you in a very awkward situation?” See, because we tried to use
incidents to say, “We’ve got a learning curve thing here. Did you do
something very brave, or was it really unwise, or what does it say about the
relationship you have with this man?”

74

And she said, “Oh, Mrs. Siegel, it’s good that you asked, but, you
know, I know this man. He circles around me all the time anytime that I’m
in his store. You know, we’re exotic people to a lot of these Italian guys.
They can’t believe this hair is part of this person who’s come from
California. It’s all so unbelievable. They need to feel the reality of it.” And
she said, “I knew that that’s what he wanted. This was not akin to a sexual
closeness. There’s nothing like that there. I could give him his wish, touch
it and know it’s really hair, it’s mine, and it’s the way some of us look.”
[00:51:24] I said, “Well, I felt you were really very wise in letting his
urgency be addressed and knowing the limits of it and therefore you’re
imparting to this man he can touch it, but that’s it. ‘We’re not in touch with
my hair ever after. It was this incident.’” And she felt okay about herself,
but she only felt okay about herself because these students didn’t know this
Italian culture and that the guys were going to be overcome by this bevy of
American girls all—
MarkdaSilva: I wonder to what extent the African American ones, they were probably
more prepared to be exotic in the eyes of the Italians than the Caucasian
ones, I would think, because they’re so conscious of themselves already.
Siegel: [00:52:22] Yes, right. This was very hard for these students. Something
amazing about them aroused Italian vigor and interest, and it was very hard
at first. They thought it was sexual come-ons, and they wanted to nip that
in the bud, which they did. They gave the message, but they went through
hard times to feel their own okay-ness. But they were feeling it. She would
not have done it.

75

MarkdaSilva: Are you talking about the African American ones specifically?
Siegel: [00:52:56] Yes, particularly, although there was a thread for all the women,
all of these beautiful American women who were there. They all had to
experience the guys coming after them and just wanting to sit and adore
them or be omnipresent when the girls wanted to see the world.
But they had to work at being comfortable, and it came about even
more poignantly—it came about around food. The minority students who
came on this trip, it was unbelievable that they couldn’t bear the food that
was served to them. We had the queen and king of good Italian cooking.
They were just expert cooks who loved to cook for these hungry American
students, and dish after dish, my African-American and Hispanic kids, they
wanted their foods that they were accustomed to. They wanted their soul
food. They didn’t want this fabulous lasagna. They had a real mountain to
climb before they could make a deal with this exquisite Italian food.
Wherever you looked, they were climbing mountains, you know.
There were so many adjustments which you could ignore, but that was not
our aim. Our aim was to understand what students were feeling, to expose
them in ways, “Well, maybe you could try a little of this special—.” As a
matter of fact, the cooks made Sunday night dinner a special draw to get
the students back from where they had traveled on the weekend. She had
her special super-duper lasagna advertised. That would be the dinner that
night. So when the students let themselves taste Italian food, bit by bit,
they could make it.

76

But I’m talking about you have an opportunity as faculty on that
scene to live with and to see where they’re not enchanted, where the
struggle is too great, “What brought me over here? What am I doing here
in Italy of all things?” You know, to go through that, just the same thing
when Vi opened.
[00:55:20] It’s why I started a group called Transitions here, because
people were saying, “And why did I leave my beautiful house? I have no
garden here. I have nothing here. What is this that I’ve transferred my
interests and my life into?” There’s always a beginning fighting against
something so new, culturally speaking.
[00:55:42] So the four of us, an art professor, an anthropology
professor, a social worker wife, and Matt’s wife, a wonderful artist, had an
opportunity to enhance the experience and to enjoy it together. Students
really loved overseas experiences. It’s one of their favorite pieces of their
Stanford life. I’m talking about the things that make for a family,
belongingness to a world. You participated and you belonged.
MarkdaSilva: Can I ask you where? You mentioned that you went to Florence more than
once.
Siegel: [00:56:38] We went three times, and then on the fourth time, we took a
group of students to the University of Haifa in Israel. It was a completely
different experience.
MarkdaSilva: Did Stanford have a program going already?
Siegel: Yes. It was different because these students were living in the University of
Haifa’s dorms.

77

MarkdaSilva: Do you remember the years of these trips, by any chance?
Siegel: [00:57:13] Oh, yes. I have to go to my diaries for Italy, because I was there
in the seventies. Haifa, University of Haifa, was just before war broke
out—it was the beginning of the eighties—between Israel and—what’s the
country just adjacent to Israel on the north? They got into war. Lebanon.
War broke out, I think in the summer of ’82, but we were there in ’81.
We had an apartment. We took an apartment that belonged to a
faculty there who was teaching here. That apartment was very nice and it
could be home to these students, because there was a difference. Most
students in Italy were more conversant in the language than—you had to
be some level of conversant to go on the trip.
MarkdaSilva: You had to have taken a certain amount of Italian, but I imagine living—
Siegel: [00:58:36] And a certain amount of Hebrew.
MarkdaSilva: Let me ask you about this. I went to Stanford in Florence, and I was
actually in love with Florence, and the villa was incredible to live in, but I
thought, honestly, pedagogically it was not a good setup because we were
set up to not partake of Italian life, really. They required you to eat all three
meals, for example, at the villa. So if you wanted to spend the day in the
city, you had to skip the meal you’d already paid for. They set it up so that
you were supposed to stay at the villa.
Siegel: [00:59:13] I don’t remember any ruling like that. What year was that?
MarkdaSilva: I was there ’77-’78, I think.
Siegel: [00:59:22] We were not there with you. [laughs]

78

MarkdaSilva: No, no, I wish you had been. My gosh, this whole time you’re talking, I
think, oh, I missed so much. I would have loved to go to those farms and
been engaged like that. I was looking for engagement.
Siegel: [00:59:34] Yes, that’s what, of course, an anthropologist would try to bring
to bear. But art was there. It was in the museum. We spent a lot of time
and energy, and, of course, we had very excellent Italian faculty to bring us
into the art world.
MarkdaSilva: That was the best.
Siegel: [00:59:54] Didn’t you love that? Yes. And, of course, one time we were
there, we had the big flood, and that was a huge learning curve because our
students got out into the town. They helped frantic shopowners to clear
out the muddy waters so that their stores would open in the spring,
because that was the lifeblood of Italians.
It was a wonderful opportunity for intermixing. We all found
something to do. We had a project. My project was being at the law library
of the university and blotting page by page these huge, wonderful art
books. You had to blot them to a certain level of dryness before they could
go to ovens to bake. If you put just a wet thing in, it would curl up. So
everybody found themselves, and we had reasons—
MarkdaSilva: To interact.
Siegel: [01:00:56] And I think that interaction, we had more marriages evolve out
of that time where we were involved in city refurbishing than in any of the
other groups, because it was a time that we were working together.
MarkdaSilva: That’s interesting. But I would think that the setup in Haifa would be—

79

Siegel: [01:01:21] Was the best.
MarkdaSilva: Yes. I mean, maybe the students didn’t come home as enamored of the
place as they did in Florence because it was such a luxurious way to live,
the way we lived in Florence, but I think the educational experience must
have been superior in Israel.
Siegel: [01:01:45] I can’t say that.
MarkdaSilva: Really? Not living with local people?
Siegel: [01:01:48] Oh, I think absolutely that’s the way to go, and Stanford in
Florence has recreated itself. You now live with families, Italian families,
and stuff. And also it isn’t just an undergraduate experience anymore. It’s
also graduate students who are deeply into their Italian stuff.
But living with students in a university, you know, the University of
Haifa has this model, which I think is a great model, of an apartment for
students that has a central room and kitchen, and then each student has a
small little room where the student can do his studying, he can goof off,
whatever he does, but you have your privacy and you have your
togetherness, and for most students, that works.
Siegel: [01:02:55] But we had one student—
MarkdaSilva: You had one student in Haifa.
Siegel: [01:03:25] Handsome, attractive, very steeped in the Near East, as his
father was a State Department person, had lived in the Near East, very
fluent in Hebrew, not Jewish, and he just wasn’t making it. He couldn’t
seem to make friends. All the other students were all being invited home
on the weekends. Some of the students were also from different

80

persuasions, but they were intermixing, and that kind of an apartment
space is a good model to set up because you have what is very much
needed--privacy, but you also cook together and it’s all very great.
[01:04:25] So we were taking the students for a month in a kibbutz, as
part of the experience. Since this guy was having such a hard time socially,
sort of a loner kind of feeling that he gave you, not complaining but not
being part of the group, Bernard and I said to each other, “What’s going to
happen to this kid on a kibbutz? I mean, is he just going to be a lonely
fellow on the kibbutz? You have to interconnect. Oh, we’ll have to watch
out,” because part of our outlook is preventive rather than just coming
after the fact.
So a wonderful thing happened. When you came to the kibbutz,
which was down south, you were immediately assigned a job. You were
there for a month and you had to work, and they wanted you to work. So
when they were interviewing this kid, they said, “Well, have you had any
work experience? We like people to do the work that they’re already
accustomed to, if possible.”
And he said, “Well, my couple of years at Stanford, I’ve been
working in the kitchen.”
They said, “Kitchen? Say not another word. Our kitchen is falling
apart. We do not know how to handle it so that that meals come out on
time and in a pleasant atmosphere. We are assigning you to the kitchen and
hope your experience will work in making our kitchen life, our eating life, a
better thing.”

81

Well, he was assigned the kitchen, and he became the hero of the
kibbutz because he could make a difference. He knew the tables over there
had to be arranged not by the people cooking over here. We need different
staff. He just organized it, and he was the hero. Everybody loved him.
Well, he was a very kind, dear person, basically shy but available, and that
experience in the dining hall at Stanford University gave him his place.
MarkdaSilva: Oh, that’s great.
Siegel: [01:06:43] Bernard was assigned to go up to the orange groves and pick
oranges. When he came home for dinner at one o’clock. I said, “So what
did you learn? I mean, was it a big learning curve thing out there? Good for
your Hebrew?” although Bernard was fluent in Hebrew.
And he says, “Not good for my Hebrew, but excellent for my
Spanish.”
I said, “Your Spanish?”
He said, “Yes, the people who built this place are all from Argentina.
Spanish is the language here.” [laughter] So in different ways you were
open. It was a wonderful add-on to be in Haifa.
MarkdaSilva: Oh, it sounds like it. Is Bernard the one who organized that, or is that part
of students’ lives, all of them who go to Haifa?
Siegel: [01:07:48] That they go to a kibbutz?
MarkdaSilva: Yes.
Siegel: [01:07:51] Yes, they had done it before when other staff was there. They’d
done it, set up the program for a year, and would spend a month in the
kibbutz. We added on to our program that we would have a trip to Egypt

82

over spring break, because we got to know the person who was the head of
the UC program of students. He was fluent in Arabic, fluent, had lived in
Egypt and knew the language and the culture. We joined him and his
students and said, “What about we take a bus trip to Egypt?”
It was over Passover, also, so we went with the students bearing a
package of matzo like this. We said, “It’s a reverse trip.” Remember, matzo
was part of our past. Now we were bringing it. We placed a box of matzo
in our hotel dining room where we all had breakfast together. But the
Egyptian students wanted these matzo. They loved the matzo. And we
thought, “How can we be graceful and indicate we wish they would not eat
up all the matzo, because we want it too?”
It was a lot of learning-curve things like that. If you, as the faculty,
make use of it and see it as your central mission there, it adds to the family
feeling. Certainly you’ve got these young people who are so bright, so
scared about the newness, such good learners, but if you’re not tapping
that all the time, then you’re not making what we think is an addition to the
curriculum.
MarkdaSilva: Well, I can see how you did that.
Siegel: [01:10:18] Yes, that sort of adds to the family, but you’re building the
family feeling too. You, by your experience as a teacher, faculty or a staff
person, are lending yourself to making this the most that it could be.
MarkdaSilva: Absolutely, and in a very attentive way, it sounds like.
Siegel: [01:10:47] Yes.

83

MarkdaSilva: Can I ask you about your involvement in the university as an employee? I
did not even know about your work in the Department of Gynecology at
the hospital.
Siegel: [01:11:01] Oh, yes.
MarkdaSilva: So if you can start at the beginning, that would be great. Full disclosure, my
father worked at the hospital, Jim Mark. I don’t know if you know him.
He’s a thoracic surgeon.
Siegel: [01:11:15] Say his name.
MarkdaSilva: James Mark.
Siegel: [01:11:17] Oh, yes, I know this man. What happened?
MarkdaSilva: He’s alive and well and happy with my mother.
Siegel: [01:11:23] Retired?
MarkdaSilva: Yes, retired.
Siegel: [01:11:26] He was wonderful.
MarkdaSilva: Oh, thank you. He still is.
Siegel: [01:11:30] I knew him because—where did he live on campus?
MarkdaSilva: We lived on Casanueva Place, on the same street with the Duignans and
the Ryans.
Siegel: [01:11:39] Yes, exactly, and that’s how I knew him, you know, just lightly.
He was a very good friend of a very good colleague friend of mine, you
know, in sort of circles within circles. I very much admired him. He was
very admirable.
MarkdaSilva: Thank you. I just wanted to say that before you started talking about
working at the hospital. I wanted it to be out.

84

Siegel: [01:12:06] Yes. Oh, I’m glad to know that. But I have to kind of retrace my
path. Does that answer the sense of we’ve been part of the growth of the
university?
MarkdaSilva: Yes.
Siegel: [01:12:20] And that the university was growing. If the university had only
been what we found when we first arrived in 1947, a sleepy little place in a
kind of little town with a main street, University Avenue, where there was
one bakery only. If you didn’t know how to bake our own cake, don’t even
think that you’re going to entertain. Home-baked goods were a sign of your
feminine competence.
MarkdaSilva: Anyway, yes, I do think you gave a good sense.
Siegel: [01:13:07] We came back from Brazil, we had our second child, and then
we needed to move, because our adorable little house in College Terrace
had no room for a study. It had two bedrooms and a bath. In going out
with a realtor to look, even then I did not feel able to buy one of the big
houses on campuses. It was too much too big, too staid. I needed a simpler
kind of way to start our life here.
[01:13:55] So I fell in love with a house. I had no intention of living
in Los Altos, but it was just kind of made for us, a beautiful house in the
midst of a half acre of land, in the middle with garden front and back, and
a blooming yellow hedge in March or April. I said, “I’ve got to bring my
husband,” and he fell in love with it too. We just simply had to have that
place. So there was our children’s growing-up place in Los Altos. Of
course, they went to nursery school there in Los Altos.

85

[01:14:39] I’m just trying to find out when was the point that I
actually started to work. We lived in Portugal, wanted the background of
Portugal behind the Brazilian life, and Eve was in first grade. When we
came back, she was in second grade and Paul was starting kindergarten.
That’s when I could start to think of my picking up my career. I had this
dangling degree from the University of Chicago. Did I mention this
before?
MarkdaSilva: Yes.
Siegel: [01:15:36] Because I don’t need to go into that again, except that Bernard
was pointing out the realities that social work itself had changed from a dogooder, lovely little service in Boston and Chicago and places in the East; it
was now a thing where you needed licensing or you were not able to offer
service, and it was changing in its demands and regulations.
If I were going to have a career such as I had talked about as long as
I had known Bernard, then I had to think seriously about finishing off this
degree, because without the degree I wouldn’t be eligible. So he said, “You
know, you’re not going to go back to the University of Chicago to finish
that paper,” nor did I finish it after I left Chicago for my first job in New
Haven Hospital.
[01:16:45] I started at Berkeley to see what they could offer me since
I had finished all the coursework and the agency work. They were
interested in me, but not without my taking courses that they required, so I
had to repeat some and take some that I had not taken at Chicago. By the
time they decided how much I needed, it was going to be a year’s work,

86

because they insisted on a fieldwork placement here. I hadn’t counted on,
that but they were just opening up a placement at the Children’s Health
Council, so at least I could be in this city and not have to travel.
I decided I would do the year’s work over a two-year period so that I
wasn’t commuting that much. But I had to learn how to drive Bayshore
Drive and take new risks.
MarkdaSilva: And you said Bernard was very helpful step by step and you’d drive across
the bridge.
Siegel: [01:18:02] Right. He said that, “If you need me to drive across every time,
this is not ideal.” But he got me started, and he said, “I’ll be there for you,”
and he was.
[01:18:13] Then I learned you can get into a co-driving thing and
make it easier, and I thought it’s going to be an easier schedule now
because I will just have to go to Berkeley two days a week, and that’s
doable. It’s all doable. But I also needed to feel that the children had their
home-baked chocolate chip cookies and their soup and the things they
love. So I was trying to straddle. Did a pretty good job of it, as a matter of
fact. But I thought, “Well, it’ll be more relaxing going back to school. I
don’t need to get the A’s anymore. Just do it, finish it.”
But such did not happen. Once you place me in a department up
there where I’m going to come out of it with an MSW degree, I needed my
A’s just like everybody else did. I’m very competitive. [laughter] And I had
to enter into that.

87

Fortunately, we had a very good anthropologist friend there who
said, “Anytime you have an early morning exam or exam where you’re
going to stay up all night, please stay overnight with us.”
MarkdaSilva: Oh, that’s great.
Siegel: [01:19:28] Yes. So I had support, and I got the degree. After I got the
degree, I felt now that both kids are in school, we’ve got a piece of time
that will be taken care of. Bernard was saying he’d shift a class to the
morning, so he’d be home in mid-afternoon when the kids got home from
school.
There were certain realities that you have to take care of, too. The
principal of the school in Los Altos called us in and said, “I have to talk
with you about Paul. Paul is too advanced to be in kindergarten.” That’s
because he had had a year in Portugal being tutored by his sister, who was a
reader and a teacher, and he just knew too much. The principal said, “It
isn’t good for him to be in this class when he’s already a reader and they
aren’t, and it isn’t good for them to have him here. I’d like to promote him
into first grade.”
And we said, “Oh, that has disastrous possibilities of pushing him
ahead.” He’d be the youngest.
MarkdaSilva: And smallest and all of that.
Siegel: [01:20:50] Smallest, the whole thing. So we did what we could to delay it,
said, “Well, let’s review this again in January. Now I think he needs to be in
his kindergarten place.” So eventually they did put him into first grade, and
I don’t think it was the greatest thing in the world for him, because he’s too

88

smart and too advanced, but he didn’t have time to be little, little. It was
not a good idea, and this principal was adamant that it was a bad situation
all around. So they’re in school, but there were issues of being in school,
you know.
MarkdaSilva: And you wanted to be available for them at the same time you’re pursuing
your professional life.
Siegel: [01:21:37] But Bernard was there in so many ways.
After getting my degree in ’58, I wanted immediately to get to work.
My experience that I felt was solid was my work at New Haven Hospital. I
spent two years there being a hospital worker on surgery and knowing what
it’s like to be at the end of the line when the surgeon is doing rounds.
There are his residents and his people and then eventually the nurses back
here, and way at the very end, lower than nurses, was the social worker.
[01:22:34] So I thought of doing hospital work, but it wasn’t right for
me. I was seeking something else, and I heard about a Family Service
agency that was just moving from renting space downtown to a new
building that had just been bought by the community on the next street to
California Avenue. There was a new director coming from Los Angeles,
and so I called the president of the board, and he said, “You will get an
interview with this new director immediately, because she’s hiring. She
wants people that she has chosen to be on her staff, as well as whatever
people are remaining on.”
So I got in touch with her in L.A., and she said, “I want to meet you.
I’m not coming up to Palo Alto now, so how could we arrange a meeting?”

89

I said, “We’re leaving for a summer’s work at an Indian pueblo out of
Santa Fe. We have to come through L.A. Could I meet you in L.A.?”
And so, of course, we did, and she hired me on the spot. She says, “I
like your energy, your whole thing.”
And I just felt this would be the roundest, most inclusive experience
I had. I had done a little volunteer work at an adult guidance clinic in San
Mateo, and I knew I wanted psychiatric experience, and I thought Family
Service was the basic agency of the community.
She hired me for September, and she also hired another person who
was very close to your father. Her name was Cleo Eulau and Cleo Eulau
and I started work. They had just moved from Antioch to Stanford, and
our husbands worked together. Cleo and I were becoming very good
friends, and we started at Family Service together, you know, the
networking kind of thing, that was wonderful.
So that started me, and glowing references from Gertrude Hangerer,
which—have you see any of my CV or references?
MarkdaSilva: Not your references, but your CV.
Siegel: [01:25:14] Okay. I would like you to just see that. I have it over here.
But I had this energy and this drive and this wish to be a piece of the
world-helping force. Having energy turns out to be a very important piece
of aging, because if you have energy, you can still do, and you’re still open
to new ideas and making it better or experimenting with things.
So I worked with a person who was not beloved by many of her
staff, but by me she was. I had a tough mother. I knew this tough person.

90

She didn’t scare me, but several of my other colleagues there took issue
with her and had a lot of struggles with her.
MarkdaSilva: Was this a Stanford-affiliated group?
Siegel: [01:26:20] No, it was a community agency.
At the end of my eighth year, I said, “I need to broaden my
experience. Maybe I need to have a piece of public agency work,” and so I
took on a job in the county at one of their agencies, and lo and behold, I
found the rules and regulations are very enormous in county work. I didn’t
really want to be stuck in that, and I heard about an opening at Stanford in
the gynecology department, and I thought, “Well, I’ve been with surgery,
I’ve been in hospitals. Why don’t I see if, now that I’m a clinically upgraded
social worker, I could make a difference working with gynecologists who
don’t have much contact with social psychological issues? Maybe I can
make a difference there, if they need a difference. But anyway, I could try
that to see if it works.” My first job was working in a hospital. So I went to
that job and—
MarkdaSilva: Do you remember when this was? It sounds like 1958 plus eight, maybe
1966?
Siegel: [01:27:53] 1958, I got my degree. Eight years. I know specifically I worked
at the Student Health Clinic from 1970 to 1990. So this was in the sixties.
MarkdaSilva: How long were you there?
Siegel: [01:28:17] Not very long because of opportunities that came up, but it was,
again, a learning-curve because those young gynecologists, they knew
nothing about social or psychological issues but were open to learning.

91

[01:29:05] Let’s get this on the record of how I was a welcome force
there. The psychosocial aspect became something that interested the heads
of the services. They wanted it for the teaching of their residents, because
the teaching was hugely important.
So my door was open and I was available. We started to do some
specific kinds of counseling, because California had made abortion legal
and it was not legal anywhere else in the United States. It was before Roe
versus Wade. People were coming from Georgia and New York City and
little towns here and there to Stanford to have an abortion.
[01:30:07] And I said, “We’ve got to have a plan here, folks. We just
can’t be drowning in people. We have to listen to them. We have to hear
where they are in this process. We just don’t automatically receive
somebody and see that she has an abortion. We have to listen to who they
are, what they want, and how they’re doing and whether they have support
or don’t. We’ve got to make a system work here.”
So part of the system was, I said, “Anybody who was absolutely
negative to abortion for religious or other personal reasons should not
serve in this way. We don’t want anybody serving who is alien to the
process of abortion, so that will screen out some of you. But for those of
you who are open to a patient’s request for an abortion, we then have to
listen, and we have to listen well.”
We said a counseling process will take place. The first person that
that applicant seeking an abortion will see is the social worker.

92

MarkdaSilva: May I ask what was the hierarchy? When you came in, did they say, “Please
establish some sort of system for us”? Whom were you answering to and
how supportive was that person or those people?
Siegel: [01:31:38] Let’s see if I can remember it. It was posted where people at
Stanford post openings and positions, and I heard about it and I saw the
posting. I spoke to the head of the social service department, saying I could
be interested in this job, that I’d had some previous experience. “I’m
building my future career, and I would like to be a candidate for that
position.” So I was well qualified.
They hired me. The heads of the department, you know, are faculty,
and then comes training people, interns.
MarkdaSilva: So they’re really quite involved in other—they hired you so that you would
sort of take care of this aspect of things, as opposed to—
Siegel: [01:32:35] No. Abortion and all that was not part of my being hired. I was
hired because they realized the people had social, emotional problems, and
if they are giving credit to aspiring residents and interns, they have to give
them the education that supports what to do when a person comes with a
gynecological problem. That’s why they felt the need. A social worker in
our department should be in place, so that whatever is going to be
happening, you would be a person who would be giving seminars to our
residents.
MarkdaSilva: I see. I was imagining you working directly with the patients, so thank you
for clarifying that. That’s helpful.

93

Siegel: [01:33:28] It had nothing to do with pregnancies particularly. It had to do
with the human condition and how we listen and what we figure out is a
theme here that we need to help that patient who is very upset in listening
to, yes, she is pregnant, yes—
Siegel: [01:37:16] Oh, yes, and I feel as if I gave you just the wrong imagery.
Believe me, this had nothing to do with abortion, except that there was an
agenda item, because when you become a legal resource, you’re being
flooded with demands from all over the country. What are you doing with
these hysterical people who are coming to have an abortion because their
mother insists they must have an abortion, or they insist, but they’re
scared? They’re a first-year law student, they don’t want to interrupt their
whole professional career—it’s not the right time or the right place in their
lives. And for a twelve-year-old child to be pregnant, which means that she
hadn’t told her mother about it, and the mother had noticed that this kid
was putting on weight, all kinds, and I have so many lovely stories to go
into, but—
MarkdaSilva: But focus on what you were doing for Stanford and how they supported
you or did not support you in what you were doing. I find it fascinating
that you were there to help the residents learn how to work with patients.
Siegel: [01:38:37] That’s what a medical school is. The residents to learn what?
MarkdaSilva: How to listen to, in this case, women who are coming in to the gynecology
department. It reminds me of Ernlé Young, who was one of the people.
Did you know him?
Siegel: [01:38:50] Yes, yes, lovely man.

94

MarkdaSilva: Such a lovely man, and he’s one of the people I interviewed, and so he
talked a lot about what he did, obviously, at the hospital.
Siegel: [01:38:59] Yes, it’s helping people to learn how to manage critical
conditions of life or how to build a life that has value, not only there at age
forty-two, but now that you’re sixty-nine and the issues that you face, you
know, how to always be working at the quality of your time and space,
whether professional or whether your children have now left and it’s just
you and he alone in your house together, whatever life brings you. And a
social worker is engaged in a service, going through severe cardiac surgeries
and the process of healing, and how you move from feeling stuck and
overwhelmed and into finding your power.
MarkdaSilva: From the point of view of someone who’s interested in understanding the
institutional evolution of Stanford, did you see changes in attitude or
changes in procedure at the hospital over the time you were there?
Siegel: [01:40:33] Yes. I just wanted to show you something. This is just a nice
statement from the Director of the Psychological Services at that time. I
was just a person who could perform in this area, and, yes, I saw changes.
One of the changes we can use as an illustration right now, is what
happened on the business of unplanned pregnancies, because it was
something just becoming a legal entity, it mattered during that time.
I loved this one reference of Bernard talking at an informal
retirement party or something. He’s talking about what he learned about
me, attributes that I had when we met. I had called him because his cousin
had been my friend and told me I might like to meet him. “And then I

95

learned of her background in music, her intelligence, liveliness, capacity for
hard work, in general good sense, all attributes that I lacked,” he, Bernard,
“in abundance. I made up my mind to marry her then and there. What I
didn’t know and came to appreciate and enjoy was her love of exploration
of the last frontiers, both of the mind and of all mankind. She put herself,
as I have, in Robert Redfield’s distinguished anthropologist’s words,
“squarely on the side of mankind and wished mankind well.” I have come
to know what Dr. Bennigan meant, because as a clinician, Charlotte is a
keen, insightful observer of the human condition. She’s always at home in
sojourns wherever we happen to be going,” for Bernard’s work. “What she
saw in me, I’ve come to suspect, was a lifelong challenge for honing her
skills by remaking me a more satisfying person.” [laughter] I doubt that. He
held on to who he was. He was a very good person.
Now we’re talking about how I got engaged in being part of the
university staff. I saw there was an opening in gynecology and I really
wanted to explore. The hospital stuff was still in my mind, and could there
be a lead in there into psychological or psychiatric thinking? I was
interested in building.
When I spoke to the Director of Social Service, he said, “You’ve got
some great qualities. Why don’t you make an application at the gynecology
department?”
The heads of departments in the hospital, as you know well, they are
important people. They have total experience or they built the department,
and they also have some idea, “We need a social worker because these

96

people who come to us, they come with problems, and we don’t really
know an awful lot about counseling. So you could teach us or you could
see these people, along with their medical care.”
MarkdaSilva: And did you tend to do a combination of both, teach them and see the
patients yourself?
Siegel: [01:44:52] Yes, definitely a combination and building. If something was
needed and wasn’t in place, did we have to build it into what we offer?
Because that became the issue. I didn’t know anything about abortion and
people coming until I got to the clinic and realized that these were among
the massive referrals. This was a steady force calling in for an appointment.
So I said to the big guys at the top, who were faculty people who had
done their training here or other hospitals, I said, “So if we’re having some
of these come, mightn’t it be important that we have a formula of how to
give them the appropriate service that they’re needing, and doing this thing
that may be very difficult for them, handling their feelings or handling the
actual experience of having an abortion or coming for an abortion and
deciding not to go ahead with an abortion. Whatever, we should have a
formula so that people fall into a track.”
And I think I was telling you yesterday, I said, “People who are
negative to abortion should not be in this list. Nobody who has feelings
like that can possibly listen well or be helpful.”
So out of those, we had a whole bunch of trainees, residents or
interns, and we just started having talks together in anticipation of what we
would be seeing. I said, “We need to work with the next person who

97

comes in with this request. We might start out by saying anybody coming
with their request for terminating a pregnancy, ‘We will give you your first
appointment with our social worker, who will get the general picture,’ who
will see that this person is a hysterical high school kid who’s gotten into a
really troubled place, not able to talk with her parents, not knowing what to
do, longing to have a baby but certainly not now, later, later.”
“Were you using contraception?”
“Oh, no, we didn’t do that.”
[01:47:26] And I said, “So then you’ve been living with the possibility
you could be pregnant, since you’re having intercourse with people or with
this boyfriend of yours. So let’s sort of proceed on the steps of what needs
to be. Of course, our doctors have to see you and establish that you are
pregnant, and we have to talk over your options. What are your options?
How do you feel about terminating this pregnancy? Maybe there’s a part of
you that really wants it. Either you care for this guy or you want it or you
don’t know what else to do in your life, and so having a child would be so
much good but so hard, yet no money, you’re supported by your parents,
who absolutely are not empathic to your being pregnant. What of all these
are you thinking about?”
So I had to get her to talk and to see it’s a serious thing—this
pregnancy is in your body. For example, a law student came to see me, her
boyfriend came with her and she sat in the chair, and he lay on the ground
in front of her kissing her feet and saying, “Promise me you will not abort
this pregnancy. We do not believe in abortion. Where I come from down

98

in the deep South and the religious background I have, we would never get
an abortion. And you’re saying you cannot really carry through and have a
baby at this time. Well, that’s okay, because my mother will take the child
and bring up the baby for you.”
And the girl, the pregnant woman, is saying, “I would never permit
that. I will not let anyone else take the baby. The only reasonable adult
thing to do is that I have to feel I can make a decision like that.
MarkdaSilva: So you had a whole array of people coming through your office.
Siegel: [01:49:47] Well, there are not thousands, but even two is a lot.
Siegel: [01:49:55] Yes. Whatever the number was, we had a significant number of
people say we need to have a policy, a pathway, because we can’t just be all
over the place. We need to know we have a system. There are now people
who, unknowingly or whatever, have allowed themselves to become
pregnant, and it’s a hard thing to be twelve, it’s a hard thing to be—I’m
thinking of a thirty-nine-year-old lawyer who came from New York,
who—everything. You have to notice what she’s saying. Every time she
talked about why she is here to have an abortion, she always referred to not
the pregnancy, not the abortion, but to the baby, and I felt, “You’re saying
‘baby’ so much says to me that you are mentally seeing a live baby that is
yours, who you are going to be bringing up and loving and will be loving
you. You’re seeing this baby.” So I said to her, “I’m noticing that you’re
taking a lot about the baby, and it says that you’ve got a lot of feelings. You
know, I think we should meet again in two days and see where your feeling
is going with this.”

99

[01:51:18] So when two days later she came back, I said to her as we
started to talk, “So it’s the baby. You’re thinking about a live baby.
Shouldn’t we be talking about that? Because I’m hearing that’s an issue for
you.”
And she burst out into tears and said, “I want that baby. I want the
baby. I do not want to have an abortion, even though I’m here requesting
an abortion. I have a fine position. I have a beautiful apartment, twobedroom, I have a room for the baby, I’ve got room for the baby in my
life. How many times at age thirty-nine am I likely to get pregnant again? It
was a complete accident, completely unprepared for sexual intercourse, but
yet I entered into it with this very attractive passerby.”
Well, I mean, the privilege in that kind of thing is that we listened
enough and heard clues that helped us, me, to help her to say what was in
her feeling level. She wanted that baby. She wanted it. And once I said that,
she just cried and wept and said—oh, she was just overcome with
acknowledging her feelings. So it turned the whole thing around. She did
not become an abortion candidate, having to see two gynecologists and a
psychiatrist to determine that her health, her mental health would be so
disturbed with the pregnancy—
MarkdaSilva: But was that what the process was at the time?
Siegel: [01:53:00] It was very bizarre at the time, yes, very mandatory.
MarkdaSilva: Was that a legal requirement that you had to see two gynecologists plus a
psychologist?

100

Siegel: [01:53:10] It was the state that you had to see, but each gynecology center
could make up issues. Yes, two different staff members. One, the contact
was a gynecologist who performed abortions. This might be not in our
clinic but this would be the repertoire of candidates that we process to be
the kind of people who we felt could serve Stanford students in this way,
to not be judgmental, to be there with this emotionally driven person.
MarkdaSilva: And a psychiatrist, they were there to establish that the pregnancy was
making the person so crazy that an abortion was a good idea? Is that what
you’re saying?
Siegel: [01:54:04] The psychiatrist was not one of ours usually—I say “usually.”
Maybe they saw one of our staff, but usually they went to see a private
psychiatrist, who had to ascertain that if this pregnancy were to continue,
this woman would be so mentally disturbed that she could not function.
They had to attest to the gravity of the emotional burden. They had to say,
“It is required that this pregnancy be terminated.” All lies, in a way.
MarkdaSilva: Everyone bought into the system.
Siegel: [01:54:48] Yes.
MarkdaSilva: But the legislative foundation, that is fascinating, anyway. Not that what
they said was always true. [laughs]
Siegel: [01:55:00] Yes, but we had to build the services that attended people who
are emotionally fraught and who need to separate from, “Yes, this is what
I’m going to do,” to having a chance to review their feelings. “You have to
go away, you two, get up from the floor, you two, and think about this and

101

talk about it. I’ll see you again on Thursday and find out where you are in
your decision making.”
In this case, she came in alone. She said, “I can’t tolerate what this
guy stands for, his whole religious background. He’s not dealing with my
feelings at all, but just what his religious background dictates. What am I
doing with such a guy anyway? This has no future, but I am making my
decision.”
The final analysis was that pregnancy is in that woman’s body, and
the partner can moan and groan or be warm and supportive, but he doesn’t
have the issue, the issue becomes hers where the pregnancy is. So it’s very
delicate.
MarkdaSilva: So did you have gender-related issues to deal with when you were working
with residents? I suppose that they were hugely male, as opposed to—I bet
there weren’t too many females there.
Siegel: [01:56:29] Some.
MarkdaSilva: Did you need to introduce this idea, the whole background of what you
just said to me, of the kinds of things they needed to listen for, the kinds of
conversations they should be having?
Siegel: [01:56:47] That’s what I could do for them, to tell them it seemed like a
very simple thing, but it’s not a simple thing, because there are these
[unclear] feelings. We also aren’t going to be permanently, long-term, with
this person. This is a crisis state, right now, and they’re going back to
Geneva, New York, shortly, and so here is the situation. She’s making a

102

critical decision, and we can help by understanding some of the stress for
her and of having knowledgeable, good resource people.
We felt it was very important, since the termination of the pregnancy
was not going to be done at Stanford Gynecology Clinic, to have a small
list of gynecologists in community practice who do abortion, who would
have sensitivity about pushes and pulls on the person, and would give the
person who came to them honest feedback of what could be the outcome.
It’s still with them having to choose, but it needed support at that level. I
just didn’t want—we’re sending her out to Dr. Shmoe from Alaska, who’s
working here temporarily.
MarkdaSilva: No. The concept of helping train residents in what to do when these
women come in was important -- what questions to ask, even your
orientation.
Siegel: [01:58:31] They’re taught to listen.
MarkdaSilva: Exactly. And the orientation is not universally agreed upon by any means,
even now, but at the time, it might have been a new idea to quite a lot of
the people that this is within her body. It’s not your job to try to make the
couple agree. This is your job and this part isn’t your job. I mean, I imagine
you sort of covered new territory.
Siegel: [01:58:56] I think so. But the important thing was we had a system that
seemed, to us, humane. One of my very close colleague friends was a
gynecologist working in the medical part of Student Health Service, and we
had a couple of people there who were just very helpful and very interested
in our doing well by people overcome with an onslaught of feelings.

103

MarkdaSilva: Now, are you still talking about the gynecology department, or you just said
the student—are you talking about College Student Health Center now?
Siegel: [00:00:00] Yes, I’m talking about College Student Health, because I then
worked at College Student Health.
MarkdaSilva: Let’s move to that.
Siegel: [01:59:44] Incidentally, since it’s still a fraught situation, I don’t want to go
down on record saying that Stanford University went out of its way to
encourage abortion planning or—
MarkdaSilva: No, in fact, whether you are agreeing with the right to have an abortion or
not is one question, but you certainly seem very open to helping women
decide not to have an abortion.
Siegel: [02:00:15] Yes, I helped them decide what they need to do, and so does
that doctor who’s going to see her. It’s not for him to say, “You can have
this baby. You’re young. You’ll be fine.” No. No, no. And you’ve got to
talk more with a counselor or when you see the psychiatrist who’s a
necessary adjunct into this contract that they’re making. So I don’t think it’s
anything that Stanford University feels was something brilliant we added to
the teaching. It’s just that it was a piece of business that at that time was
cropping up. We had to acknowledge that.
MarkdaSilva: Then I was looking at the years during which you worked at Cowell
Student Health Center, from 1970 to 1990, and was thinking those years at
the university were very tumultuous, and it was in many ways, I imagine,
quite integrally related to students’ health, the things that were going on
politically. There was free love. There were a lot of drugs and—

104

Siegel: [02:01:37] And throwing rocks at the President’s Office, yes.
MarkdaSilva: Yes. I imagine you were dealing with aspects of that activism.
Siegel: [02:01:46] Yes, it was a time of turmoil. I know that Stanford University
itself would not want to probably say we had this whole training and
teaching of interns and residents about listening to people, agreeing with
them, and talking with them, I mean on this subject. I mean, it’s okay to
know that I worked there and helped to develop a process and a system, so
the people weren’t just dangling, weeping in the corridor. They were seeing
a part of the GYN service, it could be me, a resident or whoever was going
to see them. I mean, we just made a system happen, and I think that’s what
we had to do.
There was no system. There were no abortions. I don’t know how
come California went for it, but that was not mine to deal with. It’s
analogous to an academic kind of hurdle the people are going through.
One thing that Bernard was able to do, and probably often did with
his students who were now working on their Ph.D. dissertations, was guide
them about where to go. Where are they going to have a future? And
Bernard would take seriously their wish to have a future, and he, with a
broader knowledge of what places concentrating on what would help them,
would say, “Well, you know, over there at the University of Ohio, there’s
been some fascinating work done by an anthropologist. You might be well
to be in contact with her, because she can give you some clues and tips.”
And similarly when a medical crisis comes up, we want to know do you
have any resources to help these people.

105

This developing systems is part of what we’re about, systems where
you get help, where you get knowledge, where you get a chance to speak
your inner-heart feelings and receive good medical care. Of course, we felt
that in a very special way by the time I got to counseling service, but there
it was like medical procedure. One of the medical procedures that those
gynecologists wanted was to know that their gynecological training staff
were learning how to listen and to how to do it humanely.
MarkdaSilva: Absolutely.
Siegel: [02:04:44] When we noticed there was a need, we tried to see what could
we do to systematize it. So that was part of what I did, but I didn’t stay
there very long because it also was a tiring feature in working as a medical
social worker. You do all this training, you get a group of people into
expressing feelings, searching for what their feelings may be, and they
know a little bit more, and then they finish that round and they’re off again,
and then your mandate is you start in with the next one.
I began to feel that was sort of tiresome. I wanted to deal with people
who were speaking my language, that is, of feelings and ideas and worries
and concerns and breakups in relationships and what that meant giving up,
or a thing you could no longer handle with your parents, whatever it is. I
just didn’t want to stay forever there.
[02:05:54] So I let it be known with Dave Dorosin, who was Director
of the Psychological Services, not director of the whole Student Health
Services, but of the Psychological Services. I’d come to know him because
he was on a hospital consultation group in which people in the different

106

services of the hospital could present a case for him that we were having
difficulty with and to get a wider audience to comment on the situation.
[02:06:34] So he came to know me, and when I was in Stanford in
Italy, I guess he had written to me or we had a conversation before I left,
something about he’s heading up the student health counseling service. So
he said, “I know your background and your interest in culture and people
who are going through different hard places, and I have been talking with a
guy who is the head of the Bechtel International Center, and they’re
looking for some way to be able to tend better to international students or
families. So we made up a possibility of maybe we could do our next hire
to be somebody who could crisscross—.”
MarkdaSilva: Oh, so when you were hired at Cowell Student Health Center, it was at the
same time that you were also hired to work at Bechtel International
Center? Was it a dual position?
Siegel: [02:07:41] Yes. There’s a very nice explanation, but who knows where
anything is in here. I was telling you last time that I feel as if I haven’t
included that guy who was head then.
MarkdaSilva:

Kenneth Cooper, yes, he was the director.

Siegel: [02:08:37] At that time, but he must have left shortly after, because I
remember his enthusiasm, but was he coming to the end of his career?
Because all of a sudden—oh, I don’t know. Did anything come to you
from San Francisco, from the name I gave you?
MarkdaSilva: Give me just one moment. I think I have it right here. Lee Ziegler?
Siegel: [02:09:12] Yes.

107

MarkdaSilva: Yes. He and I had a nice conversation.
Siegel: [02:09:16] Because he took over quite immediately.
MarkdaSilva: He said he was there from 1969 to 1987.
Siegel: [02:09:24] You see, and I started there in ’70. But the earlier negotiations
were done before. So what I’m saying is that—what am I saying? Oh, so
Dave Dorosin knew about me and we liked each other, so when he got this
new position to be the Director of the Psychological Services—
MarkdaSilva: At Cowell Student Health Center.
Siegel: [02:09:56] Yes. He then got the idea of maybe I could be this bridge person
between, and he offered me that as a half-time position back in 1970. Our
center was very interested in trying to get more coverage of students who
were having enormous difficulties in being here—either alone or with their
families. Well, what about the wife? She’s an ophthalmologist in Thailand.
When she comes here, she has no license to practice here. She’s nothing
here, mother of the children, and has to learn better English. The student
himself, of course, has a command of English or he wouldn’t be here, but
the wife has to learn it more. She feels so isolated, no family, friends to talk
to, sort of neglected people.
And just as a service at Cowell, we didn’t see student wives on their
own. Our mandate was for students, and sometimes we saw couples or
sometimes we referred them out. But at Bechtel, I could see the student
wife, so I had a much easier connection, because many international
students don’t go to a building called clinic, counseling clinic. “We talk to
our uncle or our aunt or our cousin, and what’s all this?” So Bechtel was

108

very interested in having more flow, having a problem-oriented, skilled
person be there. So we decided that I would be physically at the I-Center.
MarkdaSilva: So you were hired half-time to work at both, Cowell Student Health Center
and Bechtel International Center. But are you saying during that time you
were essentially stationed—your office was at Bechtel, not at Cowell?
Siegel: [02:12:06] No, my office was at Cowell, but on two mornings a week, I was
at Bechtel.
MarkdaSilva: Were you also concentrating on international students? Because we’re
talking about undergraduates at Cowell and then generally graduate
students, weren’t they, at Bechtel?
Siegel: [02:12:24] More. They were more international students.
MarkdaSilva: A higher percentage there were graduate students?
Siegel: [02:12:30] Yes, and undergraduates. And undergraduates usually were not
family people.
MarkdaSilva: Right. So then you’re just talking about undergraduate issues, whether they
be from a different country or not?
Siegel: [02:12:44] Yes, or the specialness of what events took place in their lives,
issues of marriage and family and ethnicities and all that that the graduate
students who saw Bechtel as their home away from home. And what I
began to understand right away when I started being there—he wanted me
to come as international students arrived early, they’d have home stays with
campus families or families in the community—he wanted me to be part of
the welcoming team, because there’s a lot to help guide people, find their
first bicycle, to know that there’s such a thing as volunteerism, and these

109

families who had them to their homes were paid nothing. This was
volunteer giving. A lot of cultures, you don’t have volunteers popping up
like that.
So, of course, I arranged to be there in September when I would be
back from the overseas campus. I think part of my part-time arrangement
was to not work in the summertime because we were in New Mexico at
this small pueblo, for family time with my kids.
MarkdaSilva: So, actually, when you were working, it was more than half-time each day
or half a week or whatever you were working, almost full-time, maybe twothirds time or something, but it was a half-time position anyway.
Siegel: [02:14:29] Yes, and then we just made it be flexible. And I soon felt that
what I developed at International Center was a sense of these foreign
student advisors welcoming an international student who just arrived. All
sorts of proactive things that are being offered, and logical things when
you’re first getting started, you don’t know where, what. Foreign student
advisors and a whole group of volunteers at the Bechtel are on tap to take
you, and this is how you have to go to get an automobile license, and all of
this. But they’re the first persons and the constant persons who are going
to see that student as he drops by to get a pass to do this or to find out
about a bicycle sale or what have you.
It occurred to me that my work was not only to be a counselor there,
to put in a plug for “But we have to sort of acknowledge his feelings, too.
It sounds as if he’s having a real difficult time making an adjustment away
from his own intact family back over there.” We noticed that and sort of

110

tried to deal with it, let it be in our awareness or maybe learn to figure out
certain clues that he’s giving you about how he’s feeling or feeling
overcome or feeling he’ll never make it through here with a Ph.D. like he’s
sent by his government or his company to get, discouragement, whatever. I
said, “We have to know this.” And I felt, “I can be sort of a model of
counseling and picking up clues, but so can you, the foreign student
advisors. You can do it because you’re really the most here and the most
available.”
MarkdaSilva: Accessible to them.
Siegel: [02:16:59] So since I was already into the training of people like residents
and interns, it’s the same model of training people who are really being
exposed to people who are making this enormous adjustment, to work
with them. There were two people, one of which is Gwyn Dukes, foreign
student advisor, working with them.
[02:17:37] Then we got very involved in doing meetings at the
American College Health Association. That was a place where we would
develop a working session about an issue that a foreign student might be
concerned with and you didn’t notice at all, but how to notice, or how he
doesn’t return for the appointment or how he says, “Yes, yes,” but he
doesn’t go to see the doctor because he doesn’t really believe in our system
of medical care. He has his medications that he brought with him from his
home country, and that’s what he’s using first. If they first use American
superb medications, what the doctor says, and then they’re not getting

111

better, they might use their stuff from home because it’s in their suitcase
that’s with them.
We became kind of well known, both by writing articles and doing
teaching sessions at American College Health meetings which met around
the country or Southwest area or something. Again, you’re teaching people
to listen and to make full use of the strength that they have and the
accessibility that they have. And that was very gratifying.
This is a dedicated group who volunteers at the I Center. They’re
dedicated and they do workshops. Gwyn Dukes is just so well known for
what she’s done to enhance the stay of foreign student wives, starting
cooking classes, starting Friday mornings you came with your children, and
the children would be playing and you’d be talking with this group of
foreign student wives about loneliness, about how hard it is to not be
where you can discuss this with your family or your sister. And, of course,
times have helped enormously more so than what was available in my time
there for communicating by email. We didn’t have stuff like that. So it was
a very gratifying building time, building more into the experiences of
foreign students, and it was very meaningful.
Then I had my regular whoever, graduate or undergraduate students,
at my office at Cowell, and all of us on the staff, the psychologists or the
psychiatric social workers or psychiatrists on staff of Cowell, were all
working with some international students. The next one requesting an
appointment is going to be served first. But then we had certain expertise.
There was a psychiatrist on the staff, Vince D’Andrea, long since gone,

112

died, but he was a very interconnecting-across-culture kind of person, and
he did a number of processing with the international students at Bechtel.
MarkdaSilva: At Bechtel or Cowell or both?
Siegel: [02:21:20] Both. But I had that official position, which was like, “It’s a start.
Now can we continue this?” Maybe not, because maybe there’s no special
money to pay for that.
MarkdaSilva: Do you know if it did continue after you left?
Siegel: [02:21:36] Yes, it didn’t continue per se, because there wasn’t the money,
but Vince D’Andrea took a stronger stand in seeing internationals. We
were more conscious of the psychological stuff that brings that student to
us at this time.
MarkdaSilva: And about Cowell Health Center, to go back to something I brought up
before, the historical context: the time you were there was a very
tumultuous time at Stanford, and I wonder if you saw that reflected in the
students who you saw coming in for your services.
Siegel: [02:22:21] That it was a hectic time.
MarkdaSilva: In other words, what people come in for, the problems they’re having, the
issues they’re facing, I imagine they might be a reflection of the historical
times.
Siegel: [02:22:34] Yes. How can you not be impacted by the culture of the world
that you’re living in?
MarkdaSilva: Yes. So when you look back over those particular twenty years, do you see
a certain evolution of issues that people came in with?

113

Siegel: [02:22:48] Different issues at different times, yes. Even in Italy when we
got the news that students had crashed into the President’s Office or what
have you, what did this mean to you? I remember the wonderful
administrator, the Italian administrator of the service over there, said,
“We’re going to have a meeting in which people will talk about their
feelings about some of the student unrest.”
MarkdaSilva: That was brilliant. Who was that at the time, do you remember?
Siegel: [02:23:39] Yes. Giuseppe Mammarella. You must have known him.
MarkdaSilva: Yes, and his wife, Joan.
Siegel: [02:24:02] What I want to say was they were separated by the time I was
there. Their marriage was falling apart.
MarkdaSilva: Oh, well, it must have fallen apart over—
Siegel: [02:24:14] A long time. They kept it going, but it became clear that it was
an ending of that relationship. But she’s a character who was part of our
system. Giuseppe we just thought was the coolest person ever. He never
lost his cool, except that one time it seems when they were on a field trip
down to the south of Italy, and when we arrived at an historic site and the
bus that was carrying our lunch didn’t arrive on time, and for Giuseppe,
whose thing was his food, he could manage anything, but he could not
manage that.
[02:25:10] What I want to say is I don’t feel we’ve got this thing wrapped.
Where are we? Am I giving you the feeling of interwoven into Stanford’s
fabric is an opportunity that came to me because I was the wife of a faculty
member, it was my home? I was an employee because I had certain skills

114

and talents that were helpful on the scene, and so going to student health
on that basis was a really great opportunity, because I had twenty years to
be there and to develop programs.
It was also a time in university life between ’70 and ’90 that a lot of
Stanford thinking was on the well-being of students, and that meant we
worked together with other offices in the university. The Dean of Students
was a guy by the name of Jim Lyons, and under his reign we were joined
together. Our monthly meetings would have the person from the Loan
Office, the person from the Stanford Overseas Project, the different
service scenes, the faculty people who were involved. All of us would get
together at a sort of monthly meeting. We were all the support to the
Stanford student experience, and we felt that we were under an umbrella
that cares about what can we do more in Escondido Village for that lump
of people who’ve come from other countries who are wives. What can we
do for people of different sexual orientations? Can we build over here? Can
we enhance?
Not that it wasn’t always a feature, but those years turned out to be a
time when it was really a concern, and whenever we got together
afterwards—I retired in ’90, and bit by bit other people on these different
services finished or left or something—we always say when we meet, we
were there at the best time of Stanford’s history when the well-being of
Stanford students and their families and how it interfaces into the larger
community was an issue. We felt that it was the desired time to be an
employee there, and I think it really was.

115

MarkdaSilva: I think if there’s any theme running through your professional life -- your
life, as you say, they’re so integral for you -- that I’ve picked up on is that
you are a community builder. So everything you did had to do with
enriching people within the community and the community itself.
Siegel: [02:28:56] Yes, when I came to live here I knew how to be part of a system
that you keep building or enhancing. You don’t just throw it all away, keep
this little part of it that will work. I just brought it with me here [the Vi]. I
was one of two hundred people who came in September ’05 and being here
just a little bit, I could get the feeling that this is a community system, very
different from Stanford, but the same things, people in adaptive new places
in their life who have to learn new rules, new being, new being an aging
person, new being without your garden and your way of being in your own
house, to be alone, to have lost the valued partner. We had been married
sixty-three years. Bernard, incidentally, had no interest in coming here. He
had none.
MarkdaSilva: Didn’t he live here?
Siegel: [02:30:12] No.
MarkdaSilva: You just came after he—
Siegel: [02:30:14] Died. He wanted to live—we adored the house that we finally
bought on campus.
MarkdaSilva: Where was it?
Siegel: [02:30:22] Mayfield Avenue. From my back garden, I could look down two
streets below, and your parents would be there. The Ryans were close
friends.

116

MarkdaSilva: Oh, yes.
Siegel: [02:31:32] It was on the very top of the hill.
MarkdaSilva: Oh, on the very top, so you’re right near the park?
Siegel: [02:31:42] Well, a pathway from here to out there took me to the park. Yes,
and my friend Cleo Eulau was just down the street a block. So, you know,
it was great.
I was just saying something.
MarkdaSilva: You were saying how you—
Siegel: [02:32:22] Oh, systems. Systems, and that’s what, of course, was an add-on
in my learning. I didn’t know that I was going to be so much enjoying the
making of systems, the propping them up where they were needed or let’s
let go of that, no good is coming out of that. And that’s been in many of
my older years, I would say, and it goes from one place to the next. I’m not
going to be going to somewhere else, I hope. [laughs]
But a systems person goes together very much with a person who’s
individually into the psychodynamics of—you know, they all combine into
making a fruitful career. I feel lucky that I’ve had this high-quality life and
so many wonderful explorations. Stanford behind me, that’s what I meant.
I’m part of whoever Stanford is, because I’ve been in the ups and downs
and all the way through Stanford. We might complain and have to bring
action over there, but nevertheless, I think you’re lucky to have a sense of
accomplishment and fulfillment.
[02:33:50] Bernard certainly had that. He had the life he wanted and
hoped for. He wanted to live in his own house. He wanted to die in his

117

own house. He was not interested—he was very much more an interior
into himself kind of person. But after he died, I knew lonely. I’d been
married for sixty-three years. I’d never been really alone, and I didn’t like
what I saw coming up in my life as an alone person, and I’m a community
person. I’m a social worker. I love community. I take my place. So it was
natural for me to come here.
MarkdaSilva: Well, they are the richer for it, I’m sure. The people here are the richer for
you being here.
Siegel: [02:34:46] Oh, thank you. Thank you.
MarkdaSilva: You’re welcome.
Siegel: [02:34:49] We benefit from each other. We do.

[End of interview of Charlotte Siegel, August 26, 2013]

118

STANFORD UNIVERSITY
PROJECT:

STANFORD STAFF ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

INTERVIEWER:

MAGGIE MARKDASILVA

INTERVIEWEE:

CHARLOTTE SIEGEL

DATE OF INTERVIEW:

SEPTEMBER 9, 2013

MarkdaSilva: The date was September 9 th, 2013.1 My name is Maggie MarkdaSilva, and
I was interviewing Charlotte Siegel. Charlotte is the widow of Bernard
Siegel, professor of anthropology at Stanford, and was herself a social
worker at Cowell Student Health Center (now Vaden Health Center) and
at Bechtel International Center, both at Stanford.
Siegel: I married a man who since he was 12 had always planned on being
married someday. Bernard came from loving parents; he was the fourth
son. The world was his. Whatever he wanted to be or do, they loved it for
him. I married into serenity.
MarkdaSilva: Oh, how wonderful. And did it feel like that the whole time?
Siegel: [00:00:29] Yes, despite a fight or two.
MarkdaSilva: Well it would have been super human if that hadn’t happened.
Siegel: [00:00:38] Absolutely. As a matter of fact I’m looking at a couple of cards
that he gave me along the way. He said it’s a wonderful thing to think
about two people who essentially are very different who found matching
values and ways of life and things we cared about. He was a much more

The recording of this interview, the third of three, began after the interview had already started. Nothing
substantive was lost.
1

119

introverted person, and I’m much more outgoing. It made this great
combination. Also, I think Bernard, in 60 years of being married, became
more outgoing as he developed his own security in his profession and
everything. And I became more introspective, a little. We moved toward
each other, and that’s a good way for marriage to be.
MarkdaSilva: It is. And you can never really predict that kind of thing. We can sort of
just work toward it.
Siegel: [00:01:58] Yeah. I went to Chicago emblazoned with finding my career.
And I noticed this lovely man was taking me out to concerts and lunches
and, I don’t know, it just grew. And it was a very hectic time, soon after
the war started, 1942.
MarkdaSilva: Now I forget, did he go off to war?
Siegel: [00:02:37] No, he didn’t. He was disqualified. He had very poor eyes and a
pattern of asthma. But because of who he was, he was asked into a project
that was taking place at Yale that had to do with United States’ rubber
supplies out in the islands of the Pacific, which were getting thwarted
because of the fighting that was going on--Japan and the United States.
The U.S. needed rubber, and therefore they wanted to enhance our
connection with Brazil.
[00:03:24] Well, Bernard had been planning to do field work
research in Brazil, so he had been an intensive student in Portuguese. He
was Portuguese fluent, either to read it or to speak it, and he was an
anthropology student. So he got onto that project, which was like part of
the war effort. We were at Yale for a couple years.

120

MarkdaSilva: It must have been nice for you that his interests were in places that were
so wonderful to visit and/or live in.
Siegel: [00:04:34] Sometimes, yes. Sometimes, no. There was a bit of resistance at
that time on the part of wives. “Why do I have to go out and live in a
country town somewhere because my husband is doing a piece of work? I
don’t want to go out there. The pediatrician for my kids is here in Palo
Alto.” There was a bit of resistance, but not from me. When I was there
at Chicago, Bernard spent time introducing me to anthropology through
meetings and courses. That department was very social. I got into
anthropology, and I found culture and background was just as important
as a person’s psychological history.
[00:05:50] I was bringing anthropology to my life. I was ready to
go. The first time was hard because Eve was one year old and there were
some problems in traveling with a one year old. [laughter] But it was a
great trip, When the ship arrives you’re not ready to get off. You love it.
We had a suitcase that opened up to be a playpen and we put that out on
the deck. We would be out there greeting the people who came by and
chatting with them.
MarkdaSilva: How long was that boat ride? It was from where to where?
Siegel: [00:06:59] New York to the town on the coast, Santos, where you took a
little train up the mountain to São Paulo.
MarkdaSilva: How long was the ship ride from New York to Santos?

121

Siegel: [00:07:17] About eight days. The night before we arrived, when the
captain announced we have to be ready at six, we said we’re not ready. We
can’t get off the ship yet. We loved it there on the ship despite the fact
that this was before there were disposable diapers and we had clotheslines
across our little stateroom, and in a steaming hot climate diapers don’t dry
very easily. Always wet diapers. It was a big thing. But I was so proud of
my husband right away because we’re out on the dock with our suitcases
and boxes and the customs people were giving Bernard a very hard time.
They said nobody would bring three cases of baby food unless he was
planning to sell it in the black market.
[00:08:35] “We’re not letting these three boxes go through without
a heavy tax.” There was my husband, fighting it out in Portuguese. My
hero! We got it through.
I also want to say something about my work I was doing at
Stanford and in other countries. We were in Stanford’s overseas programs
three times in Italy and one time in Israel for a year. I found out in my
work, in outreach to Bechtel and in Stanford programs overseas that you
worked not only as an individual, but you also worked to empower the
people who were in everyday contact with international students, to
develop their counseling skills. At Bechtel we got the foreign student
advisors involved more with the American College Health Association,
where they did a lot of training. We did live examples of how to listen,
and how when you listen and you hear something that’s not fitting, you
make a mental note. “Maybe I need to think about this a little bit more”,

122

or what have you, to be more sensitive to clues and issues. It’s like
empowering others. And with the American College Health Association,
we did a lot of demonstrations at annual regional meetings. That principle
of enhancing the system was something that I found I liked very much.
When I was out with students groups, it occurred to me that I was
intrigued with systems.
[00:17:00] For instance, how could our systems work to their
fullest if I couldn’t see international students’ wives as a free service at
Cowell? Couldn’t we offer more to student wives? Couldn’t our foreign
student advisors devise Friday morning coffees, where the wives would
come and meet each other and then move on somewhat more solidified?
It was sort of like a working system in little pockets. At that time in
Stanford’s history--I worked there from 1970 to 1990--the administration
was in a mood to do something for student well-being.
[00:18:00] They were receptive. We wanted to get professors into
it, too. A professor could accept a student from Thailand who’s going to
work in his field. But the student is struggling because he is handicapped
by the language. You have to have a certain command of the English
language to be a graduate student at Stanford, so they are all prepared for
that. But still you are working at translating, and there are some very hard
parts to that. And maybe the student is feeling he or she is not up to the
rigors of a PhD, but the professor has accepted the student, who is
subsidized by the Bank of Japan or whatever, and he wants to see that
student get through with a PhD. But sometimes you’re going to have to

123

come to grips with the fact that the student is doing a master’s degree
work that he can handle, but maybe he is not PhD material at this point.
But you are supportive of his struggle. His honor is involved. They gave
him the scholarship from the bank. He’s supposed to go out there and
come home with a degree. You have to be able to understand and take it
into account.
MarkdaSilva: Were you able to make systematic changes that lasted beyond your time
there at Bechtel or at Cowell? I know you’re talking more about Bechtel.
Siegel: [sentences deleted] [00:20:38] I think I was making a contribution. Like
the Business School. The Business School decided at one point to be
much more inclusive. You don’t have to be an undergraduate economist
now to come to the business school and get an MBA. They decided to
bring in a more diverse student body. I remember a case, a client, a
struggling woman who was an opera star in San Francisco. All of her life
she was in the arts, dancing, singing; she had not the slightest connection
with computers or business. She in her late 30s needed to think of a career
change and academic experience. She applied and was accepted to the
Business School.
[00:21:50] She felt herself sinking because in the world of the
MBA program you’re speaking business language. If you’re not and
everyone else is, you’re just out of it. Out of that came an awareness that
led me in my discussions with people from the business school to say you
know, we have a problem here. When you open up the doors to let in
widely diverse people, they need some help and training. There needs to

124

be a summer program or something that gets them into computer
language or computer competency. And that did happen, but they didn’t
say, “Oh that’s a great idea. Tomorrow we’ll institute it.” It wasn’t like
that. But it came to be that after that first brush with untrained people
changing fields dramatically, a summer exposure class began to be
required.
MarkdaSilva: Well, good for you. How about at the international center? Were you able
to make any systematic changes?
Siegel: [00:23:05] Oh, I think I did. Most of my work there was through
consultation with my fellow foreign student advisors or with the director
of the program, Lee Zeigler or John Pearson who is the continuing
director to this day. OK, this isn’t working here, better put our heads
together and find out another way. We need to enhance women’s
activities. The husband is gone all day and all night in his studies, but she
has a life and the kids are in school. So how can we get these women to
feel comfortable with each other or to work with good people like foreign
student advisor Gwyn Dukes who’s going to help? It’s a hard thing to give
up your profession for two or three years, because you don’t have the
right visa to be working.
[00:24:20] But there’s so much that can be accomplished. There
can be free classes they can take. And we can have a cooking group that
gives a show of cooking from different regions where a bunch of women
can all work together. And so the richness of Stanford wives was

125

enhanced immediately through people like Gwyn Dukes and Marsha
McKenna, both helping student wives to open new doors.
MarkdaSilva: What percentage--I don’t know if you remember--but more or less, what
percentage of those women, those wives of graduate students from
various countries were professional? Was it very many?
Siegel: [00:25:07] I have no idea. I think quite a few. And there could be statistics
to support it but, in a certain sense it doesn’t really make any difference.
Even if there were only ten, it would be a start.
MarkdaSilva: And you’d also want the other wives, whether they were professional or
not, you’d want them to have an enriching experience while they were
here.
Siegel: [00:25:30] And you know what? That group has become very powerful.
Gwyn Dukes distinctly left a legacy with the wives and partners of foreign
students. They gained a lifestyle. They could have counseling to help with
options or they could work with the foreign student advisors. I was there
for consulting with them, as back up for resources in the community. It
was enhancing.
[00:26:14] What I’m trying to say is that I moved from seeing
myself as a person who intervened with individuals under stress
conditions to one who helps them find new options or helps them to give
up unrealistic goals, whatever. I saw the need to understand that I really
liked systems. I liked making a community more aware and sensitive to
the hard times of student family life. It impacts the student, too, the
stress, the disappointments, he takes it all with him. But a system has to

126

be pushed up over here or let go of over there if a program’s not working.
It wasn’t that I was the manager as such. I helped to open doors!
[sentences deleted]
MarkdaSilva: Residential life?
Siegel: [00:27:52] Yeah. How could Stanford Village2 where the majority of
international students lived be more receptive? Some of us decided that
we’d have certain daytime hours when we would be at Stanford Village
and could talk more easily with people there. It was a time of concern
about the whole life of students.
Under Dean Jim Lyons’ direction we in Student Services met
together every month. This brought a variety of opinions and attitudes
from issues with the student loan office to academic problem areas to the
attention of all of us. How could Stanford Village be more receptive to
the issues of living as student families? We came to feel that these were
the best years at Stanford because there was concern about the “whole
student,” not just the part of him struggling with new adaptations and
academic pressures.
MarkdaSilva: By the time your responsibilities at Stanford started to wind down, did
you see that happening less and less? Did you see there being less of a
focus at Stanford on the students’ welfare?
Siegel: [00:28:52] My responsibilities did not wind down before my retirement.
Eventually. But you can’t really say it in that way. I think that Stanford
In WWII, the U.S. Army bought the estate of Mark Hopkins and built Palo Alto General Hospital, later
renamed to Dibble General Hospital, in present-day Menlo Park. After the war, the property was turned over
to the FPHA and became Stanford Village. By 1956, Stanford Village was becoming deserted and it was
scheduled for demolition in the mid-60s. Today the site is home to the Stanford Research Institute and other
facilities.
2

127

feels they were very concerned then and that they got certain gains. But
the budget to have me be an outreach person came out of Cowell’s
budget plan. When I came to retirement there really wasn’t money to have
a staff person be over there at I-Center. But people on the staff,
psychiatrists like Vince D’Andrea and other people, somehow we had a
bit more international student savvy. When a student came to Cowell for
help, he might see any of the staff, but we were more conversant with
cross-cultural experience, including the art of listening beyond the spoken
word.
[00:29:58] Lots of people from Cowell saw international students,
but it just happened that I was rather well equipped because I had spent
so much of my life cross-culturally aware.
Siegel: After my retirement, Bernard and I lived several years more at our campus
home until he died. We were fortunate that we had lived peaceably despite
his growing limitations due to family cardiac disease and Alzheimer’s
disease. Professionally and personally, he was fulfilled and lived a fully
contributing life by the time of his death. And he knew it.
[00:35:32] So anyway, when I came to the Vi, I found those same
impulses in me. I’m in this brand new organization. I’ve left our home on
Mayfield Avenue with my beautiful garden. My husband is no longer alive.
I’m living my life alone. True, I have two wonderful kids, but kids have to
do their lives and I have to find mine. I found that the same principle
applied. How can we help this new living system be as useful and as good
as the ones I have cultivated in my 20 years at Stanford? And, of course, I

128

was a prime candidate because of the way we came here--Bernard on a
two-year contract that continued to grow.
[00:36:37] The identification with Stanford was always very strong
and very loyal. I found that I had moved into the concerns of this new
community just by natural experience, and now I found myself addressing
them. So that’s what I brought with me. The Vi opened in the summer of
2005. All the buildings weren’t finished in September, but this clump of us
moved in then. I looked around at this group of 200. They’re having a
hard time with adjustment just like I am, and I’m much more equipped to
do this because I’m an old hand at Stanford.
[00:38:20] You were encouraged to sign up for some committee. I
was on the health committee. I said, “I think we could use a group here.
So many of us are facing the same loss of the old identity, the old garden,
the old everything.”
MarkdaSilva: Everything -- home, independence.
Siegel: [00:38:50] And it was much harder for people who came from, say,
Milwaukee because their daughter or son was now living here, or they had
been to Stanford long years ago, or their mother had been to Stanford.
Stanford connections brought people, especially parents where one parent
was ill or had died. There were tremendous levels and nuances of loss.
How were we going to get started? They had a whole program of events
and things for us, but it also needed the people who had come, the
residents, to get to a comfort level so they could also be creative.

129

MarkdaSilva: That’s interesting that they hadn’t thought of that, but they’re lucky they
had you right there at the start.
Siegel: [00:39:42] Not me, but a number of us, a whole bunch of people who
maybe had done artwork in their careers or had said, “One day when I
retire, I’m going to get into the studio,” but here they were. They grouped
together. They did art work with zest. Another group of us are passionate
about music.
[00:40:44] See, one of the things about entering a place like this is
that is not like other communities. They’re all educated, they’re all welltravelled, they’re all exposed. But nevertheless, they’re adjusting to a new
environment. They have to take these baby steps, like the sharing and the
finding of a friend because you’ve lost your friends in Milwaukee. Even I
lose my friends from Stanford, not entirely as you can see, but they’re old
threads. We meet at concerts and things. But we’re a different group than
what entered in 2005.
[00:42:09] Many more crutches and wheelchairs and
diminishments, more falls. You fall and you break a hip. It’s learning
about aging, too. The problem at the Vi was to move from the hotel
concerns into retirement concerns. They considered that we were very
healthy and very able. But at the same time we were going through pains.
They provided program people, but the residents themselves wanted X or
they wanted Z and they complained that they never got to talk with them.

130

MarkdaSilva: But it seems to me you had incredibly creative, dynamic people and
everyone knew that budgets needed to be worked within. That’s just life.
That’s not going to stop anybody, I imagine.
Siegel: [00:46:12] What I’m saying is that a structure was given. They have all
these people who are accustomed to a certain quality of living or who are
being trained as we live here in the importance of physical health as part
of a regimen. I have one class where three times a week you do some
structured exercise, and you come out feeling “Oh, every piece of my
body is jingling.”
They’re saying “That’s how to live longer. We’re trying to get a
standard of good health into the living room.”
MarkdaSilva: Living better, not just longer.
Are you still in that group called Transitions?
Siegel: [00:47:56] Transitions Group. I founded it; we developed it. At one point
a psychiatrist that I knew from the community entered, and I asked him if
he would work with me on it. It’s much easier to have a partner in most
enterprises. [laughter] He said he wasn’t interested in a long-term thing,
but he said he’ll work with me over the summer and see if we can get it
started, which we did. And the group has gone on, with shifts and
changes, different nuances, for five or six years. In the last year, I was very
impacted by my brother’s dying.
[00:48:47] He had a brain cancer with no treatment possible. They
could give him a year. No pain, fortunately, but every time I was with him
he was less and less the person that he had been. We were very close. I

131

had taken him with me when I went to Chicago for my master’s degree.
He was in high school then. That was when I met Bernard Siegel. While
my brother was ill we developed a program for my family for a year, and
everybody in my family healed and went on with his life. It was very
successful. We were each moving on. My brother had a wonderful
experience there. We all did. And my mother got on her feet, so that it
was great.
[00:49:46] They could learn by being a group. So, if you’re upset
with things that have happened at the clinic or they don’t happen right,
we, the Transitions Group, got to bring it to the attention of the
supervisor to see what could be done to make a better scene for us. We
have to let them know when we’re really happy with a development or
when we’re not. It’s interesting also how much stress, particularly at first,
there is over food.
You know, they are wonderful cooks here. [00:50:29] We have a
wonderful dining room and it serves this great bunch of us. And yet, at
first, “Oh that terrible dish they serve.” You know, it was sort of like we
have an avenue somewhere to express it.
MarkdaSilva: I was just going to say, it’s one of the things, particularly women, control
their entire lives in their own homes, and you talk about giving up your
garden, but I think giving up your kitchen is something that people feel as
well.
Siegel: [00:51:00] What do they feel?

132

MarkdaSilva: The same thing they feel when they have to give up their garden. I think
it’s control and I think it’s their own--it’s the heart of their home.
Siegel: [00:51:09] What about the feeling of gladness and joy that I’m no longer a
slave to the kitchen? I come down to a beautiful dining room.
MarkdaSilva: Yes, we were just talking about that last night. That too, yeah.
Siegel: [00:51:21] There is something in that though. The women who are free
therefore need to be looking elsewhere for friendship in book groups and
lectures. We have a lot of lectures. People give their selves and their
understanding of their fields. Stanford professors have been very
generous.
MarkdaSilva: The residents give lectures or is it visiting people from outside?
Siegel: [00:51:51] Both. We have a committee that sorts out special topics that
the residents might like to bring forward. That same committee, I think, is
the group that works with getting people from the medical school and
business school and deanship who want to share and enlighten.
MarkdaSilva: And that’s beneficial to everyone I imagine, but especially to a person who
lives here but still remains dynamic in a particular field.
Siegel: [00:52:39] Occasionally we find a professor who is somewhat over the hill,
but that’s very rare. The people who come to lunch are usually on top of
some topic or field. We’re going to have the university archeologist come.
She came once in the first years but now she’s got a position on the
administration at Stanford because this was once Indian territory. There’s
a whole history, and every little blade of grass has strictures as to where

133

you can build and not build, places that were holy ground for the Indian
groups that lived there. It’s fascinating.
MarkdaSilva: They should tell the students about that too. Stanford students would be
very interested to know that about their campus.
Siegel: [00:53:43] In any case, what I’m saying is that there are some people who
don’t want to come down to the dining room, who want to eat their
dinner in their apartments, put on their bathrobes and watch the six
o’clock news. Yet there’s a certain amount of effort made by committees
and groups to promote a social experience. We have a community table
for people who might all like to sit together, but enhancing sociability
while also respecting privateness and private time and aging is not always
possible.
[00:59:49] It’s also the people, like it was at Stanford or any other
community. It’s the people and it’s the system. I did want to make one last
observation. This was written several years ago, and now I’m a retired
person living at a retirement center, and I find I look with my eyes, my
sense of myself, at this scene that I am now part of. And what I see is a
new a community to be invested in. I bring the work I’ve done before to
this enterprise, as a system to be explored or to be expanded.
MarkdaSilva: And it’s what you do. It’s what you bring to community.
Siegel: [01:01:38] I gave a lot to Stanford. I got a lot. And I’m bringing it all with
me, is how I’d like to sort of tie it up.
MarkdaSilva: That’s a beautiful tie-up. That’s lovely.

134

Siegel: [01:02:59] I guess I’m making the point it wasn’t just right here on the
campus. It was in Escondido Village where the students lived. It was, yes,
at my office in counseling, at my presence on campuses abroad.
[01:03:37] It’s going where the issues are for building quality life or
building the most that you can from this education experience. This is
what I mean. This is my community.
MarkdaSilva: It really is. We’ve been here for, what, an hour and a half and already
three different people…. four different people have stopped by.
Siegel: [01:11:01 I’ve been very fortunate. Some things happen out of lucky,
accidental connections. I took on a piece of work at the medical center at
one point, and one of the persons I came to know there was the guy who
was in charge of consultation about problem cases. I told him we were
having a large volume of people coming to California in those early years
to get a legal abortion.
[01:11:56] People were coming from all over the United States,
twelve year old kids, forty year old people. That was one of the areas
where I thought I could make a difference. I didn’t really want to go back
into medical social work because I’d gone beyond that, and now my
closest associates were in the psychiatric field, and so forth. I said, “We’ve
got to have a system for this pouring in of people from all over.” And I
said that the first thing in the system is that anybody who’s opposed to
abortion, on no matter what kind of a principle, is not going to be in this
program.

135

[01:12:34] You are not to be interviewing people who’ve come in
for an abortion if you’ve already got a point of view. You have to be able
to listen and to know the differences and how to make a program work
well. And then that guy who was doing consulting over in the medical
school was given the position of Director of Psychological Services at
Student Health Center C.A.P.s. So he had the opportunity to start
building this program.
MarkdaSilva: Do you remember his name?
Siegel: [01:13:31] Oh yes. David Dorosin. Anyway, he was also talking at that
time with Ken Cooper about making some kind of connection with a
small but definitive mass of students from other countries. They dreamed
up the possibility, and then Dave Dorosin said, “I know this person from
the medical school. I want to ask her to be on the staff because I think
she could do it. She has all the right background.”
[01:14:09] So I was offered this position, and I took it and I grew.
So I think I’ve been very lucky. You grow, you do, you respond and you
understand that growing takes certain visions. We want to keep growing.
It is an important way to deal with aging, to see it in terms of education.
Siegel: [01:15:40] Do we have it?
MarkdaSilva: We do.
Siegel: [01:15:43] I’m happy.
MarkdaSilva: Oh good. I’m glad. Thanks.
