Tracy: Hi. This is Allison Tracy. It is November 5, 2014. I’m here with Nancy
Packer to conduct an oral history interview for the Stanford Historical
Society. This is in addition to the other interviews that we’ve done with
Nancy and will build on those.
Nancy, to start out, I was hoping you could tell me a little bit about
where you were born.
Packer: [00:00:21] Okay. I was born in Washington, D.C. I was the youngest of five
children. We were almost the same age, though. My oldest sister was six and
a half years older, so there were three between us. My father was a member
of Congress from Birmingham, Alabama. He had been in Congress… by the
time he left, he had been there twenty-two years.
I went to the public schools of Washington until I was twelve years old,
when we moved to Birmingham, where I finished my public education—
high school. I then went to Birmingham-Southern College, where all my
siblings had gone and graduated. Actually, one was still there, the one
immediately older than I.

13

My two brothers about this time were off in the war. One was in the
army and one was in the navy. Almost all the men were away in the army.
Birmingham-Southern was a coed school, but you’d hardly know it while I
was there between 1942 and 1945. There were very few men on campus
except, I think, for a program for training pilots. So there were some men,
but they were not part of the college.
It was a pretty good school. I liked being there, and I sort of liked not
having the distraction of a lot of social goings-on. So I liked that.
Tracy: Did you always expect to go to college? Was that something as a child that
you knew that you would do?
Packer: [00:01:59] Go to college? [00:02:01] I never thought about it, because
obviously it was going to happen. It just had to happen, so that’s what
happened. We all went to Birmingham-Southern. The three oldest had
started off at different colleges, but they had not made all A’s. Therefore, my
father wouldn’t let them continue there. He brought them back where he
could watch them at Birmingham-Southern. So we all graduated from
Birmingham-Southern.
I had a rather disreputable college life, even though there weren’t very
many men there; I was drinking, carousing, cutting classes, making D’s and
F’s. And I had to take a religion course. It was required by the college, which
was a Methodist institution. I had to take a religion course, and I took it from
a man named Harold Hutson. He was in his thirties, I guess. I knew his wife.
He had a little child. And I was not doing very well in that class, as usual,
with what I was doing then, and he said, “Stay after class,” and I did. And he

14

said, “Why are you wasting your life this way? You have a good mind, and I
want you to stop fooling around.”
I said something like, “Okay, I will,” and I did. I started making A’s
and doing pretty well in school. Also I majored in religion, which he taught.
I’m not from a religious family—I never saw my father in church except
when he made this speech when he was in Congress. But I majored in
religion because of this man.
After I graduated, I went to the University of Chicago Divinity School,
where I got an MA in theology. It was really the joke of the family, in a sense,
because none of us were religious and I wasn’t religious. But my brothers,
whenever they would come home on leave, would tease me brutally about
being the little religious person.
When I graduated with my MA, I went back to Birmingham-Southern
and I taught for a year. All the GIs were back by then, and most of the kids
in the class, most of the people in the class were ex-GIs. They were older
than I was and smarter than I was and more experienced than I was, but I
did get through that year of teaching. It was just one year of teaching religion
at Birmingham-Southern.
Then I thought I would try to be a writer, and I would write for a
while. I should say that I lived at home with my parents, which was quite
customary at that time in that place. Like it would have been outrageous if I
had not lived at home with my parents.
Tracy: Was it customary because you weren’t married yet at that point?

15

Packer: [00:05:04] I was not married, so you were supposed to live at home with your
parents until you got married. [00:05:10] All my friends lived at home with
their parents until they got married, and I didn’t get married when I was very
young.
So I began writing, and I would have a writer’s block so easily. I would
start something, get three pages in, and say, “It’s no good,” throw it away. So
that went on for a while. Occasionally I would take a job being the writer at
the Community Chest or the writer for some other public organization. Then
I would say, “Okay, now I’m ready to really write.”
So I’d go home. I’d quit my job, I’d go home, and I’d start writing. I
couldn’t finish anything. Then I did finish something, and I sent it to Harper’s
magazine, and they published it. So that didn’t really help me; that just
increased my writer’s block. After that, I couldn’t finish anything because I
kept trying to repeat that success. So I think a lot of young writers have a
problem with it. You have a success, you just want to repeat it. And I didn’t
do very well with my writing. Take another job, quit, write some more; that
was my pattern.
I met Herb [Herbert L. Packer] through a friend. He was visiting
Birmingham, and I really liked him and he seemed to like me, and we
corresponded quite a lot. Then he came back to Birmingham to visit and
back again to visit, and we were married and I moved out here. I didn’t know
anybody out here, didn’t have anything to do except write, and I was having
the same old writer’s block—I couldn’t finish anything.
[recorder turned off]

16

Tracy: I was going to take us back for a moment. You mentioned your position as
instructor of religion at Birmingham-Southern—you only did that for a year.
Was that your first experience teaching, or had you done teaching while you
were at Chicago?
Packer: [00:07:13] No, I had never done any teaching before.
Tracy: So tell me about that, your first teaching experience.
Packer: [00:07:18] Oh, I worked like a dog for every class because I didn’t know
anything, really. I had an MA in theology and I was teaching the Old
Testament, which, by the way, I love. I was teaching that, but I didn’t know
Hebrew, I didn’t know Greek, and I didn’t know the Old Testament. So I
worked like a dog. I would prepare a class, and it would take me ten hours to
prepare a one-hour class. I know everybody takes a little bit more than the
time they spend in class, but that was really difficult. However, I quite
enjoyed it, and I made friends with some of the GIs who were in my class,
but it was not for me. Basically, it was a charade for me to be teaching.
Tracy: Teaching in general or teaching religion?
Packer: [00:08:13] Religion.
Tracy: In terms of your study of theology, did you, yourself, have some sort of
spiritual conversion or was this theology more in the sense of a critical
analysis of religion?
Packer: [00:08:25] I had no conversion. I had almost no belief whatsoever. I looked
at it as intellectually challenging. Also I was trying to please my old professor,
who had, in a sense, saved my life by getting me out of a bad situation. So it
could have history, it could have been geography, could have been anything.

17

But it’s a fascinating subject, after all. You know, the Old Testament is a
fascinating document. There’s nothing more fascinating than it. The whole
thing—the New Testament is fascinating, history of the Christian church is
fascinating. It is intellectually fascinating, and that was my only connection
with it.
Tracy: I wonder if, in terms of your other teachers and professors that you’re
studying with, there was an expectation that you invest in theology beyond
the intellectual interest.
Packer: [00:09:27] I went to the University of Chicago. It was right after the war.
Most of the people there were not, in my experience with them, very
religious. Some of them were draft dodgers who went into religion in order
not to serve in the army. The faculty were intellectually brilliant. I mean, they
were brilliant, but I didn’t feel that there was a whole lot of religious passion
at the University of Chicago. There might have been if I had gone to Union
Theological Seminary or some other seminary, but at the University of
Chicago there was not a strong feeling of religion.
Tracy: You’d noted that at the Birmingham-Southern it was mostly women, in part
because of the war. What was your experience in terms of your cohort at
Chicago?
Packer: [00:10:26] The cohort at Chicago was totally different. It was at the end of
the war. The GIs were pouring back. I had never felt more attractive than
with all those guys coming back. I mean, I must have looked like ice cream
or something. [laughter] So I had a marvelous time socially at the University
of Chicago. I could have gone out ten times a day with some guy, because

18

there weren’t very many women but there were lots of men and they were all
pretty avid for women at this point. They’d all been overseas and probably
for years, and hadn’t been in society for years. So it was fun.
Tracy: What was your experience of Chicago generally? I mean, certainly you’d
grown up in D.C., so you weren’t unaccustomed to cities and large
metropolitan areas, but I wonder what Chicago was like.
Packer: [00:11:22] Hey, Birmingham was a big city. Birmingham had as many people
almost as Washington, D.C. until the war when Washington grew a lot.
Birmingham had a medical school. It had two white colleges, two black
colleges. It wasn’t exactly non-urban.
Tracy: Right.
Packer: [00:11:41] Yes. But what was my….
Tracy: Your experience in Chicago generally.
Packer: [00:11:46] Well, I liked the busyness of it. There was certainly more of a
downtown feeling in Chicago than there had been in Birmingham. Certainly,
when I was in Washington, I’d never left the block. So there was a feeling of
excitement, you know. I’m trying to think of a line from a poem of Carl
Sandburg—big Chicago vital town. It was different in that sense. But don’t
knock Birmingham. [laughs]
Tracy: I won’t. I’m sorry for that. What were your motivations for pursuing a
graduate degree?
Packer: [00:12:27] My motivation was that I majored in religion in college. I must
have been somewhat in love with the professor, although there was
absolutely nothing between us at all. I must have been… at least I felt very

19

grateful to him because he saved my life in a sense. Maybe somebody else
would have, but he did. He said, “Stop goofing around and start being an
intelligent person instead of getting drunk in the middle of the day.” So that
had a lot to do with my going into religion. In fact, not a lot; it had
everything to do with it. I’m sure you want some religious experience, but I
can’t give it to you.
[00:13:13] Let me tell you that when I came back and was teaching, my
professor had gone on to work at American University. There was another
guy who had taught religion, and he also had a ministerial post at a Methodist
church, and one day he said to me, “I want to take my wife on vacation, but I
need to get somebody to give the sermon at my church.” He had a little
country church. “I want somebody to give the sermon. Would you do it?”
I, at that point, felt challenged, and I said, “But of course.” So I wrote
my sermon out. It was called “The Sin of the Good People.” Obviously all I
cared about at that point were interactions between human beings—morality.
It was called “The Sin of the Good People.” I don’t think it even mentioned
Christianity. I don’t think it mentioned religion.
So I prepared this sermon and I said nobody in my family that was
living at home [could go]. My brother was living at home; he was a former
naval officer, so he was home with my mother, my father, and I said,
“Nobody’s coming. I’m going, giving the sermon, but nobody’s coming. You
can’t come.”
My father said, “Well, of course I’m coming.”
And I said, “No, no.”

20

He said, “No, don’t be silly. Of course I’m coming.”
I said, “Nobody else then. Only you.”
My mother said, “Okay, I won’t come.” And my brother, I assumed
wouldn’t come.
So my father and I went off to the church and we got there and
everybody’s happy to see my father. He was a politician for a very long time.
Everybody rushed up to him and they were so glad to see him.
I had told the fellow that asked me to do this that I didn’t want to lead
a prayer. By that time, I knew that that was not for me. I did not want to lead
the prayer. He would have to get somebody else to. So I’m sitting at the
podium, and this great big guy who was asked to lead the prayer gets up and
he says [imitating accent], “Thank you, Lord, for bringing this great
statesman and his little daughter, who gave her heart and her love to God.”
I was just fuming. I mean, it wasn’t about the great statesman; it was
supposed to be about me. I looked out in the audience, and there in the back
row was my brother. He’s red-headed like me. He’s in the back row with his
girlfriend, and they’re both having to hold back their laughter. They were just
jittering with laughter because they knew how offended I would be by that.
So I thought, “I can’t. I can’t do this. I will not be able to give this
sermon,” because I was kind of laughing and angry too. Then I thought, “I
have no right not to give the sermon.” I assumed I was an adult, and I’m
going to give the sermon. So I got up and I gave my sermon.

21

By the way, after I saw my brother laughing, I looked down and my
father was laughing too. So I did get through the sermon, and that was really
the end of it for religion, as far as I was concerned. That finished it off.
Tracy: Right. I asked about your experience, because I know in the field of religious
studies, there was a shift from education in terms of seminary more to the
study of theology, and so I was interested where your experience fell in that
shift over time.
Packer: [00:17:09] Well, it was theology because Chicago was a very intellectual place,
especially its divinity school. It’s very intellectual for a divinity school, and it
was more theology. Well, religion is based on theology, of course.
Tracy: For your professional work, you worked in public relations and publicity for
what I assume were both of them government agencies or….
Packer: [00:17:39] Well, public agencies—the Chamber of Commerce and the
Community Chest were the two.
Tracy: How did you get into that work?
Packer: [00:17:46] Somebody just asked me, I guess, and I took it. I don’t remember
exactly.
Tracy: Do you think that your….
Packer: [00:17:55] Oh, I do know. There was a friend of my father’s whom I knew
quite well; I knew him and his wife quite well. He was probably
Birmingham’s most active philanthropist, not in terms of money, but in
terms of running organizations. This is how it happened. He was head of an
organization to raise a bunch of money—I can’t remember the quantity—for
the first black hospital in Birmingham. At that point, black doctors could not

22

practice at the white hospitals. Segregation was so firm. So he was raising
money so that there would be a hospital for blacks to practice at, and he
called me up, and he said, “I want you to help me.”
I went down and I was his assistant for a couple of months, keeping
track of the money and also asking people for money. I’d call people up and
I would say who I was and that I was calling for Mr. Sterne. Then they would
be forced to give money because I’d said “Mr. Sterne,” and he was a big deal
in Birmingham. So that was one of the jobs.
Tracy: Did you find the work compelling?
Packer: [00:19:20] It was interesting, yes. I found out who was generous and who
wasn’t. Also, he was such a great guy. He was a wonderful man, and I was
happy to be around him. He was really a terrific guy, totally unsocial, had no
social graces whatsoever, and was just all business and heart.
Tracy: So you had mentioned during this period of time meeting Herb.
Packer: [00:19:48] Actually, it was this man and his wife who introduced me to Herb.
Tracy: Oh, interesting.
Packer: [00:19:51] Yes. They’re Jewish and Herb is, too, and that was how I met
Herb—through them.
Tracy: Had you been dating or courting much before that?
Packer: [00:20:00] Oh, sure, I’d done a lot. I wasn’t particularly attached, but there
were plenty of them. They were around.
Tracy: What about Herb stood out for you?
Packer: [00:20:14] He was good-looking, he was Jewish, and he was not from
Birmingham. [laughs] And he was smart. He was very smart, not just about

23

law, about everything, he was smart. [00:20:31] That was not the question.
The question was what about me. Why was he…? [laughs]
Tracy: Well, what do you think?
Packer: [00:20:36] No, I don’t know.
Tracy: During this time, you also studied at a writing program at the University of
Alabama.
Packer: [00:20:48] I did. That was good for me. I’d forgotten about that, and that was
important. That was for a little bit in the middle fifties. I was probably
twenty-eight years old or something like that, [maybe] thirty. There was a
writing program—the second in the country—run by a man named Hudson
Strode, and I knew about him. I thought it would be good for me to try to
get into a writing program and force myself to finish something. I’d just…
three pages and out, I’d lose confidence in it. That was the problem.
So I went down and asked him if I could be in his class, and he was
happy for that to be the case, so I was in his class. I made a lot of friends
down there, older people than I. Almost all of them were older men and
women. As far as I know, none became successful as writers, but they were
pretty good. They were good writers. And I finished stuff. I finished because
I had to turn stuff in. I felt the obligation to do my part, so I would finish a
story and turn it in. After I stopped that class, I no longer finished anything
without that class pressing against me.
Then I married and came out here, and I didn’t know anybody,
couldn’t finish anything, getting pretty depressed, I guess. Herb saw Wallace
Stegner on the campus. Herb was a professor of law. He saw Wallace Stegner

24

on the campus, and they chatted for a while, and Herb told him that he had
married and I’d had… did I say that I’d had a story published in Harper’s?
Tracy: Yes.
Packer: [00:22:39] That really threw me. Herb told him that and asked if I could be in
Wally’s class. He hadn’t even asked me. Wally said yes, and then Herb told
me that he had arranged this. I decided that I would do it, and it changed my
life.
There are several things that have changed my life, and that certainly
did, because now I was in a class with very good writers; [there was] lots of
competition, and I had to perform. I had to finish. I don’t know why, but
I’ve never had the problem again after being in the class. I’ve always finished
what I start now. But that class was a wonderful thing for me. Wally was a
wonderful man and he was very kind to me.
Tracy: I want to ask a couple questions prior to Stanford. Herb came on to the
faculty in 1956. There was time after you had met but before you married
and came out to Stanford that you kept up a correspondence.
Packer: [00:23:52] That was between ’54 and ’56.
Tracy: Then you married. I was wondering if you had, besides the correspondence,
if you had spent much time with Herb in person.
Packer: [00:24:03] Not a whole lot. He used to come to Birmingham. I came out here
a couple of times. I’d spend a week out here. He would spend a week in
Birmingham. We didn’t know each other terribly well.
Tracy: What expectations did you have? Do you remember what you imagined
marriage would be or what marriage meant?

25

Packer: [00:24:23] I think I went into it with absolute blindness. I had no idea. I just
knew it was an opportunity to get out and stop being a slug. [laughs] I wasn’t
a slug, but something like that.
Tracy: Herb himself, I mean… his appointment to the faculty at Stanford was a
little controversial at the time.
Packer: [00:24:51] It was quite controversial. Herb was at a law firm in Washington
called Wilmer Cutler Pickering—a really good law firm. He was an associate
there. In his off time, he worked for something called the Fund for the
Republic. That was pro bono, Fund for the Republic. Gosh, I’m going to
have to do some hard thinking here. The Fund for the Republic was a kind
of moderate political organization. It was not left-wing. It was slightly left,
maybe, more left than right. But a guy named Fulton Lewis, Jr., decided that
the Fund for the Republic—I can’t remember. Robert Maynard Hutchins,
who was president of the University of Chicago, was one of the founders I
think, and I can’t remember the other guy. The other guy was the president
of the Ford Motor Company, but I can’t quite reach his name. Anyway,
Fulton Lewis, Jr., was a very right-wing radio commentator, and he took out
after the Fund for the Republic.
After Herb was appointed to the Stanford law faculty—I’ll talk about
that in a second, but let me just finish this—Fulton Lewis, Jr., began talking
about Herb on the radio that Stanford University Law School had employed
a faculty member who was a left-wing commie. I don’t know, he may have
said he was a commie, which was, of course, absurd. But it was really very
touch-and-go there for a while.

26

David Packard was on the board at Stanford, and he thought that
Stanford should withdraw the appointment, and so there was a big struggle
in the Board of Trustees. There was a big struggle because Herb was already
appointed, and if they had then denied him that appointment, the entire law
school faculty would have quit. They’d already voted on him. They would
have resigned en masse. Maybe two or three would not have, but most would
have said, “We’re outta here.” It would have been such a disgrace, such an
attack on the integrity of the law school.
So Wallace Sterling, who was president and was a great guy, by the way,
fought the opposition to Herb’s appointment, and finally it went through.
But Fulton Lewis, Jr., was all over it, and lots of people out here, lots of
California right-wingers like David Packard, were very up in arms about it.
I’m glad you knew about that so I could mention that. That was a very
important to Herb, not to me, because that was before I got here, but it was
very important.
Tracy: Do you know… Herb could have continued practicing law.
Packer: [00:28:30] Yes. He was so scholarly. He was not going to get down in the
trenches and fight cases in court and stuff like that. He was very scholarly.
He should have been an English professor.
Tracy: Certainly by the time he had arrived at Stanford, he had already distinguished
himself as a law scholar at that point.
Packer: [00:28:53] Somewhat, somewhat. Not much, not much. No. They took him
on faith. I think he came here without tenure, so they could take him on
faith, but as soon as he came here, he started publishing. He published his

27

first book called Ex-Communist Witnesses. That may have been… maybe he
was writing that. I don’t remember. It’s a book about the people who had
been communist and then began to testify against other people who were
communist. We’re talking really hard times in America. Of course, you were
not even born, but red-baiting was all over the place. Anybody who was
slightly liberal would be called a communist, and that was the worst thing in
the world you could say about anybody. So Herb got beat up a bit with that.
Tracy: When you arrived at Stanford, did this experience of Herb’s color your
assumptions or attitudes towards Stanford?
Packer: [00:30:03] Okay, yes, they did. I thought I was coming into a pretty
conservative situation. I knew that the law school was not. The dean of the
law school was a fellow named Carl Spaeth, who was a slight lefty, not much
lefty, a little bit of a lefty, but he had Rockefeller connections. His best friend
was Nelson Rockefeller, and he had worked for the Rockefeller Foundation.
But he was a liberal guy, and he was building [the school]. He hadn’t been
here long.
The faculty was just tired old-timers, until Carl came. Then Carl started
making appointments that built up the law school faculty. It became a very
vibrant law school as a result of the work of Carl getting these young guys
here, like Herb.
Tracy: So when you arrived at Stanford, what did you learn? How did you feel once
you’d actually arrived here?
Packer: [00:31:10] I felt I wanted to go home, where I had a situation, where I had
friends, where I had a reputation, where I was thought well of, and here I

28

was out here. I know this is a terrible thing to say, but out here I felt like I
was just an attachment. At Birmingham, I was somebody. I’d published at
Harper’s magazine. Hey, that was hot stuff. I had helped my brother in his
campaigns for Congress. That was hot stuff. I didn’t mention that, but I’ll go
back to it. I was somebody in Birmingham, and I was nothing in Stanford,
and I wanted to go home. That’s why Herb, I think, got me into the writing
program. Saved our marriage, saved my life. [laughs]
Tracy: So let’s talk a bit about your brother, because in 1954…
Packer: [00:32:03] He went in in 1954. I was basically his campaign manager and
wrote all his speeches. I was very active with him, and he went out and was
defeated in 1964 in what we laughingly call the Goldwater landslide. He was a
Democrat and all the Democrats got defeated in Alabama in 1964, and he
was one of them. He was not a liberal. He was pretty conservative. He was
mostly electable until that happened. He was a very sweet man, a really dear
man.
Tracy: Prior to your brother running, you had, yourself, toyed with the idea of going
into politics.
Packer: [00:32:52] Well, yes. Where did you get all this? [Tracy laughs.] There was a
bunch of people, young Democrats, of whom I was one, that we were all
friends. We were all conniving and planning and thinking of ways to get
power and to give power to elect the right people, like Jim Folsom (if you
can call him a right person) to the governorship. We thought maybe we’d run
one of us and see if we could get elected. We didn’t think we’d get
[elected]—no chance on earth.

29

The guy who was in Congress at that point was well entrenched, and
there was nobody that was going to beat him. But then he quit, and I think
he ran for the Senate, though I’m not sure. So we just said, “Okay, let’s run
one of us,” and we chose me, but the most bizarre [choice] because I was a
woman, but I had a name. I had a recognizable name, so we could start with
that.
Then my brother came home, and he said, “You know, I’m going to
run for Congress now that L_____,” that’s the guy’s name, “is not there
anymore. I’m going to run.”
And I said, “Okay, you run. I won’t.” So that was my little moment. It
was just a farce. It wasn’t serious stuff. It wasn’t serious stuff.
Packer: It must signify your interest that I assume continues to this day in politics
and your engagement in it.
Tracy: [00:34:27] Yes. Well, I couldn’t have grown up in the family I did. Our dinner
tables were battles over political ideas. Battles. Sometimes all the kids would
be fighting each other and then my father would say…. My mother would
leave the table. She just didn’t want to hear us quarreling. She’d leave the
table, go into the breakfast room, and finish dinner in there. And then my
father would watch us and then he’d say, “That’s enough.” Then we all were
quiet. The minute he said, “That’s enough,” nobody said another word till
the next day. Then we’d be at each other again, fussing and quarreling about
politics, because we weren’t all liberal. I was liberal, my sister was liberal, my
brothers were not. No, they weren’t liberal. The women were liberal, the men
weren’t, and we fought a lot until my father told us to be quiet.

30

My father, by the way, was called “the little Bolshevik,” in 1918 because
he was against the war and was a liberal. He had a very interesting
congressional career. He went in as “the little Bolshevik,” and he went out as
the darling of Wall Street, and he never changed. He was the same
throughout. The world just passed him by, and what was considered liberal
when he went in was considered reactionary when he went out. Interesting
career.
Tracy: That’s very interesting. We were talking about your arrival at Stanford and
your homesickness, and you mentioned Herb reaching out to Wally Stegner
and asking him if you could join his class, which you said probably saved
your marriage. Tell me a little bit about your experience in that class.
Packer: [00:36:28] It was a wonderful class, and some of my best friends came out of
that, my present-day best friends came out of that class. Bill Broder and
Gloria, who died last year, they were in that class. Ken Kesey was in the class.
Wendell Berry was in the class. There was a hot-shot group of people in that
class. I don’t remember everybody’s name. There was a couple that just were
disgusting. [laughs] I’m thinking of a woman in the class, I won’t say who she
was, but she had a career afterwards. But it was a very hot-shot class with a
lot of competition.
I found I could hold my own in terms of comments and in terms of my
writing, so it was a wonderful experience for me, gave me a lot of
confidence. I was too old to need it; I should have already had it, but I didn’t,
so that was a wonderful experience.

31

Tracy: Would you say you didn’t necessarily have that same confidence at Alabama
when you were studying within that writing program?
Packer: [00:37:30] I didn’t. I didn’t. I didn’t have that confidence. Well, there was a
difference between [the programs]. The guy who ran the program at
Alabama, I just didn’t trust that program. I didn’t think that it was what I
needed. I made friends there and I did some writing there and I improved
there, but I didn’t really trust the program as much as I eventually trusted the
program here to lead me in the right direction.
Actually, Wally wasn’t teaching that year when I first took the class; it
was Dick Scowcroft. Dick Scowcroft is a wonderful man and a terrific
teacher. He leads a class as well as anybody I have ever seen lead a class to
bring out—you know what “educate” means? Educate, “to pull out.” And
that’s what he did—pull out ideas from people.
The way it would work is we would have a story and we would read it
aloud because we didn’t have photocopy machines in those days. We would
read it. Or at least we didn’t have access to them. We would read our story
aloud, and then everybody in the class would comment on it. Dick was able
to get people to focus and comment and do it nicely. Occasionally there was
a mean character in the class who loved hurting people’s feelings, but mostly
the criticism was very good. I thoroughly enjoyed it and I think I learned a
lot in that class.
The next year, I won a scholarship, a Stegner Fellowship. I got paid a
little bit, not wildly, and then Wally taught that class. Frank O’Connor, the
short-story writer, taught one time. Who else did? Malcolm Cowley also was

32

a teacher in the class. They were friends of Wally’s, and when he was going
to be gone, he would invite his friends who were competent to come and
teach.
Tracy: During this time that you were taking these classes and that you had your
fellowship, you were also having children. [laughs]
Packer: [00:39:49] That’s right. That’s right. I remember, was it the first child… there
was an earthquake. I was in class. Wally was teaching it. I remember this very
well. Wally was teaching it, and there was an earthquake, and I looked around
and Wally said—people were more formal then—“Don’t worry, Mrs. Packer,
you’re not having a baby. It’s just an earthquake,” which I thought was
hilariously funny. Of course, I was big with child. I had it within two weeks
[00:40:25] “You’re not having the baby. It’s just an earthquake.”
Tracy: That’s funny.
Packer: [00:40:31] But, you know, the chandeliers were shaking, the building was
shaking.
Tracy: Which would have been enough to possibly put you into early labor, I’m
sure. How did you balance being pregnant and raising new little babies with
the work that you were doing at that time?
Packer: [00:40:54] Well, we had help. Every penny I made as a fellow and almost
every penny I made as a teacher went into help, to having a housekeeper, a
gardener, so that I would be free to work. So that was one way that we
managed it.
I remember one day when I had both children, George was just born
but Annie was about two years old, I came home from teaching. By then I

33

was teaching. I came home from teaching, and Annie was in my study pulling
the ribbon out of my typewriter, and I thought, “She’s telling me something.
She’s telling me she doesn’t like that typewriter.” So after that, I never closed
my door. The kids would come in and sit on my lap and peck away, hit the
keys, and then they’d get bored and so they’d go back out and play with
whoever was around. But they could come in anytime, because it seemed to
me that I had no right to exclude them when I was sitting there with the
typewriter. So they felt pretty free about it, coming in.
But I had help. I couldn’t have done it, couldn’t have taught. I had help
from nine to four. I’d get home at three-thirty. The help would leave at four.
I did the cooking, but that was… I had plenty of support.
Tracy: Where did you and Herb live in these early years?
Packer: [00:42:40] When we first were married, we lived in an apartment in Menlo
Park, a two-bedroom, nice garden apartment. During that year, we hired an
architect. Herb had already, before we were married, gotten a plot of land on
Stanford’s campus, and during our first year, year and a half…. Let’s see. I
guess Annie was born in the apartment. I mean, we were still living there. By
the time George was born, we had moved onto the campus in a house at 807
San Francisco Terrace, a nice house, architected by a guy named John Field.
That’s where we lived until I moved five or ten years ago to here.
[00:43:33] And I want to say this. There’s no better place in the world,
I’m sure, to raise children than the Stanford campus, especially our place.
Our house was on a cul de sac with five houses, and the cul de sac was off a
cul de sac with about ten houses. It was a long way out to the street, and no

34

strange cars were driving around. There’s no traffic problem. Except one of
the fathers was a little bit reckless and did speed a little. [It was] not Herb,
but the neighbor was always speeding his little play car.
But it was a wonderful place to raise children. In our cul de sac, there
were four boys in one house. They were older than my kids. There were four
kids in the next house, the same age as my kids. There were two kids in the
next house, my kids’ age and then us. Then in the fifth house, there were
three kids my kids’ age. I mean, that was the perfect place to raise a child,
always company, terrific. We were really lucky.
Tracy: Do you feel that living on campus…
Packer: [00:44:55] Is restricting and you’d see the same people all the time, is that
what you were going to say? [00:45:02] I bet you do. Everybody does.
Tracy: No. I’m just curious how…
Packer: [00:45:05] Everybody asks that question.
Tracy: I guess that’s a part of the question, but I just wonder how living on campus
influenced (or didn’t influence) your relationship with your colleagues and
other members of the Stanford community.
Packer: [00:45:20] It may have. It may have. But I want to say this. There were five
houses. At one house, the guy was an artist and worked for the Development
Office. Herb was a lawyer and I was a writer. The next guy was a doctor. The
next guy was a statistician. The next guy was a historian. They had almost
nothing in common, these families did, except the kids.
It was not as confining as most people would think it would have been.
It was not confining. If you live in a middle-class neighborhood, the next-

35

door guy’s a doctor, the next guy works in a company. I mean, it’s the same
thing. It’s money and level of finances, not occupation that makes for the
similarities.
Tracy: That’s interesting. When you arrived at Stanford, what were your
expectations of how you would spend your time? Did you have a sense of
wanting to work? [laughs] Do you know what I mean?
Packer: [00:46:33] I know what you mean, but I can’t answer it because I don’t know
that I had any expectations. One day happened and then the next. Eventually
I expected to be the great American novelist. Yes, that was my expectation. It
was not terribly lively as an expectation, but I certainly expected to do well,
to try hard and do well.
Tracy: How did your experience in the writing program and your time as a Stegner
fellow shape your ambitions or shape what you wanted for yourself?
Packer: [00:47:07] Not much. Well, everything and not much. How did it shape what
I expected and what I wanted? Basically, I know this is a… my life is so silly
and trivial. I became a teacher at Stanford in order to justify having help with
my house and children. That was the justification. We probably could have
afforded it without my working, but it was not what was going on in my
society. That’s not what the people next door did, so I needed to justify it. So
I got a career as a teacher, which has been much more gratifying in many
ways than my career as a writer. [laughs] I mean, both have had some
consequences, but the teaching has been very gratifying.
Tracy: Let’s talk then about how you got into teaching at Stanford, because my
understanding is there was a little bit of serendipity to it.

36

Packer: [00:48:23] If I ever write an autobiography, I’m going to call it Serendipity.
How I got into teaching? The year after I was a Stegner fellow Philip Roth
was going to come and teach. Wally had met Roth in Rome or someplace,
and they had become friends, and Roth was just rising. He was young. He
was quite young. He was just becoming known. He accepted Wally’s
invitation to teach at Stanford.
Then at the last minute, something came up, and I don’t remember
what it was. Something came up and he withdrew, and Stanford was left
without anybody to teach the low-level writing classes. So Wally asked me. I
had never been shy at commenting in class, so he knew that I could
comment and could do something about the story, so he asked me.
Tracy: I’ve also read that you had a Jones lectureship. Does that sound right?
Packer: [00:49:43] No, that’s quite exactly right. That is what my teaching was. The
Jones lectureship was designed so that the department could employ young
teachers. They were not on the tenure track. I was not on the tenure track. I
was a Jones lecturer, and Roth would have been a Jones lecturer, and there
still are Jones lecturers still at Stanford. The people who teach the
undergraduates are Jones lecturers, and that’s what I was for five or six years.
Then the troubles at Stanford [started]—window-breaking and lots of
problems, and Herb was on the front line as a vice provost. Whenever the
students demanded a meeting, Sterling and Dick—Dick Lyman, who was the
provost—and Herb would have to go to meet them in the dark on top of the
bowling alley or whatever. It was a very difficult, very dangerous times. They
were very, very dangerous times. The university insisted that we put in about

37

5000 watt [lamps], or 10,000, I don’t know what, all around our house so that
we could flip on the light at a moment’s notice and illuminate the whole area
in case somebody was there trying to kill Herb or burn the house down or
break a window or whatever. Those were spooky times.
I was a lecturer and therefore not a member of the Academic Council,
and therefore had no say whatsoever in anything. I was just watching my
husband get beat up by the radicals and the radical faculty as well. And I said
to Wally, “You know, I’d like to be a member of the Academic Council so I
can go to these meetings.”
And he said, “Okay.”
Tracy: And this is Wally Stegner?
Packer: [00:51:44] Yes. They were the two, W.S. [00:51:54] So he just told them that
he wanted me to be an assistant professor. You could not do that now. You
could not do that. You couldn’t have done it a year later. It’s just he was very
powerful. He was very important at Stanford. The only way on earth I could
ever have gotten on to this faculty was through him.
Tracy: So during this time you held the Jones lectureship obviously you were
teaching. What was your experience of teaching during those few years?
Packer: [00:52:28] Not pleasant. Not pleasant. Some of the kids were wonderful, and
some were so nasty, so smug, so conceited, and caused lots of trouble in class
as well as in White Plaza. I mean, they deliberately did not have respect for
authority. Now, I wasn’t much of an authority, but I knew more than they
knew. I knew a lot more than they did about how to write. But they would
just… if I would say something [demonstrates], just sneering laughter. Not

38

every day and certainly not everybody, but enough so that it was a little
unpleasant. I actually didn’t mind too much because I like a fracas. I liked it.
It didn’t bother me, but I remember that it happened.
Tracy: So at this point then you were teaching the lower level classes.
Packer: [00:53:24] Lower-level writing classes, yes, undergraduate writing classes, yes.
Tracy: Certainly today and during your time at Stanford, you were very well known
as a teacher. You talked about how that was a very satisfying part of your
time at Stanford, so I’m curious about how you developed those skills. At
what point do you think you felt really confident about your teaching or how
did that evolve?
Packer: [00:53:59] I don’t know how it evolved. I did begin… I felt pretty confident.
By the time I finished with the Stegner program, I knew that I had a capacity
to comment helpfully, and I knew I had a capacity to look at something and
analyze it to be helpful to somebody. So I just went into the teaching.
And of course, with undergraduates, there weren’t that many who were
skillful, but I had a philosophy: they’re all human beings, they all have a
capacity to grow, and they all have feelings, and never forget those facts. No
matter how silly the story was, there’s always something in it. That was my
feeling and I believe it’s true. There’s always something in the story that you
can build on. If a teacher could just identify it and let it be, let the writer
know it, the writer could make it better. Maybe never good, but better if you
just find that kernel that’s worth developing, and that was my philosophy of
teaching. I had a lot of gratification out of teaching. I thought I was pretty
good. I didn’t think I was the greatest, but I thought I was pretty good.

39

Tracy: I want to ask you about your experience or your treatment as a woman
during your lectureship, and you had made a comment during the panel
discussion about an indifference towards you. I wonder if you could talk a
little bit more about that.
Packer: [00:56:07] Well, I did not suffer as a woman, nor do I think I benefitted
particularly as a woman, and I think the reason for that evenhandedness was
Wallace Stegner. He had great respect for women, and he had a very strong
mother. So I don’t think that he felt any particular chivalry or any particular
superiority, and that really made a lot of difference.
Then eventually there were problems in the department, a little bit. I
mean, people wondered, “Who the hell is she?” And for me, I had some
problems. I’ll be frank about this. I had some problems with [wondering] do
I get all this good stuff just because I’m Herb’s wife? Is that why I get the
Lyman Award? Is that why I get all this stuff? I don’t think it is, but it
probably has some influence and some effect. But that crosses my mind
every once in a while, which is kind of saddening in a way, because I’ve
worked hard. I should be just satisfied from what I’ve done, but I do
sometimes wonder if there isn’t sort of a shadow, Herb’s shadow that brings
me good things at Stanford, has brought me good things at Stanford.
Tracy: When you were given the Jones lectureship, a part of that was that Wally
Stegner needed someone to fill Philip Roth’s empty spot. What was Herb’s
reaction to you getting the lectureship?
Packer: [00:58:03] I don’t recall. I would assume that he was just pleased, thought
that was a good thing. He may have thought, “Yes, but it’s going to interfere

40

with her writing.” Certainly it did do that. But I’m sure he was just pleased
that I had a good job.
Tracy: When you went to Wally and said that you wanted to be on the faculty and
were hired as an assistant professor, was there any negative reaction from the
English Department staff or faculty to that promotion?
Packer: [00:58:43] I don’t know, but when I have told that story, a couple of the old
guys have corrected it and have said that it was not quite accurate. [They’ve
said] that it wasn’t Wally’s influence, but they were glad that I was going to
be on the faculty and that they had promoted it as well as Wally. Now, I
don’t know. I wasn’t privy to those conversations, but I still contend that if it
hadn’t been for Wally’s power, it wouldn’t have happened. But some faculty
who were here at the time claim that’s not so. [00:59:21] But that figures. Of
course they would claim that’s not so, and not only for my feelings, but for
their own. They wouldn’t want to think that Wally just ran them like little
puppy dogs.
Tracy: Did you continue teaching lower-level classes when you came on as an
assistant professor?
Packer: [00:59:45] I did. I continued teaching only lower-level classes until about, I
guess, the 1980s, after Wally was gone and Dick was gone. By the way, Dick
Scowcroft was a very important person in the Creative Writing Program, and
John L’Heureux was here. John said, “Why don’t you teach the graduate
class.” And so I said, “Okay, I will,” and I did, and I liked doing that.

41

Tracy: We have this on the agenda, so I think this is a good time to talk about it.
Let’s talk about the history of Creative Writing a little bit, because you’re
right, some of these names we haven’t properly outlined.
Packer: [01:00:21] The first person that taught anything like creative writing was
Edith Mirrielees, who graduated from Stanford in the 1890s and then went
off to I don’t know where to do some graduate work. She never got a Ph.D.
as far as I know, I’m pretty sure. She came back and taught in the English
Department, and she would offer a course every once in a while for people
who just wanted to write, which included John Steinbeck. So she had a
reputation as a really good teacher. She was still alive when I came on the
faculty. She was a very nice, quiet, obviously really smart, very small woman.
She was quite something.
When Wally came here, which was 1945, to join the English
Department, Miss Mirrielees was still alive but she wasn’t teaching, but she
and Wally became good friends. Then Wally decided… he had been at Iowa,
which was the first university in the country that had a course in creative
writing, so he established a program for returning GIs, for people like Bud
Burdick, Clay Putnam, who had been in the army or the navy and were
coming back to school and who had lots of stories to tell. So Wally started a
class for these guys, almost all men. There were a couple of women, I guess,
and that’s how the program began.
Wally had known Dick Scowcroft as a graduate student at Harvard,
where Wally taught. Wally got his Ph.D. at Iowa, I’m pretty sure of that, and
then he taught at first Michigan, then Harvard, and he met Dick Scowcroft,

42

who was a writer. I don’t know what year this is. When the program began to
develop, Wally asked Dick if he wanted to join the program. Dick became a
professor of English, too, and he was a terrific teacher. He was a wonderful
teacher.
That’s how the program began, and then they started offering it to
undergraduates, and they would hire a former Stegner Fellow…. Oh, let me
go back for a second. A man named Henry Jones was the brother of R.F.
Jones, who was the head of the English Department when Wally came here.
Henry Jones was an oilman and obviously very rich, and he decided that he
would finance the Creative Writing Program. I don’t know what year this is. I
should, but I don’t. He would finance the Creative Writing Program, and he
insisted that there be fellowships. I don’t know whether this was at the start
or subsequently, but there were four in fiction and two in poetry, and he
financed those. Jones insisted they be called the Stegner Fellowships.
At that time, the head of the poetry part was Yvor Winters, a poet and
a curmudgeon, a curmudgeonly fellow. Just by the way, he was my colleague
for quite a few years, and his wife was my good friend, and he never spoke a
word to me, which I find marvelous, really marvelous. He knew what he
believed in, and I didn’t figure in that. So that was fine.
Anyway, so it had the four fellowships in fiction and the two in poetry,
and then they had an M.A. program, so that another group of younger
would-be writers would get an M.A. in English with a focus in creative
writing. It would take them two years to get it. There were quite a number of
people who were here for that. I’ve got books that have all these names in

43

them, but you probably don’t want to stop and look at those books. There
were some good writers, some very good writers, among the M.A. candidates
as well as among the Stegners.
Then Wally retired. I don’t know when he retired, probably in 1970 or
1971. He said he was so tired of the students in his class thinking they knew
more than he did and being rude, he just didn’t want to fool with them
anymore. He said that. There were some really bad people that were Stegner
Fellows. I can name names, but I won’t right now.
So then he retired and the program then needed another senior guy,
and that was going to be John L’Heureux. So John then joined the faculty in
1973. Dick was the head of the program after Wally left for five or six years,
and then John became the head of the program in about 1978 or 1980,
something like that.
The program has stayed pretty much the same except for one
innovation that John brought on, and that was to get rid of the M.A.
program and to enlarge the number of fellows, so that now I don’t know
how many fellows there are. I think there are four each year, so there are
eight fiction fellows and eight poetry fellows now, and then there’ll be a
couple of other people, maybe people getting Ph.D.’s in English or history or
communications or whatever, who are allowed into the program. So the
program generally has about ten or twelve people, but eight are fellows at any
one time.
Tracy: You talked about Creative Writing a little bit in the interview you had done
with Peter Steinhart, and you made a comment that you thought Wally would

44

have rather had the program—the program was housed within the English—
outside of the English Department.
Packer: [01:07:17] Well, I don’t remember exactly what I said, but I know I said
something along those lines. I think at one point Wally said, “I’d like for us
to be independent,” but he was angry at something in the English
Department. Maybe they were trying to butt into the creative writing
business and he was having to fight them off or something like that. But I
think he was glad to be in the English Department, because it gave Creative
Writing a little bit more stature to be in a dignified old program like English
literature. So I think he was really basically glad to do that. But he did say that
at one point to me, that he’d like to get out of English.
Tracy: Today the Creative Writing Program is certainly is second only to Iowa. It’s
considered one of the best programs in the country. I wonder if it had the
same stature when you were a fellow.
Packer: [01:08:23] When I was a fellow, I think that Stanford was number two in
terms of creative writing programs, but number two among how many? Not
that many. There was a burgeoning of creative writing programs in the
seventies and eighties. I mean, there are hundreds now. I don’t mean
hundreds, and I certainly don’t know how many, but every college wants its
own creative writing program. And it’s good, I like it, because it means that
our graduates, our Stegner Fellows, can get jobs as teachers at these colleges,
because there’s so many available positions.
There was Utah, there was Johns Hopkins, maybe one or two more,
but there were only five or six [at the time]. I know there weren’t ten creative

45

writing programs in the country at that time, and, as I say, Stanford was
second. That was 1946 when it really became a program. So it was
burgeoning. Everybody wants to be an artist. Some woman, a poet, said to
me, “Everybody who goes to college can write, and they all think they can
write either poetry or fiction, just because they can write English.” People do
feel that they can write, and they can, just maybe not professionally.
Tracy: [laughs] So Wally Stegner and Dick Scowcroft played a large role in getting
the program going, and then John L’Heureux came in in the early seventies,
as you said. My understanding is that John played a large role in building the
finances for these additional…
Packer: [01:10:11] John has played a major role all around in changing the program
and building the finances. Wally was a wonderful ambassador, moneymaker,
but he didn’t work at it very much. Dick I don’t think was terribly good at it,
and I was rotten. I tried when I was head of the program, which I’ve done
two years at a time a couple of times. I tried, but I think everything I said
turned people off from giving money. I don’t know. I tried, didn’t make any
difference, though. But John’s good at it. It may be female, you know? I
don’t know.
Tracy: One of the things that I went back to for research for this discussion was
that the panel discussion that you led on the history of Creative Writing that
included Eavan Boland, Phil Levine, and Scott Turow. One thing that we
noted was the growth of the faculty. Early on, there were three or four
faculty that were working within Creative Writing, but now at this point
it’s…

46

Packer: [01:12:06] Six, mm-hmm.
Tracy: —six faculty members and then certainly the lectureships in the program.
Beyond, I guess, just expanding finances, I’m wondering what allowed for
the growth of the faculty within the program.
Tracy: [01:12:21] I don’t know. It all happened after my time. I think it certainly
relates back to the fact that everybody wants to be a writer, so that there’s
more demand. You know, I was thinking about this. I’m writing something
that this stuff figures in. I’m thinking about the number of writers in 1900
and the number of writers—I’m talking about professional writers—in 2000,
in number. My guess is it’s forty-to-one, twenty-to-one at least, twenty times
as many people who can be called—it’s not that they’re self-designated—can
be called creative writers. You know, I can name them all in 1900. I can’t
even begin in 2000. Now it’s 2014, I could probably name you thirty just off
the top of my head, and for 1900 I could probably name you four.
Tracy: [laughs] Right. The interest in pursuing writing is just—
Packer: [01:13:55] Everybody wants to be an artist, and since everybody can write,
everybody wants to be a writer/artist. I mean, that’s the thing about it.
Tracy: So certainly that would increase the students coming into the program.
Packer: [01:14:05] Yes, and that would increase the need for faculty coming into the
program.
Tracy: Do you remember if there was ever any tensions between English and the
Creative Writing Program over this interest in writing and the need for
lecturers and teachers and faculty specifically around creative writing?

47

Packer: [01:14:25] I don’t know specifically, but there was always tension between
English and Creative Writing, because some people in English… I don’t
know whether it’s still possible that there are people that think that it’s silly,
that creative writing is just kind of silly. If people want to write, let them
write, but, my goodness, teach creative writing? People don’t believe that
there’s anything to teach in creative writing, and I want to tell you they’re
wrong. There is. I learned. People taught me, and I think I teach others. But
there are people, literary people, who just say that it’s a silly business.
So of course there’s tension, and Wally, anytime anybody wanted to
move in on his program, he didn’t like that very much and he would fight
back. And he always won, because he was Wally. He always won. He could
go over to the President’s Office and get whatever he wanted, which was, in
a sense, unfair, but I’m glad of it. A little unfairness doesn’t hurt.
Tracy: [laughs] So we talked about Wally, Dick Scowcroft, John L’Heureux and his
time as director. I assume it was times when John was on sabbatical or when
various people were on sabbatical that you served terms?
Packer: [01:15:47] Yes, I served maybe three times for two or three years at a time,
too.
Tracy: This happened right before your retirement, but you had a longer term, a
four-year term from 1989 to 1993. Those are the dates that I have.
Packer: [01:16:08] And now that you mentioned them, they’re right. [01:16:15] That
was when I was trying to get money for the program, and I never could. In
four years, I couldn’t get a nickel.

48

Tracy: What were the other challenges or other responsibilities that you had during
the times you served as director of the program?
Packer: [01:16:29] Well, I don’t know. Keeping everybody happy, organizing classes,
dealing with certain personnel problems, not that there were many, but there
were some. Student complaints. Just the usual administrative stuff. I don’t
know whether that’s a satisfactory answer.
Tracy: It is a satisfactory answer. In terms of any of the issues that you’re dealing
with, do any particular issues or problems stand out in your mind?
Packer: [01:17:10] Well, I had a plagiarism problem with a student. No, that was
something that was in my lit class. But that was very painful. It was a kid I
really liked, and I know he was under terrible pressure at some point, and he
plagiarized, and I recognized it and got him to come in to see me. And he
cried and…. I can’t remember. I know I wanted to let it go, but I think I
didn’t let it go. I sent it on to the dean, but it was very painful to do. That’s
just by the way. That was free. [01:18:02] Problems in the program. Well,
there were problems with some of the people. The students would come in
and complain about the faculty. I’m remembering now that there a number
that considered themselves ill-treated by some member of the faculty. I’ve
got a whole… I’ve kept all this somewhere, I wrote it all down, but I’m not
going to show it to you.
Tracy: That’s your prerogative.
Packer: [01:18:35] I don’t know where it is, by the way, but I wouldn’t show it to you
anyway. Collecting issues are cheap. I don’t like that.

49

Tracy: I wonder if you could talk a little bit about how, within the Creative Writing
Program, writing was taught. What was the model of teaching within the
program?
Packer: [01:19:04] Well, I modeled myself after Dick Scowcroft, and I don’t know
how other people taught it. I visited classes, and it did seem to me that they
were following pretty much the same model—younger faculty in the
program and the Jones lecturers. It seemed to me they were following pretty
much the same model. When I first was in the class, we read our story out
loud, which is very, very difficult for anybody to comment sensibly on
something that they just hear once. It goes flying by. You can’t stop and say,
“Repeat that.” But once we got the photocopy machine, a story would be
distributed to all the class, and at the next class meeting it would be
discussed. And generally speaking, the instructor—for me, at least—would
ask, “Who would like to comment first?” And generally comments would
come. “I really like it. I liked the characters, I liked the this, I liked the that.”
And then somebody would come in, and say, “But,” and then they would
begin to make suggestions. Sometimes they were not suggestions. They were
criticisms, which is not helpful, you know. “I didn’t like the character.” Come
on. Who does that help? “I didn’t like the tone.” Who does that help? You
say, “The character seemed to me a little bit blind about his daughter,” or
something like that.
Then the writer can say, “I’ll take a look at that and maybe do
something about it.” But these big general negative comments are so useless.

50

Oh, they’re not useless. They’re just hurtful. If you want to hurt somebody,
that’s a good way to do it.
So the problem in the class is to keep people positive and specific and,
therefore, helpful. That’s what a good creative writing class, a good instructor
tries to do, positive but helpful. You can’t be helpful by saying, “I thought
this was terrible.” Who does that help? [01:21:29] So in a sense, one of the
things that I learned as a student was how to think about helping, how to
think about being helpful instead of merely commenting. Dick Scowcroft
was so good at that. He was terrific at that. He would just ask a question,
“Well, what about the husband? Did he say anything?”
And the writer thinks, “Uh-oh, I haven’t developed that husband well
enough,” because that’s the way Dick taught. But it would be specific and it
would be not rude and not mean. He was really a very good teacher, and I
tried to model myself on him. Probably I didn’t succeed, but he was an ideal
teacher. He was better than Wally. Wally was more the authority. Dick was
more the first among equals, so that he got other people to be just as equal.
We could disagree with Dick. You wouldn’t disagree with Wally, but you
could disagree with Dick. So that was the way I hoped the class was taught.
Tracy: Do all writers have or do they eventually develop this ability to be helpful?
Does writing talent and the ability to criticize writing go hand in hand?
Packer: [01:23:14] No. Some people are just more mean and not helpful. I think that
being critical—getting the vocabulary of criticism, the vocabulary of fictional
criticism—is a big good way to advance your own writing. I do think it is. I
think when you can internalize the criticism, then your writing is going to

51

improve. If you can know that if you have a major character, he’s got to say
something, you’ve already improved. You didn’t know that before. Now you
know it. So you internalize that criticism, and I think after a really good class,
you do improve. There are people who think they were born full armed, but
there are not very many of those.
Tracy: You answered exactly what I was trying to get at—how the development of
your own writing is influenced by the development of your ability to criticize
other people’s writing.
Packer: [01:24:24] Absolutely. So this class, a lot of people say all it does is you give
people time to write. That’s not true. People can learn to think. They can be
led to thinking about stuff in literature in their writing.
Tracy: I wonder, as the program developed and grew, both in size but as its stature
remained at the high level of all writing programs, how the program’s ability
to recruit faculty and lecturers changed or improved over time.
Packer: [01:25:07] I don’t know. I’m not very current with what goes on over there. I
don’t know. I really can’t answer that. I’m sure it’s improved. I’m sure it has,
but it has ups and downs. I don’t know about the teaching over there now,
but you’re not going to be better than Dick Scowcroft. I don’t know about
the leadership over there now, but you’re not going to be stronger than
Wallace Stegner. I mean, they were top, top. There have been maybe less, but
they may be equal, may even be more, may even be better, but I doubt it.
[01:26:05] You know, I’m not a hero worshipper. I’m really trying to be
as critical. I’m really talking about these two guys as a result of my experience

52

with them. They both had clay feet, but it wasn’t in class. I mean, they were
wonderful for the program.
Tracy: Is there anything more to say about the development of Creative Writing or
an important aspect of the program that I haven’t asked you about that you’d
want to include?
Packer: [01:26:38] I don’t know. I do think that the writers are probably better today,
the students are probably better today than they were. And now, why is that?
A number of reasons. Probably because they all took creative writing as
undergraduates, and when I first started, there was no such program for
undergraduates anywhere, so that they’re all better prepared to come. But
also when you’ve got twenty thousand applicants. When I was a fellow, there
were maybe ten people wanting fellowships. Now there are ten thousand.
You’re bound to have a little bit… I mean, the top is higher than the top
was, so there are bound to be some better writers coming into the program.
Maybe all of them are better.
Tracy: And that’s a really good point. In the panel on the history of Creative
Writing, Charlie Junkerman, who did an introduction, made the point that
the admission rate at Stanford is very competitive, but the admission rate
specifically within the Creative Writing Program is the most competitive.
Packer: [01:27:59] “Everybody wants to be a writer.” That was a statement that
Diane Wakoski made, “Everybody can write. So when they want to be artists,
they think they can be writers.” It’s an exaggerated remark, but probably not
totally untrue. The base is so much broader.

53

Tracy: In terms of your own contributions to the Creative Writing Program, what
do you feel you were able to do for the program?
Packer: [01:28:38] First let me say that I was also director of freshman English.
Tracy: And I do want to talk about that.
Packer: [01:28:43] And I think I made more contribution there than to the Creative
Writing Program. [01:28:49] I kept my finger in the dike, holding off the
water coming in, but I don’t know that I made any changes. I don’t
remember having made any changes to the program to improve it. I mean, I
don’t know that I have.

[End of November 5, 2014 interview with Nancy Packer]

54

STANFORD UNIVERSITY

PROJECT:

STANFORD FACULTY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

INTERVIEWER:

ALLISON TRACY

INTERVIEWEE:

NANCY PACKER

DATE OF INTERVIEW:

DECEMBER 3, 2014

Tracy: Hi. This is Allison Tracy. It is December 3rd, 2014. I’m here with Nancy
Packer to conduct our second session for our oral history interviews for the
Stanford Historical Society.
I wanted to shift a little bit and talk more generally about the English
Department and your time there. One question before we jump into the
English Department, and I think that this will become important as we talk
about your progress towards tenure, is your experience as a faculty wife, as
Herb Packer’s wife? Were you ever expected to fill that role as a faculty wife?
Packer: [00:00:53] Well, I certainly had that role for several years before I went into
the English Department, and I enjoyed being a faculty wife. The law school
was a very community-interested group. The law school was small at that
point. We knew everybody and we had dinner parties, and everybody was
friendly. Oh, there was some slight enmities, I guess, but mostly people were
friendly and respected each other, and it was a lot of fun to be a faculty wife
there. Some of my best friends I had got as a faculty wife and the ones still
alive are my friends.
Tracy: Were there any expectations in terms of contributing or…

55

Packer: [00:01:37] Yes, there were. I once asked the wife of the dean—her name was
Sheila Spaeth, and she was a fantastic woman, a marvelous social being, very
kind, very attractive—I asked her what was I supposed to do. And she said I
didn’t have to do anything except come to the ladies’ lunches. The law
faculty wives’ lunches I had to do, which I found quite amusing, because that
would be the thing you’d think I wouldn’t have to do, but that was the thing
she told me I had to do. It was a good group. It was a very good group.
Tracy: Did you have any sense at that time the wives of the department having their
own careers? Were they frustrated in their careers?
Packer: [00:02:32] The answer to that is I don’t think anybody had a career until I
started having a career. There were faculty wives who were lawyers, but they
weren’t practicing during that period. In fact, they may have never practiced
again. The person I’m thinking of left Stanford and went elsewhere, and I
don’t think she ever practiced law again. But they had their children, their
lives, but more typically 1950s wives than you would find today.
When I started working, which I did fairly soon, I guess the second
year when I started working, people were a little surprised. I had full-time
help, but still people were surprised that I was working. They weren’t critical,
I don’t think, just surprised.
Tracy: When you were a Stegner fellow, was the fact that you were married to a
faculty member ever an issue while you were studying?
Packer: [00:03:37] I don’t know whether it was an issue or not. Of course, a person in
my situation at that time would naturally have feelings that maybe she had
gotten ahead because of a connection with my husband. I did sometimes

56

think I would not have gotten as far as I got without having been a faculty
wife of a man who was prominent at the university.
Tracy: After Herb’s death, were you able to maintain connections to the law school
or his department?
Packer: [00:04:16] The law school was terrific. I was still invited to the faculty wives’
lunches. I was still invited to all the parties. Some of my very dearest friends
are law faculty people, the men in the department and some of the women.
They were still my friends. There was no problem about that.
[00:04:36] Loyal group. I would be happy to mention the ones who’ve
been closest, if you want me to.
Tracy: Absolutely.
Packer: [00:04:48] Well, John and Nancy Merryman, Byron and Linda Sher, Keith
and Ginny Mann, they were the closest. They were all close to Herb, but they
were close to me and they really supported me. They would take me out to
dinner, take me to the movies. When they went as a couple, they’d take me to
the movies. So those three, and I may come back and add a name or two
later as my mind works on it.
Tracy: As we had established that you eventually moved on to the faculty yourself,
and so you weren’t necessarily a faculty wife in a secondary sense; you were
faculty. Did you ever, though, even from a distanced viewpoint, see this role
of faculty wife change or, you know, maybe within the English Department,
did you see faculty wives…
Packer: [00:05:42] Yes. Let me see if I can recollect this in any kind of detail. Faculty
wives took turns giving lunches for the other faculty wives. That stopped.

57

The faculty, when there would be a party, there were faculty parties, the
wives all did the cooking and the cleaning up. That stopped, and it stopped
fairly quickly, about 1970. That’s not so quickly, but at the height of the
troubles, that’s when all of that stopped. [00:06:23] And I think the sense of
community was not nearly as strong thereafter. Of course it wasn’t. There
were good things about it, but it was a loss as well.
Tracy: Would you link the faculty wives no longer playing that role to the upheaval
during…
Packer: [00:06:40] Oh, absolutely. Well, two things. One, women started going to
work. It could also be that the faculty that we’re talking about, their children
by this time were getting to be pretty close to independent, so that freed the
women. They didn’t have little kids. They could go out and work, and that
certainly had a lot to do with the change in mores, but also just women’s role
in the United States changed.
Tracy: Certainly after your arrival you had both of your children fairly quickly. Ann
was born in 1959 and George was born in 1960. And you mentioned that
you had help with keeping a home, but I wonder if there were still any
challenges with having young children as you were climbing the ranks within
the English Department.
Packer: [00:07:40] Yes, there were plenty of challenges, believe me. [laughter] We had
help. She came at nine and she left at five, so it was breakfast and dinner that
I took care of. It was also doctors’ appointments and so on. There were
problems. I tried to work at home.

58

I may have told you this story before, but let me tell it again in case I
didn’t. My daughter was about eighteen months old, or two years and a half
old, in there somewhere, and I came home from my office. I’d always done
all my writing at home. I had an office at home and I had a typewriter, and
that’s where I spent my mornings. I came home from work one day and I
saw my daughter was in my office pulling the tape out of my typewriter, and
I thought, “There’s a lesson in there somewhere. I’m not going to close that
door ever again.”
So after that, my kids would go and be playing. They didn’t want to
play with me particularly. But they’d want to check with me, so they’d come
in and climb on my lap while I’d be typing, trying to write. They’d climb on
my lap and they’d hit the keys a little bit. Then they’d get bored and they
would leave. It was so much better that I kept that door open than if I’d kept
it closed, as I had started out doing. [00:09:04] So I was busy, let me tell you.
I was busy during those years, getting breakfast and dinner and teaching and
really being the primary caretaker as far as responsibility was concerned. We
had a wonderful woman helping us, though. She was terrific.
Tracy: Did you ever encounter any difficulties in the department if you needed to
take time or over the fact that you didn’t necessarily have as much flexibility
in your schedule?
Packer: [00:09:34] I don’t think I ever had any problem there. I don’t think I ever
needed any particular assistant.

59

Tracy: So let’s talk a little bit about the English Department. Maybe a good place to
start was thinking about who was around when you started in the English
Department and where you fit into that constellation of faculty.
Packer: [00:10:07] I’ve already told you how I got into it?
Tracy: We talked about the Creative Writing Program and how you got the Jones
lectureship because of Philip Roth.
Packer: [00:10:18] Well, no, I got the lectureship because Roth backed off, but I had
already been a fellow. A Stegner fellow.
Tracy: Right, yes.
Packer: [00:10:30] I’d been a Stegner fellow. I was there one year as a student, then
the next year I was a Stegner fellow, and then the next year I was teaching,
because Roth backed off.
Tracy: When the lectureship ended, how did your role in the department continue,
or how did you come into the department after that?
Packer: [00:10:55] I can’t tell you in any detail because I don’t remember that there
was any. It was just that I was there, so I taught the next year, and then I
taught the next year, and then I taught the next year, and I got to the point of
six years. You could be a lecturer for six years and then you had to leave
because they were afraid of tenure.
But at that point, though, the troubles had started. My husband was on
the firing line, really on the firing line, and I said to Wally, “I want to be at
those faculty meetings. Can I become an assistant professor?”
And Stegner said, “Yes, I’ll see to it.” And I became an assistant
professor at that point.

60

That was followed the next year by another guy who was a lecturer and
who was for three or four years, and he asked Stegner the same thing, and
Stegner said no. [laughter] Why? I don’t know. Was it because of my
connection with Herb or because I was a better teacher? I was a better
teacher than the guy, but still, I felt privileged.
Tracy: When you came on as an assistant professor then, were you on tenure line at
that point?
Packer: [00:12:16] I was on tenure line.
Tracy: So you were expected to start that process.
Packer: [00:12:22] Yes, that’s right, and I became a tenured professor, I guess, in
three or four years. I’d have to go look and look that up.
Tracy: The dates that I have were that you went from assistant to associate in 1974.
Packer: [00:12:36] That’s when I got tenure.
Tracy: And then moved from associate to full professor in 1981.
Packer: [00:12:46] But I think I was tenured in 1974.
Tracy: Okay. In 1974, at that point were there publications that you had…?
Packer: [00:12:56] Had I published anything? [00:13:00] Yes, I had published quite a
few short stories. I’d have to go look in my books to see the publication
dates. There may have been a book.
Tracy: Well, Small Moments came out in 1976, but certainly you would have been
publishing the short stories before that.
Packer: [00:13:19] My first story I published in 1950-something. [00:13:21] And then
after I came to Stanford, I started publishing fairly frequently, and all those
stories appeared in Small Moments and some that I wouldn’t let appear in

61

Small Moments . I’d written while I was either a Jones lecturer or an assistant
professor.
Tracy: Do you remember the process of going up for tenure? Do memories stand
out when you went up for tenure? Was it a difficult process?
Packer: [00:13:56] You know, I can’t remember in much detail. All I remember is a
kind of maybe sheer bravado on my part, that, “If I don’t make it, I’ll really
become a writer.” [laughter] That was my attitude, was kind of… one of my
favorite expressions is “Toujours gai, Archie.” Let’s never mind. Everything
is okay. So I had that attitude. Whether it was bravado, I can’t remember. I
don’t think it was just bravado.
Herb died in 1973, and my movement to associate professor and
tenure was 1974. So I always thought, again, there was something about my
connections with Herb and with the university that eased my way, maybe did
the whole thing, but certainly contributed something to my advancement.
Tracy: Was this just a general sense that you had or was there ever a specific
moment or incident that…
Packer: [00:15:07] No, just a general sense. I mean, how could I not have? I’ve said
this. This might just be interesting for the little business that we’re doing. My
father was a congressman, my brother was a congressman, my husband was
an officer at the university and an important person at the university. And I
used to laugh and say, “I’m somebody’s daughter, I’m somebody’s sister, and
I’m somebody’s wife. Am I somebody?” [laughter] But, you know, when you
have those advantages, which they were, they were advantages in my life,

62

when you have them, you always kind of doubt that you would have made it
as easily or at all without them. [00:16:01] You seem affected.
Tracy: We’ll talk about this later in your interview, but I mean, certainly I think the
awards that you’ve received for your writing and the awards that you’ve
received for your teaching, you know, are coming from…
Packer: [00:16:15] Well, I don’t know about the teaching. My writing, nobody knows
anything about me, so I got those.
Tracy: Yes. [laughs]
Packer: [00:16:22] But teaching, who knows, you know? I’ve gotten a lot of awards
for teaching. Is it because I’m a good teacher or because I’m somebody’s
wife, who had a tragic ending? I mean that figures in there also.
Tracy: You became an associate professor in 1974, became a full professor in 1981.
Can you tell me about the process that you had to go through to move from
associate to full professor? Was there another review …?
Packer: [00:17:08] I assume so. But I don’t really know. I should. Of course there
was. They would have to have done that, but I just don’t know what the
review was. I don’t know what I did. Did I do anything? I’m not sure. I’d
published another book, I think. You probably know that better than I do.
There was Small Moments and then In My Father’s House?
Tracy: In My Father’s House, I have that as 1988.
Packer: [00:17:35] Oh. Well, maybe that was the next one.
Tracy: You’ve also published, beyond your short story writing, you’ve published
more academically-oriented instruction on writing.
Packer: [00:17:47] Low-level academic.

63

Tracy: [laughs] Well, your book called Writing Writing, which came out in 1977.
Packer: [00:17:54] Yes.
Tracy: So certainly that would have been…
Packer: [00:17:56] That was just a tiny little book. It was what I thought every
Stanford student should know and didn’t need to know anything else about
writing. All these books were so thick, it’s just full of stuff. But this was just
about forty pages. This is what you know. You want to know where a
comma is? [demonstrates] You can find it in here. It went into a second
printing, but I never made a penny off it. But that was not the point. The
Press brought it out. The Stanford Press published it.
Tracy: In 1990, you received the Melvin and Bill Lane Professorship in the
Humanities in 1990. I wonder do you remember being named to that
professorship? Why you were named to it, what was the spirit of its
endowment?
Packer: [00:19:04] Bill Lane and his wife Jean. Bill and Jean, Mel and Joan, They’re
very good people. They were interested. They had a daughter who was
interested in writing, took a class from me, and we became friendly but not
really friendly. They wanted to make some contributions to the university.
They decided to make it to the English Department and decided to make it
to Creative Writing because Bill Lane is a big conservationist, and Wallace
Stegner is a big conservationist. So he wanted to honor Wally.
[recorder turned off]
Tracy: So we’ve established that it’s Bill and Jean.

64

Packer: [00:20:09] Yes, Bill and Jean Lane Lectureship in the Humanities, and it went
to Creative Writing and it went to me. I guess I was the first holder. I’m not
sure.
Tracy: I think you were.
Packer: [00:20:20] Yes. That was nice. It didn’t mean any money. There’s some little
prestige, I guess. I mean maybe not prestige at Stanford, but I could go
somewhere else and claim I was a named professorship, and it would look
pretty big. [laughs] [00:20:36] So I was glad to have it. They’re very nice
people, good people.
Tracy: How would you compare or describe your progression towards tenure? Was
it typical of other faculty members? Was it typical of women?
Packer: [00:20:54] First of all, you’ve got to separate Creative Writing from the
English Department. I mean, it’s just totally different. The teaching is
different. There’s no scholarship—it’s just writing, so you’ve got to separate
those out. In the English Department, you had to have a big fat scholarly
book. I happen to think that’s easier, but then, of course, I’ve never done it.
[laughs] So that’s easy for me to say.
But in creative writing, it’s mostly that you write a novel. How often do
you write? Maybe you write a novel about as fast as you write a critical book,
but it’s just different. It’s just quite different. I got it on short stories. I’ve
written maybe fifty or seventy short stories that have been published, and
that’s how Wally could justify my getting tenure. I mean, he really did
support me enormously. When did he quit? Seventy-one? After 1971, I was

65

on my own. After 1971, I was on my own, but when I was up to join the
faculty in seventy—
Tracy: Four.
Packer: [00:22:18] No, I’d already joined the faculty in the 1960s. Never mind. Sorry.
Go ahead.
Tracy: So when you think of the progress towards tenure in terms of Creative
Writing, I mean, do you feel that your trajectory was similar to your
colleagues in terms of getting tenure?
Packer: [00:22:32] Yes, I do. L’Heureux for example, is more productive and Fields is
less. [laughs] So there you have it.
Tracy: There has been at least one, certainly, but I think there have been at times
multiple pushes at Stanford to promote more women to the faculty and up
through to tenure. Do you feel that you were ever influenced by or a part of
that?
Packer: [00:23:00] I did not think that. I did not think that my being a woman helped
me particularly. In fact, I think it kind of may have held me back a little. Not
really. But it didn’t help me. When I began this process, nobody was paying
much attention to women, the fact that women had been mistreated and
ignored and so on. That was not the issue, really. That came a little bit later.
So I don’t think that… I never felt that the women’s movement was helpful
to me. I’m glad of it, and I think it’s been helpful to others, and I think now
it doesn’t have to be, and that’s wonderful. But I don’t think it was helpful to
me.
Tracy: Did you… it didn’t particularly help…

66

Packer: [00:23:50] Let me go back. Let me say something here. When Wally came to
Stanford in 1946, there was a woman who taught creative writing here. Her
name was Edith Mirrielees, a marvelous human being. I knew her only
slightly. She was pretty old when I came. But she, no doubt, opened a door
for people like me because she was so good. She was a wonderful teacher
and a wonderful human being, and she wrote a book called Story Writing. She
never published anything else, as far as I know. As far as I know, she never
published any fiction. She may have, but I don’t know it. She opened the
door in creative writing for women, and then I walked in.
Tracy: So there was a pathway…
Packer: [00:24:40] That was it, yes.
Tracy: Certainly with your experience is in Creative Writing, you may not be able to
comment on this, but in terms of the women within the English Department,
outside of Creative Writing, did you have any sense of how welcoming or not
welcoming the department was to women?
Packer: [00:24:57] Well, I’ll tell you a little story. There was a faculty meeting, and we
were all talking and it had to do with the student revolution, what the
students were up to. And I said, “Well, I think—,” x, y, z.
And one of my colleagues said, “Oh, we know what Herb thinks,
Nancy.”
So, yes, I went back up to him afterwards, and I said, “That’s really not
right. That’s not a fair comment for you to make. I have my own thoughts.”
And he said, “Well, I’ve never seen you disagree with Herb.”

67

And I said, “Have you ever seen Herb disagree with me? It’s the same
thing.”
So he actually became a very close friend of mine. His name is Ron
Rebholz. I’m sure you’ve heard of Ron.
Tracy: I actually interviewed Ron.
Packer: [00:25:53] Ron’s a great guy.
Tracy: Yes.
Packer: [00:25:55] He’s a great guy. It was a terrible remark he made, absolutely
inexcusable, but he and I became pretty close friends after that.
Tracy: Well, and Ron certainly had the reputation of speaking plainly to people.
[laughs]
Packer: [00:26:09] Speaking plainly and being extreme. He was a great guy. He really
was.
Tracy: I enjoyed working with him.
So not to beat this subject to death, but were you ever… the reverse of
being married to Herb, was there ever any issues in terms of nepotism?
Packer: [00:26:33] It never came up.
Tracy: Was that ever discussed?
Packer: [00:26:35] It never came up. That was what I was concerned about, what I’m
still somewhat concerned about, that there was not nepotism…. I don’t think
there was nepotism, except in the minds… the only nepotism was that
people, because they cared for Herb, might have judged me less strenuously
or stringently or whatever the word is. I don’t think that it was, “Hey, we’ve
got to do something for Herb’s wife.” I don’t think it was conscious, quite

68

conscious like that. Because Herb didn’t have anything to do with the
English Department.
Tracy: He was in a completely separate school, so…
Packer: [00:27:17] Well, Herb was in the administration.
Tracy: Yes, you’re right. He had progressed.
Packer: [00:27:21] He had power in the [administration], but he would never have
done anything like that to promote me.
Tracy: Right. I know that there was a time at Stanford had an anti-nepotism policy,
and certainly that was never an issue.
Packer: [00:27:36] Yes, that was an issue.
Tracy: Okay.
Packer: [00:27:39] That was an issue that it just wasn’t going to happen, because you
don’t have a married couple on the faculty at the same time. You just don’t.
And I may have been the first. I’m not positive of that, but I have the sense
that I was the first wife to be on the faculty. Yes, I think I was.
Tracy: Another person that I’ve actually interviewed was Barbara Gelpi, and she was
a lecturer for a very long time.
Packer: [00:28:17] I know she was. I know she was.
Tracy: So Nancy, you mentioned Ron and some other colleagues. Let’s talk a little
bit about the colleagues that you were working with and the constellation or
the structure of the English Department.
Packer: [00:28:33] If you had a question, I’d try to answer it. I don’t know how to just
free-think about that. Creative writing was different. At one point, Wally
almost decided that he wanted to make us an independent department in the

69

university. Then he thought better of it and decided he wouldn’t make that
effort. I’m not sure he could have succeeded, because it would have been a
big blow to the English Department to lose Creative Writing. As Don
Kennedy once said, “Creative writing is the jewel in the crown,” not just for
the English Department, but with Wally here, for the university. But he did
think about doing that.
But our majors had to take English courses. They couldn’t just take
creative writing. They had as many English courses as English majors did,
and then they took a little creative writing on top of it.
Tracy: So you then would have taught primarily in writing. You didn’t necessarily
have responsibility…
Packer: [00:29:43] I taught creative writing until Wally retired. He retired in 1971, I
think, and then I started teaching the short story, which he had taught, and I
taught the novel. So I taught some lit classes, low-level lit classes. No way I
could have taught a course suitable for an English major who was a senior,
but for people who weren’t English majors or were beginning English
majors, my courses were pretty popular. For the short story, I had big, big
classes.
Tracy: When you took those over from Wally, what did you do to make those
classes your own? You’re very well known for teaching those classes, so I
wonder how did you—
Packer: [00:30:38] I don’t know. I didn’t know. Wally gave me some of his notes, but
he was more freeform. I was more organized than he was, because he knew
stuff, and I was just learning stuff. I had to catch up with the students, and so

70

I worked like a dog during the period that I was learning how to teach,
particularly the short story. It’s a very big subject, and I would spend from
nine o’clock in the morning until one o’clock preparing for the two o’clock
class. I just really worked very hard until I kind of mastered it. Not totally,
but I learned a lot more about it than I had done.
What was the question? [laughs]
Tracy: We kind of meandered a little bit, so I’m trying to remember. I’d asked
about—
Packer: [00:31:37] Teaching? You asked me did I teach anything besides creative
writing. And I’m saying, yes, I did. I taught the basic lit classes. No real
English professor wants to teach introduction to the novel or introduction to
the short story, because it’s too low level. Obviously it’s low level. It’s not
that. It’s that it’s too general and it doesn’t help them with their scholarship
because it’s just stuff that they naturally know.
Tracy: I wonder, though, if you coming from the creative writing side and
approaching the topic as a writer, I wonder if your classes were different than
if someone from—
Packer: [00:32:24] I think they probably were. I’m sure that I did focus more or less
on theme and history and more on structure. [laughs] And character. I know
that’s true. I know that’s true. Because I didn’t know much about all the rest
of it anyway.
I don’t mean to be bad-mouthing myself. I’m just trying to be honest
about this. I knew about how stories were made. I knew that. And then I

71

took on the novel the next year, [after the] short story. So I always taught the
short story and the novel, plus the creative writing.
Tracy: In talking about focusing on lower-level classes and professors maybe not
wanting to do that, you took on the huge task of directing freshman English
for a time. The years that I have are 1976 to 1983 or 1984. How did they
rope you into taking that on in the first place?
Packer: [00:33:31] Well, I needed more money. I needed to be full-time. And I could
teach one class of creative writing and then short story and then the novel,
but that’s not full-time. Five courses is full-time. I was also the director of
Creative Writing.
Tracy: Around the time that you took on—
Packer: [00:34:01] Around the time, yes. I really don’t remember. But I loved doing
the freshman English, I really did, and I did a lot. I think I made a
contribution in organizing freshman English. Before I took it on, it was a
chore given to an English professor who didn’t want it, didn’t have an
interest in it, but they would take it on for a year. I took it on for three—I
don’t know how many years. But for me, it filled out what I needed to make
a full-time job. In fact, it made a one-and-a-half-time job.
Tracy: I could imagine.
Packer: [00:34:51] It was, because I redid the whole thing. I redid how you avoided
freshman English. If I contributed toward Stanford, that’s it. I reorganized it.
After me came a professional. They no longer asked an English professor to
do it, but they brought in somebody whose specialty was that subject of
composition. I think she’s still there. I’m not sure.

72

Tracy: In some of the changes that you made, one of them was that you lowered the
class size of these introductory classes; why was that important?
Packer: [00:35:34] Well, if you ask an English graduate student to teach twenty-four
freshmen, he’s never taught a single thing in his life before, what kind of a
job can he do? How could he read twenty-four papers? He doesn’t know
how to do it. He or she. So, lowering the class size meant English graduate
students could learn better how to teach. And I also didn’t just do that. I
don’t know what else. Where’d you get all this?
Tracy: From Stanford Report articles and old Stanford Daily articles.
Packer: [00:36:11] Reducing class size and also insisting that all the English graduate
students, before they could teach, had to take a class on how to teach
freshman English, which I conducted, which I was responsible for. I think
that was as major a contribution as I made to Stanford, because even though
they changed it totally, they haven’t changed that. Frankly, what I think is
what I did to change freshman English made it a more professional-seeming
job, instead of just commandeering some English professor to do it. And
then they had to appoint a professional because it was too big a job after
that.
Tracy: You did such a good job, you put yourself out of business.
Packer: [00:37:07] Well, I don’t know about good job, but a big job. [Tracy laughs.] I
got it organized better and more intelligently. Take some twenty-two-year-old
graduate student and throw him in a class with eighteen-year-olds?
Ridiculous.

73

Tracy: I think we talked last time about that because you can write, it doesn’t
necessarily mean that you’re effective at criticizing writing.
Packer: [00:37:35] That’s right.
Tracy: That those two don’t necessarily go hand in hand.
Packer: [00:37:38] They don’t necessarily. That’s right. You have to have some
abstract ideas in order to criticize. You have to have some standards. It can’t
just be impulsive, “Oh, I like that, I like that.” You’ve got to figure out.
You’ve got to be able to figure out what’s wrong, and you can’t do that just
looking at the stuff. You’ve got to have some ideas, I think. I wonder if I do
think that. [laughs] I’m not sure. I’ll have to think about that.
Tracy: How did the graduate students react to having this class on how to teach?
Packer: [00:38:16] Oh, I think it worked very well. I do. I’d like to know what they
think, and I don’t. The first year, of course, they hated me. All those graduate
students hated me because I was visiting their classes and telling them what
they were doing wrong, and so I was not very popular.
But the first group of graduate students that took this pedagogy class—
that’s what it was, a pedagogy class—they appreciated that. They learned. It
gave them some security because they had some idea what they were doing
instead of just being thrown in and teach them how to write. Surely if I’ve
made a contribution, that was it.
Tracy: I’m sure, of course, that it did, but I’m wondering how the restructuring of
freshman English impacted the freshmen and their writing abilities and their
sort of perception of—

74

Packer: [00:39:19] I don’t know. I don’t know. I’m sure it did. It has to. I’ve got a
couple of books here from kids who took freshman English. I took over a
class of freshman English when I first became the director so I’d know what
was going on. And this kid was in my class. Probably got a book over there. I
made a couple of friends in the freshman class, who were so grateful. They
would say, “You know, I thought I knew how to write. I didn’t know how to
write. Thanks.” But that’s really right. It was a most gratifying experience. It
really was. I don’t know why I ever quit. [laughs]
Tracy: During this time, you developed the booklet that we talked about, the Writing
Writing.
Packer: [00:40:22] No, that’s gone.
Tracy: But this came out of the time that you were working in freshman English.
Not that the two necessarily went hand in hand, but that was around the
same time.
Packer: [00:40:33] Yes.
Tracy: Did you ever have graduate students outside of the English Department that
would participate in your pedagogy class?
Packer: [00:40:43] Sometimes. Not very often. There were a couple from—where
were they from? Communications, maybe. We didn’t really have enough
graduate students to teach all of it, particularly when we reduced the class
sizes. And we did have some from history, yes. Yes, we did. That was a
change we made—other graduate students could come, but they had to take
the pedagogy course. So if they were willing to do that, then I or whoever
would know whether or not they really were suitable for freshman English.

75

And sometimes we didn’t employ them. Not very often did we fail to, but
sometimes we knew—there was a guy, I couldn’t let him teach fifteeneighteen freshmen. He was not able to communicate at all, and he was just
slightly crazy. I can’t quite get his name, and I wouldn’t give it to you if I
could.
Tracy: [laughs] Yes.
Packer: [00:41:54] Anyway, I remember now that we didn’t let them all teach, but we
let most of them from other departments who came and took our class,
which was a rigorous class. They had to grade papers. Every week they had
to grade papers that I stole from the boxes. Some of the freshmen English
instructors would tell their class that their final paper would be in a box, and
if they didn’t collect them, I collected them. Then I reproduced them and
presented them to the next class in the pedagogy class for them to grade—
you can tell I’m proud of what I did with that business. I stole those papers
and reproduced them and gave them out, but nobody knew. How could they
learn to teach? How could they learn to correct papers if they never had a
paper to correct? I mean, really, how could they—but they never had done
that before.
Tracy: You asked this question, you know, why did you stop directing freshman
English, and that is my question. Do you know? Do you have any sense of
why you moved on from the position?
Packer: [00:43:16] No, I can’t totally remember. It’s probably that I thought I’d write
a novel, which I didn’t. Probably I thought, “Okay, now I’m set. I’m

76

writing.” My kids were gone, grown, out of college. I didn’t have to work
full-time anymore. I think that’s why.
Tracy: In terms of the restructuring and the organization that you did for the
program, did running it ever go from over a full-time job to manageable
within the hours of the week?
Packer: [00:43:57] You mean for me? [00:43:59] Oh, it was fine. It was fine. It was a
lot of work, but I enjoyed it. You weren’t a Stanford student.
Tracy: No.
Packer: [00:44:12] The woman who worked for me was a wonderful woman who
worked with me and then went over and became the secretary of the English
Department. She and I continued to be buddies. She’s a wonderful woman.
Dagmar Logie was her name.
Tracy: I’ve heard her name. Ron Rebholz brought her up and—
Packer: [00:44:30] Ron came in after me. [00:44:31] I hired Dagmar from the speech
department, I believe it was, and then Ron took over maybe the year after I
left. I’m not sure. I can’t remember.
Tracy: Prior to directing freshman English and taking on some of that teaching
responsibility at least initially, what was the split between graduate and
undergraduate students for you? I mean, were you teaching one group more
than the other?
Packer: [00:45:04] The only graduate students I taught were in the writing program.
Because no graduate student would take introduction to the novel.
Tracy: Right. That’s a good point. So you were working more primarily with
undergraduates.

77

Packer: [00:45:19] With undergraduates when I was teaching lit classes. [00:45:22]
Exclusively when I was teaching lit classes, yes. I often employed—
sometimes if I couldn’t get English Department people to be my assistant in
the class, I would employ Creative Writing people. I’m reminded of that
because this book, Akhil Sharma T.A.’d for me. He was a creative writing
student of mine and then he T.A.’d. The English Department people, for
two reasons, I think— one, there weren’t enough of them. I needed too
many. I’m kind of conflating and getting a little confused.
In any case, I wasn’t a director of their dissertation. The graduate
students didn’t have any need for me, but they did need to have somebody
who was a distinguished scholar, like Ian Watt. They needed to have Ian
Watt as their supervisor, but not me. So does that make sense?
Tracy: It does.
Packer: [00:46:32] I think Ron did follow, and I think I reduced my teaching to lit
classes and the graduate writing class, and went back to half-time.
Tracy: When you came on and took on the freshman writing program, that extra
load made you full-time, but as you’re saying, when you left that, then you
focused again—
Packer: [00:47:15] Then I was back to—yes.
Tracy: Okay. I’m trying to think of anything else about freshman English. In
learning about how the program worked and in thinking about teaching
writing to freshmen and thinking about teaching other people how to teach
freshmen, did that impact your teaching or impact your view of teaching or
your approach in any way?

78

Packer: [00:47:37] I’m not sure I can answer it. I can’t remember that it did. Well, I
do remember thinking that I had become a better teacher as a result of
teaching teaching, that I had myself become something of a better teacher, a
better commenter on student papers. In the old days before that, I would
write the longest comments, beyond what anybody could tolerate, any
student could tolerate. And after that, because I told my graduate Englishteaching students, “Don’t overload with comments. Choose three things to
say, and then let it go.” After I taught them that, I taught myself that. Quit
saying everything you know. Just choose the most salient points and be brief
but clear.
Tracy: Now I’m trying to think back to my own freshman English classes. In terms
of the type of writing that freshmen could be doing, could they have been
doing creative writing, but then also could they have been doing more sort of
critical writing about literature? But now I’m trying to remember in freshman
English what was I doing? Were you doing more critical writing or—
Packer: [00:49:11] We did not do creative writing. I did not allow that. Nobody. I
don’t think anybody—well, there was one person who was director years ago,
years before, who did allow creative. We didn’t. That’s not the kind of
writing [we did]. One thing I’ve just suddenly remembered. [Tracy laughs.]
I’m really bragging about this freshman English, because I really felt that I
did make a contribution to it. What I did was to organize the classes
differently. I got each of the graduate students and the lecturers—we had a
staff of lecturers who taught freshman English—I got them to select a topic
that people would be writing about. Just as an example, say there was a

79

southerner who was a lecturer. That southerner could say, “Literature of the
South,” and teach a class in freshman English called Literature of the South.
And the purpose of that was for the instructor to be interested in what the
content of the class and also for the students who chose that class to come in
with an interest rather than hostility.
I thought if you were writing about something you cared about, you
could learn better how to write. And I do believe that. If you come in feeling
hostile, “I don’t want to be here,” you know, that slows down the learning
process. But if both the instructor and the student see—I’ll just make this up;
I hope nobody would do this—that you assigned Gone With the Wind. Write
an essay in which you criticize Rhett Butler or whatever. [laughs] That’s more
interesting than just somebody who doesn’t care about the southern literature
or Gone With the Wind. That was my philosophy, and that’s what we did. That
was a major change. That plus the course in pedagogy, were the two
contributions. Three contributions, reducing class sizes. Those were the three
contributions that I made. [00:51:26] I don’t know how long they’ve lasted;
maybe not at all. But I thought those were major and good things. I do think
that my situation—my husband—helped me to get the dean to let me reduce
class sizes. I do think that had much to do with it. It was kind of a sympathy
feeling that softened the deans.
Tracy: When you lowered class sizes, in terms of the ripple effects, you would have
had to have had more sections and more lecturers—
Packer: [00:52:21] That’s right.
Tracy: —and so it wasn’t a small request.

80

Packer: [00:52:23] That’s right. That’s when we opened it up to the people from
history and from communications, subjects that were close enough to
English, that’s when we had to do that. We opened it up.
The university was very good about increasing our budget, because it’s
not just you have to find more people; you’ve got to find more money. And
the university was very good about that. And who was the dean? Well, Ted
Anderson was one of them. I ought to be more grateful and remember.
[00:53:01] Have I bragged enough?
Tracy: Absolutely. [laughter] We do still want to talk about your writing and your
awards, so you might have to do some more of it later.
Packer: [00:53:10] Well, I don’t want to brag about that.
Tracy: [laughs] We talked about the classes that you developed. One thing that I
read was you would, for larger classes, have students over in kind of smaller
groups.
Packer: [00:53:42] Groups of ten, fifteen.
Tracy: Was this in creative writing? Was this in your novel and short story class?
Was this freshman English?
Packer: [00:53:49] Yes, this was in novel and short story. Because obviously I’d had
them over for creative writing. I always thought, “This is a big university. I
bet they’ve never been inside a faculty house. They don’t know whether we
even have houses, whether we’re alive.” And I enjoyed it.
Tracy: Were there ever quarters where you sort of thought to yourself, “Oh, I can’t
imagine having students over”?

81

Packer: [00:54:20] No. It was just something I did. It was something I thought I
owed the student.
Tracy: Was that desire to know and create relationships with the students typical of
colleagues, or was it unique what you did that?
Packer: [00:54:46] I don’t think it was done very much. I didn’t particularly want to
know the students. I wanted the students to feel that they were part of a
group that mattered and that they mattered at Stanford. No, I have some
student friends, the kid I told you about from my freshman English class,
but, of course, I invited the freshman English class over to my house. But
I’ve never particularly wanted to be friends with students. I have friends, I
am friends, but not anything that I particularly valued. I mean, I valued the
friendships, but I don’t want to—the abstraction doesn’t interest me. [laughs]
Does that make sense?
Tracy: Yep, absolutely.
Packer: [00:55:37] In fact, this table is full of students’ [books], this, that. [laughs]
And probably some more.
Tracy: Yes, yes. Full of students and then also your children who were—
Packer: [00:55:52] Well, my children and some older friends as well. That’s my
daughter’s book. It’s not out yet.
Tracy: Oh, it’s—
Packer: [00:55:58] This is an advanced copy. And that’s my son’s book, but I’m going
to put it up. It’s been out long enough.
[recorder turned off]

82

Packer: [00:56:13] I was on Admissions Committee. I was on a couple of committees.
I don’t remember which.
Tracy: I thought to start out, we could talk about your experience as a university
fellow, and I guess—
Packer: [00:56:36] Let me tell you that my husband designed that program. He
started that program. And I became a university fellow just before he died in
the fall of 1972, and he died in 1973. Am I right about that? No. He died in
1972. 1971 to 1972 I was a fellow. And it was a lot of fun. We would meet at
the Faculty Club and get drunk. [laughter] And talk about the university, and
it really was a lot of fun.
Tracy: What did Herb hope the program would accomplish? What was the purpose
of it?
Packer: [00:57:20] He thought that the university was becoming not bifurcated,
because there was a lot more than bi. Multi-furcated. I doubt if that’s a word.
The departments and the schools were so separate, there was no way to
keep—they didn’t see a common purpose. And the purpose of the university
fellows program was to bring together junior faculty from the different
schools: medical, law, H&S, the whole thing. They would meet once—I can’t
remember whether it was [weekly]—I don’t think I got drunk once a week.
[laughs] It was probably more like once a month. I don’t remember how
often we met, but we got together, and we always had a senior person, the
president, the provost, a dean, present at the meetings to give a little talk
about what he was up to, and then that was the way of integrating all these
young faculty into the university.

83

It was a very good program, and each of us was supposed to have a
project that would affect the education or something about the university.
Not necessarily about students. I don’t remember. But my project was what I
called the freshman-year program. It seemed to me that the freshman year
was just—I’m going to take it and go back a little bit. Herb had run a
program of education; SES it was called. The Study of Education at Stanford,
and it had been a major thing. He had a stroke right in the middle of it, but
he had done a lot, particularly about undergraduate education. And what they
had done is what Herb called freed the slaves, the slaves being the
undergraduate. And I think they over-freed them. [laughter] Freedom came
too wide and too soon. And what my program [tried to do] was to
reestablish—They had something at Stanford. It was an education program, a
lockstep education program for all the freshmen and up certainly through
sophomore year, maybe through junior year, and then you had one year to
major. And what Herb’s program did was break that apart so that you had
practically nothing in the freshman year, nothing certainly in the sophomore
year, and you just went right into what you were interested in, which, to me,
made the departments even less congenial with each other. One department
was more isolated from another than it had been before, because their
students were all now so locked into taking courses in a single department.
So my program was to undo what Herb had done, in a way. [laughter] He
had freed the slaves, and what I did was try to structure society so that there
had to be some things in common. Everybody had to have taken Western
Civilization. Maybe Herb left that in. I’m not sure. But I tried to restructure

84

the university’s education program for the freshman year. It was called the
freshman-year project, and I don’t remember the details anymore. And it had
a little effect, but not much.
Tracy: I think in terms of the students’ distribution requirements—the stuff they
had to take—it seems as though that’s always a bit of a moving target. In my
experience of looking through Stanford’s history, it seems the distribution
requirements come up every few years.
Packer: [01:01:37] Yes, well, they were there, but not just distribution requirements; it
was lockstep in the fifties and forties. And Herb blew it apart. Then I
reintroduced distribution requirements again, and now I guess it blew apart
again. Did it come back together?
Tracy: I think it’s probably blown apart and come back together a few times. You
brought up Western Civilization; within distribution requirements, that’s also
a part of those courses, and they themselves have gone through quite an
evolution over the years.
Packer: [01:02:09] You had to take one course of something like that in Western
Civilization, so what I did, I think—I’m going to have to read my paper.
[laughter] I can’t remember. But I think we brought in three continuous
courses in some aspect of civilization and of Western culture. It could be art,
history, literature, but you had to have three consecutive courses instead of
one-course-fits-all or whatever. For me, the important thing was choice, a
choice in structure. Give students choice, they’ll be happier if they think they
made the decision themselves. And structure, give them structure so that you

85

go from one to ten consecutively. That was what my program was supposed
to do. I don’t think it had a bit of effect. I don’t think it went anywhere.
Tracy: Did it, in terms of your later thinking in, for example, freshman English,
influence your later roles or positions….
Packer: [01:03:24] I don’t think so. I think I had more influence in the university than
I had in the English Department. [laughter] I really do. You know, the
president and the provost were dinner friends of mine. I’d go to their house
for dinner, so I had a little more power with them than I did with English.
And the English Department, for the most part, they were not my social life.
The Creative Writing Program was and law was.
Tracy: That’s interesting.
Packer: [01:03:57] But not English.
Tracy: When you were in the University Fellows Program, do you remember who
else was a fellow that year?
Packer: [01:04:07] No, I can’t. I remember Artie Bienenstock. I remember a guy from
Psychology. If you name them, I could—.
Tracy: I certainly know Artie was one. I interviewed Herant Katchadourian. He
served as one.
Packer: [01:04:27] Herant, yes, but when was he? I don’t think he was there when I
was there. Maybe he was. I mean, we’re friends, so—
Tracy: Yes. Another name that I had in my previous notes was [Henry] Breitrose.
Packer: Yes, Breitrose and Bienenstock. I think there were four, but there may just
have been three, I’m not sure.

86

Tracy: Correct me if I’m wrong, but my understanding was since it was a fellowship,
you had some break in your usual teaching.
Packer: [01:05:03] In the teaching, that’s right, but I didn’t take the break, as I recall
now. I may have been on three-fifths time and therefore—
Tracy: You had time. Presumably.
Packer: [01:05:21] I don’t believe I did. I don’t know.
Tracy: So besides the work that you did on the freshman-year project, in a more
general sense what do you feel like you gained from participating in the
program?
Packer: [01:05:44] I had fun. I met a lot of people that I hadn’t known. I certainly
liked doing the freshman-year program, project, whatever it was. And I met a
lot of people throughout the university I certainly would not have known
that I still feel friendly toward. Artie, I feel friendly toward Artie. I mean, I
don’t see him, but we always wave. But I think it was a good program. I
wonder if it still exists.
Tracy: I don’t think it does.
Packer: [01:06:23] Probably at the first economic crisis, it collapsed.
Tracy: Well, one thing that I do know about the program is—certainly we’ve
brought up Artie Bienenstock and Herant Katchadourian. A lot of people
that did the program did move up to—
Packer: [01:06:43] Administration. That’s right.
Tracy: —very important administration roles. Do you think that that was Herb’s
intention initially?

87

Packer: [01:06:49] No, I don’t think so. I think his intention was education, educating
people about all the departments. It may be that a kind of self-selection went
on. I mean, Herant probably wasn’t happy in psychiatry. Maybe Artie wasn’t
happy in applied physics. Herant never went back to psychiatry. I don’t know
whether Artie did or not.
Tracy: After that, Artie was at SSRL, the Synchrotron Radiation Lab, over at SLAC.
That was his longtime role after he did the program and after he served in
the administration.
Packer: [01:07:42] Carl Schmidt. Somebody named Carl Schmidt. I think he went on
to Harvard or Yale, I’m not sure.
Tracy: Anything else about the University Fellows Program?
Packer: [01:08:00] It was a good program. It was an expensive program. You can see
why the university got rid of it. Giving extra sabbaticals to half a dozen
people is expensive, and then buying them dinner and drinks two or three
times a month, it was expensive. But Al Hastorf always came to them. He
was the dean of H&S, and he was always there. He was one of the seniors.
They enjoyed it too. It was fun. It was a lot of fun.
Tracy: In terms of other women that participated or other people from—
Packer: [01:08:37] Herant was there when I was there. I’m just remembering, yes. Go
ahead.
Tracy: Do you have a sense of how many women participated, or how many people
from English or Creative Writing?

88

Packer: [01:08:48] As far as in the fellows program, I think I was the only person
in—I think I was the only woman. There weren’t a lot of women on the
faculty.
Tracy: At the time?
Packer: [01:09:02] You know, we’re talking 1970. We’re talking 1971. There weren’t
very many women on the faculty. There were some, but not so many. And I
don’t remember that there was another woman. There must have been. I
didn’t feel alone, but I can’t remember who it might have been. Oh, I know
who it was. It was somebody from the administration who was our
administrative person, and I can’t quite get her name, but I can almost see
her face. Nice woman. Her husband was a faculty member. What was her
name? Maybe that was Carl Schmidt. No, it wasn’t.
Tracy: There may not be much to say about this, but you brought up the Study of
Education at Stanford, and my understanding is that you did help write [a
portion]. There was the overall study, but then there was—
Packer: [01:10:01] I don’t think I helped. Did I say I did?
Tracy: I could have read this wrong, but I thought that you contributed to the study
of residential life.
Packer: [01:10:11] Oh, I did do that. I did. What happened? Why was that? I’d
written a paper about what to do about residential life at Stanford and how
to make it more intellectual.
Tracy: What I have written down was that it called for the integration of residential
life and academic life for finding—

89

Packer: [01:10:41] Yes, but why did I do that? I don’t think that was my project for
the Study. No, my project was the freshman-year project. And anyway, I
wouldn’t have—let’s don’t talk about it, because I can’t reach it. [laughs]
Tracy: A part of your coming on to the faculty, as we talked about, was you telling
Wally Stegner that you wanted to participate in—what was it called at the
time?
Packer: [01:11:17] It was called the Academic Council.
Tracy: Then it changed into—
Packer: [01:11:21] My husband did that, redesigned the Academic Council to make it
the Academic Senate because he thought—he made a lot of changes at
Stanford. I don’t know how many exist still, but he thought the Academic
Council was unwieldy, that it was too big to legislate, that it had too much
medical school [faculty].
Tracy: Interesting.
Packer: [01:11:58] That was the problem it had, because the medical school has
extensive—it calls everybody faculty. You never saw a student, but they’re
faculty. That’s not true. I’ll take that back. Anyway, he thought that it was a
way to give more power to a small school like law and less power to a big
school like medicine, because they both had, I think, two representatives on
the Senate, and I’m sure he thought that lawyers could legislate better than
doctors could.
So he designed the Academic Senate to make legislation by the faculty,
because here’s the thing. Prior to that, the faculty really had no power.
Wallace Sterling and the provost ran everything, they just ran everything that

90

the Board of Trustees let them run. With the unwieldy faculty, the faculty
had no power. If you could make an Academic Senate, a smaller group of
thoughtful people dedicated to this job, not just there haphazardly or helterskelterly, that the faculty would have more influence and that you should
distribute that influence better than sheer numbers. So he designed it by
schools. That may have been Herb’s best contribution.
Is that enough?
Tracy: [01:13:49] I think that that’s great. I wanted then to talk about how you
would have—did the Academic Council include tenured or tenure-line
faculty members—
Packer: [01:14:02] No, it didn’t have to be tenure. Just tenure line, I think.
Tracy: And they were considered a part of this Academic Council?
Packer: [01:14:09] Who was?
Tracy: Any faculty member.
Packer: [01:14:12] Any faculty member was a member of the Academic Council.
They were a member of the Academic Council, any faculty member.
Tracy: The Senate created a system where—
Packer: [01:14:20] The Senate gave certain number of seats to each school.
Tracy: I’m sure it was potentially different in the school for how they elected people
to those seats or—
Packer: [01:14:32] I don’t remember. I think probably not. I think it’s probably just
all the people who had a vote, voted.
Tracy: You’ve served on the Faculty Senate.

91

Packer: [01:14:49] I didn’t serve very much. I served on the Senate, but I never got
reelected. Really hurt my feelings. I never told anybody I wanted to be, but I
would have liked to have been, but I wasn’t.
Tracy: Do you remember how long your term was?
Packer: [01:15:09] I don’t remember.
Tracy: The dates I have were the early—I have ’91 and ’92.
Packer: [01:15:14] Yes, I think that’s probably right. It’s just as well. I retired in ’93.
[laughter]
Tracy: Why do you think you weren’t reelected to your seat?
Packer: [01:15:23] I don’t know. I may not have been liked. I don’t know. Maybe
nobody thought I wanted to be. Maybe they thought I didn’t want to be. I
don’t know. But I did want to be, and I wasn’t. That’s the bottom line.
Tracy: I have some notes about things that came up on the Senate during your time,
but are there issues that stand out in your mind that you dealt with while you
were on the Senate?
Packer: [01:15:49] No, I can’t remember anything. Those were quiet times. We’re
talking late eighties, nineties.
Tracy: I wonder if the Senate dealt directly in any way with the indirect-cost
controversy. Because that’s the only thing that I can think of in late eighties,
early nineties.
Packer: [01:16:17] I remember that it was there. That was a major thing. I can’t
remember the details about it. I can’t help you.
Tracy: One thing that I know an issue that came up while you were on the Senate
was a proposal to allow research staff to serve as the primary investigators on

92

grants, whereas, up to that point, it had been only a faculty member could
serve as a P.I. on a grant. And you opposed it.
Packer: [01:16:59] Did I?
Tracy: Yes. [laughs]
Packer: [01:17:02] Why did I?
Tracy: Well, I was going to ask you if you remembered that issue.
Packer: [01:17:07] ] [laughs] If you had not said that, I would have said I would have
been for that.
Tracy: Oh, funny. Okay.
Packer: [01:17:12] I wonder why I would do such a thing. That’s so narrow-minded,
if I understand correctly.
[recorder turned off]
Tracy: Okay. So we’re talking about the principal investigator policy change. Tell me
about what you opposed about it.
Packer: [01:17:37] Well, I have to say that you just told me what I opposed about it.
[laughter] What I opposed about it was that the increase in research power as
the focus over and against teaching at this university. The thing that was
happening at this university, all the interest and money going into research,
not into teaching. We should be primarily a teaching institution, not a
research [unclear]. That was my position on that.
Tracy: Was that an ongoing tension between—
Packer: [01:18:12] Oh, sure. It’s been going on since—well, I don’t know exactly
when. Certainly since Fred Terman’s time. Fred Terman was a provost and a
very distinguished engineer. And there was a kind of a slow shift. Stanford

93

was no longer a college; it was becoming a real university under Fred Terman
and Wallace Sterling. But mostly Terman’s attitude toward learning and so on
was very much determined by his research, by engineering research. That was
a real conflict at this university, between teaching and research, between
engineering and science and rest of them, the rest of us. That was something
that was happening not just here but all over the United States, and it still is.
In fact, it may be that people have simply given up. I wonder if the English
Department has simply given up. We don’t matter. I don’t know.
Tracy: We laughed about this when I was looking at this article, but I think it’s
funny to note that you and Ron Rebholz were serving on the Senate at this
time and were in agreement about—
Packer: [01:19:38] We were in agreement about a lot of things. The thing we were not
in agreement about was my husband. [laughter] Ron probably thought he was
evil. It was the student revolution that Ron and I disagreed about. He was a
fomenter and I was an opponent of the student revolution. But after that was
over, we became good friends, went out for dinner, you know, really good
friends.
Tracy: In thinking about the ongoing impact Herb has had on your career, at
whatever extent that that’s been the case, besides Ron, I wonder did you ever
perceive that other people associated you with the administration or
associated with you with the power?
Packer: [01:20:30] Everybody. Everybody during those years. Everybody. And well
they might have. I mean, I never would have gone against whatever Herb
was promoting at all. As a matter of fact, we had a very close agreement, as I

94

think I told you, when Ron said, “I never saw you disagree with him.” I said,
“You never saw him disagree with me.” Because I was just as influential with
him as he was with me. Maybe not quite, but pretty darn close. In fact, I
would say yes, it was equal.
Tracy:

Given what we were just discussing the tension between research and
teaching, I wonder, in terms of your perspective as a professor from the
humanities if there was tension between the humanities and the sciences.

Packer: [01:21:31] Yes, there was. Because the scientists were getting all the money.
They were getting all the play, everything. Humanities was just there for a
little undergraduate teaching. That was all that mattered. And it really is what
matters. Undergraduate teaching ought to be the fundamental purpose of this
university.
Tracy: In terms of the committee work that you did while you were on the Senate,
you were on the Committee for the Professoriate, which was really dealing
with issues around tenure and promotion.
Packer: [01:22:19] Mm-hmm.
Tracy: But you also served on the Committee on Athletics, Physical Education—
Packer: [01:22:24] I was the chair.
Tracy: —and Recreation.
Packer: [01:22:25] I was the chair.
Tracy: I think people would not necessarily associate you with an interest in
athletics.

95

Packer: [01:22:31] Oh, I have an immense interest in athletics. Absolutely. I have
television only to watch football. [laughter] I don’t like football so much, but
baseball. Yes, I was the chair or whatever you call it, the head.
Don Kennedy was the president. Don’s a friend of mine, and he was
the president after I was the chair. I guess he appointed me chair or
something. After it was over, he asked me how it was, and I don’t remember
exactly what I said, but I said something like, “Might as well have not had a
brain or a tongue, as far as the Athletic Committee was concerned.” I had no
influence or power whatsoever.
Here’s an example. They lost the football coach, and so the Athletic
Committee was going to hire a new one. And I was the chair of the Athletic
Committee, so I was part of the hiring. We were over at the gym, whatever it
is, interviewing coaches for the job. Now, we interviewed a guy, talked about
him, interviewed another guy, talked about him. Then somebody came in and
said, “They’ve hired Bill Walsh.” [laughs] I mean, the committee, of which I
was the chair, was sitting there interviewing people, while people who really
ran things were hiring people. It was ludicrous. It was a charade. It was
ridiculous. The athletic director runs things, not the faculty, the low faculty
person sitting in a chair thinking they’re running things. They’re not.
Tracy: Is that to the detriment of athletics or—
Packer: [01:24:26] I don’t know. I don’t know. It’s to the detriment of the pride of
the person who’s the chair. [laughs] It’s very hard to realize that you’ve just
been sitting there pretending that you had power, and you just were nothing.
That’s not flattering. Don is a good friend of mine, and I was needling him,

96

of course, about this. I needled him about quite a number of things.
[laughter]
Tracy: Do you remember what else, beyond this not very influential hiring process,
you were doing with on the Committee for Athletics or—
Packer: [01:25:13] We weren’t dealing with anything except rubber-stamping
whatever the A.D. said. We were nothing. It was ridiculous. It’s humiliating.
Tracy: Why do you think Don—
Packer: [01:25:26] That’s just the way it always was. It’s not Don’s fault. Don was
honoring me by getting me to chair an important committee] He knew I was
an athletic fan, and offering me to chair an important committee—except it
wasn’t—was an honor for me. [laughs] I could get a job somewhere just
based on having been the chair of the Athletic Committee. It was totally
pointless, had no power whatsoever. Except that the A.D. had to be kind of
nice to me. [laughs]
Tracy:

Would he not have been otherwise?

Packer: [01:26:07] He wasn’t a friend. I mean, I knew him, but—
Tracy: If anything, what does it say about athletics at Stanford that this committee
was—
Packer: [01:26:20] It says that it was a big fundraiser, and therefore they can’t have
silly people like faculty interfering. Probably most of the faculty would be
happy to get rid of intercollegiate sports, probably be happy to. But actually,
football was a moneymaker, not just with the sale of tickets, but big donors
like Arrillaga and other big donors, they love football. So we can’t get rid of
it, and we can’t ride it either. It’s unrealistic to think that the faculty can get

97

rid of football, although UAB did. You know, I’m from Birmingham, and the
University of Alabama at Birmingham just got rid of it. [01:27:20] Today.
Tracy: Oh, really?
Packer: [01:27:22] Mm-hmm. [There’s an article in] the paper about it today.
Tracy: I don’t have extensive notes about the Faculty Senate, so I wonder were
there other important committees that you remember? I also have that you
were on the Steering Committee for the Senate.
Packer: [01:27:43] That means I helped appoint people to the various committees. I
guess. Like Academic Council committees. Maybe. I don’t know. Steering
Committee of the Senate? I don’t know what we did. I really don’t
remember. I had a good time, though, didn’t I? I was involved in a lot of
stuff. [laughs]
Tracy: Beyond the Senate, Don Kennedy appointed you to a study on admissions at
Stanford, and this was in 1984.
Packer: [01:28:17] Yes. I just did my duty. I don’t remember what I did. I didn’t have
any axe to grind, as I recall. I didn’t have any ideas to promote. I served on it.
I don’t remember. For the Athletics, I had an axe to grind, but it was dull.
[laughs]
Tracy: You were asked to do something, and so you served the university. Is that
notion of being a good citizen at the university, has that always been
important to you?
Packer: [01:29:11] Well, pretty much. I think so, right? Also it’s more interesting than
just sitting around. Herb was very interested in the university as university,
and I became interested in the university. And you want your place to be

98

better. I particularly wanted English and Creative Writing, but I most
particularly wanted freshman English, to be better. It seems to me that
freshman English is the most important course at the university, period. If
you can write, you can think. If you can think and can’t write, you can learn
to write. It’s just the most important thing that a person can do—think and
write.
And now we’ve got those little silly machines like yours. Maybe not
that one. That one’s just a recorder, isn’t it? Just a story illustrating my
distaste. I had a big Christmas dinner here, twenty people, and four or five
little kids. So they’re sitting over here, all on the couch, looking at their little
machines, talking not to each other, but to someone else, sending, “How you
doing?”
“I’m fine. How are you?”
“I’m fine. What you doing?”
“ Not much. What you doing?”
“Not much.” I mean, pointless little exchanges that they’re making on
those little machines.
And I said, “You’re at a party. You’re supposed to interact with the
people at the party. Put them up.”
And they said, “Oh, okay.” My grandchildren. They put them in their
pocket, and I walked away and talked to somebody else, and then I glanced
back, and they’re not like this; they’re like this now [demonstrates]. [laughter]
They’ve turned away so I won’t see what they’re doing, but they’re still
locked, hooked. It’s a leash. Well, that’s a—you can erase that, can’t you?

99

Tracy: No. [laughs]
Packer: [01:31:11] That tirade. [laughter]
Tracy: I think it’s a good story about how times have changed and communication
and how we communicate with each other.
Packer: [01:31:24] Yes.
Tracy: While you were teaching, I wonder if there were changes in the students that
you witnessed—
Packer: [01:31:34] Not really.
Tracy: —that you were teaching.
Packer: [01:31:35] I don’t think so. I’m trying to remember. I think the computer
thing really came at the end of the nineties, and I was out of there by then. I
retired in ’93. I go back now, but it’s to Continuing Studies, and they’re all
fifty years old, which I like it. You know why they’re there? Because they
want to be. Not because Mommy and Daddy want them to get a degree or a
Ph.D. or whatever. So it’s really nice. I like it. I like it. I like the other
teaching, I like dealing with the youth, young people, but I also like this
middle-age teaching.
Tracy: Before we went on this tangent, we were talking about the idea of being a
good citizen at the university, and I think maybe a part of this is the work
you’ve continued to do with Continuing Studies. You know, certainly you’ve
participated in some of the Stanford Historical Society events that we’ve
done.
Packer: [01:32:44] And the emeriti organization.
Tracy: The Emeriti Council, yes.

100

Packer: [01:32:48] Yes. I enjoy it. I enjoy it and I, of course, should do it, as a onetwo punch. Obviously why not do it if I enjoy it and they want me to do it
and I think I should do it, so I do it.

[End of December 3, 2014 interview with Nancy Packer]

101

STANFORD UNIVERSITY

PROJECT:

STANFORD FACULTY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

INTERVIEWER:

ALLISON TRACY

INTERVIEWEE:

NANCY PACKER

DATE OF INTERVIEW:

DECEMBER 10, 2014

Tracy: Hi. This is Allison Tracy. It is December 10th, 2014. I’m here with Nancy to
wrap up our oral history interviews for the Stanford Historical Society.
Nancy, today I wanted to shift to talking about your writing. You’ve
written in the area of instruction about writing and instruction about short
story and then you’ve also done your short story writing, fiction writing, and
you’ve had [short story] collections. I wanted to talk about both. So, starting
with the writing about writing, I was wondering if you could tell me a little
bit about your publications in that area.
Packer: [00:00:47] About my book on writing?
Tracy: Yes.
Packer: [00:00:51] It seemed to me when I became director of freshman English that
it wasn’t very systematized. It was just anything anybody wanted to do was
fine, and there were textbooks on writing that weren’t used much by our
staff. And I began writing these little pieces of paper, just three or four pages
of instructions about various things on how to teach spelling. That’s not one
of them, but it might have been. And I gave them to the young teachers, the
new teachers. I think I mentioned this the last time that we had instituted a

102

program of teaching the teachers. These were these twenty-two-year-old kids
coming in and thrown into a freshman English class to teach eighteen-yearolds how to write. I mean, it is a pretty silly system, but at least we tried to
make it a little bit more reasonable by having a course, actually more than
one course in how to teach writing.
And I would produce something for that class, and it eventually grew
into this book, Writing Worth Reading. I wrote it with John Timpane, who was
the advanced graduate student who earned his stipend by being my assistant,
by being the assistant of the freshman English director. So he was assistant
or associate freshman English director, and he and I wrote this. He’s a very
creative fellow. I don’t know what’s happened to him, but he’s a very creative
fellow, and he and I worked this out to…. I had already written this one little
book called Writing Writing, which was the original, and this was an expansion
of that. I’m not sure exactly whether it made it better. I guess it made it more
detailed and it had more stuff in there, but I often think that most books are
a lot of filler, and I guess we had our share of filler.
The Short Story: An Introduction was basically the idea of Wilfred Stone,
who was a professor of English. I don’t know what his connection to the
short story was, but he knew a publisher, and so we decided to write it. He
asked me to write the book with him called The Short Story: An Introduction.
And we worked on it. That was an easy job. Writing the other, Writing Worth
Reading, was a lot of work. This was more pleasurable, and we just used my
course on the short story as the basis for this book. [00:03:44] I don’t think
it’s still in print. I’m pretty sure it’s not, or I would have gotten [something].

103

The publishers bring out editions every two or three years to keep the money
coming in, and I would have gotten some money on it if they’d brought out
another edition, and I guess they have not. It’s been superseded.
Tracy: Were you ultimately happy with those books? How were they received?
Packer: [00:04:11] I thought they were really good. [laughter] I have a tendency to
think what I do is really good, after I get over being terribly sure that it’s
terrible. I think that they worked. The Short Story: An Introduction, I refer to it
still. If I want to know something about a writer, we had a bunch of stories,
and there was a fairly good introduction to each story that included a
biography of the writer, a very quick one, something else he had written, and
something about the story itself.
Then, of course, we had to write an instructor’s manual, because the
book was used a lot of places. I never knew how much it made, because I
gave the copyright to my kids, and they never told me if they got a penny
from it. In any case, we had the book and we also had the instructor’s
manual, and that was a good experience. In fact, both collaborations, mine
with Will Stone and mine with John Timpane, were very good.
Tracy: For Writing Worth Reading, do you remember who published that, or was there
interest in terms of—
Packer: [00:05:25] Well, it was published. It went into several editions. It was
published by—sorry, slippage.
Tracy: No. I should have written it down.
Packer: [00:05:38] Yes. I can go look at it. I know the guy; I know him pretty well,
and the editor, I know him too, but I can’t reach him. Sorry.

104

Tracy: That’s fine. I should have [that anyway], and what that was leading into was
did you have to shop Writing Worth Reading around or were people—
Packer: [00:05:58] No, no.
Tracy: There was interest?
Packer: [00:06:00] There was interest in it. In fact, publishers’ reps would come
through Stanford and go to other schools as well, of course, in order to
promote their own books, and I was asked to do a book a couple of times.
So, no, it wasn’t hard to sell that. Either one of them. It was Will Stone’s
contract, the first one was. The Short Story was Will’s contract, so he had to
arrange all of that.
Tracy: Then the other aspect of your writing is your writing [laughs], the short
stories that you work on. We talked a little bit about the first story that you
had published in Harper’s, and we traced your development as a writer. I was
wondering if, in terms of short story as a genre, you have a sense of what
about it is engaging for you or why that’s what you’ve tended towards?
Packer: [00:07:05] Yes, right. Well, I would love to be a novelist. It’s much more
important to write novels, it’s a lot longer, but it’s also more rewarding if
you’re successful at it. I may have said this before. There are marathoners
and there are sprinters, and I’m a sprinter, about everything, just about. So it
wasn’t hard.
Although every summer I thought, “Okay, now I’ll start a novel, but
first I’ll warm up. First I’ll warm up with two or three short stories, and then
I’ll go to the novel.” Of course, I never finished the short stories, I never got
them satisfactory before the summer was over. That happened every

105

summer, just about. “I’m going to write a novel. Now, what will it be about?
Well, I don’t know.” [laughs] But the short story, I never had too much
problem figuring out what something could be about. I guess it’s not in my
nature.
I have written a novel now that I’m trying to get published, but it’s not
really a novel; it’s five short stories. And two of them, one has already been
published and the other one will be published next. Another one will be
published next summer. It’s not really a novel; it’s five very well-connected
short stories.
Tracy: More like a short story cycle than—
Packer: [00:08:31] Well, it really is a novel, doggone it. [laughter]
Tracy: You just said that you often wouldn’t have an idea for a novel, but I wonder
if there were any novel ideas that have been rolling around in your head.
Packer: [00:08:48] No, I don’t think so. I just don’t—you see in the flash or you
don’t. [00:08:57] And for me, you see in the flash; that is, the short story, I
know what it’s about. If I start a short story not knowing what it’s about, by
the end of the first paragraph, I know what it’s about. And it’s just very
different, the short story and the novel.
I’ve been writing something now, not fiction, and I just found a
quotation from Faulkner, which was in my own notes, but I came across it.
But he says, “I first started out writing poems, and when I failed at that, I
went to the short story, which is the second most difficult form, and then
when I failed at that, I started writing novels.” He actually doesn’t say it like
that, but that’s the gist of it, that he first tried poems. His poems are very

106

lush. I’ve just been reading some of them this morning. They’re very lush and
full of adjectives and so on. His short stories are a little bit better, but they’re
not as good as really good short stories. And then he’s got these great novels.
He was born to be a novelist, not a short story writer and certainly not a
poet.
Tracy: It seems that the short story and thinking about—you described his language
as lush in the poetry. It seems the short story doesn’t have much time or
room for lush language.
Packer: [00:10:28] Gotta keep moving, gotta move. You can’t stop and describe the
trees. You’ve lost it if you have to—what have the trees got to do with it,
basically? It’s got to be a human…. Of course, there are stories that are not
about two humans in conflict. Most stories are, almost all. Most are definitely
one human being pitted against another in some way to work out some kind
of solution.
Tracy: Though, of course, a tree does feature prominently in one of your short
stories.
Packer: [00:11:19] Yes, but the tree is not the important part.
Tracy: Right.
Packer: [00:11:22] Yes, there is a tree. Do you know what kind of tree it is?
Tracy: Oh, I forget. It seemed to me like a very unique tree. I forget the name of it,
but it was a very unique species.
Packer: [00:11:31] I don’t know what the name of it is. I don’t know what tree it is,
because it doesn’t really matter, except that that story is based on the fact
that we lost a tree. An important, expensive tree in the front of our house

107

went down in a storm, and that’s the basis of that story. That’s the only basis
of the story there.
Tracy: So in the story, the husband and the wife are at odds about how to deal with
the tree. In real life, when that actual tree fell down in you and Herb’s yard,
do you have any memory of how you two dealt with it?
Packer: [00:12:14] Well, I can assure you we didn’t squabble about it. Probably Herb
said, “Take care of it, Nancy.” [laughter] And so I called somebody up and
they came out and sawed it down and sawed the rest of the trunk off and
pulled the trunk out, and it was no quarrel about it.
Tracy: So your first short story collection, Small Moments, was published in 1976.
Certainly up to that point you had published individual stories at great length
in magazines and anthologies and other collections. So what’s the work
needed in gathering all of these already-published stories into a short story
collection?
Packer: [00:13:06] Well, I never thought to do so. I’d just write my short stories and
send them out, and they’d get published or not. But this is kind of a
nepotistic story. A very close friend of ours was a director of the Stanford
Press, Leon Seltzer. [He was an] absolutely wonderful human being, he and
his wife both. And he said, “Why don’t you get them together.”
I asked, “What?” [laughs]
He said, “You’ve got a book here. Come on. Put them together and
make a book out of it.”
And I said, “Okay, I will.”

108

But it never would have occurred to me if Leon hadn’t said, “You’ve
got a book here.” So I got a book. He even suggested that I send it to the
University of Illinois Press, where he knew they had published some stories.
He knew the book business cold. And he had told me to put them together
and send it off, and I did.
Tracy: Was it difficult? Was there any difficulty in terms of deciding on the
arrangement or how the stories would go?
Packer: [00:14:26] Not really. You put your best story first and second best last, and
you put the weakest ones in the middle. [laughs] It was as simple as that.
[00:14:37] I may have put my second best second, and my third best last, but
you—
Tracy: Hedge your bets a little bit?
Packer: [00:14:45] Yes. [laughter] Hedging the bets. Right.
Tracy: When you started gathering the stories together, did they take on any
different meaning as you regarded them as a collection?
Packer: [00:14:58] No, they didn’t. [00:15:00] They didn’t really. You know, my
second collection were stories about my family. [00:15:08] And they fit
together well. I should have called it a novel. I should have called it an
episodic novel, but I was too dumb to. It would have made a lot of
difference in terms of my reputation if I had put them together as a novel.
Tracy: Because as you alluded to earlier, novels have more gravitas to them than—
Packer: [00:15:38] Yes, they have more—people remember them. I’m just writing
something now about books, and I’m finding that my favorite writer,
Chekhov, I’m not writing as much about him as I am half a dozen other

109

writers who are not my favorite, because the short story’s just somewhat
different here.
[recorder turned off]
Tracy: So you were saying you’re working on a book now and you’re writing much
more about authors who are not necessarily your favorites.
Packer: [00:16:09] Well, let me tell you what I’m writing now. May I?
Tracy: Yes, yes, please do.
Packer: [00:16:13] I’m writing about downsizing my books when I moved from my
house to the apartment building. I downsized from about 1,500 or 2,000
books to about 250 or 300 books, and this piece that I’m writing is about
that downsizing, why, what I chose and what I didn’t choose. It’s not very
detailed about any book, but it just hits a little bit of what I think about the
book; not much, but a little bit. So I’ve got 500 words on Henry James and
375 on Chekhov and 500 on Tolstoy. That’s the way it’s been going.
[00:17:10] And I’m liking it. I’m obsessed, as a matter of fact. [laughter]
Never been obsessed with my writing before, but I’m obsessed with this,
mostly because I want to get the damn thing finished before I kick off.
[laughs] And who knows? I want to get it now because I think it’s not
unimportant for my family. I doubt if it’ll ever be published. Maybe, but I
doubt it. But my family will know where I was as a result of that.
Tracy: Well, when you think of the records that people leave that are clues to their
inner workings, I imagine this sort of piece for a writer could not be any
better of a—

110

Packer: [00:17:57] It should be. It should be. I’m saying kind of strange things on F.
Scott Fitzgerald. I may read Gatsby again, but I’m not going to keep it. In this
piece I’ve written, I’m saying that I’m keeping Tender is the Night, because I
think it’s a better book. After I had decided that, I subsequently—obviously,
if it was after—discovered that Malcolm Cowley prefers Tender is the Night. I
thought I was the only person in the world who preferred Tender is the Night.
So I’m keeping Tender is the Night but not The Great Gatsby. Gatsby just doesn’t
speak to anything that I understand, anything in my condition.
Tracy: Did you keep anything by Wallace Stegner?
Packer: [00:19:01] I haven’t gotten to Wally yet, except to say that anything that was
written by a friend of mine, I’m keeping. And he was certainly a dear friend,
so of course I’m keeping Stegner. I think I would keep him anyway, but I’m
keeping all of his books. I’ve got five or ten of his books. That one bookshelf
is all books by friends, and he takes up a big hunk of that.
Tracy: In doing this sorting, were there any books that you did away with that
surprised you that you came to the conclusion—
Packer: [00:19:35] One of the things that surprised me that I kept was Nathaniel
Hawthorne. I mean, imagine keeping Nathaniel Hawthorne, but I am. I truly
like The Scarlet Letter. I think it’s a wonderful book, so I’m keeping that. I’m
also keeping Herman Melville’s Moby Dick, but I don’t know why. I will never
open that book again. I didn’t like it the first time, and I certainly would not
read it again, but I’m keeping it to tell myself, “Okay, go back and look at it.
You must be wrong. A million people can’t be wrong and you the only right
one.” So I should take another look at it, but I have no interest in it.

111

Tracy: Beyond Melville, are there any books that you’re keeping because you feel
like you should keep it?
Packer: [00:20:25] Well, there are a couple that offhand I can’t right this second tell
you what they are, but one or two that I think they must be okay, they must
be good, so I’ll give it another try. All these books I’ve read, so I’m trying to
weed out the ones that I’ll never look at again. I know a lot of people like to
have thousands of books. I do too. I just haven’t got room for thousands of
books. So I just want to be sure I’m keeping the books that I’d like to look at
again. That’s the principle.
I’m keeping lots of Chekhov and keeping two Tolstoys, only one
Dostoyevsky. The Russians are great writers, particularly the early part of the
nineteenth century up to about 1875. They’re terrific, and a lot of them are
short story writers like Gogol, and they’re in anthologies. That’s enough, just
to have The Overcoat, which is a great, great short story, but I have it. I don’t
need a whole volume of Gogol. So I’m not.
Tracy: I’m wondering if there are any particular short story collections that you like
especially or that seem especially important.
Packer: [00:21:52] Just a collection of many different short story writers? My own.
[laughter] That’s the best, and so I’m keeping it. No, I don’t. I can’t think of
any collection of short story writers. You know, I’ve been working on this
for quite a little while—more than a couple of weeks—and I’m just at
Faulkner. I have got the entire twentieth century, up to 2014, I’ve got a lot
more to do. [00:22:27] But I don’t seem to get past Faulkner. Every day I go
to work, and I change stuff, fiddle with this, change “a” to “an” and then to

112

“the” and then back to “a” on what I’m writing, and not making much
progress. I know you don’t want all that stuff.
Tracy: No, I do. I was just going to say I don’t know if that says more about
Faulkner or it says more about you. [laughs]
Packer: [00:22:46] No, I think it says more about my age, that I’m just not as focused
as I should be. But I go back and I improve it, but it is to change “a” to “an,”
that kind of improvement. It’s silly. Push on. Don’t stop. Don’t look back.
They may be gaining on you. Who said that? Woody Allen, I think.
Tracy: I think of your books--Writing Writing and then Writing Worth Reading--I
wonder if there’s any advice in those that would help you move more
quickly.
Packer: [00:23:21] Yes, I think there probably is. It probably says, “Don’t stop. Don’t
look back. Finish and then go back. Don’t stop and keep changing
directions.” I’m sure that it says that.
Tracy: This may not be faster, and this is me thinking about this as an oral historian.
I wonder if sitting down and actually recording, speaking your thoughts out
about books as you’re looking at them, if that would be any faster than
spending the time actually writing.
Packer: [00:23:55] No, I don’t think so. Maybe it would, but I really don’t think so. I
think what I have to do is just stop fiddlin’. I think what I’m doing is just
fiddlin’ around and changing it. It’s remarkable. Today I didn’t have much
time because of all these guys working in my apartment, but I didn’t make
much progress. I may have written one paragraph. I’m not even sure I wrote
that much. But I improved a lot of stuff. But that should come later. Don’t

113

stop. It’s called free writing, and I used to teach that when I was in freshman
English. In free writing, just keep going, keep going. If you haven’t got an
idea, just write, “I haven’t an idea. I haven’t an idea.” “That’s a pretty good
idea,” and you start having an idea. So don’t stop. That’s my advice.
Tracy: Even if it never gets published, I think certainly your children will like having
it, but, I mean, even I would be interested in reading it.
Packer: [00:25:05] Okay. I was thinking that I can’t see this being published, but I
was thinking I might, if I ever finish it, I would maybe make fifty copies, give
them to my grandchildren and friends and anybody wanted it. I like it. I like
what I’m doing. I’m really enjoying making decisions about the books. What
I really just want to do is stop fiddling and move on.
You finished? You think we’re finished?
Tracy: Finished the—
Packer: [00:25:38] No? Okay, go ahead.
Tracy: You first published Small Moments in 1976, and you mentioned what you
really see as an episodic novel, which is In My Father’s House, which is
about—
Packer: [00:25:54] It should have been a novel.
Tracy: Right.
Packer: [00:25:56] It should certainly have been a whole thing rather than stories.
Tracy: Right. That book focuses on your father, but then also certainly stories about
your family and your early—
Packer: [00:26:08] It’s just the family, yes.

114

Tracy: Then shortly after In My Father’s House, you published The Women Who Walk
in 1989. With doing Small Moments and In My Father’s House was the idea by
the time you got to The Women Who Walk of putting together a collection, did
that make more sense in 1989?
Packer: [00:26:35] Yes, it did. I realize that that’s the way to preserve them, and it’s
also the way—you know, you like to be known for being good at what you
do. Everybody, I think, likes that, and I’m not well known, but the books
help me a little bit be known. So I’m glad to have things collected in books.
And I’ve never gotten a bad review. I’ve only had one review in The New
York Times, but I’ve never gotten a bad review from my short stories, so
that makes me very happy and also sad. Why didn’t I do more? Just to be
honest, I do feel that way, that I didn’t do enough, didn’t write enough.
Incidentally, let me interrupt you for just a second, and don’t forget what you
said.
Tracy: I won’t.
Packer: [00:27:30] Wally Stegner, I asked him once, I said, “You’re such a good short
story writer. Why did you stop?”
And he said, “Because you can’t make a major reputation writing short
stories. Therefore I started writing novels,” he said.
Of course, that’s not quite true. Poe, Chekhov. But then who? Who
contemporary? Not much. He was probably right. [00:28:03] And he was
right to go on to his novels. He’s a wonderful novelist.
Tracy: Do you regret not making or not being able to make that transition?

115

Packer: [00:28:14] I like the word “able,” not being able to, because I really have not
been able to, yes. [00:28:20] But as I say, there are sprinters and there are
marathoners, and I’m just not a marathoner.
Tracy: One thing, and this certainly, I think, could be said of Small Moments as well,
but in reading reviews about The Women Who Walk, one thing that stood out
to me was this idea—and this is something that you yourself has said—that
you work with a small canvas. That you’re working on, you know, situations
that are really close at hand for people. I guess I don’t have a specific
question, but I’m wondering if you could talk a little bit about this small
canvas and what interests you about these more personal conflicts that
people deal with in their lives.
Packer: [00:29:03] Well, I don’t know how to actually approach that. Most people
who write short stories write about domestic things. It does feel very limiting
to be domestic, only domestic. I do have a story or two about teaching,
broadening, getting really broad out there. But mostly they’re husband-wife,
mother-child stories. That’s what I know, I guess. That’s certainly part of it.
Also it’s where life takes place more than anything else. I guess I could
write—not I, but others can write about businesses, running companies, but
that sounds more like nonfiction to me. Fiction, you want to get to the heart
of something. And when is the heart affected? Is the heart affected by the
daily, the quotidian job situation? It’s affected in relationships that matter,
and that means family, for the most part. Or close colleagues.
Tracy: Well, in reading The Women Who Walk—
Packer: [00:30:24] God, am I going to get to edit this, I hope?

116

Tracy: Yes, certainly. [laughs] In reading The Women Who Walk, one story that stands
out in my mind is “The Saturday People.” Or am I—is it just “Saturday
People?”
Packer: [00:30:41] I think it’s “Saturday People.”
Tracy: There’s an observation [in the story]. It’s about a mother and daughter and
another father and daughter that meet at a park, and at one point in the story,
there’s an observation that the mother makes about her daughter, that her
daughter is sort of following this other girl around and needing [to be led]—
you say it much more eloquently in the story. But to me, it struck me as such
a powerful insight that this mother had into her daughter, and it struck me
that in writing these short stories that you, yourself, would need to be able to
have this insight into people.
Packer: [00:31:24] Well, I think that—I don’t know that I have it, but a short story
writer better have it. That’s what it’s all about, is understanding what’s going
on with people. Probably Chekhov knew more about people than anybody in
the world. I used to say this to students, you don’t go sit in the coffee lounge
and look at people. You’re not going to learn anything about people that
way. What you have to do is think what is their situation and imagine
yourself in that situation, get into their skin, get into the character’s skin, not
watch them. Now, you don’t learn anything by watching people, observing
people. You may find out that they curl their little finger if they drink, take a
cup of coffee, but you don’t really learn about them until you imagine
yourself in their skin, and that’s, I think, what the writer has to do is
project—not project, inject that person’s situation into yourself.

117

Tracy: Is there any difficulty in finding a balance between the empathy needed to
imagine yourself in other people’s situations and yet still being able to
maintain a critical eye to transform that insight into the story?
Packer: [00:32:54] That’s the trick. That’s the trick. You can’t be swallowed. You
have to still maintain a little bit of objectivity, a little bit of distance, but the
sympathy, the empathy is important. A person who doesn’t care for people
can’t—never mind. Let’s go on. [laughs] I got bogged down on that thought.
Tracy: No, it’s okay. So The Women Who Walk came out in 1989, and then your next
short story collection was Jealous Hearted Me, which came out in 1997, but that
isn’t as much of a short story collection, is it?
Packer: [00:33:41] Yes. You haven’t read that.
Tracy: I haven’t. You can tell by the way that I’m asking this.
Packer: [00:33:45] Yes, it’s short stories.
Tracy: It is?
Packer: [00:33:47] Yes.
Tracy: In what I’d read about it, it seemed like it focused around the same people
throughout the stories.
Packer: [00:33:54] No, not really. If you wait a minute, I’ll go get it.
Tracy: Yes.
[recorder turned off]
Tracy: So I just started recording again, so I hope you don’t mind me saying this,
that you commented that there’s more of your mother in Jealous Hearted Me.
Packer: [00:34:07] Yes, yes.
Tracy: So tell me how she kind of appears in there.

118

Packer: [00:34:10] She was a very—I have to talk about my mother, rather than about
the story. She was a very energetic woman, feisty, warm, difficult in some
ways. Not really; she wasn’t really difficult. There is more of my mother in
here. For example, in “Brotherly Love,” that’s a story about her and her
brother, and it’s really about her and her brother. It never happened. It never
happened, but it could have happened, that they loved each other dearly but
they could spat. [00:34:47] So that story is about my mother, and Jealous
Hearted Me is about my mother. “I Never Said a Word,” is that about my
mother? I’m not sure. “The Boyfriend,” that’s not about my mother. Well,
she’s in it, probably.
Ask me a question.
Tracy: At the time in your life that you would have been writing the stories that
were collected in Jealous Hearted Me, was there a reason that your mother was
coming up in those stories at that time?
Packer: [00:35:22] What’s the date?
Tracy: This was published in 1997.
Packer: [00:35:27] Well, my mother was dead for quite a while by then. She died in
1973, but she was very important to me, I mean, really important. This “I
Never Said a Word” is about my mother. A lot of these are about my
mother. “The Boyfriend,” that’s about my mother because it’s about
“Mama.” I never called my mother “Mama.” If we called her “Mama,” and
she said, “I’m not Mama. I’m Mother.” [laughter]
Ecuador, that’s—yes, you’re right, they are about my mother. They’re
all about my mother. I’m going to have to read it. Certainly the one about her

119

brother. Mosquitoes, that’s about an old lady and a husband, who is not my
husband, but is my late sister’s husband, is the man in that. So there’s family.
That’s right. How did you know that? [laughter] I didn’t tell you that, did I?
Tracy: Well, you commented as we were talking that a lot of the stories were about
your mother, so it just made me curious.
Packer: [00:36:43] I had forgotten that. I had forgotten that. And at the end—you
haven’t read it?
Tracy: No.
Packer: [00:36:54] The last story in it, an old boyfriend comes back, not the narrator’s
old boyfriend, the mother’s old boyfriend comes back, and they go off
together.
Tracy: Oh, interesting.
Packer: [00:37:11] I love that story. I really do love that story. It’s called Vim, V-i-m,
where the old man comes back. They’re in their seventies, and he comes
back, and the mother says something like, “Well, I see you haven’t lost your
vim.” And of course, vim means sexual prowess at that point.
Tracy: Right.
Packer: [00:37:33] I love that story. I’d forgotten how much I liked that story. It’s the
last one, you see.
Tracy: How do you think your mom would have felt about being, if not the
character, the basis for some of the characters in the stories?
Packer: [00:37:49] Some of these may have been published during her life. I’ll have to
look at what the copyrights are. She was so proud of the fact that I ever got a
story published. If somebody would have criticized me for it, she would have

120

been furious with them. I mean, she was just very pleased at what I had
done, even though I guess she did know that some of them were about her, I
can’t remember which stories. I’m sorry that my memory is not accurate on
that.
Tracy: No, that’s okay.
Packer: [00:38:23] But she was proud of it. Not proud of the stories; proud of my
writing them. But they are about her. I’d forgotten that, about a trip. She
came out here once the year before she died. This is in there. She came out
here, came on the train from Birmingham, Alabama, to San Francisco on the
train, and it’s a sad story. But she wasn’t sad. She was perfectly happy and
made lots of friends on the train. [laughter]
Tracy: In other articles that I’ve read you and about books that came out at the
time, you’ve been insistent that your stories aren’t autobiographical, that they
start with a kernel that maybe you’ve experienced but then from there on—
Packer: [00:39:16] They never happened.
Tracy: I wonder even in that there’s a kernel, they start with a kernel of your
experience, if there’s any vulnerability or perceived vulnerability in even
starting with a kernel of your own experience and expanding from there.
Packer: [00:39:46] I don’t know how you can write if you don’t start with something
you know, a feeling, a picture, something you heard. You have to start
somewhere, and even somebody who writes about being out in the galaxy
starts with something he or she has experienced or heard or seen.
Imagination is not out of the blue. It’s enlargement of experience from your
tiny little experience to a much larger experience out into the world. But you

121

have to—you’re always you. You have to be. How else could you write? You
couldn’t.
Tracy: Yes. I’m wondering if every story, every short story that you start, does it get
finished and would you consider it a success?
Packer: [00:40:47] No. Well, that’s two questions. Do they all get finished? No. But
I’m going to go back and finish them, even those that are languishing for
forty years. In other words, no. Then what was the other half of the
question?
Tracy: Well, the other one is are all of your stories successful, or do you finish
stories that you don’t consider as—
Packer: [00:41:15] I never finished something that I didn’t think was worth
something. [00:41:22] I certainly think they’re worth something, some kind of
insight. I mean that I don’t think any story I’ve written hasn’t had some
insight, maybe not particularly original, but has some feeling to it. But that
doesn’t mean that I think they’re all equal. I don’t.
Tracy: Are there some stories that came together fairly quickly or are there some
stories that you did ultimately finish but took many years to finish?
Packer: [00:41:57] Yes, yes, to both, yes. Some stories finish in a couple of days,
maybe a day, and some stories I go back to and I finally see how I can finish
them. I probably have a folder of old stories. I’d better take them out and see
if I can finish them.
Tracy: When do you know that a story is done?
Packer: [00:42:20] It’s never done, really, in a way. When it’s published, that’s when
it’s done. Otherwise, I’m going to fiddle with it, I’m going to change “a” to

122

“an” to “the.” Change “Joe” to “Bill” to “Tom,” just fiddling things. What
that is, is confidence. What I’m telling you is I lack sufficient confidence to
leave the damn thing alone. Got to go back and see if I can’t make it better.
Whereas I don’t know this, but I’m sure that Wally finished, “That’s it. On to
the next,” because he had confidence. But it is a matter of confidence, which
has a lot to do with success in anything. You know that. You know that. If
you think you can do it, you can do it much better than if you think you
can’t.
Tracy: In terms of advice to students for the issue of fiddling, what would you have
told a student who kept going back over and over and over to their stories?
Packer: [00:43:29] Get the thing published so you won’t be able to tinker with it. But
also don’t stop until you finish it. That is to say, don’t go back, don’t go back.
Get the manuscript finished and then let your critical faculties operate.
There was this—I can’t remember what book it was, some book on
writing, that you have two minds: you have the creative mind, you have the
critical mind. If you let the critical mind operate too soon, you ruin what the
creative mind is trying to do. I don’t know that that is anything except
hogwash, but it’s a kind of an interesting idea, that you shouldn’t be your
most severe critic until you’ve finished what you’re doing. But I’ve got to tell
myself that, stop fiddling.
Tracy: How has your practice of writing—in terms of literally sitting down at your
typewriter and writing, how do you write today and how has that changed
over time?

123

Packer: [00:44:44] Of course, your physical circumstances makes a difference; that is
to say, when I had little kids, always being interrupted. When I had a job, I
had to go off and teach. I couldn’t stay there at the typewriter. Now I can
stay as long as I want. I often almost never—the reason you caught me
drinking orange juice is that I forgot to eat lunch until about one o’clock and
then I grabbed something. So it’s different, your circumstances are certainly.
And also physically, you do have your life to live, even though you’re writing.
[00:45:23] This thing that I’m working on now is the first time I’ve ever really
understood the writer who says, “Don’t telephone me until I finish this
book.” It’s the first I understand that. I don’t want people to telephone me
until I finish this book. I mean, obviously that’s not the way my life is
organized, so I’m exaggerating enormously. But I am so involved in it that I
love working. I don’t fight it.
You know, the writer is a person who gets up and sharpens his pencil
ten times an hour just because the creative process has come to a stop. So
you get up and you sharpen your pencil. And I was certainly like that. Any
interruption was wonderful. But now, I don’t know why, maybe time’s
winged chariot or something like that, I’m not sure.
Tracy: Jealous Hearted Me came out in 1997, and I didn’t have this on my list, but you
published Funny Little Pictures in 2010.
Packer: [00:46:34] I don’t even want to talk about that. It just is stupid.
Tracy: Okay. So in 2012 then, you published the short story collection Old Ladies.
Packer: [00:46:44] Look, I didn’t mean to cut you off.
Tracy: No, no, no, it’s okay.

124

Packer: [00:46:47] Because it’s just something that I wrote and I am kind of ashamed
of.
Tracy: Well, then we don’t have to talk about it.
Certainly age-wise, the characters in Old Ladies on average are a little bit
older than The Women Who Walk. You know, before I came over today, I read
“Untangled,” and it struck me that there’s, at least in The Women Who Walk
and Old Ladies, a handful of stories that deal with two people who at one
time had a relationship, have been separated for a long time, and are coming
together, and in that coming together are sort of dealing with a fraught
experience in their past. Is there something about that kind of dynamic that
interests you?
Packer: [00:47:45] It is, and right offhand, I can’t tell you, but I have another story
that’s like this that’s based on old lovers getting together, which is not
autobiographical at all. I can’t remember which one it is, but it is interesting
what does happen in this story that you just mentioned. [00:48:14] What
happens is that this woman who has carried this bitter grudge basically for a
great long time, finally gets to express it and really, I mean, she has a new life.
It’s a boil lanced after fifty years. So I like this story because of that. They’re
finally untangled.
Tracy: Well, it’s interesting that you say that she finally gets to lance the boil,
because the way that she does that is by communicating to this former lover
that what had happened to them fifty years ago didn’t prevent her from
living her life.

125

Packer: [00:49:00] Didn’t prevent her from being happier than he was. Yes, that’s
right. That’s her vengeance.
Tracy: And in The Women Who Walk, there’s “Making Amends.”
Packer: [00:49:17] Well, that’s the same story. That’s exactly the same story I told
from a different angle. It’s a different story, but I said a minute ago that I had
written something like it, I couldn’t quite remember it, but that’s what it is.
Tracy: That it is, and I don’t think I realized that even until you said that. But even,
like, appearance-wise, the man, he seems very similar. What’s fantastic about
Making Amends is that she just drives off in the end, she just leaves him
standing in front of the restaurant.
Packer: [00:49:51] Yes, she makes amends. [laughs] She finally gets even. Her getting
even is kind of pitiful in a way. She doesn’t get to run over him. But, yes, I
like those stories. I do like those two stories. They’re mean, yes. They’re not
autobiographical. There are some that are much more autobiographical and
that are autobiographical somewhat. But the stories I like best are the twopoint-of-view stories and to be able to control them. It’s not easy. [00:50:33]
It’s not easy. The first thing you tell the students in a creative writing class is,
“Don’t change the point of view. Stick with it.” But these stories that have
two different people. Their approach is interesting to me, that they’re two
different. But it seems to me in that story it’s not really a point-of-view story.
It’s neither one of them is inside the head. I’m not sure.
Tracy: There is a little more distance, I think, in “Making Amends” and in
“Untangled.” The story “The Day the Tree Fell Down,” which we
mentioned earlier, that is the dual point of views. It’s interesting how it, I

126

think, in seeing the different or knowing the different viewpoints, you see
how at every moment they’re miscommunicating or misunderstanding each
other as they’re dealing with this tree throughout the day.
Packer: [00:51:35] Yes, yes. I got three stories of those. Of course, “The Day the
Tree Fell Down” takes—I mean, they’re still married.
Tracy: And then the other—what stands out in my mind is another story with a dual
point of view, is “Two’s Company,” which is in Old Ladies, which is about a
children’s book writer and a maid who works in her home.
Packer: [00:52:05] Yes, I remember it, yes. These I remember better because they’re
fairly recent.
Tracy: Right. What I love about that story is the transition between the two
women’s viewpoints is so seamless, and, again, it’s such a good examination
of how so completely the women are misunderstanding each other, and yet
in some ways how much the women need each other.
Packer: [00:52:31] What I want in that story is to do justice to both. That’s what I
want to have done is here you’ve got some powerful woman, rich enough,
educated, and you’ve got somebody, an immigrant, and I want to do justice,
and I hope I did make them. Neither one wins, I don’t think. You’re going to
drive me back to reading my own stuff. [laughter]
Tracy: Please forgive me if this question is a tired question, but I’m wondering who
you feel have been the biggest influences for you on your own writing and
how that influence manifests.
Packer: [00:53:22] I don’t know. I really don’t know the answer to that. I would like
to say Chekhov. I mean, that would be such an easy answer. I didn’t discover

127

Chekhov until I was already writing. When I was a kid, I read an awful lot of
stuff, mostly sports stuff. But I read a lot. We had access to the Library of
Congress because of my father. We could go over to the Library of Congress
and get twenty books and take them home and read them. Then we’d call the
library and they’d come by and pick them up and take them back. So we
always had a lot of books around, and I read a lot when I was a kid.
The writer that I cared most fervently about I have nothing in common
with, and that’s the first Thomas Wolfe, the North Carolina—well, again,
maybe they’re both from North Carolina. Anyway, For Whom the Bell—no,
not that. Not For Whom the Bell Tolls; that is Hemingway. But he also has been
a big influence. Of Time and the River. I can’t think of the titles. But have you
ever read him?
Tracy: No.
Packer: [00:54:46] Nobody reads him anymore. He’s voluminous. He wrote about
four books, died quite young, age thirty-eight, I think. Of Time and the River is
one of his books. Anyway, he’s very influential, but I’m not like that at all.
My writing is not like that. My little short, short stories are nothing like his.
And then Hemingway certainly influenced me, and Faulkner. Just the
usual. Just the usual. What I’m writing right now is about Faulkner, and I
have written a sentence about using Faulkner’s very elaborate language. After
I finished the sentence, I said, “See what I mean about being influenced by
Faulkner,” that I tried to be Faulknerian, but I mostly tried to be
Hemingwayesque.

128

I remember when I was in college, I was a freshman in college, we had
to give a book report in English class, and I chose Thomas Wolfe. I gave this
report, and I was so full of Thomas Wolfe. I was overwhelmed by Thomas
Wolfe. I’d given this lecture to the class, and after class, the professor said,
“As we now walk out, we will all pass by the altar and bow our heads to
Thomas Wolfe,” which was making fun of me in a gentle way. I mean, it was
not too mean. But he was absolutely right, that’s what I had done was just
put Thomas Wolfe up as some kind of god. But within a year, I wouldn’t
touch Thomas Wolfe. [laughs] By then I’d moved on to Hemingway, and as I
say in my piece, it took me quite a while to be able to use an adjective after I
fell under the spell of Hemingway. [00:56:48] I think young writers do get
caught up in—Henry James, I would like to think he influenced me, but I
really don’t. Fitzgerald I read when I was young. But I would say Thomas
Wolfe, Ernest Hemingway, and William Faulkner. They were the big writers
of the time. I worked in a bookstore, and I would take those books home
and read them. So I would say the big three of American literature were the
big three of my life.
Tracy: You’ve talked about being a reader and reading a lot, and I wonder how you
balance the reading and taking in other people’s viewpoints and style and so
on, and yet maintain your own identity.
Packer: [00:57:48] Well, if you have a really strong style, you probably don’t need to
worry about it. I don’t. I don’t have a particularly unique style or approach,
so I just write what sounds right at the time. But then it may not sound right
five minutes later, so I have to go back and revise. That’s a terrible habit. It’s

129

a terrible, terrible habit, and I’ve had it always, all the time that I’ve been
trying to write. It’s lack of confidence. [00:58:24] You know, if you think
you’re hot stuff, you don’t go back. You know it was great. But if you have
lack of confidence, you’re always going back until it gets published. That’s
why it’s so important to get it published. That’s not the reason, but it is, it
helps.
Tracy: One last thing that I want to just bring up about your writing—and I don’t
know if this is much of anything besides gushing a little bit—the story “A
Woman and His Dog.” If nothing else, I just thought that was the most
clever title for a story and so fitting. It’s just such a clever title and a clever
story.
Packer: [00:59:11] It is a clever title, yes. Probably the best thing about it is the title.
[laughter]
Tracy: But, you know, the magic that this little dog first brings to the husband and
then to the wife—
Packer: [00:59:28] Yes. I had a little dog, a wonderful little dog, and that’s probably
the source of that story. [00:59:36] A little dog named Frank. I don’t
remember what that dog’s name is. Frederick or something? My dog’s named
after Roosevelt.
Tracy: It’s Ozzie.
Packer: [00:59:56] Ozzie, okay. Yes, I like that story. It’s kind of touching.
Tracy: Well, and the interesting scene at Starbucks where she meets this—well, just
the insight into her husband’s life for the last couple years and how she’s

130

both literally and figuratively following the same path that he followed. Yes, I
enjoyed it.
Packer: [01:00:24] Yes.
Tracy: So let’s shift a little bit, then, and talk about some of the awards—
Packer: [01:00:31] Aren’t you tired of me yet? [laughs]
Tracy: No. Are you tried of me? Do you—
Packer: [01:00:34] No. I’m the one doing all the talking, talking about myself.
Tracy: So you’ve received a number of awards over your career. You’ve received
awards for your writing. You’ve also received awards for your service to
Stanford. I have a list here and we can go through them, but I wonder if
there are awards for your writing or for your teaching or for your service, do
any of these awards stand out to you as being particularly important or that
you were particularly honored to receive?
Packer: [01:01:07] Well, the three awards from Stanford. Stanford gives three awards,
and I got three awards, which is remarkable. You know, of course, I wonder
why they do that. But still, I’m honored, tremendously honored, even though
I suspected—I mean, why would they give me the awards? Still, I won the
teaching award, the service award, and the alumni award, gosh—that’s
terrific. I don’t think anybody else has. Am I right?
Tracy: I don’t know, but I will check on that.
Packer: [01:01:42] It is my thought that no one else has won the Dinkelspiel, the
Gores, and the Lyman. But I don’t know that that’s the case. Anyway, I’m
very, very proud of that.

131

In a way, you know, I just have to say, I do think my teaching has kept
my writing back. If I hadn’t been a teacher, if I hadn’t been so concerned
with my teaching, I would have done a lot more writing, I think. [01:02:14]
And why was I a teacher? My reason for being a teacher is so absurd. I came
out here. I come from the South. I always had servants, always had two or
three in the house. We weren’t rich, but we lived in the South and we were
sufficiently well off, and we had servants. I came out here, nobody had a
servant. I mean, you stayed home, you did the housework, you had a kid, you
had to look after the kid. You were totally confined by housework and kids,
because nobody had a servant. And I thought, “If I work, I can leave the
house. I don’t have to do this. I don’t have to do the housework.”
I won the scholarship, the Stegner Fellowship, I still had to look after
the kids, but I started having a servant. Every penny I made as a Stanford
fellow went to pay for help, plus whatever other money I had. When I
taught, every penny I made went for help in the house. I didn’t take home
money. What I spent on myself came from Herb. But my work meant
leisure. [01:03:34] But it also meant—that’s not true. My work meant not
being at home, but it also meant not writing. In the South, if I’d been living
in the South, I would have had help and I would have stayed home and I
would have written and perhaps written more, because I certainly haven’t
written a heck of a lot. Does that make sense?
Tracy: It does make sense. In your teaching, do you think if you had hated it, you
would have stuck with it?

132

Packer: [01:04:06] I should have added a sentence to that long speech I just gave. I
should have said and yet teaching has been extremely gratifying to me, egofulfilling and challenging and informing. I mean, it has been wonderful.
Being a teacher has been wonderful. So I can’t complain. I might never have
made a big success as a writer, even if I’d been there full-time, but the
teaching has been my life mostly.
Tracy: Certainly in addition to receiving the Dinkelspiel award for teaching, you’ve
been recognized—
Packer: [01:04:51] That’s the Gores Award for Excellence in Teaching.
Tracy: Then Dinkelspiel is for teaching—?
Packer: [01:05:00] It’s for contributions to the university.
Tracy: Oh, then I’ve got those mixed up. So you’ve been recognized by the
university for your teaching.
Packer: [01:05:08] Yes, I have.
Tracy: Another thing in my research that stood out was just how many students
commented on how much they enjoyed your class and how rigorous but how
fair you were. Both in terms of the university and from students, you’ve been
very well respected for your teaching ability.
Packer: [01:05:30] Thank you. [laughter] Thank you. I’ve worked hard. You know,
some people are gifted. I’m not saying I’m not gifted. I’m not feeling sorry
for myself about it. But basically because I have a master’s degree in
theology, I didn’t even major in English. So when I started teaching, I was a
blank page. Oh, not really, because I’d read a lot. But I hadn’t had any formal
education much in English, and I had to work hard just to stay ahead of the

133

class. I did. I worked awfully hard because I didn’t have any fallback. Some
teachers—there was a guy in my department, he’d go into class and he’d say,
“Where was I yesterday? Or what was I saying last week? I’ll pick it up from
there.” Whereas for me, I knew where I was yesterday, because I picked it up
the next day right from there and had to work all morning. I’d work for three
hours preparing a forty-minute lecture every day when I was lecturing.
Because I was a blank page, almost. This university can be very, very tolerant,
and they were very tolerant of me, mostly because of Stegner.
Tracy: You also received a number of awards for your writing.
Packer: [01:07:06] Not nearly enough. [laughter]
Tracy: So, two that I have—I’m not actually sure how to say this, but you received
an O. Henry Award and your story was published in the—
Packer: [01:07:23] O. Henry Collection.
Tracy: One of those awards was for the story The Women Who Walk. It that
received an award.
Packer: [01:07:32] Yes.
Tracy: You know, what is the bene—
Packer: [01:07:39] What’s the benefit? Well, not much, I guess. I don’t even
remember whether I got any profits from the sale of the book that contained
the story, the O. Henry Collection. I’m not sure I got any profits from that. But
what’s the pay? The fact that you knew it, the fact that it meant something to
you. It increased my reputation, as far as you’re concerned. So that’s what it
means. There was also The Best American Stories, the two volumes of those

134

yearly best stories. I always wonder why all of mine weren’t in there, but they
weren’t.
Tracy: The Women Who Walk also then received the McGinnis prize as well, which
was, if I have this right, was given from the Southwest Review.
Packer: [01:08:37] Southwest Review, right. I just received, by the way, the prize from
the Sewanee Review for the best story of this year, of 2014.
Tracy: What story was that for?
Packer: [01:08:51] Give me a second. It’s for the first chapter of this episodic novel
that I’ve been working on. And what is it entitled? Let’s go on. The wheel
will turn.
Tracy: It’ll come back to you. So still today, you’re still receiving awards for your
writing.
Packer: [01:09:16] Too old to play golf. [laughter] That is pretty good, isn’t it? I mean,
to receive that award. I don’t publish many short stories. They don’t have
John Updike. They don’t publish John Updike. They’re obscure writers like
me, but still I got it. That’s pretty good.
Tracy: How do you—is there any traditions around celebrating your receiving
awards?
Packer: [01:09:46] Not that I remember. The Lyman Award, there’s always a party.
Tracy: Right. And I’m sure a good one. The Lyman Award, you received in 2000.
Packer: [01:10:03] Which was this?
Tracy: 2000 is when you received the Lyman Award. You also, in addition to the
awards, you had some honors that came with responsibilities, including
having been the Class Day speaker at Stanford.

135

Packer: [01:10:22] And I’ve been the commencement speaker at Birmingham
Southern College.
Tracy: Oh, you have?
Packer: [01:10:26] Yes.
Tracy: What did you speak about?
Packer: [01:10:29] I graduated from Birmingham Southern, and I spoke about my
career there, talked about being in Birmingham Southern. And then I had a
twist. I can’t remember exactly what it was. I think I started out by saying,
“I’m not going to give you advice. I don’t have any.” And then about halfway
through, I said, “Well, I do have some,” and started giving them advice about
how to live. Such a silly performance. That was not the commencement
speaker; that was the [for being] outstanding alumni. Now, that’s another
award from Birmingham Southern. I’ve had two awards from Southern, yes,
Outstanding Alumni and commencement speaker.
[recorder turned off]
Tracy: You retired from the university—“retired” in quotation marks—from the
university in 1993, but certainly you’ve remained involved in the university
after your retirement. Can you talk a little bit about how you’ve remained
involved?
Packer: [01:11:42] Well, mostly my involvement has been through the Continuing
Studies Program, and I don’t know when I started teaching it. I don’t even
know when the program was started. But I don’t know when I started
teaching there either. I teach there once a year, and I like it. I’m kind of
embarrassed to say, but I like older students. They’re really there because

136

they want to be. They don’t have to be there to make up for some kind of
requirement.
I do miss the university. I miss the politics of the university. I miss
having a say in something as important as the university, not that I had much
of a say; I didn’t. But in the English Department, for example, I would have
a say. Nobody listened, but I could say it anyway.
I remember once at a English Department faculty meeting, it was
during the troubles at the university, and I made a statement about it, that I
thought we ought to do x, y and z. And one of my colleagues said, “Oh, we
know what Herb thinks, Nancy,” which was pretty infuriating.
And I went up to him afterwards and I said, “That’s a really insulting
thing you said.”
And he said, “Well, I’ve never seen you disagree with Herb.”
And I said, “Have you ever seen Herb disagree with me?”
“Well, no,” he said. That guy actually turned out to be a very close
friend eventually.
But I was furious. I went home. This is feminism at its beginning. I
went home and I told Herb, and Herb said, “That son of a bitch. I’m going
to talk to him.”
And I said, ‘No, let me handle it. You stay out. I don’t need your help.”
You know, that was the perfect masculine response on Herb’s part. He was
going to get that guy for hurting his wife’s feelings. That was just typical,
typical of a male response to something like that. [01:13:49] I don’t think
anybody would do that now.

137

I don’t know what tangent I was off on, but—
Tracy: Well, you were talking about missing the politics of the university.
Parker: [01:14:00] Well, yes, I do miss the politics of the university. I can’t complain.
I could still be there. I went out to dinner last night with a couple. They’re
both in their eighties. They’re still working full-time at the university. I do
not think that’s right. I think that’s wrong. Young people have to have some
openings so they can move up. But also I don’t really regret much, not still
teaching there, because I thought I would do a lot of writing. I didn’t do a
whole lot, but I continued to write. And I do miss the university. I miss the
politics.
Tracy: In thinking about the entirety of your career at Stanford, in what ways do you
feel you contributed to the university?
Parker: [01:14:51] I don’t know. I don’t know how to answer that question. I think I
made some impact by my willingness and effort and success in teaching lowlevel English classes, the short story and the novel, but the people who took
those classes were not English majors. They were engineers who had to take
a course in English, so they would take that low-level course, and I think that
was good. I didn’t try to fill them up with a lot of criticism but talked about
the stories and the novels themselves, and I think that may have been the
best contribution that I made. [01:15:42] Boy, did I have to work, because, as
I said, I’d never taken the course myself, and here I was teaching it. I had to
start from scratch.
Tracy: Certainly in thinking about your contribution to students, I don’t know if it’s
the exact numbers, but there are notable writers today who were your

138

students at Stanford and who were your students in the Creative Writing
program. In that sense, you’ve contributed to other people’s careers.
Packer: [01:16:23] Well, yes, and I don’t know whether I showed you, but I have a
bookcase full of works mostly by former students, and on my coffee table
now are three or four books by formers students. The most recent one got
the front page review of The New York Times about three months ago. It’s
Akhil Sharma, who is a very close friend. He was a Stegner fellow, and he
and I became very close friends. That book I read before it was finished; I
mean in the process. So I’ve stayed in touch with him in that way. He stands
out right now because his book is just out, so he’s in my mind more than
others would be. But there have been some wonderful writers coming
through the program. [01:17:18] It’s a great program. It started with Stegner.
I guess a history of the Creative Writing Program has been done.
Tracy: And we’ve talked about it a fair amount in our first session, about its
beginnings and evolution.
Packer: [01:17:40] Oh, good. Okay.
Tracy: Would you consider the successful students one of your legacies? Do you
think you have many legacies at Stanford?
Packer: [01:17:51] Not particularly, I don’t think so. What is a legacy anyway?
Something that I have done? No. I don’t know. There’s a point in there
somewhere. I can’t remember it. My legacy at Stanford. No, I don’t think I
have one. Well, yes, I do. [01:18:50] No. There was a room named after me
too. I think they closed it.

139

Tracy: Oh, no. [laughs] Well, one thing I will say is that there’s so much ongoing
construction on campus that you most certainly are not the only person
who’s had something named after them and had it closed—
Packer: [01:19:19] And lost, yes. That’s right. That’s right.
Tracy: —or torn down at some point.
Packer: [01:19:22] That’s pretty terrible. That’s pretty terrible.
Tracy: Thinking of Stanford and its growth, what are some of the biggest changes
during your time at Stanford that you’ve seen happen to the university?
Packer: [01:19:35] Well, the growth of engineering, the growth of computer science,
the shrinkage of English, the shrinkage of classics. They’re just hanging on, it
seems to me, just barely hanging on. Nobody wants to take English. That’s
not true, of course. But it used to be that people did major in English
because they just majored in English. It was just a good major for life. But
now everybody’s into computer science or engineering. That side of the
campus, so many new buildings have gone up, it’s a wonder the ground
doesn’t sink. The other side of the community, humanities side of the
campus, there’s no room for it to change, but it hasn’t changed.
When I first came here, some people sneeringly referred to the place a
Terman Tech. Fred Terman was the provost, and he had been Dean of
Engineering. We said, “It’s just Terman Tech.” Little did we know that
technology was just going to swamp not just Stanford but the world. So why
criticize little old Stanford?

140

Tracy: In light of Terman Tech and in light of this focus on engineering and
computer science and all of that, did that environment ever made it difficult
for something like the Creative Writing Program to grow?
Packer: [01:21:22] No, it didn’t. In the first place, Stegner was very strong. He was
the most famous person on the faculty, I think, apart from Linus Pauling or
something like that. He was very famous and he was very strong, and he had
immense character. He really was a terrific guy. So as long as he was there, it
was kind of a stone, a cornerstone for the humanities. And of course, it
wasn’t his no longer being there that caused the change; it was the growth of
computers and science.
What was your question again?
Tracy: Just if there was ever any, for something like the Creative Writing Program,
was there ever any difficulty for that program?
Packer: [01:22:12] There was never any difficulty for that program because it was
founded on such a rock. I was once over in the shopping center when Don
was—Don’s a friend—in the shopping center, and we met, saw each other
there. We were talking about Creative Writing. He was president at the time,
and he said, “Well, Creative Writing is the jewel in the crown.” And it was. It
was the most famous single section of the university. It was known all over
because there was only two or three of them, and ours was the second to be
formed. We were producing writers all the time, and it was a very important
program. It was the jewel in the crown. So even now, I think, Creative
Writing has a special place. [01:23:06] At one point, Wally said that he
thought he was going to take it out of English and make it independent. He

141

was mad at the English Department for some ornery thing or other, and he
decided obviously not to, because it would have been a terrible mistake. It
should stay in English. [It’s] not big enough to live on its own, really.
Tracy: What are you most proud of in your career?
Packer: [01:23:34] Most proud of in my career?
Tracy: It doesn’t have to just be one thing.
Packer: [01:23:40] How about George and Annie? [laughs]
Tracy: You know, I’m so glad you said that because I meant to acknowledge that
both of your children are award-winning writers in their own right. You
know, different, I mean—
Packer: [01:23:57] They are different, yes.
Tracy: Being a writer yourself, has that aided or impeded your—
Packer: [01:24:07] It hasn’t affected it, except in this way. They used to show their
work to me and I used to show my work to them, but we don’t anymore. I
think they don’t want Mom taking over their work, which I used to do a little
bit too much. Since they don’t show me theirs, I’m not going to show them
mine. So we just go our own way.
Tracy: Do you talk about what you’re working on?
Packer: [01:24:44] No. Well, I have mentioned this [current project]. Because I’m
obsessed, I have mentioned this thing that I’m working. I never have before
but this time. George keeps saying, “Well, I want to see it. I want to see it.”
“No, not yet. Not yet.” But we don’t share work.
I’m very proud of them. Things that I’ve done that I’m proud of? I
think my stories are pretty good. They were kind of small, but there are small

142

moments in lives. But I couldn’t name all the books Small Moments, but I
think they’re pretty good.
Tracy: Right.
Packer: [01:24:44] They’re not blockbusters. They were real.
Tracy: Yes.
Packer: [01:25:32] So I’m pleased with them. I like the fact that I was a success as a
teacher. I mean, I do like that. In a way, that was the hardest, because I was
so ignorant, really, particularly in teaching the novel and those classes. It was
very difficult. Not difficult—demanding.
Tracy: Well, Nancy, is there anything that I haven’t asked you about that you want
to include?
Packer: [01:26:00] I don’t think there’s a thing in my life that I haven’t already
exposed to you. I bragged about three-quarters of the things and complained
about a quarter.
Tracy: Well, that seems like a good ratio for oral history. Thank you so much for
your time.
Packer: [01:26:04] Sure, sure. Thank you for your interest.
