
Brest: This is Monday, January 13, 2015. Iris Brest about to interview Barbara
Babcock.
Babcock: [00:00:12] I’m glad to be here and actually it’s Tuesday, I think. But that’s all
right.
Brest: Oh, all right, take it back. It’s Tuesday.
Background, where you grew up, parents...
Babcock: [00:01:04] OK. I grew up in Hyattsville, Maryland.
Brest: Do you want to say when you were born?
Babcock:

[00:01:11] I was born in 1938 and I grew up in Hyattsville, Maryland. My
parents were from Arkansas and they had met at a little college in Arkansas,
Arkansas College. And then the year that my dad graduated, 1929, the
depression hit. So lots of people--I don’t know what he might have been
planning to do but he came to Washington or went to Washington to get a

11

job, which a lot of young Arkansas people did and young people from the
south.
Brest: What kind of job?
Babcock: [00:01:51] With the government or with those--he actually went to work for
the Masonic Library. Then my mother...
Brest: As a what?
Babcock: [00:02:06] I don’t know exactly what he did. My father was kind of a genius.
But here he was a young man from Arkansas and they hired him. But maybe
just checked out books or something. I don’t know what he did. Later, he
went to law school at night at George Washington and continued to work in
the library in the daytime. He paid his tuition at law school by playing bridge
for money, which he was very good at doing. [laughter]
Brest: Were you alive then?
Babcock: [00:02:43] No. They were married in 1935. My mother who was the first in
her family to go to college and grew up in Hope, Arkansas, where her parents
were--where her parents and her grandparents and great grandparents were
all pioneers in Hope. From, I don’t know exactly where they came from-Germany, Scotch-Irish, you know, descent. But my mother was the smart
one. She had two sisters and one was known--she was known as the smart
one and one was known as the beautiful one.
[00:03:42] And one was known as the sweet one. And they all looked just
alike. [laughter] They were all quite smart and sweet.
Brest: You look just like your mother.
Babcock: [00:03:52] You think so?

12

Brest: I do.
Babcock: [00:03:54] Yes, I like that. I like to think that. She just--she had to drop out of
college after her sophomore year because my--her father, who was so proud
of her and used to take her--the smart daughter--he used to take her around
to be in speech contests and things like that...declamation contests. He was
very glad to send her to college. He was successful on his farm and so he
decided to open a feed store in Hope. Then came the crash and he lost the
store. The family lore is that he could have saved himself by declaring
bankruptcy and not--but he really paid all his debts and then went back to
the farm.
[00:05:03] My mother and father got married and three years later, I was born
and then my brother, David, who’s fifteen months younger than I, was born.
I think they had a great life until we came along. Then I think it got kind of
complicated. There was really a lot of what my mother used to call ‘cute
people’ there from Arkansas. They were--and they had a good time. But
then--my dad, I think maybe he was about to be drafted or something,
because he joined--or maybe he just got drunk. Anyway, he joined the navy
and went off. My brother...
Brest: With two babies at home.
Babcock: [00:05:56] With two babies at home. So maybe he wouldn’t have been
drafted. But they were drafting a lot of people. And then my mother--so my
mother stayed in D.C. because she had a good government job and sent us,
the babies, to Arkansas to be raised by relatives and that’s why I still have a

13

slight southern accent because you get your accent between the ages of three
and six. Did you know that?
Brest: No.
Babcock: [00:06:30] Yes. I was reading a thing about that. And you never get rid of it
really unless you make a big effort or take classes or something. Anyway, my
father’s relatives were in Batesville, which is a beautiful, little town on the
White River in the Ozarks, not far from Memphis. And my mother’s family
was from Hope. David was supposed to go stay in Hope and I went to stay
in Batesville. In Batesville, we had a beautiful, old Victorian house--huge-and it had the biggest Magnolia tree in the state in the front yard. [00:07:19]
It was one of those trees that had branches that go all the way down so even
children can climb them. It was a great, old house. I loved it. But David and I
couldn’t be separated, it turned out--that we just cried for each other. So I
ended up on the farm in Hope. I still have some memories of the farm. I
remember going out to feed the pigs, you know, you call them...suwee,
suwee, suwee, sup, sup...but I never understood why you call the pigs
because the minute they saw you coming with a bucket, they were there, you
know. [laughter] Maybe if somebody was resting or sleeping, you’d wake
them up. I don’t know. [laughter]
[00:08:17] The other memory I have of living on the farm--I have two other
memories. One is that David--every evening in the twilight, Pop, who was
our grandfather, would say, “David, you want to come with me to get the
cows?” I just wanted to say me, me, I want to come with you to get the cows
too, you know. But he never asked me and I never said it. David has these--

14

he loved going to get the cows because there was something, you know, a
little dangerous about it because they’re so big. And he would have a little
switch and hit their legs and get them in line to come home, you know.
[laughter]
[00:09:10] I do--I remember--I loved my grandmother--my mother’s mother.
She had been an orphan and had been raised by a country doctor that I met a
long time ago named Uncle Frank, and Aunt Emma. They raised her. I think
they raised some other children too. But they didn’t have any of their own
but some in the family, you know. She had no real education. I mean, she
graduated--maybe she graduated from high school. She was very beautiful,
very beautiful. And then she married Floyd Moses and then she had four
children, a son and three daughters.
[00:10:08] My mother remembers her childhood as totally idyllic, — growing
up in Hope, which was a little town. She was the only one of the girls that
could swim to the deep end of the quarry. They would ride their bikes to the
quarry and swim all day and...
Brest: So there was a brother as well? Was he...
Babcock: [00:10:41] And the brother--and he was the oldest and he--and this great
tragedy--when he was about twenty or so, he died in the airplane crash. Yes.
Larry was his name and I never, of course, knew him--. Anyway, those
memories--those are stories that I’ve told a lot of times. So those are real-vivid memories and I talk to David about it. He has--he remembers going to
get the cows. [laughter]
Brest: There was another memory.

15

Babcock: [00:11:26] Another memory, good, good, which is that we were out in the
yard on the farm and there was a swing set there. It was a great swing set. We
were playing with my cousins who were my mother’s sisters’ children. We
were--and we knew that Pop was sick but then we heard this screamfrom
inside the house. My mother came out and said stop playing, your
grandfather died. I was thinking does this mean forever, you know, and what
are we going to do instead? [laughter] It was--you know, it’s so funny how
memory is because you do--I can just visualize it, you know.
Brest: So your mother was back at the farm then?
Babcock: [00:12:30] At that point. Maybe she came back because he was sick
Brest: You lived on the farm from the time you were about three?
Babcock: [00:12:39] To six maybe, six and a half. Yes. And then my father came back
from the navy. He bought this house with the GI Bill in Hyattsville,
Maryland, which was a sleepy little suburb of D.C. at the time.
Brest: So your mother had been living there [in D.C.] though?
Babcock: [00:13:06] Yes, the whole time.

Babcock: [00:13:07] So we bought--my dad bought this beautiful, old Victorian which
had been built in 1877 and it was always--it was built by a rich merchant in
1877. But it was on a kind of hill in Hyattsville. It had an acre and a half of
land and wonderful--there was a grape orchard and cherry trees and apple
trees and magnolia trees. It was just a beautiful place. It was also always
known as Senator Brookhart’s house because the senator from Iowa had
lived there.

16

[00:14:05] He had two terms, I think in 1900 or so. Since then, it had fallen
into disrepair, to put it mildly. The previous owner had raised pigeons on the
back porch. [laughter] There were rats -- and large rats. It had a attic and a
basement–you know, that’s rat heaven. But we got it in--it never was the
house it might have been, although it is now. Some people have it and they
fixed it all up. To me, it was always a magical place. We loved it because we
each had our own room and we always joked that that’s what kept our family
together...everybody had a room that they could go into and shut the door. I
don’t know. I had my special--there were two staircases.
[00:15:19] There was like a servants’ staircase and it had a beautiful fireplace
in every room. And the front staircase had a big, wonderful window right by
one of the stairs that was my reading place. It’s so funny that now, you know,
I’ve spent many, many years in a house that’s all on one floor. To me, it just
couldn’t be a real house if it’s all on one floor. Now, it’s really nice to have a
house that’s all on one floor. Anyway, that was--and so Hyattsville, Maryland,
in those days, was extremely middle class place. I mean, it--and white, very
white. Now it’s interesting because it’s really a black suburb now. You know,
Washington has changed.
[00:16:25] Did you know that--how much it’s changed? That it has become a
black city really. When I was--the last years I was there, for instance, we
always had mostly black juries and that’s not true anymore. The whites have
moved back in and I think it’s more like a forty percent black city. And the
blacks have moved out to the suburbs to Hyattsville and Chevy Chase and
Silver Spring. Have you ever lived in D.C.?

17

Brest: A year.
Babcock: [00:17:00] A year.
Brest: Yes, when Paul clerked.
Babcock: [00:17:02] Oh, oh. Yes, that’s right. I forget you all have been together
through a lot. Yes.
Brest: Since the beginning of time.
Babcock: [00:17:10] I always remember one of the first things he told me about you is
that he fell in love with you at Swarthmore when you came to math class
with your trench coat on over your pajamas.
Brest: Right. Maybe we can get that part excised from this [laughter].
Babcock: [00:17:35] But this is all, you know, you don’t want all this.
Brest: Yes. No, I do. But wait a minute, so you moved back from the farm and…
had you gone to school?
Babcock: [00:17:49] I went my first year in--in first grade, I went to school in Hope,
Arkansas. And remember that game we used to play called Deprivation?
Brest: No.
Babcock: [00:18:01] Well it was a popular game for a while and which you named
something that you didn’t have that you thought everybody else had. See, and
if they had it, they had to throw in a token. I had a big winner which was I
didn’t have any shoes in the first grade.
Brest: Goodness gracious. You’re the person who walked to school through the
snow and...
Babcock: [00:18:28] Right. But it wasn’t cold. It was in Arkansas and it was warm. I’m
sure I eventually got some shoes. On my first day in school, I didn’t have

18

shoes and though I remember that other kids didn’t either, somehow I felt
very embarrassed about it. But anyway, then I started the second grade in
Hyattsville Elementary School, which was known as The Little School
because--not because it was a little building but because little people went
there. [laughter] I just--I loved it. I loved that--the little school. That’s when
I first began to get attention as a smart person. One of my real ur-texts is that
one day like about a month into the second grade, they called recess but I
was so busy reading that I didn’t even hear them until the teacher put her
hand on my shoulder and said it’s recess time.
[00:19:48] Then she told the whole class, you know, Barbara Babcock was so
enjoying her reading that she didn’t even hear. It was like the proudest
moment of my life, you know, that I was--then every day, I tried to pretend
[laughter] if you can imagine but never with the same effect. I loved the little
school. Looking back on it, it’s so--we pick up Dinah, our grandchild, every
week and we go to her school to get her. I look at these children of all ages
and how free they are and all the things they have to relate to and everything.
[00:20:45] It’s just like a different world. We sat at little desks that
were nailed to the floor and you had to raise your hand and leave to go get a
drink of water, much less to pee or, you know.
Brest: Yes, I don’t remember ever being able to go and get water. [laughter]
Babcock: [00:21:04] [laughter] No, but it was--but I didn’t, you know, none of that--I
didn’t relate to that in a adverse way. It was all wonderful as far as I was
concerned. My best friend, who’s still a very dear friend, lived about a block
from me and we walked to school. She came by my house and we walked to

19

school together. We would, on the way, jump over this small magnolia tree
that is now a huge magnolia tree. [laughter] You can’t imagine little girls
jumping over it. But no, and it was just--it all seemed quite wonderful for
me...school and our house. Then Starr was born in 1948. By then, I was ten
or nine--between nine and ten and 1938, 1948 fits together. [00:22:14] The
story makes sense. Starr was, first of all, he was the cutest baby you ever saw
because he was born with a huge head full of black curls, you know, and big,
black eyes. Right from the beginning, he was just a mess. He just--he had
colic and he weighed eleven pounds. They just--today they would never let a
woman get that big and nobody would get--David and I were both large
babies--nine pounders--but Starr was just huge. And my mother was old. She
was just weak and so she really couldn’t--and then Starr was such a handful
just screaming all the time. He’s bigger than babies. He could cry for--most
babies--he could cry for hours. And with this colic and--and then he went
from that into temper tantrums, which he would have. [laughter] He was just
a mess. I kind of took over. But he’s also very cute and funny. [00:23:39] I
sort of was--Starr always says, you know, I didn’t really have a mother. All I
had was you--meaning me. What am I? Chopped liver. I mean, you had me.
I think that’s part of the reason--and we may reach another question why I
didn’t. I never had a strong urge to have children, which I said in that thing I
sent you I think.
Brest: Note: the “thing” is a chapter of Barbara’s memoir which will presumably be
published by the time anybody hears this.

20

Babcock: [00:24:21] Well, you know, I did kind of raise Starr for about six or seven
years. I was really the one that fed him and bathed him and tried to discipline
him. And that was very hard and read to him and all those things. It’s partly
maybe the experience with Starr. I’ve never really thought about it this way
but I don’t care about little babies. But as soon as they can walk and talk, I
really love them and find them fascinating. On the way there...
Brest: Yes, well, I mean, they’re not very interesting.
Babcock: [00:25:13] I know. [laughter] They are.
Brest: And some are more interesting than other people’s but still...
Babcock: [00:25:20] Yes, one’s own. That’s what they say. That’s what Ann [Richman]
always says that she--other people’s children, she just can’t relate to. But her
own. Anyway, so that was--but I--one of the things in looking back and
writing my recollections that I’m struck by is, how little we knew about the
world outside of our immediate--you know, we got the Washington Post every
day and I started reading it at an early age. But I didn’t--I mean, for instance,
I didn’t even know that there were such things as private schools and that
people went to private schools if they wanted a really good education though.
And people in Hyattsville didn’t go to private schools.
[00:26:15] Maybe they went away but I never knew anybody who did. We
thought that our--we thought our school was great. By the time I got to high
school--I went to this new high school and people in Hyattsville were very
proud of it. It was called Northwestern. It was fifteen hundred people, five
hundred in each class. It was huge.
Brest: So that what--you had junior high that went through ninth grade...

21

Babcock: [00:26:52] Junior high, Yes.
Brest: ...and the high school was tenth, eleventh, twelfth.
Babcock: [00:26:55] Right. And the junior high was seven, eight and nine, Yes. I loved
high school. I was a very big wheel, as they called them in those days, and
loved all the things there were to do.
Brest: So what--big wheel on account of...
Babcock: [00:27:17] Oh I was an officer of the class and I was an--there were three
honor societies for the Thespians, the Quill and Scroll for the writers and
then there was the regular honor society for grades. And I was an officer of
all those and an officer of the class and the editor-in-chief of the--not the
Law Review [laughter] the yearbook. It’s so funny. I went to my fiftieth
reunion and saw--and I said listen, you got to look back on your yearbook
and you’ll see that Patsy--there’s a picture of Patsy and me on every page.
Sometimes we were in the far crowd. But it’s kind of a Where’s Waldo. We
managed to get ourselves all over the yearbook.
[00:28:13] But I knew--my parents had always described going to college as
one of the great experiences of their lives.
Brest: Even though your mother hadn’t finished.
Babcock: [00:28:26] Even though she hadn’t finished. No. And it was a great regret of
her life that she didn’t finish. She went to--and took courses at Maryland and
actually matriculated in, you know--and she took art history courses and was
going to work toward her degree but then she came down with this MS,
which is very slow kind of thing-- it can be. Sometimes it’s fast and kills
people right off. With her it was slow. But she lost her energy. Anyway, the--

22

I really felt like going to college was going to be just like this great thing and
going to change my life. It was funny because I didn’t have any idea where to
go.
[00:29:39] There’s one guidance counselor for fifteen hundred people. You
can’t--and they had books and things but whenever I would hear of a school,
I would apply to it, you know. And I [laughter] and so--and everywhere I
applied--and there was none of this--you know, I--people—parents--helping
you write your applications and your essays and taking you to visit and look
over schools. I’ve always wondered what you could possibly learn from a
visit. Nobody did that. I went to...
Brest: They didn’t have interviews?
Babcock: [00:30:23] No. Well maybe they did. I mean, but I didn’t. The man--but a
man came from town to our school and I had an interview with him.
Everywhere I applied and it was--I applied to Penn, Cornell, Duke, Syracuse,
Y and--but the one thing I was sure is I didn’t want to go to the University of
Maryland and live at home, which is what most people did in our school.
About fifty percent of the people went to college and about seventy-five
percent of those went to the University of Maryland and lived at home,
which was not expensive. But I was determined to leave home because my
father who was--one of the things that’s been interesting about writing these
recollections is that I’ve mellowed a lot about my father.
[00:31:26] He was like a really serious alcoholic and a binger, so that when he
was sober, he would--did you ever meet him by any chance?
Brest: No. Your mother, of course, but not your father.

23

Babcock: [00:31:44] Well he was so charming and witty and just a wonderful man and
people loved him but when he was drunk--when he was drunk, he wasn’t
mean but he was just irresponsible and just like a big blob. My mother--and
now I’m beginning to believe that my mother didn’t handle it right because
she would start from the minute he came home drunk, she would start
screaming and just scream and scream. [00:32:26] It was just--it was kind of
horrendous. It really was. So I was really determined to leave. And college
was going to be--because I was--and it was a way out and Starr--Starr was
coming along. He was always...
Brest: He was seven or eight by now?
Babcock: [00:32:54] He was, yes, and he was--or nine or ten maybe.
Brest: Well if you were ten when he was born, you went to college 8 years
late.Babcock: [00:33:05] Yes, Yes, that’s right. I really wanted to leave and
get out of the house and start my own life where I didn’t have to worry so
much because I really did take on my mother’s sorrow and grief about this.
The worst thing psychologically is that my mother--it was partly that she was
a big Christian so that she believed that Jesus was going to help us and if she
prayed hard enough and was good enough. The other thing was that she
always--every time he sobered up and it often lasted for four or five
months...
Brest: Months??
Babcock: [00:34:10] Months. Months. Several times he was given up. The doctor said
he wouldn’t live the night. At a young age, I saw delirium tremens which are
just a terrible thing to see. I’m sure it’s terrible to have. But I think it would

24

have been better if my mother--if she wasn’t going to leave and she didn’t
feel that she could, see, with three little children and she didn’t have any
career and no resources. When my father was sober, he would make a good
living.
Brest: What was he doing at this time?
Babcock: [00:34:55] Practicing law and he had a little--opened a little office. It was right
down on Baltimore Boulevard, the main drag then. Route 1. He did
everything. He was--he called himself a country lawyer and he would try
cases, incorporate little businesses, got divorces for people… and he had all
kinds of clients. He was and he never--people couldn’t pay, you know, that
was OK. We were always having people come and they were usually inept,
you know, like to put a new roof on for him because--to pay his fee. But he-and he really enjoyed practicing law.
[00:35:57] That’s where--he would tell--he was a true story teller. He would,
you know, his story would start “A lady came into the office today...” and
then there would be this wonderful story of the lawyer saving the situation. I
just thought I’m going to do that. I’m going to have these special powers and
be a lawyer. From an early age, I decided to be a lawyer and I guess, in a way,
make it work.
Brest: Make it work.
Babcock: [00:36:43] See, my father was up and down and they--he had ambitions like
he would have been a wonderful judge but he never--who’s going to let him
be a judge? It was funny, I went to--I was thinking about my dad and they-and I got this scholarship to Penn that was a wonderful scholarship that paid

25

tuition and books and room and board and travel back and forth. I got
scholarships everywhere but not like that. It turned out Penn was a great
place for me. I loved it.
Brest: Going back just a second, you said you thought your mother didn’t handle
things--things meaning family, your father--properly. Was that because of her
religion? I didn’t get the connection there.
Babcock: [00:38:05] I don’t know. I think it was that she--her religion led her not to-her religion led her to be sort of blind to the nature of alcoholism. See, a lot
more is known about it now, but she really thought that it would end if she-every time that he went on a binge, she thought this was the last time and it
was going to be all right. And sometimes it would be all right for six months,
sometimes for a year before there was another binge. But I think that it-when he first started drinking--when he started the binge, if she hadn’t
started screaming and throwing things and had sort of tried to persuade him
to come home and eat, that he could have maybe been kind of a maintenance
drinker rather than say just ending up just--have you ever known an
alcoholic?
Brest: No.
Babcock: [00:39:23] It’s really a disease.
Brest: I mean, not at home.
Babcock: [00:39:26] Yes, Yes. It’s quite a disease. Anyway, I remember--there’s one
other story that I tell and I tell--it’s one of my ur stories from my childhood.
Except for this great shadow, I now see that I had quite a happy childhood.
When I showed--and I loved Hyattsville. When I went to Yale, and I say my

26

Yale snob days, I called it Hiatusville, because there was nothing there. There
was a library a couple of blocks from us and I used to take a wagon to--a
little red wagon--every week and just take back a load of books and get a load
of books. And nobody tried to supervise me or have anything to--or bother
me or say this is too old for you or anything. I read the wildest damn things.
At first, I was going to read everything in the library.
[00:40:53]So I started with the A’s and then [laughter] I realized that couldn’t
be done because things kept coming in and out. I was always behind. There
wasn’t--there really wasn’t much in Hyattsville. But we would go--my mother
would take us into D.C. That was our city. She and I would go shopping at
Woodward & Lothrop, big--remember Woodward and Lothrop? It was one
of the first department stores in the whole country in the 1870s. We would-they would mark down things every week. If it didn’t sell, they would mark it
down for the next week so that, in the end if it lasted, you could really get a
bargain.
[00:41:55] And so my mother--it was really our sport and we would keep
watching things. We would go and try on things and then watch them. I just
got this--even today, I cannot pay retail.
Brest: It’s against your religion.
Babcock: [00:42:13] It was really. [laughter] It just makes me uneasy to pay retail. The
other thing we did was go to--my mother would take us, David and me, and I
guess this was before Starr because I don’t remember his being included. He
was too little anyway to the--and Patsy would often come with us.
Brest : Your friend?

27

Babcock: [00:42:44] My friend--to the National Gallery. We would--and now I just, you
know, I love it. The basic collection at the National Gallery I know because
those are the pictures I grew up with. Often when I go back to Washington, I
go there again. It’s gotten more glamorous than it was when I was there-when we went. But it was pretty glamorous and then we would go to a
lecture there. They would have free lectures and have pecan pie in the
cafeteria. I just thought it was the most wonderful thing. But my brother,
David, hated it. He said we--he spent the whole morning in church and
Sunday school and then instead of going out to play, he goes down to an art
gallery. I think he’s beginning to like it a little bit better, going to art galleries.
[00:43:46] His wife tries to get him to go with her and--but it’s probably too
late for him to like it. Both of my brothers said when they read my first draft
of the chapters that it--you ought to tell some of the good things. There were
good things. First of all, I was--I felt strong and healthy and successful at
school so that--and my dad, as I say, maybe fifty percent of the time, he was
sober. And when he was sober, he was wonderful. Everything you would
want in a father. Anyway, one of my stories that I’ve told many times and I
bet you’ve heard it so you can stop me [laughter] is when I was in the fourth
grade, I was chosen to be on a quiz show.
[00:45:14] It was a quiz show that--it was just a local--it was a radio show. It
pitted two elementary schools against each other, fourth, fifth and sixth. I
was chosen and the teacher, Mrs. Vanderlinden, said that I was chosen
because I had the highest IQ in the class. Of course, everybody was saying,
well how’d you get it, how’d you get it. I said well I’m the smartest person in

28

the class [laughter] which I didn’t know that you don’t say that. It was quite a
lesson in letting people find out that you’re the smartest [laughter and
inaudible]. The other thing was that I was so excited to be chosen that I
didn’t realize that I--and I still don’t have a lot of information, just things that
you know, and being married to Tom, I’ve just always been able to ask him.
[00:46:27] Now I Google. [laughter] I knew so little about things like
geography or anything. I was very smart but I didn’t have any facts, not very
informed. The first question--so right--we’re sitting on the stage and it’s a big
stage for a little kid. In between the two teams is this table that’s filled with
the things that are going to the school that wins--a movie projector and a set
of encyclopedias and wonderful things. The other team is on the other side
and each child comes up to the microphone one at a time and is asked a
question. My first question was, where is the Sahara Desert; and I hadn’t the
faintest notion. I’ve heard of the Sahara Desert.
[00:47:36] The man--the emcee, who was very nice says, it begins with an A. I
said Asia. Then I sit down and behind me is my alternate who had the
second highest IQ. His name was Billy Davis. He leans up and he says, I
knew that. Then I heard the other people being asked questions, none of
which I knew, which they answered on both sides rapidly and easily. Then I
go up for my second one and it was “Who was the great Frenchman scientist
who invented a process for purifying milk?” No, not even--I don’t even
have the faintest notion. The man says well visualize the milk carton. So I
said Homogenay (giving it a French twist).

29

[00:48:43] That got a huge laugh. I sat down and Billy Davis said, I knew
that. Then I go up for the last question and we’re behind and the last
question was “What did the Native Americans...” but I think they said
Indians, “use fish for other than food?” I said, raincoats. [laughter] You are
such a good audience.
Brest: Any special reason you said...
Babcock: [00:49:30] The raincoats? That’s all I could think of. I didn’t know the
answer was fertilizer. Did you know the answers, by the way?
Brest: I did but we had bigger Thanksgiving rituals than you did.
Babcock: [00:49:44] Many years later, Pam Karlan who’s heard this story many times-she wrote me this note and I put this in the book, too--in which she said ‘I’m
in Washington and I argued a case in the Supreme Court today. Often you
would say--most of the time you would say arguing cases in the Supreme
Court is the biggest thing that happened to you today. But the biggest thing
that happened to me was that I went to the new Native American Museum
that’s on the mall and number such and such from Alaska, translated by the
government, says fish raincoat.’ [laughter] And she says, so see you were
right. They did use the [laughter]. Yes.
[00:50:45] I remember walking home and I just--it was like my--remember
I’m ten years old--it was really I felt that my life had ended. My dad, he just
kept laughing--he had a wonderful laugh but loud laugh--and he just kept
saying Homogenay, hahaha, fish raincoats, ha and clapping me on the back
like it was--and I was--that night I was supposed to be a--I was a--they call
them junior bridesmaids (?) a little girl that wears a bridesmaid’s dress but too

30

old to be a flower girl, something in between. I went and had my hair made
in sausage curls and I had a beautiful dress to wear. I was miserable, beyond
miserable. I couldn’t...
Brest: Yes, your life was over.
Babcock: [00:51:47] My life was ruined and I--but I went to school on Monday with a
lot of trepidation. The teacher called me out in the hall and said it would be
okay that we lost. You know, that happens and that we didn’t get the
encyclopedias or the movie projector. You shouldn’t have told people that
you were the smartest person, [laughter] especially the way it turned out. I
said--so I just thought--I said this is it. I would not--I decided I could never
go back to school. I would pretend to leave every morning and then I would
climb up into the magnolia tree and just read all day.
[00:52:37] I could see if my mother left. I could see her leave and I’d go in
the house and get something to eat or something and then come home at the
regular time. I don’t know--I’m sure that my mother found out and went and
told them off, you know, at the school because she was very good about
standing up for me and for us. But I don’t remember that. For me, the story
ends in the tree.
Brest: That’s so heartbreaking.
Babcock: [00:53:16] It really was. [laughter] It was so funny. You know what’s funny
about memory is I do--I just--I remember that. I remember going out there,
see the microphone. Later on, at various times, I’ve been asked to be on
things like when I was in college, we had a team of the College Quiz Bowl
and they asked me to be on it and I said you must be crazy. I would die

31

before I would be on it--that kind of thing again. Anyway, is that enough of
that? I think it’s--you’re such a good listener.
Brest: Well it’s just fascinating. So you went off to college.
Babcock: [00:54:13] I went off to college.
Brest: And leaving Starr at home.
Babcock: [00:54:18] Leaving Starr. I just, one--and David--David was still at home too.
Well he was--yes, he went into the--when I went to college, year after I went
into college, he graduated from high school and went into the army. He
didn’t--he qualified for Officer Training School but he didn’t want to. He
wanted to drive heavy equipment. He’d always wanted to learn. He was a
great mechanic. And he wasn’t much of a reader or anything. So he went--he
was serving in Korea, driving heavy equipment, which--while I was in college
and Starr was at home. That was it. I went to college and I met--my second
best friend for life was Bunny--Bunny was her nickname--Bunny Yaecker but
her given name was Rosemary and now we call her Rosie—now that she’s
approaching eighty.
[00:55:40] She was one of my best first friends outside of college and I loved
her. Her story is a really real story of the fifties. Now remember this is the
fifties, you know, 1956 we started. They had a college for women at Penn. It
was just like Wharton or...
Brest: I didn’t realize that.
Babcock: [00:56:10] Yes, at that time. They don’t anymore.
Brest: I was at Penn in 1965, I guess.
Babcock: [00:56:22] Oh really?

32

Brest: Yes, but I don’t...
Babcock: [00:56:25] Did you actually spend a year there or...
Brest: I did.
Babcock: [00:56:29 ] Before you went to Swarthmore or...
Brest: No, no, after.
Babcock: [00:56:32] After. Why?
Brest: Because Paul was still at Swarthmore.
Babcock: [00:56:37] And you had graduated so you did a year of graduate school?
Brest: Yes, but there wasn’t a women’s college. I don’t remember that there was
any--must have been undergraduate.
Babcock: [00:56:50] Yes, it was definitely undergraduate. No, no, the graduate schools
were integrated but the undergraduate had a college for women and it was--I
remember the dean, to this day, though I didn’t think to myself this is
insulting and I hate this, but she really did give this speech. Though looking
back on it--her name was R. Jean Brownlee and she was the dean of the
college for women. She was clearly a lesbian and not married but she said,
you know, we are going to give you the kind of education you need to be
great wives and mothers [laughter] and to raise educated children. I still
remember it to this day but I--so I must have been more insulted by it than I
recall but I--and no mention, you know, of careers.
[00:58:02] Your choice--you could take a--there were also all the activities-many of the activities were segregated, especially prestigious ones like the
Daily Pennsylvanian, you know, the newspaper was all male. The women had a
weekly newspaper, which wasn’t as widely read or, you know, as you can

33

imagine, or distributed. There were Honor Societies and, of course, sororities
and fraternities, which were very important. There were some things that
were less prestigious that were not sex segregated like the Debate Club,
which is what I joined. But I was very active in--I just had the same thing-like that I have to do everything that I had in high school.
[00:59:20] I went out for Debate because we didn’t have a debate team at
Northwestern and I’d always wanted to try debating. And I loved it. I just
loved it right from the beginning. Then I met my first Jewish intellectual. In
Hyattsville, there were no Jews and very few intellectuals [laughter] that I
had ever met. It was my debate partner and I fell in love with him, just madly
in love. I had Bunny and Eddie Cohen and then I had lots of other friends. I
sort of led this double life and I was still quite religious, though it just slipped
away from me.
Brest: So there was no moment when...
Babcock: [01:00:16] No, no moment. There was no moment but it was--my life was so
complicated and going to church on Sunday–and I couldn’t find a good
church--it takes a lot longer than you think to get dressed to go to church. It
takes up the whole--a good portion of the whole day. I just--and then Eddie-he couldn’t believe that I really believed in any of these things. It wasn’t that
he tried to convert me or change me. It’s just that he was--his simply being
astonished had an impact on me. I was reading back on--Patsy and I had this
thing in which we would try to write to each other every day and then we
would save each other’s letters and then exchange them at the end of the
year, see.

34

[01:01:20] I lost the ones from my freshman year but I have our sophomore
year. I was reading it and I just--the other day, because I’m going back now
and finish the thing. But I’m going back to memoirs and filling in stories and
things. And I just--the pace at which I lived just stuns me because I was, you
know, debating, you go off to other schools for a whole--did you ever try it?
Brest: No.
Babcock: [01:01:55] It’s very demanding and--debate both sides of the question, you
know, five or six times on a weekend. And Eddie and I were a really good
team because I had charm and he had prowess. [laughter] So we won. We
won a lot. We won great big, huge trophies. I love trophies. I had never
gotten a trophy before.
Brest: I saw you looking at that and said you didn’t have prizes (inaudible) it was
considerable understatement.
Babcock: [01:02:40] Prizes--when I say what?
Brest: You said you hadn’t got the Nobel Prize (talking at same time).
Babcock: [01:02:43] No, no, no, no. No, I’ve won a few prizes, Yes, Yes. No, debate
trophies certainly. I did. On the whole, though I led a, you know, sort of
intense life. When I was a sophomore, I went to hear the Admissions
Director at Yale Law School speak today and wrote to Patsy that’s where I
have to go. That’s the best law school to go to for me, but the trouble is--I
said they do something called sociological jurisprudence there, but I think it’s
just logical. [laughter] But I really want to go there but they take just one out
of five applicants. [01:03:43] So I was--say--this is the birth of the dream so
we’ll see what happens. And you know that I applied only to Yale. I just can’t

35

even imagine that. Then I said--I tried to get an interview and they said they
didn’t do interviews, which is--makes a lot of sense. Where I got the idea that
this very sensible rule shouldn’t apply to me, I don’t know because I--but one
time when I was debating in New York, I went to New Haven and dropped
in at the admissions office and, of course, I got to see the dean of admissions
and got in. I’m sure that that had a lot to do with it.
[01:04:48] I still, looking back on it, can’t--there are other stories that I have
that show me as being very assertive, let’s say. I don’t feel like I’m that way
but I must be.
Brest: Or have been.
Babcock: [01:05:07] Or have been [laughter] right. Anyway, I have--I had a good time
at Penn. Lots of traumas, you know, that everybody has-- I did well. I made
Phi Beta Kappa. Another prize. I was selected to be the valedictorian at the
College for Women.
Brest: Was it separate graduation?
Babcock: [01:05:52] They had a separate sort of honors ceremony, graduation. You
could also be in the big ceremony. It was true, you could take classes in the
College for Women, but all they were was having classes with other women.
It wasn’t like the--they didn’t have anything like Women’s Studies or the
History of Women in the United States.
Brest: And could you take classes in (talking at same time).
Babcock: [01:06:19] And the College for Men, in Wharton, anywhere you wanted to-and even in the graduate school. I took a course in Judaism and the teacher,
who’s an excellent teacher, just--and I wrote this paper on a Pirkei Avoth or

36

something like that, part of the Torah. The teacher gave me an A+ and he
said I can’t believe you know so much Old Testament history, all of which I
learned at the Hyattsville Presbyterian Church. I took a course also--Eddie
was majoring in classics, so I took some graduate courses in classics. The
wildest thing was--and Greek History-- was that Eddie had come to Penn
with two years of college credits because they had this advanced placement.
Do people still do that? I don’t know.
Brest: Oh yes.
Babcock: [01:07:33] And he had gone to Central High in Philadelphia, which was one
of the oldest and best public high schools. It was all boys at that time. He
said to me that his life plan was to--that he was going to get his PhD in
classics because that’s what he loved. He just loved it. Then he was going to
go to law school and be a lawyer and make millions before he was thirty. I’d
never heard anybody talk this way before. And that’s, God knows, what he
did. Now he’s a multi-millionaire. He owns a little island off the coast of
Maine--one of the places that he owns.
[01:08:34] When I was up there seeing Barbara [Fried] and Joe [Bankman] a
couple summers ago--somehow I told them some kind of stories about
Eddie and so they just said, let’s go. Let’s call him, go to the island. And we
went there and it really was--it’s just so cool to think of him as being this-because part of it was he was really--he had a terrible Philadelphia accent, you
know that accent of course going to Swarthmore. There were lots of
Philadelphia people.
Brest: No, not so many at the time.

37

Babcock: [01:09:12] Well it’s an awful accent I think. It’s the same as Baltimore and
New Jersey maybe. Those were--just an ugly accent. You don’t have that
prejudice against the accent. He also didn’t--I can’t tell. I mean, his parents
were not educated. I went once to--he always told me his father was an
unemployed paper hanger. [laughter] When I went once to his house to
dinner, I can remember the small rooms and they had this awful wallpaper
on--all different wallpapers on different walls with small rooms with huge,
huge flowers in the wallpaper and I just thought, well maybe it’s true. When I
took him to Hyattsville--one time we were debating in D.C. and my mother,
who--I had told her that I was really--I’m not sure I said I was in love with
him but I was involved with him. My mother was just kind of horrified.
[01:10:33] He’s not good-looking at all. He had thick glasses and he didn’t
dress well and he wasn’t athletic, sohe was sort of weak looking. [laughter]
He wasn’t fat. That’s good. [laughter]
Brest: Right. And he had the usual number of eyes and ears.
Babcock: [01:11:09] Bunny couldn’t live with me in the dorm because she was a
Philadelphia commuter. So they weren’t allowed to live in the dorms. They
didn’t have room for them. She joined this sorority, Kappa Alpha Theta,
which was one of the big deal sororities, maybe the best at that time, you
know the meaning of that. I didn’t really approve of sororities but I really
wanted to live with Bunny and I never would have gotten into Theta because
they--you really had to be pretty as well as athletic. But they wanted Bunny
bad enough to [laughter] take me. So we roomed together at Theta.
[01:12:05] I would come back from debating with Eddie and carrying these

38

big trophies. My sisters would look at him with such scorn because he didn’t
look good and had this bad accent. They went with lacrosse players and
football players and fraternity boys.
Brest: Oh goodness gracious. You should have gone to Swarthmore.
Babcock: [01:12:42] I should have. I had never heard of Swarthmore. Even though I
was the smartest person in the fourth grade, I’m not sure I could’ve gotten
into Swarthmore. You had to have--people used to talk about Swarthmore at
Penn in sort of hushed tones and would say, you know, on Saturday nights,
the library is full. It’s just like a cocktail party. [laughter] That was one of the
things about Swarthmore.
Brest: Somebody in my class after a couple of years, wrote a piece that was in the
alumni magazine, the crux of which was they really should have told us what
it’s like in the real world. We never knew that we could be anything that we
wanted to.
Babcock: [01:13:43] That’s good--Yes. That’s a wonderful thing in this whole--did you
love it? Did you love it?
Brest: Oh ySes. So...?
Babcock: [01:13:55] So I went to...
Brest: So you brought him home.
Babcock: [01:14:01] Oh I brought him home. I brought him home and--but I didn’t
mean to introduce him as my boyfriend, just as my close friend. He wasn’t, in
the official sense, my boyfriend but I--but I was just thinking today when I
was going through some things, about how my heart used to pound when I
would see his handwriting on a letter. I still--and I mean that’s love. That’s

39

what it’s like. Anyway, my mother was horrified but she wouldn’t be so awful
as to--crass as to say it was because of his clothes or his accent. It was his
table manners.
[01:14:49] He just had these awful table manners because nobody had--and
he would sort of gesture with a heavily laden fork and talk loud and with his
mouth full and interrupt. My mother said how can you be with somebody
that has manners like that? I said well I just--what he’s saying is so brilliant
and wonderful that I just feel like it’s churlish, you know, to complain that he
has bad table manners so I’d just try not to look. Then I thought, this is silly.
So one time I said Eddie, you really should do something about your
manners and these basic sort of things.
[01:15:43] Don’t gesture with your fork and don’t talk with your mouth full.
He said, oh thank you. That’s the kind of thing I need to know. Why didn’t
you tell me that before? I was just really struck by that. And there was the
same thing--our sorority sisters--see Bunny was the oldest of five and in a
family that was sort of poor. She had the habit of eating very fast and
grabbing food. Our sisters complained about it and how she was always
finished before everybody else and left the table. I told her and she had the
same reaction. She said oh, it just never occurred to me, you know. [01:16:42]
It’s just in our family, you had to eat fast or you wouldn’t get any. Then she
developed--she’s got these exquisite manners in which she [laughter] still to
this day. Bunny was going to come with me to Yale--we majored in American
Studies together, which was a very hot new major. Only Yale had it then.
They had had the first American Studies.

40

Brest: Wait a minute. I thought you were at Penn.
Babcock: [01:17:18] I was at Penn, majored in American Studies but Yale was the only
one that had it other than Penn. Penn had just started it--had just started the
program. Bunny and I enrolled in it. I loved it and mainly because you didn’t
have to take a foreign language, which I [laugher] was so bad at. It was
interesting. I thought it would be interesting for law school. I liked history
and it was mostly history at that point. Bunny was going to come to Yale and
get her PhD. We continued to live together. I really looked forward to that
because she was--she was just so much fun and so good to be with. She was
also just really beautiful.
[01:18:29] She was Miss University of Pennsylvania at the same time that she
was Phi Beta Kappa and I don’t think anybody has ever done both of those
at once. They probably don’t have a Miss University of Pennsylvania
anymore. In our senior year, she met this man, Bob Tancredi, who was in
medical school. She was so extremely popular and just pursued--the
telephone never stopped ringing. She had this thing that everybody was
worth one night. Everybody had a story. She would hardly ever say no. She
was really looking for a husband

[01:19:25] When I sent her a

chapter of my Recollections, she said well I didn’t mind that we were second
class citizens at Penn and that we--and that there were like four men for
every one woman at the time because that just gave me more possible people
to look for and I wanted--I didn’t care about having a career. I didn’t--all I
wanted was to find a suitable husband and have a lot of children and raise
them better than our parents had raised us. That was my ambition. I don’t

41

think that’s really true because she came to Yale. But Bob her future
husband--didn’t see the point why she should come to Yale, why she should
get a PhD.
[01:20:31] He wanted her there in Philadelphia while he went to medical
school. At Thanksgiving, when I came back to the room before the holiday, I
could tell that she was gone. On the table there was the signet ring that you
wore on your little finger from Penn. She had gotten one and I hadn’t
because I thought they were too expensive. She left me hers and says wear
this for me at Yale and I did. Then she went on to have five children. Bob
was a cardiologist at the Mayo Clinic. She had three boys and two girls and
each of them--Bob was extremely handsome and he was probably a gifted
doctor and musician also, the son of Italian immigrants who--then the first in
his family to go to college from Hershey, Pennsylvania.
[01:21:44] He was dark and she was fair and their children were these most
wonderful combinations of their very different appearances. We stayed
friends except that she sort of turned into a Republican for a while--but she
got over it. She liked Richard Nixon. That was really hard for me to take. At
one point, when her children--her boys were all in college and her girls were
in high school and she decided to leave Bob, said she couldn’t stand him
anymore. This is such a fifties story, you know, and that she wanted--she had
gone back to school and gotten a counseling degree and she was working as a
counselor.
[01:23:04] He didn’t give her any help at all with all those children. But at
least they were living in a place, Rochester, Minnesota, where the kids could

42

ride their bikes and they didn’t have to take care of them all the time, once
you got them past a certain age. She wanted to go to medical school because
she’d always wanted to be a doctor. He just said no, you can’t do that. I’m
not going to help you and I don’t want you to do it. She just decided that she
was going to leave him; and she did and went to Harvard Business School.
Brest: Not to become a doctor.
Babcock: [01:23:54] Not to become a doctor. She had to give up that dream because
it’s too long.
Brest: Because this was after the kids were basically grown.
Babcock: [01:24:04] Grown. Yes, Yes. Then she--at one point, she came out here and I
was with Tom. I’m not sure we were married but I think we were and she
and Starr got together. Starr had always loved Bunny. And one summer--as
all men do, let me just tell you--even today, when she’s an old lady, you can
just see the men practically fall at her feet. But she had like a magic charm.
She’s so warm and interested in other people. Starr really was--one summer
when we were in college, she came and stayed with us over the summer and
she had a job in Washington at the Smithsonian. We would drive in and out
to work together. The boys, Starr and the little boys, would come and...
Brest: Little boys?
Babcock: [01:25:25] The boys in the neighborhood. They would come and hide in the
bamboo and wait sometimes for an hour for her to come out and hang her
underwear on the back line so they could just watch her. My dad always
laughed because there was--he saw one time--he was sitting on the front
porch and she was out in the yard and he saw a boy down the street walk

43

right into a telephone pole staring at her. She got into Stanford. She applied
to Stanford Business School. She decided that Starr--I don’t know what their-I don’t know what either one of them would say today about it. There were
different stories that she didn’t want to come to the West.
[01:26:28] It was too far away from her parents. She didn’t really have a good
relationship with her parents. I don’t know. I don’t know what it was with
Starr but it really broke his heart for a while. He just wanted her so much. It’s
sort of--she was considerably older than he--ten years older. I think it would
have been--I think both of them would have had a better life if they had
gotten married. I don’t know. That’s one of the things you never know.
Brest: She went to Harvard instead and then what?
Babcock: [01:27:27] Went to Harvard and then she went to work for--I think AT&T
maybe or something, some big company and she did--I forget what they call
it--but like she did public relations for them. She had a good job and made
good money and then she married a man who was her second husband, who
was a really nice man but he wasn’t like a high status man like Bob, like a
doctor at the Mayo Clinic. I don’t think that bothered her. He was a great
tennis player. That’s the other thing about her. She was a great tennis player,
a champion. And then Dean, his name was and he--I think she was happy
with him, though they had problems.
[01:28:50] One of her sons married one of his daughters. He had two
daughters by a prior marriage and they had a terrible time and Bunny didn’t
want them to get married. Knowing her son, she didn’t think they were
suited. He didn’t want them to get married either because he knew his

44

daughter but they got married and had a miserable time and I think Bunny-but this is too far off the track.
Brest: Yes, but it’s too interesting. You went to Yale and Bunny came to (talking at
same time)
Babcock: [01:29:40] And Bunny came at the beginning and then she left. And I, from
the minute I got there, loved it. Loved law school.
Brest: You knew you wanted to be a lawyer because of your father and you knew
you wanted to come to Yale because you heard that talk, which made you
know that it was the right law school for you because of what?
Babcock: [01:30:06] Well it was partly the talk was that it was small and I liked the idea
of that. Remember I had never really gone to a small--been in a small setting.
It was just something that I thought was very ritzy about Yale. Penn, in those
days--we really thought of ourselves as, you know, we were part of the Ivy
League but we weren’t really. The only people worse than us were at Brown I
think, which is also an Ivy League school at the time that people didn’t--the
true Ivy League was Harvard and Yale. This description of the small setting
and it sounded idealistic to me--Yale, as was described by this--that we were
going to try to improve and change society by studying law. So it just seemed
right.
Brest: Did you, at that time, have any or recognize any specific interest in, I don’t
know, criminal justice or women’s...
Babcock: [01:31:35] Yes. No, not women. I still was totally unconscious, though some
of the things I did like go and push my way into having an interview sounds
like I may have thought that I would need something extra, being a woman. I

45

knew there weren’t many women. No, I had decided--part of the thing that I
had always said, along with being a lawyer, was that I wanted to be a criminal
lawyer. And I had that in mind. And I’m not sure exactly where it came from.
I think it was partly being religious that you had to help the downtrodden
and outcasts of society. I don’t know.
[01:32:39] I didn’t really like Perry Mason but it wasn’t--I didn’t think that
was very realistic but it was the big TV show. I had in mind that I was going
to be a criminal defense lawyer and that was extremely unusual, more unusual
than being a woman, to want to do that at Yale anyway. I imagine that at
most big league law schools. What’s funny about the way that I spent my life
is that I had never even heard of Stanford or thought about it as a place to
come.
Brest: We never heard of it until...
Babcock: [01:33:24] Until you came here to teach.
Brest: Until the dean came recruiting.
Babcock: [01:33:30] It’s funny, given the how things have changed.
Brest: (?). Right.
Babcock: [01:33:40] Yale was the only school I applied to and I went and for years and
years, I told the students--I made this talk to the opening class...
Brest: At Stanford?
Babcock: [01:33:55] At Stanford and to the--about my arriving at Yale. Then Kathleen
[Sullivan] canceled my talk because she wanted to give the talk, I think, but
also she told me other people didn’t approve of the talk. The talk was--and
the talk was about my father taking me to Yale, a small law school like the

46

one they’re coming to and he, whose office was up a flight of linoleum
covered stairs on a busy boulevard. He had a sign on his desk with a quote
that was said to be from Abraham Lincoln that says, “A lawyer’s time and
advice are his stock in trade.” Not really a classy sign. A. Lincoln and then-and he had gone to law school at night for two years and then you could take
the bar in those days and set up his practice.
[01:35:13] So when he looks around at Yale, which looks like a cathedral and
is so incredibly impressive and he just looked around and he says, Barbara,
you never have to do another thing and you’ll be a success. I was saying that
to them. I was saying my dad didn’t mean to stop working and stop striving,
but he did mean that a certain mark had been passed and you should feel the
same way, et cetera. [sentences deleted]
The students, they always remember that story. I loved law school and I did-I didn’t like everything that I took but I liked most things. I met a lot of
people that I was really fond of and that’s when Eleanor Norton, who was
Eleanor Holmes then and John Ely’s girlfriend, Judy Stein and I--she was
getting her PhD in history, American History, and the three of us had an
apartment together. We had a great time.
[01:37:29] It was like--I had never really lived that way, not in the sorority
house, not in a dorm. We had--Eleanor--we had--one of us would cook and
buy the cook for a week and one of us would clean the place and one of us
would wash dishes. So that’s how we divided it. But Eleanor’s week to cook
and buy, we would have chicken every night. When we complained, she said
there are three basic foods. These are chicken, rice and mushrooms and you

47

should have them every day. And then she also claimed that huge, vast
differences in taste you achieve with different spices.
[01:38:35] We would have fun and we would have our professors to dinner
and our classmates and gossip and talk. Eleanor--a lot of civil rights leaders
came through our--Bob Moses--and Eleanor was involved with SNCC in
New Haven, which was quite active.
Brest: What year are we at now?
Babcock: [01:39:05] We’re now in 1960 to 1963, so still early. I’m trying to think. John
Ely was my good friend. He was--and Eli Evans. Those were two men that
were my really close friends.
Brest: Identify them.
Babcock: [01:39:40] John Ely was our dean here.
Brest: (?) later on.
Babcock: [01:39:43] Later--much later. He was a really well known...
Brest: Constitutional...
Babcock: [01:39:53] Constitutional law scholar. Eli Evans went into philanthropy and
was the president of the Revson Foundation and of--that’s what he was
president of. He worked at Carnegie for a while too before that.
Brest: Carnegie?
Babcock: [01:40:17] Carnegie Foundation--the Carnegie whatever.
Brest: Oh, Carnegie Corporation of New York probably. And Eleanor?
Babcock: [01:40:24] Eleanor was one of the--she worked for the ACLU and then she
was Human Rights Commissioner as a very young woman in New York and
then head of the EEOC and now, for many years, she has been the

48

congresswoman for D.C. She is sort of the congresswoman for life. Now
nobody even runs against her. I never would have imagined her, because
she’s kind of a rabble rouser, being good for elective office. She really has
been and the people in D.C. love her.
[01:41:17] I love to go out with her, go around in D.C. because you can just
hear these “that’s her, that’s her,” you hear these whispers all around. I have
a lot of stories about law school but I don’t think they’re consequential at this
stage.
Brest: What was Bob Moses there?
Babcock: [01:41:43] The what?
Brest: Why did Bob Moses...
Babcock: [01:41:45] Eleanor--they were people that were coming through to either do
things in New York or have rallies in New Haven or somewhere. And we fed
them in our apartment. And Eleanor cooked and Judy and I slaved. We
would sometimes have so many dishes we had--we couldn’t do them in the
sink. We had to do them in the bathtub. And Eleanor would go to sleep-take a nap after dinner. She always--if we complained, she said well just leave
them. I’ll do them when I get up. But she wouldn’t. But it was and we were-it was exciting because these civil rights people were full of--they were full of
excitement and that things were going to change and it really was neat. It was
neat to be part of it.
Brest: Was there anything in that that affected you going forward?
Babcock: [01:42:50] No, I was still really set on doing criminal defense. There wasn’t
anything that--I wasn’t--I sort of considered myself part of the movement, I

49

mean, or a supporter. I would join large marches and things, but I never
aspired to be a leader or to be really a part of it. And I didn’t really get it very
much, the philosophy part of it. People would get in these big arguments and
there were lots of words that I heard that I had never known, like boogie
and...
Brest: What’s boogie
Babcock: [01:43:43] Boojee is for--what’s that word?
Brest: Oh—bourgeois?
Babcock: [01:43:48] Bourgeois. Yes, and you don’t want to be that or Trot. You sound
like a Trot--for a follower of Trotsky. I didn’t know what that meant. These
insults were hurled that I didn’t get. And I didn’t understand what people got
mad about but they were always--seemed to me--be getting mad. [laughter] I
was glad to do the dishes and to have it happening in the background. And I
was proud of El because it was--she could have sunk into the richness of our
situation--of being at Yale Law School but she wasn’t. She was out there on
the--leading.
[01:44:48] I mean, she was--I had a good time at the law school and I was
very good at it. I always knew I would be but, you know, you can’t be sure. I
thought I’d be good on the quiz show too. [laughter] Looking back on it,
one of the funny things is the teaching was nothing special. I mean, I really
didn’t have many great teachers. Even the people that I admired the most,
like Lou Pollak, who was just a wonderful man--was a terrible teacher. Oh
terrible and all from a lack of preparation. He would come--he would stand
in front of the class and he would flip the pages of the book back and forth

50

and he would say something like, so what do you think of this case?
[01:45:56] [laughter] I had--one day--I tell the story in my first year, I had
Grant Gilmore who I admired extravagantly with something that bordered
on lust, even though he was one of the ugliest men you ever saw. He kind of
looked like a frog. He was so brilliant and his questions were so fascinating. I
was--this was first year and I was just kind of crazed preparing. I mean, I
would always prepare, read the notes and the cases cited in the notes and the
articles cited in the cases. I just knew everything, but I would never
volunteer. I always longed to be called on. None of the women volunteered.
There were thirteen women in my class.
Brest: Out of?
Babcock: [01:46:58] A hundred and seventy. That was more than it had ever been in
any class at Yale, of women. They had--every other class was five or six. It
was a cause of great consternation that would seem even comic today. People
would just actually say to us, you realize you’re taking a man’s place. It would
be one thing if you wanted to go to a night law school or something, but
you’re taking a place at Harvard, I mean, Stan--[laughter] Yale, where the
future leaders of the world need to be trained. And, of course, women
wouldn’t be among those. It really was--it was kind of unfriendly in that way,
although when I was just back recently for my fiftieth anniversary, some of
the men came up and apologized to me for how they treated the women in
those days--when they look back on it.
[01:48:08] Of course, they had forgotten but the women reminded them.
They did. There was a real feeling of resentment that we were where we

51

shouldn’t be and so we didn’t want to excite anybody by appearing unduly
brilliant and raising our hands or volunteering. We never did. Nobody--it
wasn’t just me. Nobody did. But one day I was called on by Grant Gilmore
and it was one of the days where I had done this exquisite, over-the-top,
preparation and it was the true Socratic Method. It’s the only time I’ve ever
been a part of it. [laughter] It was just like he drew out this information with
his questions. I could hardly believe it was me that was saying these things. I
had it there in my head but I didn’t know where it fit.
[01:49:15] I spoke for the whole class. He called on me for the whole class.
And then my friends gathered around me afterwards and said, you know,
you’re a rock star. You’re going to be great. I ran down to the pay phone in
the basement, in the olden days, and called my father and I said dad, I talked
for the whole day, a whole hour in Grant Gilmore’s class. And he said, that’s
nice honey. I said but dad, you don’t understand. This means I’ve made it.
I’m going to be great. He said, that’s good honey. Then I just realized that
nobody outside of this little insular world would ever really appreciate or
know what it meant.
[01:50:07] With all the honors, et cetera, that I won, I don’t--I still value that
day. [laughter] I still remember it. It was good. Law school was good and I-there weren’t very many courses for somebody who wanted to do what I did,
but I took them.
Brest: That is there was no real preparation for practicing criminal law?
Babcock: [01:50:37] Certainly not. There were no clinics or any way to do outside
things. And, in fact, you were really discouraged from trying to work outside

52

of school. If you wanted to--if you needed money, you could take out some
more loans or something. I had gotten a Woodrow Wilson Fellowship to
teach, which is a wonderful fellowship. They only gave it to a couple people
for law school and they stopped doing it because they realized that it was for
future teachers. It’s just for the first year. Then I had other scholarships. I
had a scholarship at Yale partly and then I had loans, but nothing like the
loans today. But it seemed like a lot to me at the time since I had never really
borrowed money before.
[01:51:50] Anyway, it was--it wasn’t a big problem with money. I didn’t feel it
was a big problem. Then one summer I worked for Arnold, Fortas & Porter
as it was then and met my first woman lawyer, the first woman lawyer I’d
ever met and that was Carolyn Agger was her name. She was Abe Fortas’s
wife. Did you ever hear of her or meet her?
Brest: No.
Babcock: [01:52:28] She had gone to Yale and graduated the year that I was born, from
Yale. Fortas was teaching at Yale when she was a student. Or maybe she was
his wife and then she became a student.
Brest: Wait a minute. I didn’t know there were--the year you were born?
Babcock: [01:52:54] Nineteen thirty-eight.
Brest: They had Yale women in law school?
Babcock: [01:52:58] They did. See, Harvard--you know, Harvard was far, far behind.
Oh no, Yale had its first woman I think about 1894. Yes. Almost--by the
turn of the century , that is, the twentieth century, most law schools had
taken women but they never had a lot and no women law professors. She

53

was--she smoked cigars and wore big hats and she was supposed to be razor
sharp. Paul, Weiss hired her. She was the first woman that they ever hired.
Then when Fortas went with Thurman Arnold and Paul Porter and set up
this law firm in Washington, she took the whole tax department of Paul,
Weiss over to Arnold, Fortas & Porter. She was very impressive.
[01:54:16] I didn’t--she was my first woman lawyer but I didn’t really connect
with her. I mean, she really thought that being--my aspirations to be a
criminal defense lawyer were just beneath contempt. I think she may have
suspected--you know, Fortas was a real--you know, womanizer is a funny
way to put it--but he was always hitting on young women or any women.
[laughter] They didn’t have to be that young. Laura Kalman wrote a
biography of Fortas that’s very good and very interesting for those times, the
1950s, 1960s, 1970s in Washington. He came to such a sad end, Fortas, and it
was--a lot of people blamed her because she wanted money and what he
actually went down on was being paid to give these speeches and all. [break].
Brest: OK, back.
Babcock: [01:55:39] So that was--and so I met my first woman lawyer and I didn’t feel
so good about it. I had...
Brest: You were saying that people blamed his wife.
Babcock: [01:55:54] Blamed her because she wanted money and they...
Brest: Surely as the head of the tax department (talking at same time).
Babcock: [01:56:00] Yes, no, she did. She made a lot of money but she wanted more.
They ran a big Georgetown establishment. I don’t know. They didn’t have
any children, so they didn’t have those expenses. But that was Washington

54

gossip, that she was driving--that she drove him to make money as well as be
on the Supreme Court and that she didn’t really want him to be on the
Supreme Court. One of nine, yes. So she got that wish. That summer, Fortas
was appointed by the Supreme Court to represent Clarence Earl Gideon.
Gideon had written this pro se petition to the court from--that he didn’t have
a lawyer, and they appointed Fortas to represent him.
[01:57:12] John Ely and I were both working there and, of course, I was the
one that wanted to be a criminal defense lawyer but John was the one that
was chosen to work with Fortas on the brief for Gideon. I resented that.
Brest: I should think so.
Babcock: [01:57:36] But I worked on a [laughter] case where a TV--where people,
businessmen, had been denied a renewal of a TV license. Big case. Worth a
lot of money. That was Paul Porter’s case. I remember it was just like this
huge record. I had never seen an administrative record like that. And I wrote
this brief and Paul Porter said--took me out to lunch at a very fancy
restaurant and said that’s a great brief. It reads like a detective story. Then I
had this odd feeling years later Paul Porter died choking on a piece of crab at
that very restaurant, choked to death on a piece of crab at the restaurant
where we had had lunch. [laughter]
[01:58:40] It’s one of those things in life you don’t know quite what to make
of it. John wrote this brief in Gideon...
Brest: That is, the case Gideon versus Wainwright?
Babcock: [01:58:58] Yes, which established the right to counsel and said the
government had to appoint counsel if they wanted to put the person in jail.

55

In that case--and I was there at the creation because John and I used to talk
about it. John wrote the brief and then he was very disappointed not to get
more credit for it. In my TV case, they filed the brief I wrote but in John’s
case, Fortas spent two or three days in the library rewriting the whole thing.
John, of course, didn’t think it was nearly as good as what he had written.
But they gave John a footnote. He wasn’t--hadn’t even graduated from law
school and got a footnote for his work on the case. He was always very
proud of that.
[02:00:00] Then Gideon came down--the year I graduated from law school
and here I am wanting to do this thing and here the Supreme Court has said
it has to be done. I was very excited.
Brest: You had always wanted to be a criminal defense lawyer but had you, even at
that time, a notion of providing...
Babcock: [02:00:22] How to go about it?
Brest: No. Well yes, I’d like to know that but also about the provision of free
defense.
Babcock: [02:00:30] No, I hadn’t thought that far. I mean, I just imagined summing up
to a jury in a murder case. But then in my third year, and that’s when we
started to think about it, you know, what our first job was going to be, not
from the minute we arrived, which is the way it is now. I wanted to go back
to D.C. and I--in fact, I wouldn’t have imagined doing anything else, going
anywhere else. I never really lived anywhere else except Philadelphia and
New Haven.
Brest: And Hope.

56

Babcock: [02:01:09] And Hope but that was a long time ago. So I just--and I wanted to
clerk. Most judges, at that time, did not take women law clerks...most federal
judges. They had never done it. But I applied--the D.C. Circuit was extremely
liberal at that time and, you know, it was Bazelon and Skelly Wright and Carl
McGowan and Robinson and even--even the second tier people that were
more toward the center were extremely liberal. Of course, what I really
wanted was Bazelon, because he had already decided the Durham case,
which changed the insanity defense to make it more available. And Alan
Dershowitz, who had been the Editor-in-Chief of the Law Review when I
wrote my contributions for the Law Review and was my friend, and he called
me up and said none of these judges will hire you.
[02:02:35] I said Alan, I’ve got interviews with everybody. He said they’ll
interview you but they won’t be able to hire a young, attractive unmarried
woman. They’re just not there yet. He said, but there’s a great, old judge here
who’s a senior judge who still hears cases and he--so I’ve signed you up for
an interview with him. And I said, OK thanks. It was Judge Henry Edgerton.
I went and read his opinions and he was a wonderful judge. He was the first-he may have been the first to have a black law clerk and he was one of the
first to have a woman. And he had had a couple of women before me even.
[02:03:35] He had been a judge for like 26 years at that point...27 years. He
was the first appointment I had, because the rest of my day was filled up with
these people. And I was really--when I was young, I was really this way. I just
had this immense confidence in my charm. I just felt like if people met me,
they would be convinced, and do what I wanted them to do. I kept getting

57

evidence to the contrary [laughter] and it didn’t make any impact on me. So I
really thought I could talk Bazelon into it, and I knew Alan would support
me. But my first interview was with Edgerton...
Brest: What was Alan doing at that time?
Babcock: [02:04:34] Clerking for Bazelon. Then he went on to clerk for the guy that
was only in the court for a couple of years.
Brest: Goldberg.
Babcock: [02:05:08] I had this wonderful call from Judge Edgerton. Did you ever see
him or see a picture of him?
Brest: No.
Babcock: [02:05:13] He was out of central casting for a great judge. He had this big
shock of white hair and these big bushy, white eyebrows and his craggy, New
England face. I’d read a lot of his opinions and he was just a great judge from
my viewpoint. He had been a law professor and had been fired from his first
job, which was at Cornell... for pacifism in World War I. Then he had gone
to work for a great law firm--at Ropes, Gray in Boston. Then he wrote--then
he was back being a law professor, I forget where, and he wrote an article
about how the Supreme Court, in its cases, always decided for business
against poor people, just traditionally.
[02:06:19] It wasn’t about the court packing plan, but it really did sort of
provide an intellectual justification for Roosevelt’s court packing plan, plus-and it just knocked me out. Plus it was--to write about opinions not as
doctrine but for their effect and as politics, that was very unusual thing to do.
And that an obscure pacifist law professor could become a big deal federal

58

judge was very impressive. We just had a great talk and we talked for about
an hour. At the end, he said well, Barbara Babcock, if you would like to be
my law clerk, I would like to have you for my law clerk. My mind just raced,
you know, maybe I could just say I would just like to meet the others, or-and then I just thought you’re crazy:
[02:07:33] Here’s this great man who is offering you a job. Take it. Take it. So
I did. It was a great thing to do it, see, right on the spot, because he, as
people often do, was worried that nobody would want to clerk for him in his
old age, when he wasn’t so powerful. Again, it would be better to clerk for
somebody young who can help you with your career and future and that kind
of thing. But this was no mistake. But he was very glad that I did. We started
off--he was wonderful. Then when he learned that I was interested in
criminal law, he said, well I can’t choose the particular cases but I can choose
the kind of case, so I’ll just sit on criminal cases. I’m not sure how it came
about but he ended up loaning me to Judge Bazelon for criminal cases, only
criminal cases. So I got to clerk for Judge Bazelon under the best
circumstances, because Judge Bazelon was so hard to work for.
[02:08:56] In fact, I was just reading Alan Dershowitz’s latest memoir and he
was talking about what a mean boss Bazelon was, which he really was.
Brest: Yes, I’ve always heard that.
Babcock: [02:09:11] He would always--Bazelon would always–say, would always have a
good clerk and a bad clerk. He would make--and just like he had two sons
and one was the good son and one was the bad son. And the bad clerk could
not do anything right. And the good clerk--Alan was the good clerk, but he

59

hated it--the system. It made it so--but he couldn’t act that way toward me
because I could just go back to doing my work for Judge Edgerton. It was
fun. I just did criminal cases and I learned a lot and I really learned a lot about
writing from Judge Edgerton. He was an incredible judicial craftsman.
[02:10:05] He would--we would get a case and I would read the briefs and
then kind of write up what I thought, and what the questions were, in a kind
of bench memo. And then he would come back and tell me what he wanted
and if he had the opinion and then I would write up a draft. Then everything
that I cited, I would put on one of those big, wooden library carts and wheel
it into him and he would read everything I cited and read what I wrote and
revise it and improve it. And, oh my God, I mean, what an education. I loved
that old man. He was really great. I never really knew either of my
grandfathers, and he felt like a grandfather to me, I mean, except the one in
Arkansas, but I was six when he died.
[02:11:11] My father’s father died when he was a young man, like eight or
nine. Anyway, I had a wonderful time in the courthouse clerking. And then
the courthouse was like a little community. And see remember, this is before
email or anything, but it was just like this constant gossip and buzz. So you
would hear there’s going to be a great argument in courtroom 5 or there’s a
great case before a particular Judge
Babcock: [02:12:09] I remember one time going down to hear an argument and I saw
Judge Bryant, Bill Bryant. Did you ever hear of him?
Brest: No.

60

Babcock: [02:12:18] He was the first African American judge on the District Court in
D.C., hard to believe, isn’t it? At this time, he was a defense lawyer and he
had--and I saw him arguing to this mostly black jury and I just thought he’s
got them--and, at one point, he said, that was like going bear hunting and
giving the bear the gun; and the jury just laughed, and I though, ah, that’s
how you get them. He became one of my main mentors, Judge Bryant, when
I was a trial lawyer. Now in the courthouse, there was a man named Gary
Bellow. Did you know Gary?
Brest: No. I just know of him.
Babcock: [02:13:16] ...of him. Well he had just graduated from Harvard. This was his
first job. He had come to be the Deputy Director of a little group that was
called the Legal Aid Agency that was formed as a pilot project to work out
how to implement Gideon, and what did you need, because see D.C., of
course, being so full of lawyers, they had assigned counsel system that was
quite sophisticated because there’s so many lawyers to appoint and from the
bar. They had a couple of law firms and then there was a whole little bar
called Fifth Streeters because they were down by the courthouses--the house-and it took mostly criminal cases. They weren’t very good lawyers. But
Gary...
Brest: But they were appointed by the court?
Babcock: [02:14:21] They often were [talking at same time] or people. Yes appointed
and paid by the court.
Brest: So D.C. already, I mean, so far as the District was concerned, Gideon didn’t
mean very much...

61

Babcock: [02:14:37] New, although it was an opportunity, you know, because they said-right through Gideon is the idea that it’s not just a warm body. You got to
give them a real lawyer. We mostly had warm bodies. So that this was--and
there was this Prettyman program was started at Georgetown also at the
same time, to train people to be defense lawyers as part of their--like a
graduate year, after law school. Those were--it was just alive with how are we
going to do it--do it right, you know, not just have lawyers summoned who
are on the whole--they’re paid, but not paid well and not trained and not...
Brest: ...not chosen for competence in this.
Babcock: [02:15:37] No, no. So Gary had been--so they had this really good Fifth
Streeter--some of the Fifth Street lawyers who just made their living at
criminal law were good lawyers, not great but good. And this man was OK.
He recognized some kind of talent in Gary and maybe this young man
coming from Harvard Law School, straight out and wanting to do this. Gary
was very charismatic. I mean, he’s the most charismatic person in my own
age I had met ever, at that point. I still--I was trying to write about this the
other day; because people loved him. And there’s nothing special--he didn’t
have a great voice.
[02:16:36] He didn’t--except for he had these beautiful eyes with very long
eyelashes but that was the only distinctive characteristic and yet there was
something very compelling about him. He had this little band of lawyers that
were working for Legal Aid. There were just five or six of them and they
were sort of the talk of the courthouse.
Brest: Legal Aid.

62

Babcock: [02:17:05] They called it Legal Aid even though usually Legal Aid is civil.
Brest: Civil, right.
Babcock: [02:17:11] But, you know, the New York Public Defender is called Legal Aid.
Brest: No, I didn’t.
Babcock: [02:17:15] Anyway, it was called Legal Aid for a while. Now it’s called the
Public Defender Service. I wanted to know those men and I wanted to work
for Gary but when I finished clerking, there were no openings. I think there
were no openings--but maybe there were no women and maybe Gary said go
and practice for a while and come back. I had written a paper on a case that
Edward Bennett Williams argued in the Supreme Court. When Williams
came to give a talk at Yale, I had arranged to interview him for the paper.
[02:18:25] I think that he thought that it was a ploy to get a job interview.
[laughter] But I hadn’t thought that far ahead. At the end of the interview, I
just gathered up my things and thanked him and he was obviously stunned.
He said, what are you going to do? I said I was going to clerk and then that I
wanted to do criminal defense work. He said, well give me a call if you do. So
I did; and he hired me. When I look back on it, I realized because this is the
time--the very time when a lot of law firms wouldn’t even consider women,
wouldn’t even look at their résumés.
Brest: So what year are we?
Babcock: [02:19:25] This is 1964. I went to work for Williams and he was--and, at that
time, it was a small law firm of just ten or twelve people. Now it’s this huge
Williams and Connolly and it’s--and it was this very strange place in many
ways. They were all men, big men. There were no short men there. [laughter]

63

They were just big, imposing men, loud--with loud voices. Williams was also
really a kind of charismatic person but he had a very deep prejudice against
women in the courtroom and he really did believe that--I mean, he believed
that women should be writing motions and things [laughter] and
interviewing, but not be talking to juries, which is what I wanted to do.
[02:20:41] About six months after he hired me, or maybe earlier, he hired
Judy Richards Hope--did you ever meet her or hear of her?
Brest: No.
Babcock: [02:20:55] She graduated in 1964 from Harvard and one of the first classes at
Harvard to take--what year did you graduate from Harvard?
Brest: 1966.
Babcock: [02:21:05] 1966. Well hers was one of the first class to have a lot of women.
She wrote a book called Pinstripes and Pearls about the women in her class and
her. She was very pretty and had this sort of model’s figure and she was from
Ohio and she had a piano. I thought that was the most grownup thing, to
have a piano that she had in her house. She had a navy blue sports car that
had a vanity plate. I mean, she just seemed much ritzier to me than I. We
became--and she was the blonde from Harvard and I was the brunette from
Yale. And Williams, you can just imagine him getting drunk and talking about
hiring these two women.
[02:22:03] I think it was--there’s nothing like it today, even the law firm itself.
I don’t think that men in law firms wear suits and ties all day long even when
they’re writing things. Maybe they do. I don’t know.
Brest: I don’t know. I bet they don’t.

64

Babcock: [02:22:24] But they were nice men though they didn’t--I don’t know what
they thought about having us. I think Williams actually thought it would be
sort of amusing to have us compete with each other, Judy and me, and set us
up against each other because he told me and I’m sure he told her the same
kind of thing, you know, he would tell me mistakes she made and how she
wasn’t. He had gone to Georgetown,
[02:23:11] so he sort of looked--which he thought was much better than
Harvard or Yale. Judy and I, remember we went out to lunch at Sans Souci,
which was a great French restaurant and we made this pledge to support each
other and to tell each other anything that we learned that would be important
to the other person And we did. We were good friends. I had a lot of
interesting cases and stories, but it was not what I wanted to be doing. At
that time, we were representing--Williams was representing mostly organized
crime figures who--and big, big organized crime figures. I kind of liked them,
you know, some of them anyway, and had sympathy with them.
Brest: They weren’t the downtrodden.
Babcock: [02:24:38] They weren’t what I imagined. So I was still looking to go back to
Legal Aid, which after two years, I did. I have a lot of Williams stories but I
just--I think we ought to move on.
Brest: Yes, and it’s too bad. [laughter] You can tell them to me afterwards.
Babcock: [02:25:09] OK or I’ll send you the chapter. [laughter] Anyway, so then I
went to the public--I went to Legal Aid, which was the public defender and
it--Gary had left to become the head of the civil Legal Services. Then he
went to Harvard and started their clinical teaching program. I had gotten to

65

be friends with Gary and I was very upset that he left and then the place was
just in an uproar because of...
Brest: So who was the head of then?
Babcock: [02:25:53] Then they appointed this other--the man that had been the good
Fifth Streeter left when Gary left and then the new man who was not a bad
Fifth Streeter but not--but then he wanted to run it the way the judges
wanted it, which is they just wanted--they didn’t want everybody to have a
real lawyer, which was our goal, that you’d have a real lawyer who would try
to figure out what was best in every case. They just wanted people to--the
few innocent people, you might go--if they were completely innocent, you
might go to trial with them but otherwise, you’d plead them guilty and do it
in a civilized way.
[02:26:47] Then there was this man, Addie Bowman, who was my first
husband and he was--but I wasn’t married to him at the time--but he was the
deputy. He took Gary’s place, but then the new director wouldn’t let him
play the role that Gary had played in hiring and training and supervising. So
Addie left and went to teach at Georgetown. I was there and I just thought
well, this is really disappointing but I have a chance because Williams didn’t
think he--Williams didn’t think that women belonged in the courtroom and
that the clients would never accept women. That was completely false. The
clients like anybody who keeps them informed and does a good job. So I just
thought this is my chance, and I’ll just take cases.
[02:28:05] I got a little posse of investigator students from Georgetown and
others to help me and I started trying cases. I had a great time trying cases to

66

juries--my own cases. Just me. It was quite different from the cases where I
had been sitting at the counsel table with Williams, where the courtroom
would be packed and the reporters all there and people fascinated by
Williams and his acolytes. It was just me and the client and the prosecutor
and an empty courtroom most of the time. But I loved it. There were twelve
people on the jury box, fourteen actually, with the alternates.
[02:29:01] I tried a lot of cases and I got better and better at it. I thought I
had the talent that I thought I did. A couple years passed, and I fell in love
with Addie and I should have--did you ever meet him?
Brest: No. But we brought you a wedding present from somebody at UCLA. Who
was it from?
Babcock: [02:29:40] Oh from Monroe [Price].
Brest: Yes.
Babcock: [02:29:41] Yes. Wonder where that is now? That’s what I--Gail loved that
thing and I didn’t like it very much. It was a great big, ugly vase and I don’t
say that lightly about vases. [laughter] I like vases but--what is Monroe’s
wife’s name? She has a great name.
Brest: I don’t know.
Babcock: [02:30:05] It’s like Chloe or something but it’s not that.
BrestAimee
Babcock: [02:30:15] You’re close. Anyway, she’s an art historian...Monroe’s wife. Do
you know Monroe?
Brest: No, no.
Babcock: [02:30:28] You didn’t know him. You just ran into him and he gave it to you?

67

Brest: Yes, because Paul was interviewing at UCLA and he was our more or less,
guide, chaperone and we were coming right back to Washington.
Babcock: [02:30:48] I’m going to ask Gail what happened to that. Anyway, so Addie
and I--I should have known--Addie was 33. I was 30. He was 33 and had
been married twice. Now that was just like a little [laughter]--but he was a
very compelling person. He was very handsome and also he was a terrific
trial lawyer and very good at teaching. He was just--he had his--it was almost
like a sickness--it’s almost like Clinton. I mean, he just loved--it wasn’t that
he loved women so much, but he just loved seducing women, or flirting with
women, or whatever. He couldn’t stop himself.
[02:32:00] Anyway, we got married. Judge Edgerton married us in the
Cosmos Club which didn’t allow women to come in through the front door
or join. I never gave it a second thought. [laughter]
Brest: Consciousness not yet ready.
Babcock: [02:32:20] Consciousness not even glowing on the edges here. I mean, lots of
things had happened to me that were driven by my being a women but I
didn’t--it never occurred to me that there was anything I could do about it.
[laughter] So I got married during that period. I tried lots of cases. Then I
was starting to worry about the Agency, as we still call it, us old-timers, even
though everybody else calls it PDS now.
Brest: Sounds like CIA when you call it the Agency.
Babcock: [02:33:04] I know. The Agency. I know. We kind of like that comparison.
Because this new director was hiring Fifth Street types, that just--because

68

there is a way just to work toward a plea and plead most of the people and
not--it’s a long way from client-centered representation, let’s put it that way.
Brest: Must be good for getting through a lot of cases.
Babcock: [02:33:37] Oh yes.
Brest: Efficient.
Babcock: [02:33:38] Oh yes, very efficiently. So Addie and I went to see Judge Bazelon,
and said this is a joke, and this thing that was going to be a pilot project and
wonderful has just turned very sour and not what it should be or could be.
Judge Bazelon, who was a master politician--did you ever meet him?
Brest: No.
Babcock: [02:34:14] He was a great man. He appointed a committee of distinguished
lawyers to--because by this time, Legal Aid had been in existence for eight or
nine years but nobody had ever really reported or studied it. So they came
out with a scathing report on what they were doing and how it was. That
caused quite an uproar. I’m in the deep background here and so was Addie.
The director and--Addie had already left to go teach at Georgetown--the
director left without a word or explanation. But he just didn’t want to have a
fight with Bazelon. Then we had to find a director.
[02:35:16] I wanted Addie to do it but he was really liking teaching at
Georgetown and he was running the clinical thing--the Prettyman Program-and he didn’t want to come back and try to deal with the agency anymore
and again. At some point, Addie said to me why don’t you do it? I’m 30
years old and a woman and I just thought, you know, I could do it and I
would be the person to do it and that would be--so I wrote up this

69

prospectus, and I still have it, of what I would do if I was running the public
defender.
[02:36:06] It’s amazing if I do say so, without undue modesty, document for
the time because this was 1968 and I just wrote up that--it was about clientcentered representation and giving everybody a full defense and having
investigators–paid professional investigators--and having social workers
attached to the agency to help clients find jobs and with their other mental
health and other problems. I went to Bazelon and I gave him this prospectus
and said--and he didn’t flinch at my being a woman or being so young or
anything. He just went to work with his unparalleled skills.
[02:37:14] The agency was run by a board of lawyers, some of them uptown
lawyers. I remember the interview, because they asked me questions like, you
just got married, how can you run an agency and raise a family. I didn’t say,
that’s an illegal question, you wouldn’t ask a man that question, or anything
like that. That thought did not cross my mind. I said, oh I’m not having any
children. [laughter] I got the job. My picture was on the front page of the
Washington Post--below the fold--saying: “Thirty Year Old Trial Attorney
Appointed.” I just loved that. I loved that. I loved being a thirty year old trial
attorney.
Brest: It didn’t even say woman.
Babcock: [02:38:16] No, didn’t say woman. My dentist sent me a note saying I’ve just
given you your yearly checkup, because I had such a smile, you know, you
could count very tooth. Then I went and for four years, I ran the agency and
I did--the smartest thing I did was to hire this man that had wanted to be

70

director but he really couldn’t afford because built into the pilot project, was
the salary for the director, which was $16,000 a year, which even though that
was a lot more then than it is now, it still wasn’t enough to have a family. He
had two children and et cetera. In recruiting Norm Lefstein I said Norm, the
first thing we’ll do is write a new statute and raise the salary. but ] meanwhile,
there’s nothing about the deputy’s salary in the statute so -I’ll pay you
$30,000 or whatever--twice as much as I made We turned out to be a great
team. I loved working with him, and he liked to do all the things I don’t like
to do...spreadsheets and dealing with Congress. Our budget came through
the Congress, from the Congress as part of the D.C. budget. It’s not where
you want to be. That was a time when D.C. was just treated like a plantation
sort of.
[02:40:06] He would go up and show--I was sort of the spiritual leader, the
great things we’re going to bring justice and truth, and he was the--he would
go up and talk about efficiency and the number of cases we could handle.
And we did things that nobody did...have social workers and a training
program, very intensive training program before anybody went into court,
and supervision. We ran a great agency and we had a wonderful time and we
got a new statute and et cetera. [02:41:01] One day I’m sitting in my office
and my investigators come in and they want me to come teach this class at
Georgetown. That’s in the chapter you read, isn’t it?
Brest: Yes.
Babcock: [02:41:23] I was--I really didn’t want to and I just said--but I had begun--I
had dawning awareness. I read Betty Friedan. Did you read it?

71

Brest: No, but it was in the air.
Babcock: [02:41:36] It was in the air and people were talking about it and I wanted to
learn more about it but I didn’t want to get too deeply into it because, really,
I had a fulltime job. [laughter] But then they convinced me, and then I began
to like it and then I went and taught the class at Yale--the same class. And I
met all these other...
Brest: Describe the class because not everybody’s read...
Babcock: [02:42:07] Oh yes, it is--well it was Women and the Law, we called it. I’ve
always thought that was so funny, you know, like The Law and Elephants, or
something. It’s like, Women and the Law, and we covered the entire
curriculum--what cases there were about women and how these cases, on the
whole, discriminated against women. We covered family law and
constitutional law and employment law and criminal law just to name the
main subjects-. It was fun to teach it just because there was so much
excitement.
[02:42:57] It was new. There wasn’t anything like it. At that time, it was still
kind of unusual to have anything new and exciting in law school. Old and
traditional was what things mostly were.

[End of Interview with Barbara Babcock on January 13, 2015]

72

STANFORD UNIVERSITY

PROJECT:

STANFORD FACULTY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

INTERVIEWER:

IRIS BREST

INTERVIEWEE:

BARBARA BABCOCK

DATE OF INTERVIEW:

JANUARY 15, 2015

Brest: It’s Thursday, January 15th, and Barbara Babcock is about to continue
recording her recollections. Where were we? We hadn’t gotten to how you
came to Stanford. That was going to be the next concrete topic.
Babcock: [00:00:38] Yes. How I came to Stanford, and what it was like at Stanford.
That’s the main drift of this.
Brest: Start with where you were before, and what all happened...
Babcock: [00:00:50] OK. It’s 1971; I was in D.C., and running the public defender, and
we’d started this wonderful agency. And it was like a dream, you know, for
me, come true because it’s what I’d always wanted to do was lead this little
band of brilliant young lawyers on this idealistic mission to help people have
a fair trial, and due process, and all of that. And they were a great little group.
I thought of them--I always encouraged women, and hired women, but there
were not very many women.
Brest: How many people?
Babcock: [00:01:43] We eventually got to 40. But it started out, it was about 16, and
then 25. Norm that I mentioned before, Norm Lefstein, he kept getting us
more and more people. [laughter] We had great people. We attracted people

73

that were, like, Supreme Court law clerks. I remember there was an article on
the front page of the Washington Post that said, “Supreme Court Law Clerks
Going to Public Defender.” It really was--it was just a great group of people.
Mostly men, but really nice men. [laughter] I loved being in charge, and I
was still trying cases and enjoying that.
[00:02:46] Then I got married, and within a few years, divorced. That
changed things a little bit for me, just because so many of the places that-and things, places we went and things we did, had been connected to Addie-my husband--and his friends. Though most of the--everybody struggled to be
friends with both of us, and more people came to be friends with me, but it’s
almost impossible for people to do that.
[00:03:31] Then the students came, and they asked me to teach--this Women
and the Law course. I taught that at Georgetown. Then they invited me to go
and teach it at Yale.
Brest: That was just kind of once a week? You didn’t move to New Haven?
Babcock: [00:03:54] No. I flew up on Thursday nights, and taught the class--late
Thursday afternoon. Then I would teach the class and stay over, and come
back Friday morning. Sometimes I would go to court on Friday after having-I was just so--it’s a miracle that I’ve gotten to live this long. [laughter] The
way that I was in my youth--but I was really--I saw that something big was
happening, and that things had changed, because first of all, the halls were
full of women.
[00:04:41] In my day at Yale, which was only seven years earlier, you could go
the whole--you could go for hours without seeing another woman. Now the

74

halls were full of women, and these were really tough women. I mean, they
were kind of amazing to me, just how they were in terms of just saying,
“What are you doing? You lured us here and you don’t have anything for
us?” [laughter] “Where are the women law professors, and where is the
curriculum for us, and why aren’t you taking care of us?” It was great. Then,
just all of a sudden, though I never tried to pass myself off as a leader of The
Women’s Movement, but to appointments committees--[laughter] I look like
that.
Brest: Close as they come. [laughter]
Babcock: [00:05:49] Yes. Here I was--I’d gone to Yale, which produces academics, and
I had done all right there. I mean, I had better than average credentials,
though not the usual--clerking on the Supreme Court, first in the class-- but I
did have a good record, and I had--it didn’t count that I had run this big
agency and founded it, and been a leader, and tried cases to juries and won
many of them. That was not important. But that I had taught these courses,
and...
Brest: Had you written anything by that time?
Babcock: [00:06:38] No. I mean, I’d written the Law Review pieces as a student-student pieces. [laughter] No, no. Iris, how could I write anything?
Brest: You were living 30 hours a day anyhow.
Babcock: [00:07:00] I couldn’t--but I had taken on this idea of doing a textbook for
Women in the Law. But I don’t think that is--it was this idea I came with
regular teaching credentials, and a course. All the law schools were
undergoing this tremendous change. It was just amazing because, all of a

75

sudden, all of them were kind of overwhelmed with women, and they just
were desperate to get a woman. [laughter] But I was still busy running the
agency, and teaching the course.
Brest: But meanwhile, all these law schools were...
Babcock: [00:08:00] After me. Oh my God. It was just amazing. Yes, just--I wish I had
saved all the letters. It would be interesting because there were dozens of
letters and calls. But I just decided that I’d better--I was happy. I was so
happy with my life, though it had been somewhat undermined by the
divorce. I felt sadder about that. But I decided this was my chance. I could-there was such interest, I’d better do it while I could because I’d always
thought I would teach after I finished trying cases.
Brest: Changing the world.
Babcock: [00:08:47] Yes. Then when I got older and weaker, I would teach. [laughter] I
saw that this was the time. I didn’t have any advisors to tell me that, but I
saw it. I give myself a lot of credit for that. I decided, though, that I would
just interview at four places. I interviewed at Penn, and Harvard, and Yale-and Stanford. The interview at Penn, my alma mater, went very well...my
undergraduate school. They were clearly just crazy about me, and desiring
me, and wanting me to come. Being in Philadelphia, I liked Philadelphia, it
was familiar, and close to Washington on a fast train. That was very
tempting.
[00:09:59] Harvard just seemed too much. They had never had a woman. I
just felt the hugeness and coldness of the place.
Brest: So there had been women faculty at Penn?

76

Babcock: [00:10:16] I think they had two women.
Brest: OK.
Babcock: [00:10:19] Yes. I would have been the third woman there.
Brest: Being the first woman faculty member at Harvard didn’t have attraction...
Babcock: [00:10:29] The idea of it; but the actuality--from what I saw--even though I
had friends. Alan Dershowitz and this man Phil Heymann had been a visiting
professor at the public defender. He was a good friend. Do you know him?
Brest: We’ve met.
Babcock: [00:10:49] He’s a nice man. Good man. I think John Ely was there too at the
time, at Harvard. I think so.
Brest: Can’t remember.
Babcock: [00:11:01] I can’t either. But anyway, I had some friends on the faculty but it
was just too big. It was so--it seemed incredibly pretentious to me. [laughter]
Brest: The astonishment!
Babcock: [00:11:17] Everybody was so full of themselves and full of telling me how
great they were. I didn’t have any room to tell them how great I was. I don’t
know. It really was--but anyway, after this time there, I heard nothing from
them that I remember. Now I can’t believe they were so rude not even to
send me a rejection letter, but I don’t remember it. But they just faded. Mike
Wald had been another visiting professor at the Public Defender. He had
come there. He had come straight from teaching at--straight from Yale, being
a student, to teaching at Stanford.
[00:12:19] But he had gotten an agreement that he would have two years off
after a year or two of teaching to get actual experience. So he came to the

77

Public Defender. I was very uncertain about whether he would be--see, I’m
trying to train these guys. [laughter] I was just afraid that he would want to
do a study or something. But he turned out to be a real workhorse and also
wanted to do juvenile law, which all the other people were trying to get out
of that and move on to trying felonies. [sentences deleted] He was good. He
was a very good lawyer. Really a good lawyer, and really related to the clients.
Once or twice, he came in and said, “You know, I’m just working all the
time. I’m just working on this all the time not getting to study or think.”
[laughter] My reaction is that’s the way it is. But he did a great job for us.
When he left, he said, “If you ever want to go into teaching, let me know.” I
just thought, first of all at that point, I didn’t know that my world was about
to change. Secondly--I had barely heard of Stanford. I heard--and I’d never
been to California. Then I--and it was extremely far away. [laughter]
Brest: Yes, right. Primitive.
Babcock: [00:15:00] Primitive. I just thought that it would be--but anyway, then he
heard that I had interviewed at Harvard and Yale.
Brest: Oh. So what happened at Yale?
Babcock: [00:15:19] At Yale--it was during the time I was going up there every week
and so they said, “Could you stay over a day and do an interview?” I just
had--what I would say was an extremely unsuccessful interview. It started off
with my old civil procedure teacher Fleming James, Jr., who I really thought
was great, saying to me very earnestly, “Why do you want to do this? You’re
doing such an important job and you’re doing it so well. Why would you

78

want to be here writing academic articles that nobody reads and especially
not your colleagues, when you can be changing the world?”
[00:16:23] That just left me--it left me a little bit speechless. See, I’d been sort
of thinking the same thing. Then the funniest one I had was with Guido
Calabresi, in which he said, “What is your scholarly agenda?” [laughter] I
think that may have been the first time I heard that phrase. I said, “Well, I’ve
been practicing this criminal procedure and I think there’s a lot to be said
and written about it, and I was very interested in the doctrine of it.” He says,
“So when you run out of stories from your practice, what will you write
about?” [laughter] So I said, “Well then I’ll have tenure and be like the rest of
you,” which I thought was like a little joke. But...
Brest: [laughter] It didn’t go over?
Babcock: [00:17:30] No, nobody laughed. Everybody looked stunned that I would say
such a thing. I got a little note from Abe Goldstein, who--I learned recently
in writing my memoirs, I made a FOIA request for my--and I got my FBI
check. Yes. It was really nice. I mean, all these--I remember that the man
who was in charge of the investigation said that, “Everybody who’s ever
known you has only the nicest things to say about you.” I thought, oh man,
you didn’t get to all of them!” [laughter]
Brest: That was an investigation for..
Babcock: [00:18:25] ...for being assistant attorney general. But Abe was interviewed.
Abe Goldstein, who was the dean at Yale, was also my criminal procedure
teacher, and had been a clerk to Judge Bazelon, so he was part of a special
little group of people. Abe was, by this time, dean. He wrote me this letter

79

that just pissed me off. It was, like a three-line letter that said, “It turns out
we’re not in the market for anybody in criminal procedure, and good luck to
you or something.” You know. It was sort of cold and sort of empty
rejection. Then they hired this young woman, Barbara Underwood. Did you
ever know her?
Brest: Yes.
Babcock: [00:19:26] She lived across the street from me in Washington. I knew her
well, and she wasn’t--to teach criminal procedure that year when they could
have had me or maybe they could have had me. I don’t know.
Brest: You’re not going to say that they were less arrogant and pretentious than the
Harvard lot?
Babcock: [00:19:54] Oh, no. Heavens no. But they were my [laughter] arrogant,
pretentious people. I don’t know what I would have done because I was still-when I went to Yale, I was just overwhelmed by the sense of privilege that
they make you feel there. It’s their stock-in-trade. Do they do the same at
Harvard? Maybe they do. There’s just so many more people.
Brest: I don’t think so, but they’re certainly always doing it at Yale. When Hilary-when my daughter was...
Babcock: [00:20:28] Oh, Hilary was there. She knows.
Brest: Yes, and said exactly the same thing. The first talk that the entering class gets
is, “You’ve now made it.”
Babcock: [00:20:41] Yes. That’s it. I never had had such a feeling before that I was on
the inside, that I was a success, that anything I did was going to be--and then-I don’t knock it. [laughter] It really did make me--inspired me. But--so I

80

might not have been able to resist, but they resisted me. [laughter] Then I
came out to Stanford to interview, and discovered, to my--amazement and
dismay, that Stanford was not in San Francisco. [laughter] Mike Wald picked
me up at the airport. I was really stunned. He said, “I don’t live in San
Francisco. I live in Palo Alto, where Stanford is.” I was just--I really was--I
was so stupid. Remember that we didn’t have Google. Yes. I didn’t know
anybody, really, that had gone to Stanford.
Brest: No. Nobody knew it. [talking at same time] Stanford had risen out of--it
wasn’t its own ashes. It just had taken off in the quite recent past.
Babcock: [00:22:18] Yes.
Brest: There’s no reason anybody knew it.
Babcock: [00:22:20] No. So I came, and I--and Tom Ehrlich, who was very charming,
and just very enthusiastic, almost scarily [laughter] enthusiastic because he
was just kind of desperate to get a woman. I was the woman to get, because I
came with a course, and a book, and a book in progress on the whole field.
Tom Ehrlich--OK.
Brest: Tom was the dean.
Babcock: [00:23:11] Tom Ehrlich was dean, and he was very enthusiastic, and really
pressing me. Bernie Wolfman was dean at Penn. He was also very
enthusiastic, and pressing me. It was sort of fun. But the thing that impressed
me about Stanford at first was, on this interview--was first of all, I couldn’t
believe that it was October and [laughter] it was so beautiful. The campus,
and the cyanotus, and the golden sandstone buildings, and the law school
was, at that time still, in the old building on the quad, though it turned out

81

that those were the worst classrooms I’ve ever taught in. But the building
itself, and driving up Palm Drive and parking there, it was great. [00:24:18]
Everybody that I met was really nice, and really unpretentious compared to
the other law schools. It was striking. Now remember the law schools I went
to.
Brest: Right. The high bar.
Babcock: [00:24:41] There was a high--[laughter] yes. But they were all really neat. I
remember meeting you and Paul. Do you remember that? It was at
somebody’s house one night.
Brest: No.
Babcock: [00:24:56] It was at a dinner party, like one of the dinner parties. But it was
the same thing. Paul was the same. He was like the rest of them. Everybody
was very unpretentious, and not pressing me and not asking me to spin out
some big theories. [laughter] I felt like I would fit in.
Brest: No. What I do remember is everybody really liked you at first meeting you,
and was hoping you’d come.
Babcock: [00:25:45] I did. I had a great time. I ended up with offers from Stanford and
Penn. Penn, I would have been the third woman and Stanford, I was the
first. I actually had a hard time. Looking back on it, when I think how
different my life would have been if I hadn’t come here, though I don’t know
exactly what shape it might have taken. Then I had the third alternative of
staying in D.C. and teaching at Georgetown and maybe leading the Agency
for another year, which I did love doing. I hadn’t actually interviewed at
Georgetown, but I’m sure I could have gotten a job there.

82

[00:26:48] I was really torn because my--of course my parents were, and my
friends were, anxious for me to stay on the East Coast. But then I loved the
idea of coming to California. Those were the days that California was so
romantic.
Brest: Yes, and exotic.
Babcock: [00:27:16] Exotic, and far away. My friend Gail that I had--when I broke up
with Addie, she had come, and we had gotten a neat apartment together and
had this nice life together. She promised to come out here as soon as she
could. It seemed like more of an adventure. But I did--I loved my mother so
much, and I hated to leave her. She really wanted me to stay in the East, but
I decided to do it. I can’t quite say how I decided that. Maybe--when I told--I
told this story once to Gail, and she said, “How could you not? If you had a
choice between Philadelphia and Palo Alto?” [laughter] But it really did seem
like it was far away, and so different from what I was used to.
[00:28:55] I felt a little bit like I was getting out of--leaving a place where I
had really established myself, and was known. In D.C., honestly, I would get
in taxis and the driver would be somebody who’d been on a jury in a case
that I had tried, and had voted for me. That happened more than once.
Those--and everywhere in D.C., it has memories for me. Every corner.
Either some terrible crime that happened [laughter]--or--but I--so it was
hard. It was really hard to leave. But looking back on it, you would say-today’s young people would say, “Good grief! Of course you should go.
[00:30:02] Who would choose to go to Philadelphia when they could go to
Stanford?” But it didn’t seem that way, completely, to me.

83

Brest: No. I’m not perfectly sure it would seem that way, ever, to anybody. I mean,
Penn is very, very good, and Philadelphia’s turned into quite a nice city.
Babcock: [00:30:26] Oh, it has. It has. But it was pretty grungy in the 70s, I’ll have to
say.
Brest: Yes. True fact.
Babcock: [00:30:35] Did you say “True that?”
Brest: True fact.
Babcock: [00:30:37] Oh, true fact. You know, that’s a black saying, is “True that.” True
that, they say. Basketball players, for instance. But anyway, so then I came
here. I knew Mike Wald, Mike and Johanna Wald, who lived in Palo Alto at
the time, and I had a cousin who lived in Walnut Creek, my cousin Gail. I
don’t think I knew another soul.
Brest: Yes, but that must have lasted for about two and a half minutes.
Babcock: [00:31:26] It lasted longer than you might think because I didn’t know how
to handle it. I was very struck when Barbara Fried came yers later, and I saw
how she handled coming to a place where she didn’t know anybody--I would
just sit in my office and wait for somebody to ask me to lunch. Every day.
Nobody ever did.
Brest: Oh, no!
Babcock: [00:32:05] No.
Brest: If they had known...
Babcock: [00:32:08] Yes. Of course they would have. I just didn’t realize what the
customs were or that you would just go down the hall and say--I could hear
Barbara Fried out there saying, “You want to come to lunch?” to people. Or

84

sticking your head in the door and saying, “Let’s go to lunch.” I would never
do that. I would just sit there and wait.
Brest: But Barbara Fried--what is that, 12 years later? [laughter]
Babcock: [00:32:39] -I rented a place on College Avenue in College Terrace, and I had
a--Gail’s dad was going to get me a car, and [my brother] Starr was going to
drive it out. I just had a bike at first. So, from College Avenue, I would bike
over to the law school. I came in June, which was not a good time to come
because everybody was worn out, and leaving. Everybody’s very friendly, but
most people weren’t around. I don’t think anybody had any sense of--that I
was here without resources.
Brest: It is totally true that Stanford was friendly and fine in that surface way. But it
was not nice to visitors, and it was not nice to new faculty, the law school, at
that time. They had not developed a tradition of looking out for them.
Babcock: [00:34:07] No. [laughter]
Brest: It changed.
Babcock: [00:34:10] Oh, yes. I can attest to that. I wasn’t--it was so weird, because I
had been under so much pressure as a public defender, and a defense lawyer,
and leading this agency. I just--I could just feel the tension and pressure, just
like, leaking out of me. [laughter] I rode my bike to work, and tried to read-background reading on--I was going to teach civil procedure. Of course, you
might think I would teach criminal law or criminal procedure. But everybody
said that--I didn’t really want to teach criminal law, because I’ve never liked
criminal law itself because it’s not law--you understand? [00:35:19] It’s

85

philosophy, and it’s not my thing at all. But criminal procedure… But
everybody said, “You can’t teach that, because Tony Amsterdam is the icon.”
Brest: Oh. I hadn’t remembered that Tony was here then.
Babcock: [00:35:38] Yes. Then he--and that nobody--and John Kaplan told me that.
Nobody will take the class. John had tried to offer it, and he was a popular
teacher too. I think it was Ehrlich who said, “What else do you want to
teach?” I said, “Well, I’ve always liked civil procedure. I’d like to learn it and
teach it.” So I was trying to read up on civil procedure [laughter] which I
knew nothing about. I just--I was just quite alone.
Brest: I feel so terrible about it.
Babcock: [00:36:37] [laughter] What were you doing? You had little babies by--you
couldn’t take care of...
Brest: Of course we could have been much more helpful, cordial… All right. Go
on.
Babcock: [00:36:54] Let’s see; what happened was--that summer went by. I don’t have
bad feelings about that summer. I took tennis lessons, and I remember Gail
and her boyfriend at that time gave me a racquet. Gail said, “I don’t expect
you’ll ever learn to play, because you can’t run.” It turned out that I married
Tom, and we played doubles, and he ran. He covered me. [laughter] I was
very good at hitting the ball. What else did I do? I read a lot of things I’d
always wanted to read, like “Middlemarch,” which I just love, some Trollope,
and some other 19th century long novels that you don’t read when you’re a
public defender. [laughter] Then Erika Kaltenbach--remember her?
Brest: Oh, certainly.

86

Babcock: [00:38:12] One day, she said to me, “You--” She took a bus. There was a bus
that took people who live in the city and worked on campus every day. I’m
not sure--do you think there’s still such a bus? I don’t know.
Brest: I don’t know. There was also something that went to the East Bay.
Babcock: [00:38:37] To Berkeley. Yes, to the East Bay, but this was not the same bus.
This was a bus that just went to the city, that took people. She said, “I know
this woman, and she’s a woman, like you.” [laughter] Maybe you would like
to meet her. Then she introduced me to Diane, and she...
Brest: Diane, meaning?
Babcock: [00:39:05] Middlebrook. Diane Middlebrook. The three of us went to the
Faculty Club. I was just immediately taken by her. She was extremely
friendly. We went back to my apartment on College Avenue and just talked,
for hours. That was my first friend that I made in California. She--and then-Thelton [Henderson] had come to the law school.
Brest: Was he dean of students or something?
Babcock: [00:39:45] Yes. What happened was that in 1968, Stanford Law School
graduated its first African American graduate...sixty-eight.
Brest: True fact?
Babcock: [00:40:00] True fact. That is--”True dat.” [laughter] That was Sallyanne
Peyton. Thelton, who was one of the--who had started a law firm under the
auspices of the Inc. Fund in East Palo Alto because that’s one of the things
they did was put lawyers into un-lawyered communities. Thelton was in East
Palo Alto. He came to Ehrlich and said that--being Thelton, I’m sure he
didn’t say, “This is a disgrace.” But Tom said, “Look, we don’t discriminate.

87

But no black people apply here. It’s not even unqualified black people.
Nobody.” Thelton says, “I’ll get you the applicants. Hire me. I’ll go all over
the country. I’ll get you the applicants.
[00:41:05] Then I’ll help them while they’re here, and help them get
through.” So then I met Thelton. It was so weird, Iris, to come from D.C.,
and the Public Defender. The whiteness. The total whiteness at Stanford so
that when I saw Thelton, I thought, oh God. Thank goodness.
Brest: I forgot to ask. Your staff at the public defender’s was white, black, mixed?
Babcock: [00:41:42] Mixed, yes.
Brest: Significantly.
Babcock: [00:41:44] Yes. But too white, really. But I was trying to hire blacks. But that
was just the moment--it was just the moment when black people, for the first
time, could get really good jobs at law firms, and that things were changing.
We had decided that we should have a three-year commitment at the agency
because of the amount of training that we did. You don’t really start giving it
back until about the second or third year. I had a lot of trouble getting
blacks. Now, since then, it’s been sort of taken over. The leadership is all
black, though there’s a lot of white people still. But this was white leaders
and black lawyers, all black clients almost, you know.
Brest: So Thelton came.
Babcock: [00:42:54] Thelton and I were instant, very good friends and always have
been, to this day. So that was--and I began to make friends. But I didn’t--it
was funny. I just felt like, I didn’t feel that I fit in at all. I couldn’t see--I just
hadn’t thought it through what it was to be a law professor. With the social

88

life in those days, you’ll remember this--was everybody invited everybody to
dinner at least once a year. That’s the way it seemed to me anyway. They-and then they-- and then there may have been other things going on. But-and the wives didn’t know what to do about me, see, because I was a
feminist. -and I had no partner in sight. [00:44:20] They didn’t know whether
to invite somebody for me to have the even number at the table of men and
women, which is what you did in those days, or not. Whether I’d be
offended by that or should they invite a woman? I don’t think people
thought that. But anyway--so they kept inviting the same guy. [laughter] He
and I both showed up all the time at these wonderful dinner parties,
wonderful dinner parties of the kind that very few people except you have
anymore where a single person produces a whole dinner, you know. But
maybe other people do it.
Brest: People don’t do that?
Babcock: [00:45:11] I don’t think they do anymore. You and Gail are the only people I
know that do it. Yes. But anyway, so this guy--I couldn’t understand, since-he seemed to be single, and he seemed to be nice, and we got along all right.
But he didn’t show any interest. Of course, it turns out that he was gay.
[laughter] But I didn’t know. I didn’t know from gay people. I had never
really met anybody gay that I knew was gay. But I wasn’t lonely. I wouldn’t
say I was lonely. After this sort of intense life that I led-- it was kind of
wonderful to be...
Brest: To have some empty time?

89

Babcock: [00:46:17] To have just this time that was just me. It was very strange. It was
very strange looking back on it. I sometimes drive by my little garden
apartment on College Avenue, and I’ll--so anyway, then school started.
Brest: Did you have any feeling that, I don’t know, that if you had not been a
woman it would have been easier or something? Or was that not a thing you
were thinking?
Babcock: [00:47:02] No, I didn’t think that way. I didn’t--no. I didn’t feel like anybody-I didn’t feel that I wasn’t being well taken care of or that people--I just felt
like I was in a different--just in a totally different milieu, and that I had to
learn how to get along. I didn’t know.
Brest: Were there other new faculty that year?
Babcock: [00:47:44] What was that guy that came to teach--and he was so cute. I don’t
think there--I have to look at that. I don’t know. But soon after, I saw other
people, like the guy that came to teach Contracts. Engel was his name.
Engel?
Brest: Oh, David Engel.
Babcock: [00:48:03] David Engel. Right. I think he came about the same time.
Brest: Oh, I didn’t realize he was that soon. I thought he came later.
Babcock: [00:48:11] Maybe, it could have been later. I don’t remember there being
anybody else new. But in the larger university--and in the law school, too-there was kind of a celebration of getting a woman at the law school.
[laughter] Then the business school hired Myra Strober. The engineering
school hired its first woman, Lily Young. I think she’s still around, isn’t she?
Brest: Don’t know.

90

Babcock: [00:48:53] Then the law school--the same year they hired me, they hired Bill
Gould. The four of us was kind of a traveling road show of [laughter]
advertising diversity. That was fine.
Brest: Did they really send you around?
Babcock: [00:49:20] Yes. We went around; we had press conferences and appeared at
alumni meetings. There were stories written about us all together as a little
group that had very little in common. Then I had a few of my--at least one
and maybe more of my students from Yale were out here. They were eager to
show me around, and the wonders of California. It was wonderful. Then in
the summer of my first year, Starr drove this car that Gail’s father had found
for me out here. Starr came.
[00:50:22] He just fell in love with California. This was just like, [laughter]
“Why have they been keeping this from me? Why would anybody live in
Hyattsville or Washington, D.C. if you could live here?” He became just
totally, “This is it. This is what I’m going to do. I’m going to come here.” He
had one more year of law school. As soon as I can...
Brest: Where did he go?
Babcock: [00:50:52] Georgetown. As soon as I can do it, I’m coming. That was sort of
inspirational. It was all sort of--Starr, to be a really attractive, straight man in
San Francisco in that period [laughter] was a real asset. But he always--he
loved it. That made me feel more...
Brest: Integrated.
Babcock: [00:51:34] Integrated. Yes.

91

Brest: So you had the summer. Then teaching started. You were teaching a brand
new course for you and in a subject matter that you’d had to acquire
theoretically. You had never done any civil practice, right?
Babcock: [00:52:01] No. Not a drop. [laughter]
Brest: So how was that?
Babcock: [00:52:07] It’s funny, because now I run into--occasionally, to students I had
even in the first year. I have a picture of it. They say--I had a small
section...28. They say I was great. But I think I was terrible. But I made this
one really bad mistake, which was to tell them that I didn’t know anything
about it, and I would be learning along with them, which is not what they
want to hear when they’re paying a Stanford tuition.
Brest: Even the tuition then.
Babcock: [00:52:52] Yes, right, no, exactly. But I could see that I liked it, and would be
able to teach it. I did like it. But it was funny because I thought that you had
to--or you should--and see, this is coming from D.C.--use the textbook that
was authored by your colleagues. So I used this text that Jack Friedenthal
was on, that was the worst thing. I mean, it’s a leading textbook in civil
procedures. So it’s not like--but to me, it was just an awful book because it
had all these Delphic questions that you would--at the end you’d say, “So
here--a court in Western Nevada decided such and such. How do you think
that fits in, you know, or something?” [laughter] No answers.
Brest: Not even a little teacher’s guide.
Babcock: [00:54:25] No. So I remember, I would go down. He was such a nice man.
Jack Friedenthal is a very nice man. Right before class I would go and I’d say,

92

“Jack, what’s the answer to this question?” Or, “What do you think about
this?” He couldn’t believe that I was asking such a basic, dumb question. So
he would just go off to some very complicated--[laughter] I know now what
the answers were, and it would have just been so simple to say three
sentences. But instead, he just thought I must be asking something much
deeper than I had ever--so I struggled, but honestly, right from the beginning
I was really good at it, because I knew how to ask questions, and how to
draw people out.
[00:55:32] I was there to have a good time. They responded to that very
much, and always did. If somebody looked at my life, they would say how
clever it was of me not to continue on the criminal stuff, and to become an
expert in the civil stuff. So that I could move on. But it was quite unpremeditated. But I liked teaching. I liked civil procedure, and I’ve always
found procedure fascinating on both sides of it.
[00:56:25] Then one day, about two or three years into it--into teaching, I was
at--I think it was an AALS meeting. It was at Shirley Hufstedler’s house. She
was having a party. There was Paul Carrington--was there, who was at the
time, I think, the dean at Michigan. He said--oh! Have you ever met him?
Brest: I don’t remember.
Babcock: [00:56:58] He’s kind of an attractive man, but he’s a difficult man. But he
said, “Oh, you’re teaching civil procedure. What book are you using?” I said,
“Well, I’m using Kane, Friedenthal and Miller because I thought I had to.
But now I’ve learned that you don’t have to use your colleague’s book. But I
don’t like any of them, except yours.” He had one. But I said, “Yours is so

93

idiosyncratic though, that nobody could teach it.” [laughter] The next thing I
know, I get this letter from him saying, “Why don’t you come and join me on
teaching the book, on editing the next edition of the book.”
Brest: So meanwhile, what happened? OK. Finish that.
Babcock: [00:58:03] So I just thought, why not. That would be good to have a book. It
turned out it is really good to have a book. You know the answers first of all,
[laughter] to the questions.
Brest: That you put in.
Babcock: [00:58:19] Yes. Secondly, it gives you tremendous authority to have your
name on the spine.
Brest: What happened to the women’s law book?
Babcock: [00:58:33] That was the other thing. That was going on. We--let’s see. My
original idea about the book while I was still running the Public Defender
was that Ann Freedman, this great student that I had had that was in my
class at Yale and was part of the group that got together to hire me at Yale-and my recollection is that she came to me and said, “This course is going to
die unless we get a textbook. We’ve got to have a textbook for it.” So that I
had this idea, though looking back on it, honestly it just seems wild. But I
had this idea that I would get a salary for Ann from Eli [Evans]--from
Carnegie, for it and she would produce the...
Brest: Basic content?
Babcock: [00:59:48] The basic content. Eleanor Holmes Norton and I would be like an
editorial board. Now, I’m running the Public Defender. Eleanor is Human
Rights Commissioner in New York City. Both of us are just tremendously

94

hard-pressed. Ann, turns out to be--though she’s just an amazing thinker-has true writer’s difficulties and writer’s blocks and was not the kind of
person I thought—who could just turn it out .. We had added this other
woman, Susan Ross, who was at the EEOC and was a very talented litigator,
and could turn it out.
[01:00:47] But she was just into employment law. We had all these other
fields. We struggled on with it. We struggled and we produced the book in
1975. We wanted to be the first book, but we were the second. But it was
quite a success. Actually got reviews, and was widely used.
Brest: Let me get the dates again. You came to Stanford--’72?
Babcock: [01:01:32] Seventy-two.
Brest: So your first year of teaching--’72-’73 and by ‘75, you have one textbook out
and you’re beginning to work with Paul Carrington also at the time?
Babcock: [01:01:45] On the civil procedure.
Brest: Have you been teaching women’s law?
Babcock: [01:01:51] I’ve been teaching that all along. Then we started a-- let’s see. I’ve
got to think about when this was, but--we started a clinical course, which we
called Litigative Strategies Against Sex Discrimination...

Babcock: [01:02:23] The course was born before I even got to Stanford. In connection
with the book, around 1972, we had a conference at Yale, the same time that
I was teaching. [I met Nancy Davis, and Wendy Williams, and Mary Dunlap,
who were three law students from Berkeley, Boalt Hall, and they didn’t know
each other that well. But at this conference that we had--that we got Eli to

95

fund. It was a conference about--of all the people that we knew who were
interested in women and the law, and were teaching that from all over the
United States. Ruth was there, and Herma Kay. Ruth Ginsberg and Herma
Kay, and lots of people and students.
[01:03:35] So I met these three young women. They, even though they had all
been in the same law school, they didn’t know each other that well. But they
formed this idea of starting a law firm in California. So I come--I’m hardly
here before Nancy Davis is in my office. She was married to a man who was
an historian. I can’t remember his name. Dick was his first name. Gillam.
Did you know him? Richard Gillam?
Brest: I’m trying to remember. He sounds familiar.
Babcock: [01:04:17] But anyway, he was-a very popular and successful teacher. He was
writing a biography of C. Wright Mills, which I don’t think he ever got done.
It was one of those biographies. But anyway, Nancy and Mary and Wendy
got me involved in helping them get their law firm started. It was Davis,
Dunlap and Williams. We devised this--we needed a way to get--what do you
call it? The basic money that you need to have to run a place--overhead--for
the law firm. But I have always believed that the law firm could make it on
fees, et cetera.
[01:05:33] But I thought we could get a grant from Eli, again, my classmate.
He was really interested in women’s things, and doing things--doing grants
for women, which was a new kind of thing in the foundation world. We had
this course that we called Litigative Strategies Against Sex Discrimination.
Brest: What do you mean, “We had this course?”

96

Babcock: [01:06:13] We: Wendy, Nancy, me--Wendy, Nancy, Mary were the lawyers,
and me, and then we had--the students were maybe technically on externship
for a semester. Then...
Brest: At the law firm.
Babcock: [01:06:37] At the law firm, but we had a regular class also at the law school in
which we were teaching the cases and background. of sex discrimination
law....
Brest: Teaching cases.
Babcock: [01:07:08] Teaching cases. We would take an actual case from the law firm’s
docket, and simulate it in the class. We would have each of them interview
the client, and video that, and critique them, and all the way through to--I
think we went as far as summary judgment. Then we would put the work the
students did on the simulated case--we would use that in the real case,
also...their ideas and actual work. Then they would spend a couple of days at
the law firm, actually working on other cases, other than the ones that we
were simulating. We would have a regular seminar in which we would cover
other things that weren’t cases yet. It was--it was really something. When I
look back on it, I’m moved, because the students, who were wonderful
students in that class. They all--they were so brave.
[01:08:28] I wouldn’t have taken a whole semester off at law school to work
on something as wild as this. They all said that it was the most meaningful
experience they had in law school, so it was great. It was fun. I was doing
that and teaching civil procedure. That was enough for me in the semester.
[laughter]

97

Brest: Sounds like.
Babcock: [01:09:00] Do you know them? Wendy. Nancy.
Brest: Not really. We’ve met, but...
Babcock: [01:09:09] So that was the thing. I was very involved with them. I got--don’t
know when this happened--I’m not sure--the women--I think I taught
Women and Law a couple of times, too. But then I got--then this clinical
thing I did for five years.
Brest: Were there other clinical courses at the time?
Babcock: [01:09:45] Not many. I don’t think there were. Maybe they were just
beginning, but mostly not. No. This was a new thing to have something in
sex discrimination, and to have something clinical at all.
Brest: Were there any difficulties in, I don’t know, in getting to teach that? Or you
just say that’s what I want to do?”
Babcock: [01:10:16] People were just completely--I don’t know if they were
enthusiastic, [laughter] but they were just completely willing. Nobody stood
in my way, and nobody even suggested that. It’s only looking back on it that
I realized what a wild thing it was. At the time, I didn’t think it was,
particularly. But no, I must say, in terms of the way the law school treated
me, the school was just very receptive to anything I wanted to do. So that
was one. Sometimes people advised me against doing things that I went on
and did, like doing the Civil Procedure book.
[01:11:19] That, “You’ve already done the sex discrimination book, and these
are not real works of scholarship. You’ll always be the second author to
Carrington.” I just didn’t take that advice, just because, and I was right for

98

me, because having a book meant a lot to me. Having both books meant a
lot to me in terms of mastering the subject matter, and that kind of thing.
Brest: But it is true that normally, those don’t count heavily toward tenure, do they?
Was that a worry?
Babcock: [01:12:05] It wasn’t until I came right up on coming up for tenure, 1978. I
was--I was just suddenly struck by thinking, “My God. After all my success,
I’ve gotten myself into a position where I can fail and in this public way.”
Soon after I got here, poor Dick Markovitz was denied tenure. A man
[laughter] who was not only a good teacher--wasn’t he known as a good
teacher? Tom always said he was. He wasn’t?
Brest: I think that it was bimodal. There were some students for whom he was a
great teacher, and there were students who couldn’t understand a word he
said.
Babcock: [01:13:22] Well, I don’t know. I did, I heard that he was a good teacher, but
he certainly worked at it. He’d written all these things, and been first in every
class he had ever been in, from kindergarten on and he was denied tenure. It
was just like this public flogging or something. It was so awful. Do you
remember it? I just thought, oh my God. I don’t even know what their
standards are.
Brest: Had nobody been mentoring you?
Babcock: [01:14:11] No, no one had been mentoring me. They just thought I--but I
think they thought that I--you know how I seem [talking at same time] that I
am more--I seem competent and in charge. [laughter] I think they just
thought that I must know what I’m doing, which--I had no idea. When I

99

look back on it, it’s just kind of amazing to me. But I came up on it, and--and
I thought, oh my God. I’m not going to get tenure, and then what am I going
to do? It’s going to be such a public failure.
[01:15:05] So I went to Hawaii [laughter] to teach for a semester. I just didn’t
want to be here while people were--and again, everybody--and my friends
advised me against doing that, you know, said, “You should be here so that
people can ask you questions.”
Brest: And see how wonderful you are.
Babcock: [01:15:35] Also, it wasn’t very prestigious to go to Hawaii in the first year
that it was in existence--second year--still not very prestigious to go teach
there. I just wanted to get out of here, while this was being decided.
Brest: Did you have any scholarly articles at that time? [laughter]
Babcock: [01:16:09] You’re so delicate. I had one about Voir Dire that I wrote. Might
have had--one other. But I didn’t have what you would really call a tenure
piece, or anybody else would call a tenure piece. But I did have the fact that I
was the only woman they had ever hired. [laughter]
Brest: Yes, and you also did have spectacular teaching ratings, although teaching
was not normally valued as much.
Babcock: [01:16:45] No, and clinic. I had the unusual courses and the books. But I’m
sure--I don’t know. Tom was at the meeting, and...
Brest: Tom, being Tom Grey.
Babcock: [01:17:02] Tom Grey, my husband. Yes. But he wasn’t my husband at the
time. He has a terrible memory for details. I never really learned what went
on at the meeting, but I had the feeling that it wasn’t just smooth sailing. But

100

nevertheless, when I got tenure, really the day after, I just felt this burst of
confidence, and sense of loyalty and appreciation of the school, that really
was--I didn’t expect it. I mean, I didn’t expect to feel that way, and I had
come to see what a big thing it was, you know, to vote to have somebody
there for life, and have somebody be your colleague forever is a big deal. So
that’s what happened.
[01:18:12] Right after I got tenure, the Women’s Movement swept in again
and carried me to Washington to be assistant attorney general in the civil
division.
Brest: Why was that the Women’s Movement that did that?
Babcock: [01:18:36] Because Carter had promised to appoint women to all these
cabinet and sub-cabinet level appointments that women hadn’t had. He set
up this transition team of women that happened to include lots of people I
knew. He really did appoint a lot of women to his administration. I went
back to Washington and interviewed for general counsel of the Defense
Department, general counsel of what was then HEW, and the Justice
Department. Of course, what I wanted was to be solicitor general, which was
a job I’ve always wanted. That’s a job that--see, my main ambition in life was
to be the first woman on the Supreme Court. [01:19:51] But generally, I
would not like to be on the Supreme Court [laughter] because you have to
deal with these fools. But--to be the first woman on the Supreme Court
would be great. That’s what I was sort of aiming for. But solicitor general
would be a step toward that, and I would be happy to be solicitor general.
Now it’s too late, but I would be happy to do that anytime. I didn’t have to

101

be first. But I would have been first if I’d gotten it when I wanted it. But he
had already picked Wade McCree for that. Then I said--this is Griffin Bell,
who was the attorney general. So then I said, “Well, Civil Rights.”
[01:20:42] He said, no. he’d already chosen somebody for that. [laughter] I
said, “Well, Civil, then.” He said, “Well why would you want Civil? Why
don’t you want Criminal?” I said, “Well, Criminal--” I didn’t say that I’m a
defender at heart. I don’t really want to prosecute or supervise prosecutors.
But I just said, “I’ve gotten into this field now at Stanford, and I think
running the government’s civil litigation would be really interesting,” which
indeed it turned out was true.

Brest: Tell a little bit about how it was in Washington again.
Babcock: [01:22:59] It was--I love running a big government agency. The Civil
Division is--it was fun. I tried to mold it and make the Civil Division people
into really great government lawyers--that--the Department of Justice wins
when justice is done in the courts and that kind of thing. But it was hard. I
think it was--being a public defender had been really hard work. But -running
a big agency like the Civil Division--the amount of paperwork and meetings,
I mean, it was just reams of paperwork, and endless meetings.
[01:24:10] I’m very good at delegating. It’s one of my best skills. But I--there
was just too much work. There was just a certain amount of work that
couldn’t be delegated. I had to sign; I had to look at it. I had to think about
it. I just worked--I really worked so hard. But then I had--it’s one of the few
times in my life in which I had no social life at all, I mean, to speak of. Tom

102

and I had gotten together right before I left Stanford. I would--every six
weeks or so, we would manage to see each other somewhere. I’d be giving a
talk and he would come, or he would be giving a talk and I would come. But
otherwise, I just--ten or twelve hour days.
[01:25:29] I’m thinking about it--a lot of it was fun. But it was, when I look
back on it, it was just kind of overwhelmingly hard work, too. It doesn’t have
to be. You could just let it run itself...The Civil Division. It’s an old
institution, and it has the structures and its ways. But I was trying to improve
it and mold it and change it. I reorganized the whole thing because it
happened that the Civil Division was the first litigating division. It was
formed in 1868. It never was really organized. Just whenever a new law was
passed that the Civil Division had to defend or enforce, that would be a
cause to get more money, and a new little section.
[01:26:48] They have fourteen sections, all with its own little hierarchy, and in
competition with each other, and many doing very similar--if not the same
work.
Brest: So you reorganized it into a more rational...
Babcock: [01:28:05] I did. Into three large branches, and bringing together the people
that did the same kind of work. [laughter] It was funny because there was
tremendous--, resistance to the reorganization, which I did not expect s
because it was so logical, and it’s still logical. Many of the things that I tried
to do and orders that I issued were repealed by later administrations, but the
reorganization has stood. So I’m very proud of that. Though some

103

newspaper made fun of me when I was leaving Washington saying, “Barbara
Babcock says the best thing she did was reorganize the Civil Division.”
[01:29:02] Well, they don’t know what was involved in doing that. But I had a
lot of things in mind. I had wonderful people around me. I loved doing it. I
loved going in that beautiful building, the Department of Justice. It was
funny. In my recollections, I have a chapter called “General Babcock,”
because that was my title. General Babcock. But nobody ever called me that,
except Rehnquist, when I argued in the Supreme Court, [laughter] he kept
referring to me as General Babcock--which my parents loved.
Brest: I should think.
Babcock: [01:30:05] One of the best things about being on leave--I was on leave from
Stanford--is that I could always come back. I wasn’t trying to get the next
job. That just makes a huge difference in one of these big Washington jobs,
whether you’re trying to move on and move up. That gave me a kind of
power that was good to have. But I really got tired— And also I wanted to
come back. I knew that now that I had tenure it would be easier. (I had
gotten tenure in 1977). My first years in academia had been kind of hard for
me. I have to say, because I didn’t--I just, I didn’t feel like I had a good grip
on the whole thing. [laughter]
[01:31:25] But I knew that once I had tenure that the rest of it was going to
be easier, and more fun. Then I was in love with Tom, and, so I was eager to
come back. Then it’s all been roses since then. [laughter]

104

Brest: Has there been anything--from the time you came through now, do you have
any generalizations or observations about the role of women in the academy,
and law schools? Stanford in particular?
Babcock: [01:32:18] I think it’s been huge changes with the number of women, and
now,in our place, we have all these women now...women stars. It’s not
unusual for women--I think we’ve reached almost an ideal place, where we
don’t even think about whether somebody’s a woman or a man. We don’t
have to. I think we still need to think about that with racial minorities, but
with women, they’re--and that’s been--something that’s happened in my
lifetime that that has really changed. When I went to law school, I never had
a woman law professor...for anything...any course--or even heard of one.
Never met a woman lawyer until my second summer job.
[01:33:35] That would never happen today. You couldn’t get through a major
law school without having some women law professors. It just changes how
everybody feels, and the way it is for students, and for everybody. I think
we’ve made tremendous progress.
Brest: Did it have to be fought for? Were there obstacles that needed overcoming,
or was it just numbers became available?
Babcock: [01:34:14] I think there was real resistance to women coming into the
academy, particularly into law. But it was--but the resistance was really
overwhelmed by--first of all, the tremendous influx of women, which
happened partly because of--men couldn’t get draft deferrals for law school
so that the number of women applicants in comparison to men really rose
and the number of women. Then the Women’s Movement--of just--of really

105

seeking equality. Gender equality of all sorts changed the way people looked
at things--or changed things. I’m not sure of that--I wonder sometimes what
the old fellas would think. [laughter]
Brest: I mean, you’ve been there. Was there resistance--of you there? Did you
perceive any?
Babcock: [01:35:54] I’ve always been kind of oblivious to--I just go my way. [laughter]
Brest: Yes, I know.
Babcock: [01:36:10] But I’m sure there was. I certainly have known lots of women who
have met tremendous resistance. But I just overlook it. [laughter] I would just
say on the whole that I’ve--I have had a wonderful career here at Stanford. I
love Stanford. I love the place. I’ve grown to just really care about it, and
feel--I think we’ve done a--I just think we’ve made a really special, good law
school because we don’t have--the pretension and then there’s something
western about it. There’s an openness. We’ve kept that. It’s not--and also
staying small, I think, is very important. The decision to do that was a really
right decision. Also that we have an ethic of acceptance and inclusiveness
that I think is good, has served us well. I think it’s a great place. [laughter]
Brest: It’s so blessed. Now I know one of the things I’m supposed to ask about is
[laughter] honors and prizes, apart from your trophies for debate. [laughter]
Do you still have them?
Babcock: [01:38:48] No.
Brest: Oh, how sad.
Babcock: [01:38:49] I have one little thing from Harvard Law School, but it’s a crummy
little silver bowl. But it is the Harvard Debate Tournament. But that’s all. I

106

don’t have any of those big ones. When I went back to my 50th reunion at
Penn, I thought they might be in the display cases in the student union--but
they aren’t. I couldn’t find them anyway.
Brest: I know that you won a teaching award at Stanford Law School numerous
times.
Babcock: [01:39:23] Numerous times. That’s my favorite award. The Hurlbut Award,
where the graduating class gives you--chooses the teacher that they like the
best. It’s a popularity contest. [laughter] But I love that award. I love getting
it, and I love speaking to them at graduation. I love giving the graduation
speech, because everybody is so happy and in such a good mood, and they
might even remember something that you say. I have a couple of honorary
degrees, one from Puget Sound, and one from San Diego. [laughter]
[01:40:17] I have a--the best award or maybe the biggest national award is the
Margaret Brent Award, which is an award by the ABA to women leaders.
That’s a very good award. They started out doing it just one person a year.
It’s especially for women that have helped other women, which I just felt as
though--I’ve devoted a good part of my career to doing that. I thought I
should get it early on. But by the time I got it, it had become somewhat lesser
because they started giving it--[laughter] it’s such a typical thing, they started
giving it to three or four people, including one minority, and one person who
was notable in the place where the meeting was being held, and that kind of
thing. [laughter] But...
Brest: Distribution requirements.

107

Babcock: [01:41:36] Yes. No, no--it’s funny. But it’s a nice award. It’s a pretty little--it’s
a pretty thing to have in my house. I’ll show it to you, the Margaret Brent
Award. But as I say--and then I had an award from the Society of American
Law Teachers for teaching and service. But I haven’t gotten as many awards
as I would like. [laughter]
Brest: Apart from the Nobel Prize, which--the award you mentioned you haven’t
yet gotten, is there any other specific one that you’d be...
Babcock: [01:42:23] That I’d be after? Let’s see. Let me think. That’s a good question.
I’d like to have some kind of prize for my book, for the Clara book. I was
very disappointed not to have any of those, not to get any.
Brest: Tell about the book . When did you decide that you wanted to be a
biographer.
Babcock: [01:43:27] When I came back from Washington, D.C., I married Tom. I was
now secure, and I have tenure and everything. But I want to do the scholarly
part of the job. See, I felt like I had never really published a big tenure piece.
I spent a couple of years writing this piece that had the name, “Effective
Assistance of Counsel and Evidence Favorable to the Accused.” Terrible
title, but really good article and, again, these were the days before search
engines. I studied all the jurisdictions on Brady cases, which is that the
government has to turn over evidence favorable to the accused--and looked
into the administration of Brady, et cetera, and wrote this article, which
honestly is a very good article...even today. [Actual title is “Fair Play:
Evidence Favorable to an Accused and Effective Assistance of Counsel”.]

108

[01:44:54] I read it in the last year or so, and I’m impressed by it. [laughter]
But it took me all this time to do and the work of many young helpers. Then
it’s just like it fell into a black hole. The Supreme Court decided a case,
Washington v. Strickland, which decided the opposite of everything I had
said. Didn’t even cite my article. Oh, God. But then my article has gotten
picked up and cited a lot by later cases but often in dissent. I just thought
why, why would I, why do I want to do this? So then I--and I said to Tom, “I
really think maybe I should just go practice law” because I could parlay my
assistant attorney general for the civil division into a place at a law firm.
[01:46:04] There was still time to do it. I said, “I don’t feel right. I don’t want
to ever write another article like this, and yet I just don’t think it’s right to be
a law professor without writing.” He said, “No: you’re so important in the
things that you do, and the counseling, and the letters of recommendation
and things in the teaching. Don’t worry about it.” I felt very uneasy. Then
one day, this friend of mine who ran the public defender in Santa Clara called
and said, “Could you get a historian friend of yours to write a little article for
our 25th anniversary about the woman who started the public defender?”
[01:47:32] I said, “A woman started the public defender? I had never heard
of her.” So then I learned about Clara Foltz and I said, “Forget a historian.
I’ll do it.” [laughter] Then I just thought I’ll write a biography of this woman
who was such a huge figure in her day and totally unknown and forgotten. I
decided to do that. Everybody advised me against it, starting with John Ely
saying, “Look at Gerry Gunther.” [laughter] “He spent years and years and

109

years on this, and think of all the things he might have written if he hadn’t
been absorbed in this,” the biography of Learned Hand that he wrote.
Brest: That took him twenty-five years and more.
Babcock: [01:48:44] Yes. Well, he tried to say it was fifteen. But Posner, giving a little
talk at what was supposed to be a festschrift--but if [laughter] Posner talks;
it’s sort of a grilling. But he said the first interview he did in connection with
this was twenty-six years ago, he said. But anyway, and then--but people just
said--everybody said, “Biographies, first of all they’re not really respected.
They’re not real history. They all take a huge amount of time. Why would
you do a biography of an unknown regional figure?” Unknown regional
figure![laughter]
Brest: The point of doing the biography is that she had become so unknown.
Babcock: [01:49:59] Yes, exactly. So I set off, and I had a wonderful time doing it,
though I did at times--I wrote a lot of articles along the way just to shut
people up. [laughter] But I did. I had a wonderful time. It was like living with
another person. I feel like I really got to know her. I enjoyed it. I feel like it’s
a really good book, and it is getting recognition. If I can get this memoir
published, I think it’s going to help Clara because I write about--writing
about Clara. But I do think that people--that it could become popular and
important, but probably not in my lifetime. [laughter]
[01:51:23] But it’s being used in courses and things, and that’s what matters. I
don’t have any--I really enjoyed doing it. I’m satisfied that it’s a good book.
I’m also really satisfied that nobody else could have done it, because --I can

110

just see--the unknown regional figure, there’s no papers anywhere. I’ve had
to collect everything on my own. There’s still not a lot.
Brest: Did you collect, actually, documents?
Babcock: [01:52:09] Well, things like transcripts of her trials and things that come from
appeals, appellate records and things. But there’s nowhere that anything is
ever gathered together. Then she was in the newspapers all the time. It was a
tremendous amount of newspapers--21 daily papers in San Francisco...21.
They often had several editions every day. She was in the paper all the time.
So there’s lots of sources but not the things that you would love to have, like
love letters and things like that. I mean, I’ve got some letters that she wrote
to people that are in their papers but not a lot of those either.
Brest: Like for your own memoir, the way you have your diary?
Babcock: [01:53:15] I have my diaries. I have letters, and I have--I have a lot of
sources. It’s been the most fun to write. I can’t even tell you how much fun
it’s been.
Brest: So how far along?
Babcock: [01:53:34] I think it’s pretty much finished. Yes. I’ve got an agent, and she’s
trying to--she’s going to start trying to sell it anyway, she says. We’ll see.
Even though I’m not happy with how fast she’s moved on it or anything, but
I--still it’s so wonderful to have an agent just to have somebody else worrying
about it. So it’s good.
Brest: I totally look forward to it. I loved the chapter that you sent to me.
Babcock: [01:54:12] Oh, good. Which one did I send you? I sent you the, “Falling into
Feminism.”

111

Brest: Yes.
Babcock: [01:54:18] Yes, which describes coming to Stanford. Yes, that’s good. That’s
a good one.
Brest: It really is. It’s totally charming.
Babcock: [01:54:28] Thank you. Glad you liked it.
Brest: Oh, I loved it and look forward to the rest.
Babcock: [01:54:34] Yes. Great. Great.
Brest: All right. Is there anything else we ought to have covered?
Babcock: [01:54:43] I think we’ve covered enough anyway.
Brest: OK. We’ll stop.
Babcock: [01:54:48] I’ve enjoyed it very much.
Brest: Sorry. This is a postscript. I just recall that we did not talk about other--as
other women law professors came to the law school, how things changed.
How the atmosphere or--how anything changed. When did it happen?
Although we’re not too great on dates.
Babcock: [01:55:17] It didn’t happen very fast, let me tell you that. For the first five
years, I was here, there were no other women.
Brest: Were you distressed over this?
Babcock: [01:55:28] I was very distressed over it. I kept trying to bring up women and
bringing them up. People would actually say at the faculty meeting, “We
know that you need a companion, [laughter] but we don’t.” I just wanted to
scream, “A companion?” [laughter] But I had no success at all. I remember
specifically, Brooksley Born, who was our graduate, you know, who has since
made quite a name for herself, was one of the people that I brought up that

112

they wouldn’t even look at. But anyway, not until I left to go back to be
assistant attorney general was the second woman hired. That was Carol Rose.
She only stayed a year and really couldn’t stand it--being the only woman-- in
Palo Alto, which was--harder in those days. Then they hired Deborah Rhode.
Deborah was here when I came back. She was the second woman. For many
years, she and I were the only women.
Brest: All this time you kept proposing other people?
Babcock: [01:57:04] Oh. Kept proposing other people. Are you kidding? Yes.
Brest: So why would they...?
Babcock: [01:57:10] Just absolutely, “These other people, they didn’t look like the really
great men we could hire.” It was just--it was a peculiar kind of resistance,
because it was not--everybody was nice, although the underlying thing, the
underlying thing that people said was, “Just give it time. They’ve got to be
women that look as good as the men, women that had the same credentials
as the men. But these women don’t. The women you’re bringing up don’t,”
though some of them, like Brooksley, did. But it really was--it was very
frustrating. In 1982, I was the head of the appointments committee. We
hired Ellen Borgersen, who had the same credentials as a man. Clerked on
the Supreme Court, and was a partner at a law firm.
Brest: I didn’t think that partnering at law firms got you anywhere.
Babcock: [01:58:40] It didn’t. No. yes, that’s true. But she clerked on the Supreme
Court. She had written some things. But at least she was a third woman. The
three of us struggled.
Brest: Struggled?

113

Babcock: [01:59:05] To get more women. That’s all.
Brest: So all of you were...?
Babcock: [01:59:10] Adjoined, [laughter] and trying. We had some allies, like Paul
[Brest] and Tom [Grey], who were willing. Mark Kelman got into it, trying to
help us find somebody that could be accepted. I’m not exactly sure who
broke--the barrier broke, and then it was an influx. It was also just--where we
got to where we are now, where I think is the ideal place to be. But, for many
years, it really was that there was an impenetrable barrier. Yes.
Brest: You can’t remember how it was breached?
Babcock: [02:00:15] I think it was just that it got to be a point where there were women
who had done these things. Clerked on the Supreme Court, written
important things, had important jobs, who were coming. Yes.
Brest: So in a sense, it really was just time.
Babcock: [02:00:40] It was just time. Yes. Meanwhile, lots of really neat women were
passed over. [sentences deleted]
