
Waldron: I’m Manjula Waldron, interviewing Professor Helen Blau, the Donald E.
and Delia B. Baxter Foundation Professor and Director of Baxter
Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology at Stanford University on July 31, 2015
at 9 a.m. We are in her office in the Baxter Laboratory at Stanford. This
interview is part of the Stanford Historical Society’s Pioneering Women
Oral History Project.
So Helen, if it’s OK with you, I will begin by asking some broad, general
questions about your career. You’re a researcher and director of the
Baxter Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology. How did that come about?
What difference did it make to your career?
Blau: [00:01:01] I was appointed chair of Molecular Pharmacology in 1997 and
was one of the first woman chairs in basic science in the medical school.
In 1999, I was named the Donald E. and Delia B. Baxter Professor in
honor of my accomplishments in science. It was a major sign of
recognition, and made a huge difference to my career. And in 2002, I was
named the director of an endowed lab, the Baxter Laboratory, with three
professors and approximately eighty trainees occupying most of the third

13

floor of the orange wing of CCSR, the Clinical Sciences Research
Building.
[00:01:45] This gave me an amazing opportunity to develop an interactive
and strong group, doing cutting edge science and contributing to the
School of Medicine in major ways. Our Baxter group are leaders in stem
cell biology. I run the Stem Cell Regenerative Medicine seminar series for
the university together with Minx Fuller [Margaret T. Fuller]. Garry
Nolan runs the CyTOF lab. He has developed a whole new technology
for proteomics and is the director of the FACS facility as well. Peter
Jackson, who joined us recently, is an expert in mass spectrometry.
It’s a very strong group of innovative, creative scientists who have
synergistic interests and work very well together. Having this endowment
was also a financial cushion that made a tremendous difference in a very
tangible way.
Waldron: Fantastic. I think what I’d like to do is get the story behind your success,
and have you help us understand what makes a great woman scientist?
I’m going to go with your article in the journal, Nature Cell Biology, that
you wrote some time ago. In it you quoted Shakespeare and you said,
“There’s a divinity that shapes our ends, roughhew them how we will.”
Further, you talked about being in Europe through your school years.
How did your early adventures influence your professional journey and
bring you to the doors of scientific research? Can you tell us that story?
Blau: [00:03:40] Sure. My research defied the Shakespearean adage. A lot of it
had to do with my family and my background, and growing up in

14

Germany. My parents fled from Nazi Europe. They were both from
Vienna, Austria. Before the war, my father was a very successful
businessman in France, working for Lever Brothers, and he lived the
good life on the Cote d’Azur. He made his way to the United States,
escaping from the Nazis from Les Milles, a camp near Marseilles, stowed
away on a boat to Santa Domingo where he paved roads for a while. He
eventually made it to Ellis Island and then New York. He became an
American citizen and served in the U.S. Army during World War II,
stationed first in England and then in France. After the war, he studied
on the G.I. Bill of Rights and became a historian.
[00:04:23] In 1955, he moved the family to Germany as a U.S. citizen,
where he wrote the classified history of the last years of the war and the
immediate postwar period. He later became the Chief of Military History
for the U.S. government for Europe, advising and writing on the Balkans
and Russia, among other things. That’s how I came to grow up in
Germany and spend my childhood in Europe. I’m extremely proud of
my father’s achievements and grateful for the opportunities my parents
provided me for living and traveling extensively in Europe.
My mother, who had been educated and trained as a teacher in England
during the war, was a passionate scholar of German and English
literature and taught at the University of Heidelberg. My mother was a
huge influence on my career as well--always researching and finding
extraordinary opportunities for my sister and me.

15

[00:04:57] My mother was a great beauty and had a natural elegance,
grace and style. She used to talk about the frustrations of doing tasks for
which there was nothing to show. You clean the house, you make the
meals, and there’s nothing to show over the years. She emphasized the
importance of education and how everything could be taken away from
you--all material goods--as had happened to my parents with the Nazis.
Education was the only thing that couldn’t be taken away. My father was
also extremely supportive of me. He had sparkly blue eyes and a
wonderful way with words, a sharp mind and a great sense of humor. He
also impressed on me and my sister, Eve Blau, the value of knowledge
and higher degrees, and he emphasized the value of education. Both my
sister and I took that to heart. My sister got her PhD from Yale and is
now a professor of the history of urban form at the Harvard School of
Design. We both pursued higher education and became professors.
My family was very close knit and we enjoyed wonderful outings,
scavenging for wild mushrooms and lilies of the valley, enjoying picnics
in the woods. And we went to operas, concerts and theatre--it was a rich
childhood.
Our family traveled a lot when I was young, and I think that impacted my
approach to science. It had a very formative effect on my career.
Exploring the world with my family and visiting different countries gave
me perspective and fueled my curiosity and my adventurous nature. As a
child I spent summers living with French and Austrian families, and went

16

to camps in Denmark and Switzerland. I learned languages and how to
negotiate complex cultural and social environments at a very young age.
[00:06:18] When I was nine, my sister and I went to live with a family
near Salzburg in Austria. There we rode on white Lipizzaner horses.
These were the Spanish riding school horses of Vienna that have highly
controlled, stylized movements and jumps. We also collected fresh eggs
from the village farms and milked cows. That was the first time I’d ever
milked a cow, and I remember being unceremoniously kicked and ending
up in a pile of manure. [laughter] It was quite an adventure. At fourteen, I
convinced my parents to send me to France.
[00:06:49] I wanted to learn French and experience another culture. I
went to Brittany with a dictionary in hand. I knew no French at all, just
“oui” and “non.” There I rode mopeds and sailed into the sunset. I loved
the profound tidal changes and rich colors of the countryside. I watched
the women who were washing laundry by hand with a washboard in the
river and the men who would cut fresh crabs in half with an ax on a
stone wall. I had a new camera and this adventure afforded me with a
wonderful photographic opportunity. I love photography and would
shoot photos from dawn to dusk.
[00:07:26] I went as a paying guest originally, and then I made friends and
was invited to the Cote d’Azur where I spent three summers. There I
loved climbing fig trees and almond trees, harvesting the fruits and eating
the fresh flesh of sea urchins with a swipe of a baguette, picking grapes in
the vineyard, singing French folk songs, watching octopus be harpooned,

17

and dancing into the wee hours of the morning. I had remarkable
adventures while learning French, such as being lowered via a rope to the
bottom of a deep well in a bucket with, the circle of visible light
becoming ever smaller. And I enjoyed the traditions, especially the pastis
aperitif, cheese course, and espresso after lunch. It was an incredible
experience.
I think the reason I’m describing these adventures is because they had a
great influence on me. They made me adaptable. I learned quickly how to
deal with new environments and how to figure out the ropes. And I think
that was an invaluable lesson in life, understanding how to relate to
different people and countries, languages and cultures.
[00:08:16] These adventures impacted my science. My thoughts and my
behavior were shaped and changed by these diverse locales and
experiences. So I wondered, why couldn’t the same be true for a cell? I
think it’s no surprise that the burning question that I addressed as an
assistant professor was, whether a cell’s destiny is fixed and irreversible
or could be changed? At the time, it was thought that a cell’s fate was
terminal and irreversible and I didn’t like that idea. I felt that since I
could be altered by my environment, perhaps a cell could, too.
[00:08:58] I designed experiments to challenge that dogma, which was the
foundation of my research program. What I showed was that there is
incredible flexibility in the fate of the cell and that a liver cell, for
instance, that is destined to be part of the liver and specialized to
function in the liver can be changed and induced to express genes such as

18

muscle genes that it normally never would express. This went against the
beliefs of the time and stirred quite a lot of interest.
Waldron: What a great tribute to your parents and the opportunities that they
provided. Did it affect you earlier in life, bring any rewards when you
were younger in school, your curious mind asking these incredible
questions? Did teachers give you any rewards in school, for projects,
science projects?
Blau: [00:09:57] I guess there were some formative scientific experiences I had
when I look back on my life. I went to school in Heidelberg, Germany,
and then I was an undergraduate at the University of York in England. I
went there, I guess, because my father thought it was a bargain. He liked
bargains and it was a three-year program instead of four. You could get
your bachelor’s degree in three years and it was only $1,500 in tuition per
year. So that was a huge bargain compared to the United States. But
more seriously, I had an uncle who was a headmaster of a large
comprehensive school in England and he encouraged me to come to
England to one of the “new universities.” And I went to the University
of York because it was renowned in biology.
[00:10:43] In addition, the British universities had a tradition of a tutorial
system and essay writing that I think was invaluable. We learned to
express ourselves orally and in writing, to craft an argument, and defend
a point of view. That’s invaluable in any walk of life. I think that
communication is absolutely crucial to success in biology and in every
field. Writing is a skill that I attribute to my father who helped me with

19

my reports when I was in high school, as well as to the University of
York and the English system of tutorials, weekly one-on-one sessions
between a professor and a student to discuss and debate an in-depth
essay on a particular topic.
Would you like to know about my early research experiences? I guess
that’s what you were getting at.
Waldron: Even school projects, science projects.
Blau: [00:11:32] It’s sort of a funny story. When I was in sixth grade, there was
a science fair and I decided to enter. I found a skull in the woods and
wondered what this skull was. There really wasn’t much left to it. There
was a jawbone and some teeth, so I had to research what sort of creature
it was. I went to the University of Heidelberg and dug out books to learn
about teeth and jaws. Luckily it turned out not to be a boring domestic
animal such as a cow, but a wild red deer, a doe. For the work that I did
on studying the jaw and teeth, I won a science fair prize.
[00:12:17] I guess that showed that I had an early interest in science, but I
also tremendously enjoyed drama, languages and literature. But it really
was at university that my interest in science crystallized. I was working
with Ramsey Bronk when I found out that I really loved science. I had an
undergraduate thesis project on regeneration--which is what I work on
now, and so it was prescient. I sought to understand liver regeneration.
What I worked on was a striking phenomenon--that one could remove
parts of the liver and they would grow back. This is about the only organ
we have that regenerates. Unlike salamanders and newts that can

20

regenerate their entire limbs or their hearts, we humans are quite pathetic
and deficient in that respect.
[00:13:06] I cut out the large lobes of the liver, and then I studied their
regeneration in the absence of thyroid hormone and analyzed their
mitochondrial function. I felt like a surgeon--it was thrilling--and what
amazed me was that the liver knew how to grow back to reach its final
mass. It knew its ultimate size and yet the proportions of the lobes were
completely altered. The small lobes became large and the originally large
lobes became small, but it sensed its final mass. It knew when to stop
growing. To this day, although major signaling networks have been
resolved, we don’t totally understand how liver regeneration is regulated.
Regeneration is something that has fascinated me for decades and has
dictated the direction of my research.
Waldron: From York, it seems like your destiny was restarted. It brought you from
Europe to the U.S. How did you end up at Harvard?
Blau: [00:14:11] There was another research experience that was incredibly
formative and fueled my passion for research. The summer of my
sophomore year at college I went to Erling-Andechs near Munich and
worked in Jurgen Aschoff’s Max Planck Institute for Behavioral
Physiology. There I did research on students who would go into
underground bunkers. The idea was to see whether they had endogenous
circadian clocks, endogenous circadian rhythms that could dictate their
routines, control their lives. To examine that, we gave students room and
board for an entire month so they could study for their exams. They were

21

in underground bunkers that were devoid of magnetic cues or light cues
and any human contact.
[00:15:09] They could turn on the lights when they wanted to, but there
were no external cues. The question was--did they have an inherent
circadian rhythm? And strikingly, we found that the natural circadian
rhythm is twenty-five hours, not twenty-four, and that humans are
entrained; it’s not our natural clock. As a result, the students would lose
an hour every day. But there was one student who was remarkable. When
we came to get her at the end of a month, she thought she had only
spent half her time there and that was because she had a rhythm of fortyeight hours. She was a real outlier and she was shocked that her time was
up for studying for her exam. Through this experience, I was deeply
impressed by the impact of circadian rhythms on our lives. In fact, now
we know that circadian oscillators are critically important. If you have a
disrupted circadian rhythm, your chance of breast cancer and sleep
disorders is increased. These cues are very, very important.
Waldron: Amazing how science has progressed over the years just by inquiring
minds like yours.
Blau: [00:16:28] Thank you.
Waldron: Were there any connections networking? You mentioned travel and your
curious mind had a lot to do with your success. But were there any
people who made connections for you at Harvard and at York? There
wouldn’t have been many women so there must’ve been your male

22

professors who believed in you. Would you want to comment a little bit
about how that influenced your career at Harvard?
Blau: [00:17:07] I think that chance plays a big role in our careers as well as
seizing the opportunities that come before us. Professor Bronk, who was
my advisor at York, was an incredible man and I didn’t totally realize it at
the time. When I went to see him having determined that I really liked
research, I said I’m thinking about graduate school, perhaps Edinburgh
or London. He said, “You know, I think you should consider Oxford or
Cambridge”. And then he said, “Actually, I think you should go to the
United States.” He himself was from the United States. I didn’t know it
at the time but his father was Detlev Bronk, the president of Rockefeller.
[00:17:50] He said you should find out whether your U.S. origin means
something to you. After all, I was a U.S. citizen, or I am a U.S. citizen
and British citizen, a dual citizen. He encouraged me to go to the States
and have interviews for graduate school, and that transformed my future,
opened the doors. When I went to Harvard, I discovered that I loved
research even more than I had realized. What I felt at Harvard was that
your ideas, your creativity, your energy were the limit. You could do
whatever you wanted. That was an amazing experience.
Waldron: You met your spouse in Harvard, didn’t you?
Blau: [00:18:41] Yes, I did.
Waldron: Would you like to tell a little more about how you met him and what
impact that relationship had on your career, family and other things?

23

Blau: [00:18:55] Yes, I met David at an internship match party. He was happy
about his match, and he spoke French and played folk music. I thought
that was an incredible match for me [laughter]. Actually, seriously, we
complement each other extremely well. We’re both in medicine, in
science. David is a research psychiatrist and that complements my basic
science studies. We like to joke that he covers the mind and I cover the
body. We understand each other’s work and when we have very
important papers to write or talks to give, we run them by each other. So
we can understand each other’s work and we have that higher level view
of it that can be very helpful, and yet we have distinct areas. We’re not on
top of each other. I think that’s been incredibly important to our careers
and nurturing one another and encouraging each other. In fact, I think
choosing the right husband is absolutely key. I’m very lucky that David
chose me and I chose him. We’re very synergistic. He’s also been
incredibly supportive of my having a family and pursuing my career, for
which I’m so grateful.
[00:20:15] David wanted me to pursue it fully. We discussed it early and
we used my entire salary in order to provide support because I realized
that there was no way I could do the childcare, the gardening, the
cooking, and the cleaning. I needed that help so that when I was home, I
could really be with the children and that made all the difference.
Waldron: Selecting the right spouse, and having chance and opportunities coincide,
seizing the opportunities, traveling, a curious mind. What other qualities
would you say have been behind your success that we haven’t covered so

24

far? Were you always interested in literature and did you write? Is writing
important?
Blau: [00:21:19] I think that writing is invaluable and I’ve always loved to write,
and I’ve fantasized about writing a children’s book on The Little Stem Cell.
I think it would be fun because the little stem cell is a bit like a child in its
niche, a home in which it is protected and then it has to go out into the
world and regenerate tissues and become specialized, develop an identity.
I haven’t written that yet. It would be a way not only to educate children
but also their parents, so it has a dual function. One day I may do that.
But back to your question, I think that the qualities that have really
helped me in my career are being bold, being creative, taking risks,
challenging the dogma of the time, not doing the next most obvious
experiment.
[00:22:15] In addition, creating a laboratory atmosphere that’s conducive
to discovery. It’s really important to have a place where people feel they
have their own research domain, but also where they can interact and
help one another. There’s an energy that comes from that synergy that’s
very important, that’s key to discovery and innovation. I really like to
promote people’s careers. I want them to learn all the different aspects of
a career so they can hit the ground running when they take a faculty job,
so they know how to write a paper, how to present a talk, how to
communicate ideas and results and their significance.
[00:22:47] Communication is key, orally and in writing. When my
students leave the lab, people know that they’re going to know the ropes,

25

they’ll be able to get grants, they’ll be able to publish and do well. I’m
extremely proud of their successes. When I go to national and
international meetings in my field--Gordon Research Conferences,
FASEB meetings, often ten percent or more of the speakers will be exBlau lab members, people who came from my lab who are now
professors in Europe, Australia and the U.S. That is a great source of
pride for me. I’d say fifty percent of them are women, so I’ve somehow
empowered the women in my lab by the atmosphere I create. That’s
something that gives me a lot of pleasure and a lot of pride.
Waldron: While you’ve been able to do this for all the other women, where did you
pick these skills up yourself?
Blau: [00:23:43] I guess I had to wing it. No one really taught me and I wanted
to create an environment that was different from the ones in which I
developed as a student and postdoc. I purposefully did that. Another key
thing I think I did was to have a multidisciplinary approach. That’s a
critical to success as well--having an open mind and being able to
incorporate different kinds of skills and bring them to bear on your
research question. For example, a major interest of mine is in muscle
stem cells, and how to enhance muscle regeneration and muscle strength,
which could impact our quality of life by repairing and restoring muscle
function, for instance, after an injury or immobilization or atrophy due to
aging.
[00:24:46] I’ll give a couple of examples of this multidisciplinary
approach. One of the dilemmas in the field of late was that when you

26

isolate a muscle stem cell and put it in culture on a traditional plastic dish,
it loses all of its stem cell properties and that hinders the study of the
stem cells. What we did was to think about how the stem cell experiences
the world, and I think this view goes back to my traveling and
perspective from different countries. I thought perhaps the
microenvironment a stem cell experiences is really different in the muscle
tissue in the body than in the dish.
[00:25:24] To test this, we measured the stiffness or rigidity of muscle
tissue and found that it is five orders of magnitude less stiff than a plastic
dish. The muscle stem cell never experiences anything like a plastic dish
and we thought that perhaps this rigidity played a role in its function. I
was amazed at how big a role it played. I brought in bioengineers and
chemical engineers and they were able to fabricate hydrogels, which are
materials that can be modulated to have different stiffness, ranging from
very soft like brain to very stiff like plastic or bone. We fabricated these
different stiffnesses of hydrogel and plated the stem cells on them.
[00:26:03] We found that, lo and behold, when they were on a stiffness
that was comparable to muscle tissue, relatively soft, they flourished. We
could maintain the stem cells in culture in a stem cell state for a week or
two weeks in a way that you couldn’t by traditional methods. That was a
major insight. It also enabled us to get to the next step. We wanted to
know how we could enhance stem cell function. Having a way to culture
them allowed us to do that. So then we could screen for drugs that would
enhance their function, and expand the population so that you could get

27

more stem cells. We also found that in aging, the stem cells decline in
their functional capacity to regenerate.
[00:26:51] We plated them in our soft hydrogel culture platform and
tested different drugs to see whether we could find something that would
allow the stem cells in the aged to be rejuvenated. We found a drug that
targets p38 MAP kinase and induces a rejuvenation of the function of the
population of aged muscle stem cells. Using another technology, a
multidisciplinary technology, we were able to show that it’s actually a
subset of the cells. You’re not turning the clock back on the entire
population of aged cells, but instead selecting for that one third that is
still functional in the aged and expanding those and thus enhancing their
function.
[00:27:35] It was really interesting to know that we could do this, not only
at a fundamental level, but also because it has enormous implications for
translation to regenerative medicine. The way we could determine that
was by working with artificial intelligence experts--a really fun
collaboration that we developed with Sebastian Thrun here at Stanford,
who was the head of the Artificial Intelligence Institute. He’s known for
having developed Google Street View and he’s a brilliant guy when it
comes to imaging. We went to see him and we presented our project,
that we wanted to follow stem cells while they were dividing in a
hydrogel in culture.
[00:28:21] We wanted to track their cell divisions by time lapse
microscopy and follow their fate and determine their genologic lineage.

28

This is actually not a trivial thing to do. We were doing it just like all the
other scientists, by bringing in students to score the movies that we made
of these stem cells in culture, watching their cell divisions, their
movements, their interactions and their cell fate changes by gene
expression. But this is very labor intensive. It takes a high school student
who’s very smart--it takes them a week to do this for one movie. But
your eye is remarkably good at distinguishing a cell and its progeny once
it divides. Teaching a computer to do it, which would be invaluable
because it would be automated, not subjective, and you could go through
thousands of movies in no time, is a major challenge. Sebastian really
liked that idea.
[00:29:12] He’d never worked on a micro imaging project, only macro
imaging like Google Street View; and he liked the idea of working on a
medical problem, he’d never done that before either. We combined
forces and he presented this project to his master’s students, saying “this
is Nobel prizewinning work,” and of course we got teams of students
signing up to work on it. We had three teams of three students the first
year. Unfortunately, nothing came of that. The next year, a very brilliant
student surfaced--Klas Magnusson, a Swedish student who was at Stanford
doing his master’s degree. I continue to work with him and he’s
developed an algorithm, a way of tracking the cells by time-lapse
microscopy and studying their fate decisions as part of his Ph.D. thesis in
Sweden.

29

[00:30:00] We can look at changes in shape, changes in movement and
trajectory, fate decisions and cell death, and rates of division--symmetric
and asymmetric divisions--which are really informative when testing drug
effects and growth factor effects, both fundamentally and practically.
We’ve won the international cell tracking competition three years in a
row now for his algorithms, which we named The Baxter Algorithms in
honor of the family who endowed our lab. I’m very proud of that. It’s
actually built Klas’ career and also taken us in a new direction, and
enabled us to make discoveries we never would have otherwise made.
This kind of multidisciplinary approach and collaborating across
expertise enables you to do things in a new way and get new insights.
Waldron: That’s awesome indeed. It seems like open mind and travel--as they say,
travel opens your mind--that’s the theme in your story. You have a family
and spouse support and help at home, but as a family, as you balance
your family and illustrious career with all these research projects, are
there some crucial decisions that you made that were harmful, too, along
the way that told you no, no, no, not that way?
Blau: [00:31:56] Juggling family and science was always a challenge. It was
always a dilemma. I never felt I did justice to the family or to my work. I
felt I never spent enough hours in one place or the other, and I think
that’s just the name of the game. You have to live with that pull on
yourself. On the other hand, there is nothing as stimulating as having
both and not putting all your eggs in one basket, not completely devoting
your life to family, or to work. I think I would’ve been pushing my

30

children like crazy because of my own ambition if I had only had the
family. But having another outlet gave me balance. I was able to really be
very adventurous in my research because it wasn’t the only thing I was
doing. I had the family.
[00:32:52] And that allowed me to be creative as a mother and, as a result,
I really, really enjoyed being a mother and a scientist. I had my scientific
family--I’ve just told you about how well they’ve done and I am so proud
of them and enjoy them immensely. I like to help them develop, to speak
to their strengths and weaknesses, and help them in their careers. I also
really enjoyed being a mother. It allowed me to be a child again. I could
play with the kids. We would do wild and crazy things like making cakes
for school with every color of icing all mixed in patterns, really gaudy,
that we would bring to school. We always brought our own creations.
[00:33:30] We would go to the train station and put pennies on the track
and watch them be flattened, and we’d bring home frogs from the creek
and study them at home. We had a wonderful time and I really enjoyed
both. It’s that balance that allowed me to be as creative as I have been in
my career. Having a balanced life with travel, children and work, that’s
what did it for me. I’m not saying that would be the same for everyone,
but for me I think it really made all the difference.
Waldron: You mentioned that David also had a career at Stanford. Do you feel he
had the same kind of pressures about family and work as you did, or
were they different narratives for him as for you? Did that cause any
struggle or decisions that you both had to negotiate as you went along?

31

Blau: [00:34:46] I think the mother’s role is often to coordinate everything, all
the doctor’s visits, all the school issues, all the outside activities, swim
lessons, music lessons. But my husband really helped in executing and
carrying them out and we shared that burden. We were really a team and
that made a huge difference. You need a team like that, you need a
supportive husband.
As for the pressures at work, I think we both had them. We had our
children before we got tenure. Both of us were on the tenure track. That
was an active decision. We did not want to miss out. That biological
clock was ticking; I did not want to miss having children nor did David.
We decided to take that risk and it was not easy; there was the fear that it
wouldn’t work out. I think we were tremendously lucky that we both did
well and did first rate work that awarded us tenure here at Stanford,
because that was not a given. We’re very proud of this accomplishment.
We are very happy and feel very lucky to be here. It has been a fantastic
place to develop our careers. Stanford allows you to think outside the
box and the only criteria for tenure are that you are creative, that you
have made an impact on the world. You’re being judged in your own
right versus the world. You need to make a name for yourself, but you
are not competing with your neighbor. You also don’t need to do a
certain kind of work. You can try out your own ideas. Be creative. That’s
a fantastic atmosphere in which to be able to grow and to develop your
career.

32

Waldron: Since you brought up Stanford, maybe we can go into your Stanford
career. You certainly lend credence to luck favors the prepared mind.
[laughter] Your life story thus far definitely says that.
Blau: [00:37:20] That’s true.
Waldron: Tell us a little bit about how you got hired at Stanford, which department
were you hired in? When was it?
Blau: [00:37:27] I was hired in 1978 just after three years of being a postdoc,
that’s something that has really changed. I was given my first job at age
twenty-nine and began at age thirty. Nowadays, scientists have to go
through several postdocs and they’re much older by the time they start
their first job, which I think is not a good thing. I was lucky to get my job
at Stanford early. I was hired into the department on tenure track, one of
the first women on the tenure track in the medical school in basic
sciences, in the Department of Pharmacology. Carla Schatz was hired at
the same time and so was Ann Arvin.
[00:38:15] We were pioneers at Stanford and rumor has it that it was part
of an Affirmative Action policy, and the departments that hired us were
compensated for our salaries for doing so. I think it’s safe to say that they
did well on their bet. They took a risk, but they did all right when you
look at how the three of us have managed. I was hired in the
Pharmacology Department at the same time as three men, so we were
like classmates. Four of us being hired at the same time at the same rank
was incredible. This constituted a major expansion in the department
and, as a result, we collaborated.

33

[00:38:56] We pooled our money and resources for shared equipment
and made the money last longer, and we also teamed up and had a lot of
camaraderie around teaching and developing our research programs. I
think it was a very fortunate situation that I came into at the med school.
Waldron: What a wonderful testimony to Affirmative Action. [laughter]
Blau: [00:39:22] Yes, it’s true.
Waldron: You mentioned there weren’t many women faculty, and the fact that
Stanford believed in you, and they certainly got much more bang for
their money.
Blau: [00:39:37] I really had no role models. There were no women I could
look to and certainly when I got pregnant, people looked at me and
wondered whether I would come back, whether I would really pursue
this career. I felt very fortunate to have the opportunity, but I also felt I
had to prove myself. It was a bit of a stress and pressure, but it worked
out.
Waldron: What was the work environment like for you? You mentioned that you
early on had that sense for collaboration and working with men. What
were the attitudes of people who were older? The professors? You
mentioned that they thought you weren’t going to come back when you
were pregnant. The younger ones that were hired with you, did they have
a different attitude in your relationship? Did you notice anything? Was
there generational change?
Blau: [00:40:36] It was a time of big change. When I got my job, they had just
lifted the anti-nepotism rule; in other words, previously a wife could not

34

be hired at Stanford if her husband were was hired there. Believe it or
not, that was the case before I was hired. But just that year, they had
changed the law and that was a stroke of luck for me as well, because I
was able to be hired in the same institution where David was hired. That,
of course, has changed in spades and there are many couples here on the
faculty at Stanford now, and the university realizes that that’s often a
coup and also that it’s essential that you allow couples to both work in
the same place if you want to attract the best and the brightest.
[00:41:25] Yes, it was a very collaborative atmosphere and that was a nice
way to come in. The senior faculty, I remember one in particular, Avram
Goldstein, who was a legend at the time. He was a fantastic lecturer, and
he was a mentor to me in some ways and to the other junior faculty as
well. He would come to our lectures in pharmacology--he was renowned
for his lecturing abilities--and he would give us tips on how to lecture and
tips on our careers. That was invaluable. But there were some senior
faculty who wondered and watched and were curious how a woman
faculty member would manage, because there really were not many
around at the time.
[00:42:12] I felt that I was being watched and I had to reach a higher
standard and really achieve during those first years in order to impress
them, and that required being exceptional, which was a bit of a stress.
Waldron: But you are exceptional. It’s really a great testimony to civil rights. It’s the
fiftieth year now we’re going and you were hired thirteen years after as an
Affirmative Action person. But you’ve kind of shown that it wasn’t the

35

Affirmative Action, it was your ability or vitality, your sense of openness
and ability to expand the horizons at Stanford. That’s how I’ve heard
your story so far.
Blau: [00:43:05] I just loved what I did. I think that’s the most important thing-that you do what you love, and I love doing research. I love solving
mysteries and when you solve one, then that leads you to another and it
never ends. One of the first things I did was to challenge the dogma that
cells were fixed in their destiny and I developed a new way to look at
that. It was known in frogs at the time that a cell was plastic and could
change its fate. That you could take the nucleus of an intestine cell and
put it into an enucleated oocyte and make an entire frog, that that
intestine nucleus was plastic enough, flexible enough, to make a whole
organism.
[00:43:54] That was the work of John Gurdon who was awarded the
Nobel Prize just a couple of years ago. People at the time thought that
this was a frog phenomenon and I wanted to see if it held true for
mammals. But I had to devise a way to do that. I think this was the
hallmark of my early career and what led to it. We had three Cell papers
and a Science paper. I think that’s really how I got tenure, for the
recognition of this new approach and what it showed. I had the idea
actually as a graduate student and then I worked on it as a postdoc.
[00:44:29] But it wasn’t until I was an assistant professor that I figured
out the best approach to this question, to see whether a mammalian cell
that was a liver cell or a skin cell, a keratinocyte, could change its fate, its

36

gene expression program. What I designed ultimately was a heterokaryon
system where we fused two cells together into a nondividing syncytium.
What I found was that when there was an excess of mouse muscle cells
fused with human liver cells, reprogramming occurred and those liver
cells turned on muscle genes.
[00:45:09] That finding was contrary to the prevalent belief at the time
that cell fate was fixed and irreversible, “Once a liver cell, always a liver
cell.” It showed that there was enormous plasticity. It was tremendously
exciting to me and my article entitled “Plasticity of the Differentiated
State” made the cover of Science, of the “Frontiers in Biology” issue for
1985. I think it was that kind of recognition that guaranteed tenure and
world wide recognition. It was the foundation for my career and on
which I built--it was an original approach, I have to say.
[00:45:53] It was that kind of thing that made me very excited and enjoy
my work tremendously. I did that work with a team that was all women.
In my lab, there were three grad students who did the research for which
I got tenure.
Waldron: What a testimony to women’s abilities. This is what it’s all about.
Blau: [00:46:18] We were called the “Amazons” or “Helen’s Angels” probably
because people wondered how this strange team of women could be so
productive. They were intrigued and fascinated and so we were given
these funny nicknames. Since it was Helen’s lab and they were all women,
we were Helen’s Angels [laughter], the Hell’s Angels, I guess. And the

37

Amazons, you know, fierce and able to confront adversity. This team did
remarkable work. It was a fantastic experience for me.
Waldron: That’s a nice segue into this tenure process. As with politics or granting
agencies, whenever you think about original ideas, original themes and
the unique teams that are working on them, there’s always resistance--the
politics of things. Did you ever meet that or it was there but you just
glanced over it? How did you handle the naysayers in the granting
process and the colleagues and people who evaluate? Did you have allies?
Did you have adversaries? How did you handle those things?
Blau: [00:47:49] I guess one thing was that there was an option if you had
children--that was a new thing--an option to have an extra year for every
child up to two before being considered for tenure. That actually is a
good thing, except I think that it should be the choice of the woman. In
my case it wasn’t, because there was a group of us hired together. We
were a cohort and so to stagger the time to tenure and promotion, my
chair decided that I should take those two years. I understand now that
this has changed and that it really is the woman’s choice, I think that’s a
good move forward. Also men can take paternity leave and I think they
should do that more than they do.
[00:48:37] I felt that as a woman you had to excel. You had to be a triple
threat. You had to be a good speaker, you had to be well dressed and
look good, and excel in science. For a woman, the standards seemed to
be higher than for men. Did I have a problem with tenure? I don’t think
so because I was fortunate. Those were different days or maybe I was

38

better than I thought. I don’t know. I applied only for jobs in the Bay
Area because David had a job here, and I applied for one grant and got
it, my first NIH grant. The reviewers wrote about the cell fusion
approach to turning on genes, “This is unlikely to work but Blau has
crafted the experiment so cleverly that we think we should give her a
chance and see what happens.” Or something to that effect.
[00:49:33] That’s a really unusual review that you would not get now.
Now you have to have proven your ideas before you can get the money.
But that was a big vote of confidence, my first NIH grant. I think that I
was also fortunate to have such a great team of people in the lab to make
these experiments work. I think there’s also a lesson, however, in what I
didn’t want to do, and that was to do the next obvious experiment and
compete with people who might be faster at doing that. I wanted to do
unusual things --- outside the box, and I think that was essential,
especially being a woman who was having children as well.
Waldron: What a great testimony to creativity.
Blau: [00:50:19] Thank you, you’re so kind.
Waldron: We’ve talked about research a lot. You mentioned Helen’s Angels, these
women who were on your team that took you forward and got your
research going. Was your job just to research or did you do teaching?
How was teaching for you with this research career? Did you teach
graduates, undergraduates, professionals? Talk a little bit about your
teaching and what that entailed.

39

Blau: [00:51:17] I love teaching. There’s nothing like turning on young people
to something you’re excited about and I did do quite a bit of teaching. I
still do. I taught a range of topics to medical students as part of the
pharmacology course--anticoagulants, anticancer agents, contraceptives,
which always drew a large crowd. All the students would bring in their
girlfriends and boyfriends to learn about contraceptives. Teratogenesis,
drugs that cause birth defects. Pharmacogenetics, how we are genetically
different in how we respond to drugs. That was something I especially
liked. Some topics I didn’t like so much, like gout, which I had to read up
on every year. [laughter]
[00:52:04] But preparing for these lectures taught me a lot and I really
liked presenting to the students. That course was for the medical
students, but I also taught graduate courses that were more specialized
on differentiation in those days. I taught undergraduates in human
biology, which I enjoyed a lot, about stem cells, the ethics of science and
also career development. Now I present lectures in the stem cell course
in the Stem Cell Institute and at times also in the undergraduate
curriculum. Something I’ve also enjoyed is working with medical
development and speaking to donors.
[00:52:48] I like presenting research to the layman, to the nonscientist. I
think it’s so important that they understand science, that’s something I
like about teaching the undergraduates. They’re the future voters, they
need to understand scientific issues. I like to speak to the donors for
medical development. I’ve spoken twice at Leading Matters, the great

40

fundraiser that John Hennessey developed at Stanford as president,
which has been so successful. I spoke at one in California and also one at
the Supreme Court in Washington, D.C., and that was a great source of
pleasure. I think I’m quite effective at it so that’s one reason I like doing
it so much. It’s also an important mission.
Waldron: You mentioned your students and that when you go to conferences, you
find a lot of them are from your lab and how successful they are. You
also mentioned the Swedish student you met through Sebastian Thrun’s
and how you’ve kind of launched him in his career in artificial
intelligence. You also mentored a lot of women students. Were there any
differences you found in yourself when you interacted with male students
and female students that were influenced by your own upbringing or
societal values and attitudes? Any instances come to your mind?
Blau: [00:54:25] I guess one example is when I started teaching at Stanford. I
was teaching medical students and I had a revelation. I was presenting
material and women would ask me questions, and I would immediately
know the answers and be very strong in my response. But when men
would ask me a question, I would think they’re very smart and I don’t
know the answer. I caught myself after a lecture or two and I realized
that I had an inherent prejudice myself, that I felt the men were smarter
than the women, that I felt they were smarter than I was as well, and I
was derailed by them.
[00:55:04] It took a conscious effort to overcome that. I was really quite
shocked to realize that I had this inherent bias and I worked on that

41

considerably. I no longer have that whatsoever. I think women are
incredibly smart, every bit as smart as the men. And I realized it was a
cultural, a societal view that had somehow been engrained in me as well.
It’s interesting how you discover those things in yourself and you have to
overcome them. I go out of my way to help the women. I think they’re
often less sure of themselves and I give them opportunities to present
their work locally and nationally, and to learn the ropes so that they are
unafraid--able to write grants, able to speak on their research, and be
tough and stand up to adversity.
[00:56:04] I think that’s what has led many of them to succeed. I try to
bring out their strengths and also help them overcome their weaknesses,
and that, to me, is something very gratifying. And I guess the track record
would show that it works.
Waldron: Your students are extremely fortunate and also it shows what a great
person you are that you were able to catch your own prejudices that were
instilled--we have social narratives, we have religious narratives. Only
men can study Torah and every religion has that male bias in it. That’s
what I think makes you into a pioneering woman--the fact that you can
look at a self-reflection and then change. That’s really awesome. Let’s
move on. As children are not that different from our students, so tell a
little bit more about your children. You mentioned you enjoyed having a
family, you did things with them. How many children do you have and
what are they doing?

42

Blau: [00:57:36] Yes, I’ve got my scientific children and family and I’ve got my
own children. I’m very proud of my two children.
Waldron: Girl, boy?
Blau: [00:57:47] I have a son and a daughter, and I should say that when I was
raising them, I worried all the time about whether I was spending enough
time with them. Recently I said to my son, “You know, I always meant to
be home after school and I’m really sorry I wasn’t.” He said, “Mom, stop
your mom guilt. We really liked that time to myself and it was fine. When
you came home, you were really with us and we always had fun.” So your
children teach you, and I guess the best proof is in the pudding. They’ve
turned out well and they’re happy and they’ve achieved quite a lot. My
son went to Menlo Atherton High School and then to Stanford as an
undergraduate. From there, he went to the Harvard School of Design.
[00:58:38] He realized his passion was in architecture and now he’s a fullfledged architect with a booming practice here in San Francisco, working
with his wife who is a landscape architect who also trained at Harvard.
They opened my eyes to architecture and art and design in a way that is
wonderful. Learning from your children is tremendous fun. My daughter
is also highly accomplished--I’m very proud of her. She became
interested in human rights. She says that her grandfather who escaped
from Nazi Europe was a big influence on her. She has devoted her life to
human rights and to crafting policy that will make a difference in this
world.

43

[00:59:34] She went to Stanford as well, she was involved in the Darfur
movement there. After that, she went to Uganda and worked at an
NGO, “Enough,” where she was focused on human rights in Sudan. She
was very involved in trying to bring the LRA to justice--the Lord’s
Resistance Army that is committing such atrocities in Sudan to this day.
After that experience, she went to Yale Law School. She realized that
having a higher degree would make her more successful in having an
impact on policy. She went to Yale Law School and also the Woodrow
Wilson School at Princeton and earned a combined degree.
[01:00:16] Now she’s working as a senior legal advisor to Samantha
Power, the U.S. ambassador to the U.N. There she’s influencing policy in
Africa, in the Middle East, and working on human rights and on ending
genocide. Both kids got married just in the last two years.
Waldron: Now you’re a grandmother, I hear.
Blau: [01:00:44] Yes. As of ten days ago, I became a grandma.
Waldron: Fantastic.
Blau: [01:00:49] Yes, very exciting.
Waldron: You really give credence to the enlightened people who have said educate
the mother and you educate the world. [laughter] What a great story.
Now let’s turn a little bit to your outside activities and awards. What
would you say were your greatest achievement and what is it in the future
that you are seeing? It sounds like your career is blooming and where are
the fruits going to be that you see?
Blau: [01:01:36] So outside activities that I do besides science?

44

Waldron: And awards, other than grants. You mentioned grants and teaching and
Stanford things.
Blau: [01:01:48] What I tried to emphasize is my belief that having a balanced
life is really key to being creative. I strongly believe that people who are
working one hundred percent time on their science are not the most
creative. Anyway, I couldn’t survive doing that. I have always been active
in skiing and scuba diving and hiking, and I also love music. David and I
had a folk music group called “Delta G” or “Free Energy” when we were
at Harvard, and we used to play in clubs in Harvard Square, The Idler
and No Name. We made enough money to cover our beer [laughter].
[01:02:26] That was tremendous fun. We would work very hard on the
harmonies. We were a group of three and we would practice songs in
George Wald’s yurt where we house-sat one summer; it had wonderful
acoustics. I really enjoyed having these other activities that
complemented my research. So then you asked me about awards, is that
right?
Waldron: What are your most memorable awards?
Blau: [01:03:06] I guess the landmark ones are the usual, the election to the
American Academy of Arts and Sciences, which was founded in the days
of the American Revolution by John Adams and John Hancock in 1780.
That, to me, was a wonderful award and milestone. I’ve just been elected
to the council of that academy to review reports and to set policy and
also to help with membership election. I’m very much looking forward to
that. I was also elected to the Institute of Medicine of the National

45

Academy of Sciences, which is the most honorific medical academy in
the United States, recently renamed the National Academy of Medicine.
[01:03:58] I co-organized a symposium there for one of the national
meetings; it was on stem cell biology and tissue engineering. I also served
on the council for six years at the Institute of Medicine. Those were really
meaningful achievements. I was elected Fellow of the American
Academy for the Advancement of Science, which is another one of those
hallmarks of one’s career.
But some of the others are ones that I remember fondly as being
wonderful experiences. One was in 1995 when I was invited to Sweden
to give the Nobel Forum lecture at the Karolinska Institute in
Stockholm, which was pretty early in my career. It was just ten years after
I got tenure and it was a very exciting recognition. It was October and I
got snowed in; it was a freak snow storm. So I had a chance to spend a
lot of time with my Swedish colleagues, in particular Nils Ringertz whom
I greatly admired as a pioneer of cell fusion, and to savor an abundance
of smoked fish--herring, salmon, also venison which I love. I’ll never
forget that; it was a wonderful experience.
I was awarded the FASEB Excellence in Science award in 1999, having
been nominated by Nobel Laureate Paul Berg. One of the most
memorable honors was an invitation to the 400th anniversary of the
Pontifical Academy of Sciences at the Vatican where I met Pope John
Paul II, who thanked me for my work for humanity and shook my hand,
which was very, very moving. It might seem like an oxymoron, but I

46

spoke at a stem cell symposium at the Vatican that was organized by
Nicole M. Le Douarin, who was the Secretaire Perpetuelle, the head of
the National Academy of Sciences for France.
[01:05:42] We held a symposium with international experts on stem cells,
informing the Vatican and cardinals from around the world with
simultaneous translation (like in the United Nations) about what stem
cells could do for our lives, in part because we felt that they could be
used to treat Parkinson’s, which is what the Pope suffered from. The
cardinals were very receptive, extremely intelligent and knowledgeable; it
was a highly memorable experience.
We had a private tour of the Sistine Chapel. We were able to walk on the
beautiful grounds of the Vatican with glorious flowers. We stayed in the
Vatican hotel, to which Italian citizens are not given access unless by very
special invitation, and we lived in the rooms where the cardinals elect the
next Pope, appropriately spartan, with a crucifix and wrought iron beds
and a phone with only two buttons: al Vaticano and al Mondo. This
experience is vivid in my mind to this day.
Another memorable experience was when I brokered and executed an
agreement between Stanford University and the French pharmaceutical
company, Aventis, in 2000 for high risk, high reward grants (the
Stanford/Aventis Inc. $5 Million Innovative Grant Agreement with full
indirect costs). It was my own “innovative idea.” This agreement gave
Aventis early access to nascent creative research ideas at Stanford from
the best and brightest minds. As thanks, I was invited by the President of

47

Aventis (Jean-René Fourtou) to the Fetes des Fleurs in Bordeaux in
France. My husband David and I arrived in Paris to discover that regional
flights were on strike, for a change [laughter]. We were sent to La Dome
for lunch while M. Fourtou’s private jet was readied in order to get us
there on time for the festivities. We stayed at the Chateau Pichon
Longeville. The Fete des Fleurs was a celebration of wine. There was a
dinner for 1,000 people with 10 courses, each preceded by a flourish of
trumpets and served with a paired wine simultaneously to all guests. The
feu d’artifice (fireworks) itself were a work of art, all white, intricately
designed and displayed above the river viewed from the chateau.
Another highly memorable and historic event was being an invited
speaker in 2013 at the 60th Anniversary of the Discovery of the Structure
of DNA in honor of Nobel Laureate James Watson at Cold Spring
Harbor, NY. Many of the founders of modern biology were in
attendance and the symposium culminated with a banquet in a Long
Island castle. I had taken a course from the eccentric James Watson as a
graduate student while at Harvard and was thrilled and honored to
participate in this landmark event.
In 2011, I was an invited speaker at another historic event, the 50th
Anniversary of the Discovery of the Operon in honor of Jacob and
Monod [François Jacob and Jacques Monod] at the Institut Pasteur in
Paris. It was one of the last Symposia attended by Jacob, whose work on
bacterial -galactosidase complementation had inspired my lab’s own
work on mammalian split -gal complementation which has fueled

48

successful drug discovery by numerous pharmaceutical companies. This
work and the resulting toolkit developed by DiscoveRx yielded
substantial royalties, which led to my being awarded a Stanford
Outstanding Inventor Award by the Office of Technology Licensing in
2015.
[01:06:23] One of the first awards I got was in 1992. It was the Senior
Woman in Cell Biology Award from the American Society for Cell
Biology and I did something sort of unusual at that award ceremony. At
that time, women’s gatherings could be rather depressing, I found.
People just talked about the difficulties of being a woman, how hard it
was to be a woman, how difficult, how impossible. It would get me
down. I was supposed to make some remarks.
[01:06:58] So I decided to tell a joke. I guess I told two jokes and I was
amazed at how well they went over. I was a little nervous about doing
this, but I guess I’ll tell you one now.
Waldron: Yes, do.
Blau: [01:07:10] Should I do that?
Waldron: Yes. You have such a positive attitude, it’s always good to get to a joke.
Blau: [01:07:18] Here goes. A company decides to hire a woman and they
haven’t had a woman in that kind of senior position before. They arrange
to have an outing to build morale and to get to know this new woman
whom they’ve hired. They all go out in a boat on a lake. As they head
into the middle of the lake, the woman says, “Oh no, I left my purse on
the shore,” at which all the men roll their eyes and mutter “Oy yoi.” The

49

woman then gets out of the boat and proceeds to walk across the water
to get her purse, whereupon one man looks at the other and says, “I told
you she couldn’t swim.” [laughter]
Waldron: What would be the next ten years that you can see the future for
yourself? Or twenty? Or thirty?
Blau: [01:08:21] Yes, I’m not stopping, that’s for sure. I’m going full steam. I’m
still interested in understanding the basic mechanisms that control
nuclear reprogramming and determine cell fate. A recent wonderful
sequel to my work has been the discovery of induced pluripotent cells by
Yamanaka with whom I had the opportunity to write a review in 2010 in
Nature. He showed that if you overexpress four transcription factors in a
blood cell or a skin cell of a person, they will become pluripotent like an
embryonic stem cell but without any of the associated ethical dilemmas.
Moreover, these cells can then be redifferentiated to become neurons or
cardiac cells. It’s an amazing extension of the cell plasticity we found by
cell fusion and so gratifying to see such strong validation. It shows the
ultimate plasticity, that a cells’ function and potential can be completely
changed.
[01:09:04] What’s missing now is a mechanistic understanding of how
that happens. So I’ve gone back to our old tool of cell fusion to
understand the cascade of regulators, the network that leads up to this
shift toward pluripotency. I think we have a unique chance to discover
the mechanistic underpinnings. I’m working with some of the best
bioinformaticians here on campus in the Genetics Department like

50

Assistant Professor Anshul Kundaje. And, again, I’m learning through a
multidisciplinary approach and my team of young people, students and
postdocs, make that fun, as they are so bright and creative.
[01:09:46] We’re making wonderful strides and we’re going to publish
some very exciting stories in the next year or two. I also am really
interested in taking the idea of bioengineering--bioengineering niches-further so that we can understand stem cell function and enhance stem
cell regenerative potential through understanding their
microenvironment, the external signals that impact their function that I
think are so important. I’m really interested in rejuvenation strategies.
Maybe it has to do with getting older. [laughter] But I want to understand
how to rejuvenate cells and rejuvenate their function. One approach that
we’ve come up with is a new way to extend telomeres.
[01:10:29] Telomeres are the protective caps at the ends of chromosomes
and they get shorter as we age. We’ve developed a method in the lab for
extending telomeres. With a transient treatment, a forty-eight hour
treatment, we can extend telomeres by a kilobase and ‘reverse the clock
on aging’ as this discovery was described in Time magazine this year. I
think this may have tremendous utility for studying cells. Often when
scientists obtain the cell they’re interested in, the blood cell or the
neuronal cell, they run out of cells because the cells can’t divide anymore.
[01:11:09] Extending the telomeres would give the cells more
proliferative capacity. This could prove very useful for producing
experimental tools in the dish in order to understand specific diseases

51

and test for drugs to correct them. Ultimately perhaps one could target
this technology to various tissues and change, for instance, the immune
system, overcome immune system exhaustion with aging, “rejuvenate”
the immune system. Possibly this technology could also be used to
enhance the function of bone marrow transplants to combat cancer. I’m
quite excited about this fundamental technology and its applications
clinically.
Waldron: It sounds like you have a lifetime left more to work on and take your
research to new heights. Sounds like it will never end as you reverse
aging. I can hardly wait too.
Blau: [01:12:05] I’ll never be bored and I never have been bored. I think I’m
very lucky.
Waldron: The scientific world and Stanford is very fortunate to have you as a
researcher here, and the fact that these interdisciplinary efforts of
bioengineering are available in the 1990s and 2000s.
Blau: [01:12:32] Which is fantastic. At Stanford, the medical school is in close
proximity to engineering, artificial intelligence, chemical engineering,
bioengineering. Proximity enhances the chance of collaboration and
multidisciplinary research. That’s a great attribute of Stanford.
Waldron: And an active, open mind and a personality that goes with it. It’s been
fantastic. Thank you, Helen. As you look back on your career, is there
something we haven’t covered yet that comes to your mind that you
would still like to say as we wrap up this interview session?

52

Blau: [01:13:27] Oh, I think I have told you just about everything I can think
of. [laughter] Thank you so much for your time and your thoughtfulness.
It’s been a pleasure working with you.
Waldron: Well, thank you for your time. It sounds like it’s very precious. Thank
you for sharing with Historical Society all the wonderful gifts and
especially gifts to women that are going to follow as a pioneering woman.
Thank you for all your works. It’s great.
