
Clark:

This is a picture of the house I built and moved into in
1933. At that time, this house was located in no incorporated
area, although my post office was Los Altos.

It was really in

the lew Stanford rolling foothills, about five miles from the
Palo Alto Clinic in Palo Alto, and I could look right down on
Stanford University from this view.

I had two brothers who were

architects: Birge Clark, who was older, and David Clark, who was
younger than I.

David was unmarried at that time, and he lived

in this house also, for about four years, until he got married.
It's been a great house for me all of this time, and I was
fortunate that it was built at the bottom of the Depression, so I
got a great deal of house, with things like handmade tile on the
roof, custom-made tile in the bathroom, for what is now very
little money.
Now, this next picture shows me currently, on the north side
of my house.

In the background, you can see Coyote Hill, which

is on the Stanford property and one of the large light-industrial
area buildings that Stanford permitted to be built there.

The

changes in my view have been tremendous over the year's. However,
I refuse to be particularly bothered by all this.

I still can

look out above most of the buildings and see a big expanse of
rolling foothills and see the beginning of the Coast Range Valley
to the west; and to the east I can still look down and see the
bay.

For instance, in the corner of this picture, another house

shows, and that is the house which my brother David built on a

2
piece of the same property, which we had jointly owned and
adjoinedrayproperty.
This next picture shows a view in the northeasterly
direction and shows some of the houses that have been built
within the last ten to fifteen to twenty years.

This area,

fortunately, is zoned one acrerainiraumresidential, so I trust
there will never became a high-density thing. Many of these
homes have nice orchards around them, and currently there are
three tennis courts in view fromrayhill. The animal in the
foreground is my current German shepherd, Cade, which rhymes with
jade.
Here I am watering some of my azaleas and rhododendrons and
bulb plants that are just in front of my front living room
window, with a gorgeous big oak tree that has always been there;
by always, I mean probably seventy-five to a hundred years.

The

faithful dog is along with me. Not showing in this picture,
there is a lovely bed of cyclamen, most of which I raised from
seed originally, but I think we have "children", "grandchildren"
and "great-grandchildren" there now.

It's self-seeding.

The picture of me bending over the strawberry plants and
probably picking one is in my front patio, which faces due
south.

These strawberries are being raised in a tub, which—do

very well in this exposure.
The next picture shows Katie and me sharing a secret.
Johnson:

I thought she was kissing you.

Clark:

Or else we're sharing a moment of affection.

On the left is

a blooming dogwood tree, although the fact that it's blooming
isn't apparent here. A circular object hanging from the eave is

3
a Rangoon gong, which I purchased in 1933 in the town of Rangoon,
Burma. When struck, why, it lets out
tone with many, many overtones.

a great resounding gong

The the French door opens from

the living room but is exactly in front of a huge view window on
the far side of the living room, so you can look all the way
through toward San Francisco, looking that direction.

Looking

the other direction, you look up at a great view of Black
Mountain.
The next picture shows me admiring my old antique gas pimp.
In about 1934-35, when my brother was still living with me, he
had a car, I had a car, and in those days, I always bought
whoever was my housekeeper a car, which in those splendid times
only cost from $15 to $35 dollars, according to how luxurious a
car you wanted.

So I had a gasoline tank buried there and when

necessary, the Standard Oil Company would came up and fill it,
and we'd crank our own gasoline up. After we got into the war,
in about 1942-43, they stepped giving this great service.

But

the gas pump and tanks are still there, although in a current
state of total decrepitude.
The next picture shows Mr. Ito, who was the husband of my
live-in housekeeper.
week.

He comes and does gardening three days a

He's standing in front of a tree that I enjoy a lot. It

is a sub-tropical tree and bears sapotas, which is a delicious,
indescribable fruit.
I put a swimming pool in right off my bedroom in 1966, the
year after I retired from the partnership.
best investments I ever made.

It was one of the

It's very secluded with a great

stake fence around it, and I swim every single day, usually the

4
first thing in the morning when I get up.
maintain it myself.

Since I retired, I

I am a compulsive measurer, and I like to

keep track of the temperature, not only of the pool but of the
weather.
Here I am removing the cover, prior to going swimming. The
next picture shows me enjoying the pool. The dog shows in one of
them.

She is a companion as I swim and will come up and start to

lick me dry.
This next picture is shown from the foot of my driveway and
shows part of a large open space, which is officially named
Esther Clark Park.

I did not mention before, but I eventually

got incorporated into the city of Palo Alto, so now I really do
live in a town.

Shortly after I got incorporated into Palo Alto,

I offered the city the opportunity of purchasing about
twenty-three acres from me, to be designated as a park.

I might

say that I acquired this land by degrees, and at one point I
owned about thirty-three acres.

I never felt I was greedy for

land, I always just wanted to own all the land that adjoined
mine.

This has not been developed into a park, as yet, and I

don't care.

It's just held as an open space and is enjoyed a

great deal by people who take their dogs there for a walk and a
run, and by many, many young people and older people who have
horses in this neighborhood, and use it as to graze-it is called
the field, and they are free to ride over it. The city attempts
to keep all motor-driven vehicles off of it, but they fight a
losing battle with motorcycle riders and children taking the
family car or their own car out to drive around in a rather
reckless way in it.

5
Johnson:

This was Coyote Hill.

I just thought you could talk about

your riding, because you rode . . .
Clark:

I don't think I ever rode there. This picture shows the
unspoiled part of Coyote Hill where horses graze and are more or
less turned out to pasture and is in my immediate view.

In my

youthful days, we used to frequently hike up to the top of Coyote
Hill, which has fossils dating from the time that there was
either an upheaval from the area of the bay, that put oyster
shells and such things up there.

Because they are certainly

still there, what haven't been picked over and carried away by
various sightseers.
Johnson:

Anything else you want to say about the home? We can do
that later, of course.

Clark:

Oh, I don't think so.
This picture shows the entrance of the Palo Alto Medical
Clinic.

I returned to Palo Alto to start practice in 1927, after

I'd obtained my M.D. degree and done two years of residence
training in pediatrics.

This entrance shows me, on the right,

with a handbag over my arm, just going in.
The next one shows an invention that I worked to get. When
the clinic was enlarged, we decided to have a separate entrance
so that children who were brought to the clinic to see the doctor
and were ill wouldn't sit in the waiting room with all of the
well children.

This has worked out very well over the years.

And they ring the bell, as you see, and a nurse comes as quickly
as possible and puts them immediately into a separate little
treatment room, so children with bad colds and coughs won't get
in.

If we suspect that a child has something like chicken pox or

measles, they don't even get out of the car. The mother just
comes and the doctor goes out and diagnoses.
The wing that the department of pediatrics is currently
housed in is now named for me, as this sign shows.

1965 was the

year I retired from the partnership, but '72 was the year that I
stopped practicing pediatrics completely.
The next picture was taken on the occasion of Dr. Russel
Lee's eighty-fourth birthday.

Isn't that right? And a little

birthday party was given for him down at the clinic.

He is the

founder of the clinic, and it was a large group of old-timers
that gathered to celebrate this occasion.
Johnson:

What year was the clinic founded?

Isn't it the golden

jubilee or the silver jubilee that's coming up?
Clark:

No, the golden.
year it was founded.

Next year.

They decided that 1930 was the

They had to pick some year.

The next picture, again, shows Dr. Russel Lee.

The man in

the middle, between us, is Dr. Ian MacNeil, one of the internists
who has been there quite a while.

That's a very nice picture of

him.
Johnson:

The MacNeils stayed with you, I think, when they first came
out, didn't they?

Clark:

When the MacNeils first arrived—I can't remember the year
of that—he had just completed his training in internal medicine
at the Mayo Clinic.

They had four children, the youngest being a

pair of twins about eleven months old.

They lived in my house

for a few weeks, until they could get relocated in a house of
their own.
The next picture shows Dr. Robert Dunn, who was the first

obstetrician we had at the clinic. He came after the war, wasn't
it?

I'm not sure what year he came. And his wife is next to Dr.

Lee.

He was here on a visit at that time.
Oh, this is Pajaro Eunes.

weekend over at Pajaro Dunes.
baby" for breakfast.

The next picture shows a holiday
I am just serving a "big IXitch

The gentleman on my left is John Johnson,

the executive director of the clinic. And on his right is Ann
Breener[?].

Her husband was also there, Serge Breener[?], who

was one of our cardiologists, and also John's wife Phyllis, who's
my very dear friend.
Johnson:

I think you should say about how much you like to cook.

Clark:

It's a great pleasure of mine to be away from home and
cooking.

I don't usually cook at home, although I enjoy

entertaining and fixing meals for friends at home; I enjoy it far
more some way away from home, either up at Red Rock Ranch or
camping in the mountains or anywhere.

It adds a great spice of

delightful informality.
There's my lacerated eye.

I'm glad I didn't have a stitch.

Here's another view that shows Serge.
directing how big a piece he wants.

It looks like he's

The next one shows Phyllis

and me sitting on our couch in the luxurious Pajaro Dunes.
Johnson:

You might tell how you were able to have that beautiful
holiday.

Clark:

I won a holiday weekend at Pajaro Dunes in a sweepstakes.
was lucky enough to win one of the prizes, which was the weekend
there.

The picture on the balcony of our condominium shows

Serge, Ann, me and John.

It was taken by Phyllis, so

unfortunately she doesn't show.

In the next one, Ann is holding

I

8
up her broken arm, which she broke playing tennis.
The next one shows me looking out over the Pacific Ocean,
about to take a picture, and the one below that shows a very good
friend of Phyllis' and mine, Di Niles, formerly Di Nelson, Di
Nielsen. Dianatha has been on several travelling trips with me.
We first met in 1937 when I went around the world and she, by
chance, was on the same group.

Since then, we've been together

to Africa, to the Gold Rush country, and on an expedition to view
the whales.
I'd like to have you say something about your photography.
That's the only picture I have of you, with a camera.
Photography has been a long, long time hobby of mine, or
activity, beginning when I was under the age of nine and was
given a very simple box Brownie camera. At that time my father
was doing photography, and he was using glass plates as the
negatives.

However, as nearly as I can recall, by the time I

started any photography, they had made film, and I did my own
film developing
and my own print-making from the time I first started doing it.
As time and money allowed me to do so, I have improved my
equipment, and currently I'm losing a very fine Leica camera and
I'm doing my own printing and enlarging, even dabbling in some
colored printing in my basement darkroom.
How about your underwater camera?
You're a good prompter. About 1970-71, I went on a
snorkeling trip with my younger brother Don, and he had an
underwater camera.

So, the following year, when we again went

snorkel ing, I also bought an underwater camera and have enjoyed

9
this activity very much, although I'm not particularly good at
that.
That's a very nice picture;

the picture of me and John

Johnson, each with a drink in our hands, down at Pajaro Dunes.
We have that delightful, end-of-the-day, relaxed, happy look.
Now here are a sequence of photographs taken of some
property which I acquired in 1960. My reason for wanting to own
a place away from home for a vacation spot was that I loved the
mountains, I loved cairping, and I've spent many, many years, from
the time I was about fifteen years old and was going on camping
trips with my parents, going every summer to somewhere in the
high Sierra.

I've covered many parts of the high Sierra, first

camping out of an automobile along the roads in such places as
the Yosemite Valley, the Tuolumne Meadows, Cedar Grove, Big
Basin, places on the coast of California. When I was much older,
after I'd finished medical school, it became a tradition for
several of my best friends, and sometimes with some of my younger
relatives, to go on pack trips into the high Sierra and be packed
in with animals for one or two days and then left at a campsite
for anywhere from a week to two weeks and then be packed out
again.
As time went on, I began to realize that some vacations we
were more or less at the mercy of the elements, and while there
were good spots in many of our trips, often after thinking and
planning for a whole year on one, we could be hit by a spell of
such very bad weather that it was something of a disappointment.
Hence I decided to try to acquire a piece of land which would be
close enough to drive to within one day, certainly, and that we

10
could go to at any time and be selective about it.

By any time,

I was thinking of any time of year. After researching various
places, I was able to acquire an acreage of land in Mendocino
County, a few miles out of the town of Leytonville[?], which is
about thirty to forty miles from the ocean.

I found a spot that

was up on a hill, of an elevation of about 2600 feet, and had a
gorgeous lookout, looking across the valley of the Eel River
drainage basin. And it was only about four hours drive from my
home in Palo Alto.
I acquired this piece of land in 1960.

It had an old

farmhouse on it with quite a history of the people who had lived
there from about 1932 and raised a family, etc. At first I
thought to do over the old house a little bit, but it was soon
apparent to me that the view would never be very good from its
location. And there was also a meadow near it which could lend
itself to being turned into a lake. As a result, I got my good
friend Paul Lee and a retired admiral from the Navy to draw the
plans for a house, which was a strange thing to do with a brother
architect, but my brother was very busy with paying customers.
He was so busy that he was grateful that I didn't ask him to
do it, which he would have been very glad to do.

The result was

that I was able to get a builder who wasn't very busy from this
area, Herman Kaufman[?], to go up there with three to five
workmen.

They worked sunup to sundown for six weeks and got my

new house all built. At the same time, I had hired a great man
who lived in Leytonville[?] and built roads and lakes and bridges
for a living, and he agreed that a lake could be put in within
just a few yards from the house. He started doing that the same

summer that I built the house.

So, at the end of a year, I had a

very nice house up there with three bedrooms, two baths, a deck
around the outside, a lovely living room with a kitchen
arrangement at one side so I could cook and be with the guests
all at the same time. This set of pictures shows several views
of the house, with that huge window and the deck showing.
built very close to two Douglas fir trees.

It's

In fact, one of them

comes through the floor of the deck.
The picture also shows a view of me sitting in the jeep,
which I purchased from the man from whom I purchased the house.
The jeep is a 1942 wartime-built Willy's and it is now classed as
an antique.

The picture of me at the steering wheel of the jeep

also shows the side of the house . . .

[END OF SIDE A, TAPE 1]

[BEGINNING OF SIDE B, TAPE 1]

Clark:

. . . mine was carved by my good friend Clifford Schenk[?].
He and his wife Esther are very dear friends of mine and
frequently go up with me to this spot. There are several views
of the lake, shown at its fullest.
this time.

It would be overflowing at

It has been planted with trout, but currently it is

planted with large-mouth bass, which are hard enough to catch to
make it quite a challenge, but also are catchable enough to make
fishing there rewarding.

The old farmhouse is still there and it

is a very habitable house with two bedrooms, separate dining
room, nice living room, single bath.

It currently houses a man

who is a general overall caretaker but also earns his living
doing horseshoing.

Prior to having someone live on the place, I

was badly bothered by breakage and entry attacks.
Shown, too, is a little bit of the log cabin that was built
on the house by the man who had owned the property from about
1932-33 until he sold it in 1955 to a Mr. Eisenhower, who lived
there until I purchased it in 1960. The cabin is romantically
said to have been built as a honeymoon cottage for the Snyders1
oldest daughter when she got married.

However, it has since been

used as a barn for sheep, goats, horses and cows.

It still

stands but I think its days may be numbered. It does seem to be
full of termites.

[END OF SIDE B, TAPE 1]

[BEGINNING OF SIDE A, TAPE 2]

Clark:

This is Dr. Clark speaking, commenting on the pictures taken
of my early childhood home, which is located on Hanover Street in
Palo Alto.
1892-93.

This house was built by my father in, I believe,

It was the house where we lived when the earthquake

occurred in 1906. The dormer window is shown, and opens into the
room upstairs where I was born.

I was the only one of my

parents' four children who was honored by being born at home, and
incredibly, this house still stands. We moved away from it in
1909, and it has now been divided into, I believe, three
different apartments.

But the fundamental structure is still

there, and in being taken through it this year, there were many

13
things that I was able to recall.
The other house was our house up on the Stanford campus and
was built in 1909, at which time we moved into it.

It was from

this house that I started school, going down to the campus school
where I started in the fourth grade. Up to that time I'd been
taught at home, as my parents felt there was no suitable school
for me in the other location.

This was a large, two story and a

half house, with my father's studio opening out on the ground
floor, down the hill.

There were five upstairs bedrooms,

including a guest room, with one bathroom there and another
bathroom on the stairway down to the basement.

The house looks,

from the exterior, much as it did when we lived there, with
sleeping porches on three corners.

Sleeping porches were

considered very healthy at that era, and many houses were built
with them.
The plaque shows the Lou Henry Hoover house, for which my
father and brother Birge were the architects.

That has now been

made a California Registered Historical Monument.
The pictures of my solar heater, which heats the water for
my swimming pool, demonstrate my vulnerability for using gadgets
and enjoying them.

I had it put in, I believe, about five years

ago, when it became very popular to have solar heaters.

It has

been updated many times with fairly modern panels, now, which
hopefully will last fifteen years or more.

From the first of May

till the first of November, I turn off the pilot light to the gas
heater for the swimming pool, and water circulating through this
heater, plus the use of an insulating covering on the swimming
pool, means that all my heating for the swimming pool is done by

sunlight.
A picture of the orchids in the lath house.

The orchids

have been a source of pleasure to me, although it is quite a bit
of work to take care of them, I truly have enjoyed it very much.
At one time, I had many more than I have now.

I lost several

orchids in an unexpected freeze that occurred this past winter.
I had stopped heating my greenhouse, which I also have as well as
a lath house, and the cold weather plus the lack of artificial
heat was responsible for the loss of quite a group of orchids.

[END OF SIDE A, TAPE 2]

[SIDE B, TAPE 2 IS BIANK]

[BEGINNING OF SIDE A, TAPE 3]

Johnson:

When were you first certain that a medical career was what
you wanted?

Clark:

Well, I had thought about it off and on. When I was very
young, I'd thought briefly of being an astronomer, but then I
found out there was a lot of math connected with that, and I
didn't quite get on to long division, at about that time, so I
gave up that career.

But then, I gradually became interested in

science, in sick animals, in hurt animals and so forth. Then,
when I went down to Palo Alto, to go to the eighth grade and then
on into high school, my first year in high school, I took general
science. And this was a magnificent course, even in retrospect,
it was just an outstanding course.

It was taught by a man named

15
Jumbo Morris.

Jumbo Morris was an athlete from Stanford. He was

named Jumbo because he was very tall.
have been six foot eight.

It seems to me he must

I haven't any idea hew tall he really

was. And he taught science at the Palo Alto High School, and
also was the coach for the boys' athletics.
a compound microscope.

He taught us to use

I think he had purchased or had the

school purchase cast-off compound microscopes from Stanford.

He

would stop on the way to school and scoop us stagnant water out
of a horse trough along the way, and have the class look at it
under the microscope, just straight as it was.

You just put a

drop of this wonderful liquid on a slide and then put a cover
slip over it and then focus up and down on it. There were
paramecia and amoebae and all kinds of wonderful, wriggling
things, and he had us draw them from what we saw under there.
It was very stimulating, and the questions he asked and the
explanations he would give. He would stop and give a little talk
on the life history of some of the things we were studying and
seeing.

This was a small class, I was in a half-year class, and

I think there were some sophomores in that class, and also other
freshmen.

I don't believe there were more than ten or twelve in

the whole class. We just sat around a great big table. And he
sat down one day and said, "What do you students believe at this
time that you will do? What do you want to be when you grow
up?" And he started going around the class, and some of them
said they hadn't thought about it, and some said one thing and
another, and it was
the first time I really had been asked in sort of a public place,
in what I might perhaps regarded as an important spot, to say

16
what I'd been thinking for quite a while.

So I really had to

screw up my courage a little bit in that situation to say, well,
I thought I'd be a doctor. At which the class burst out
laughing. And I've never forgotten.

He turned and gave the

class a sort of a cutting look, and he said, "What are you
laughing at?

Of course she could be a doctor, and she'd be a

very good doctor, too."
reinforced it.

Well, that just was a boost that really

I guess maybe I had a mild high school girl crush

on him, but nothing much; but I admired him, I loved what he was
teaching, I liked the way he was doing it. To have him say this
just really firmed my decision right up.

"Well, if he thinks I

can do it, I can." After that, I never really considered any
other career.

I went right on with it. But if he had joined the

laughter and said, "Well, Esther, you mean you'd like to be a
nurse, don't you."

It could have . . . I don't say that I would

never have gone on and been a doctor, but it could have given me
a setback in my thinking, because after all I was only a freshman
in high school at that time.
. . . call her up and see if she could come get him.
called her up and said, "This is so-and-so.

So I

I'm a doctor on

emergency out at the Mission Hospital. We have your son in here,
and I think he's all right to go home."

You didn't want to say

over the phone that he was drunk. And she'd say—I remember this
woman said, "He's drunk as usual for Saturday night, I expect."
And I said, "Well, there is some evidence that he has been
drinking." He reeked with it.
right down."
around.

She said, "All right, I'll be

She was an Irish woman and just knew the ropes all

She just took a look at him and shook her head, and she

17
said, "What was in his purse?" And their purses were always
opened in the presence of a witness, you know.

"Well," I said,

"it was empty, except we found this piece of paper with your name
and phone number on it."
follows.

"Oh," she said, "of course. That

Oh," she said, "I've just been working so hard today.

If I drive my car up, can somebody help me get him out?" And he
was beginning to thrash around and moan. He was conscious, and
we said, "Sure." There was somebody there that could do that.
just felt so sorry for her.
you have to do this."

I

I remember saying, "Oh, it's a shame

"Oh," she said, "girl, I've done this all

my life for the men in my family."
Johnson:

Do you remember how much a hospital bed or a room cost in
those days?

Clark:

I never knew at all. Well, mostly, it was free. You would
work up patients from the emergency room. Maybe they would have
been in a big auto smashup, and some member of the family would
be contacted, or they'd be able to talk. Right away they said,
"My doctor is Dr. So-and-so and could you call him." And you'd
call the private doctor, and he'd often instantly arrange to have
them put into some other hospital.
didn't pay anything for it.

If they stayed in the city and

county hospital, it was free.
county expenses.

But, to my knowledge, they

That was part of the city and

I don't know much about the insurance. As an

intern I got $10 a month, plus my room and board and the laundry
of my hospital clothes, plus an allowance each year for shoes,
and a clothes allowance for uniforms, something like $40 that
would buy you three or four uniforms.
sort of thing.

You wore a white smock

That was all you were paid, and you couldn't get

18
your $10 until all your histories were up to date, all filled
out.
Johnson:

Very good motivation.

Clark:

For $10. Really, in retrospect, we were so busy all the
time, you didn't have time to go out and spend money when you
were an intern or a resident, either one.

Johnson:

After you graduated from medical school, did you know where
you were going and what you were going to do?

Clark:

Oh, yes.

I had two years residency at Stanford in

pediatrics. At that time, we didn't get our M.D.s until after we
had interned. Among the delightful chores we had to do as an
intern, when we were on the psychiatric service, we that we had
to commit somebody to one of the state institutions.

There was

always somebody that needed it. You had to go down to the
courthouse, before the judge, and there'd be representatives of
the patient's family there.

The patient I went down to commit

was still out there in the city and county hospital, and the
judge looked over the history—he had all the information—and
said to me, "And who are you?" And I said, "I'm this patient's
doctor at the city and county hospital."
the case," she asked.

"And you're familiar to

"And you are a licensed physician in the

State of California?" And I said, "No, I'm not."
right.

It was all

They knew that. He didn't particularly like to bring

that out.

I think he'd been a little careless about that;

they'd never get by with that. And of course, Stanford changed.
It started giving people their M.D.s at the end of their academic
work, because we were all appeared to be one year stupider than
U.C. graduates, which were getting their M.D.s as they started

19
their internship.

Bat Stanford required it.

It wouldn't give

you your M.D. until you'd completed it. Well, then, there was no
problem.

Oh, I've forgotten now the details of the case I had,

but you just, you talked about him. He had severe delusions and
he was incapable of taking care of himself, or he was paranoid
and felt that he should kill the enemies of mankind, and he'd
been known to have a gun and appeared to be violent.
Johnson:

Was there a psychiatry specialty at that time?

Clark:

Oh, yes.

Johnson:

That wasn't required for commitment? They didn't have to
have a psychiatrist do the committing?

Clark:

Oh, no.

I think even friends and relatives could do it.

They didn't like to as a rule. Well, they might have to submit
the corroborating evidence of someone that would know, because it
wasn't enough just to have a family do it. They might want to
put somebody away, you know.

So I think they did require that

there was some medical authority or legal authority.

He would

have been picked up sitting in a tree saying he was a blue jay.
Johnson:

Were you ever in private practice, or did you start right
out with the clinic?

Clark:

I started right out with the clinic.

I was invited, about

halfway through my second year of residency, I guess, to come
down and talk about it.

I guess it wasn't even to come down.

Russ came, he interviewed me up there. He sent for me once, when
he was up there teaching, and he happened to be over there at
Stanford.

I was a resident, and I remember we just sat down.

wanted to know if I would like to come down.
financial talk he gave me.

I remember the

He said, "Whenever another person

He

20
comes,"—and at that time there was Ton Williams and Russ and
Fritz Roth, just the three of them—and he said, "We form a new
partnership, of which you will be one. And as soon as there's
enough money built up into that new partnership of Williams, Lee,
Roth and Clark, then you will start getting a certain percentage
of it. And it'll be enough for you to live on very comfortable,
and I think within a few years, you may be making as much as
$10,000 a year, and that's enough for anybody."
You've reminded him of this.
Yes, I have.

So it was on that basis that I came down.

I

think I had another offer—I never pursued it—an offer down in
San Jose with a Dr. Cook down there.
name. He was a good man.
there.

I've forgotten his first

He practiced a sole practice down

Palo Alto looked much better to me.

I recall reading that you were the first pediatrician
between San Francisco and San Jose?
That wasn't quite accurate. Harzel[?] Ray was a
pediatrician in San Mateo about a year before me.

Yes, Russ in

his grandiose way says I was the first one between San Francisco
and Los Angeles.

That just isn't true.

Well, you know, it was a wonderful, wonderful time to be
practicing, because, when I first started, we were just on the
threshold of breakthroughs in all kinds of immunization. That
was in 1927 that I started, and by the late '30s we began to get
some of these wonderful antibiotics and more and more
immunizations, like to polio.
discovery after another.

It just snowballed, one great

There have been more advances in

medical history in the last fifty years, than in all preceding

21
time, all put together.

It's been a wonderful experience to

practice that way, and it's going on and on, improving.

I think

it's within human power, whether we'll be able to get it all
effected, to prevent myriads of miserable illnesses.

Getting rid

of the infirmities of old age would be one great one to do.
We've got to learn to apply the knowledge we now have, and
whether the human race can do that, I don't know.

You get

discouraged about it sometimes.
Johnson:

We've talked a little bit about preventative medicine. What
would you think parents can do now with their young children?

Clark:

Well, I think for one thing, they can be sure they're
immunized to all of these diseases to which they can be immunized
so that they don't need to have them. They can became
knowledgeable about the other causes of fatality in children.
The leading one, at the present time, is accidents.

It's also

the leading cause of death in youth, and accidents are
preventable, they aren't just act of fate.

If you know the

causes of them, and the causes are known, they can be prevented.
It's a very hard thing to evaluate whether or not this is
happening.

Accidents as a cause of death have gone into the

foreground so much, not because there are more accidents, I feel,
but because there are fewer deaths from all the infectious
diseases that use to carry such frightful mortalities, like huge
sweeping pandemics, epidemics across the world; the incidence of
pneumonias and intestinal infection that killed scores and scores
of children, infants and young people and old people, alike, in
many areas.
Then I think we know more how to start living and start

22
children off with better health habits in general, in terms of
diet, and a good, basic, common-sense way that may actually
prevent a lot of the diseases of old age.

I think that we have

it within our power, too, to control the propagation of what you
might call bad genes or poor genes, genes that cause diabetes.
Diabetes is increasing, because with the use of insulin, people
live long enough to propagate.

In the olden days, with the

severe diabetes, they never lived long enough to produce
children.

Now a lot of them do.

If we could stop some of those

things, and if we can learn to control the population of the
world, it would prevent great ills to mankind, from overcrowding,
increasing pollution, vising up our essentially good environment.
The only answer at the present time is fewer people.

I'm

convinced that this is one of the critical things that we're
faced with.
Johnson:

What kind of group practice can you envision in the future.
Do you think it will be the same, or will there be important
changes?

Clark:

I think the main change, that's coming already, is the
introduction of more people who do the direct family care, the
so-called primary physician. When someone's feeling ill and
doesn't know who to go to, they need as a resource someone who's
skilled at diagnosing whatever their illness may be, and then
either handling it themselves or referring it to the hands of a
specialists. We've got to have specialists, because so much is
known that no one person can be skillful in brain surgery,
pediatrics and all the other specialties.

So I think there

should be multi-specialty groups, and there should be many people

23
who are in the primary care role.

I think a lot of these people

don't necessarily need to be M.D. physicians, but they can be the
R.N. assistants.

This is coming in many fields, who have so much

basic knowledge that they make very wise counselors to patients
and their families.
Johnson:

Do you anticipate there will be more acceptance of midwives?

Clark:

I don't know. I just can't answer that.
of reference on that.

I haven't any scale

I'd prefer to think of it not as midwives

in the ordinary sense, but as obstetrical nurses who work with a
doctor, and they can be invaluable.

But the midwife who likes to

deliver a baby at home and has not had a vast amount of training,
I can't get enthusiastic about.
Johnson:

What about patient education? Will that became more
sophisticated?

Clark:

Yes, I'm glad you mentioned that, because that is a thing
we've just got to have, and I think it is a coming thing.

There

are all kinds of techniques for delivering it, and at first it'll
be the people that perhaps need it the least that will go after
it the most and benefit the most from it? but we've got to find a
way to deliver it to everybody.

In minority groups of people,

and people without a background in education in medicine, there's
a monumental task to get meaningful counseling to them.

It has

to be done, I think, from the people that have emerged from that
group.

Otherwise, they view people that are coming in, trying to

help them and promote it, with so much suspicion that they just
don't accept what's said to them.

I don't know what other

techniques can be developed, but that is the sort of thing we are
seeing a little. At least it's a beginning.

24
Whether we're having too much welfare, I think a lot of
money is being wasted, but I think we're obligated to do it. We
can't let people just go hungry.

But we should find a way to get

people employed and working and being responsible for themselves,
to knew and be educated as to where they can turn for various
sorts of help, and to recognize things going wrong in the
family.

Some of these things are right on the fringes of

communities that are full of very highly educated, cultured
people, and I'm thinking of some right around the Palo Alto area,
in East Palo Alto and parts of San Jose. And it's so difficult
to deliver good medical care that is available to them.

The

schools, everybody that deals with parents and children has to
come in. And if the children can get educated in school while we
still have them as a captive audience, in terms of health,
homemaking, how to buy food wisely and all kinds of things, home
management,, infant care, what's involved with it.

It has to be

said more than once, and it has to be said in different ways and
kind of ingrained into them, beginning when they' re pretty young,
too.

But a lot of parents in certain circles have the feeling

that nobody else has a right to talk to their children, for
instance, about sex and venereal disease. Well, you see seventh
and eighth grades getting pregnant and having venereal diseases,

Johnson:

there's something wrong going on.

It isn't just because they're

uninformed, but partly it may be.

This has gone on enough.

Take your time.
