
Waldron: My name is Manjula Waldron and I am interviewing Helen R. Quinn,
Professor of Physics, for the Pioneering Women Oral History Project. The
location of the interview is Professor Quinn’s home.
Quinn: [00:00:27] OK, can I correct that?
Waldron: Yes.
Quinn: [00:00:29] I am not a professor of physics. I was a Professor of Particle
Physics and Astrophysics at SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, not the
physics department at Stanford.
Waldron: Well that’s important because that’s what we will record.
Quinn: [00:00:45] I can’t claim a title I don’t have.
Waldron: Exactly. And that’s important because that title is what Stanford Historical
Society (SHS) has. So it’s good to have that corrected.
What we’ll do is ask some general questions to get things going a little bit.
We already met and had a wonderful session so we will go from there. Today
is Friday, October 17, 2014. It is now 9:30 a.m. when the interview starts.
Tell me a little bit about your early life in Australia.

13

Quinn: [00:01:29] I grew up in the suburbs of Melbourne, Victoria. Actually, most of
my early life was spent in Mitcham. I went to an all girls’ school called
Tintern Church of England Girls’ Grammar School at the time. I think it just
called itself Tintern today. I actually went to a different school my first two
years. But when I arrived at Tintern school, in third grade, it was three
classrooms. It was just beginning to be built, and it was on fifty acres of bush
land. I think a lot of my love of the outdoors grew in that environment
around that school in the early years before more and more buildings were
built. As they built first the junior school up to full size, and then the upper
school and the boarding school, everything gradually grew on the site.
Waldron: This was in the 1940s or 1950s?
Quinn: [00:02:28] Well, I was born in ’43, so I started school in ’49. It was probably
1951 when I moved to Tintern.
Waldron: This sounds like it was fun for you.
Quinn: [00:02:42] It was. It was a wonderful place to go to elementary school and I
guess it’s where I learned to love learning.
Waldron: [Laughter] And your smile shows you still do.
Quinn: [00:02:53] Yes.
Waldron: You want to tell us a little bit about your family?
Quinn: [00:02:57] Yes. My father was an engineer, although he did not have a college
degree. My mother, likewise, did not have a college degree, but she was a
dietician. They both had some post-secondary education, but not to the
degree level. At that time in Australia when they were married, married
women could not be employed. As soon as she had a child she had to stop

14

working. In fact, she should have stopped working when she was married,
but she went to work without her wedding ring so she could continue
working [Laughter] until she had a child.
[00:03:34] I’m the second child. I have three brothers, one older and two
younger than me. My parents always encouraged us to be interested in what
was going on in the world around us. My father loved to have discussions
and arguments. He would put an idea on the table I think often just to get us
to argue about it. [Laughter] Actually, that was very good training. Growing
up with three brothers and my father and being always in these arguments
about how things worked, or whether this was right or wrong, helped me
develop the ability to stand up for my own opinions and to think things
through and express my ideas on the fly in a way that was very important
later in my career.
Waldron: Yes. It sounds like you had a lot of male influence.
Quinn: [00:04:30] Yes.
Waldron: Sounds like your father and your brothers as well as your mother were quite
independent thinkers and encouraged you to be the same.
Quinn: [00:04:35] That’s true. She expected me to learn to do all the kinds of things
that she did, so I learned to sew and make my own clothes, and to knit, and
to cook, and become trained to be a good housewife.
Waldron: [Laughter] Yet, you were getting all this male influence of what it means to
be in the male world.
Quinn: [00:04:58] Yes. Right.

15

Waldron: It’s wonderful. What were your schools’ attitudes towards women’s
education?
Quinn: [00:05:06] Because I was at a girls’ school, the attitude was that we all should
be educated. However, it was also ambivalent. There’s a wonderful
autobiography called The Road from Coorain. You’ve probably read it. By Jill
Ker Conway. She describes her education in Australia. She’s about probably
ten years older than I am. Her education in Australia was a little earlier, but
her description was very similar in girls’ schools in Sydney. She makes the
point that there’s a strange ambivalence, because these girls are actually being
raised to be proper women in society. But most of the teachers are single
women who have chosen to be intellectuals, basically. And so there’s an
ambivalence that the girls are not supposed to emulate the teachers in that
way…in that particular respect. I remember one time being called in by the
head mistress and being lectured on to tell me that I was too much of an
intellectual snob. [Laughter]
[00:06:17] And that I should be more interested in things other than how
much I was learning, which is kind of a strange attitude. Some of it came
from one particular incident where I got into an argument with somebody.
Mostly it was about they did not think I was heading in the direction that
they were supposed to be sending me.
Waldron: [Laughter] Did early life in Australia influence you to go into science?
Quinn: [00:06:53] I think as much as anything it was my father who influenced me to
go into science. He insisted that I take the most advanced science courses I
could in high school. When I finished high school in Australia I actually was

16

only sixteen, so I had to get honors on matriculation in order to enter the
university at that age. He encouraged me to apply for various cadetships.
Now, a cadetship is an agreement whereby you are paid a salary while you’re
going to the university, and your university fees, which weren’t very high,
were also paid by this agreement.
[00:07:46] My cadetship was with the Australian Weather Bureau. I actually
worked for them between my first and second year at Melbourne University,
and they were paying me a salary for those two years. I was bonded to work
for them for five years after I graduated in return for their paying my way
through school. My father said, “Look. Take it. It would be cheaper to buy
out the bond than to support you throughout this whole period. And it looks
like it would be interesting to be a meteorologist.” So I took that cadetship.
As I said, I was at Melbourne University for two years. When my family was
moving to the United States, I went and told them (the managers o f the
cadetship program at the weather bureau)that I wanted to leave with my
family.
[00:08:39] I think just purely on the opinion of the one person I was sent to,
that man said, “Well, I think we can call that circumstances beyond your
control,” and they released me from the bond without my having to pay
anything back, which was very nice of them.
Waldron: [Laughter] Yes.
Quinn: [00:08:57] There’s another interesting piece of that story. Part of the bond,
again, because at that time, the Australian government did not hire married
women in permanent positions. The bond said I could not marry for three

17

years after I graduated because otherwise, they’d be in a bind that I was
supposed to work for them for more than two years, and yet I was married.
So they put into the bond that if a girl took this cadetship, she was bonded
not to marry for the three years after she graduated. [Laughter]
Waldron: Amazing.
Quinn: [00:09:32] Can’t imagine today that they could get away with that legally.
[Laughter]
Waldron: Times have changed. Did the school that you went to, the girls’ school, did
they have a good physics program?
Quinn: [00:09:45] No. They had a terrible physics program, actually. In the last two
years of high school program. They hired a physics teacher who had to be
retired from one of the boys’ schools in town. That was the first time I took
physics. When my brother’s physics teacher, who was at another one of the
boys’ schools in town, heard who was teaching at my school, he said, “Your
sister is laboring under a severe disadvantage” because that man was actually
in the early stages of Alzheimer’s. He was not capable of teaching anything.
[00:10:29] I think actually I got interested in physics because I had to figure
things out for myself. My brother’s teacher, whenever he handed out notes
or a problem set to his class, would send home a set for my class. There were
only four or five girls in my class taking physics. Two of us actually managed
to pass the exam based on the notes that my brother's teacher had sent us,
[Laughter] and not on anything our own teacher taught. [Laughter]
Waldron: How fortuitous. What else were you interested in your younger years?

18

Quinn: [00:11:09] I loved to read. I read a lot. Like any Australian kid, I played out of
doors a lot. Before we moved to Mitcham, we lived in Blackburn and we’d
ride our bicycles all around the little lake that’s there. In the countryside, I
liked to walk. I’d go on long walks in the morning with the dogs. I wasn’t
particularly good at sports so I wasn’t on any sports teams. I think one year I
was a reserve on the hockey team, but I never got to play a game. [Laughter]
I just enjoyed being in the woods and being out of doors. We did, as a family,
a lot of picnicking and camping.
Waldron: Did you ever imagine you would be following a career path?
Quinn: [00:12:07] No. I assumed that I would finish college and work for a couple of
years and then, like my mother, get married and have a family. I didn’t think
of career and family as being compatible because my society at that time
didn’t think of career and family as being compatible. So it really wasn’t until
I was at Stanford that I began to think of going beyond a bachelor’s degree.
If I had stayed with the Weather Bureau, I would have had the five years of
work and that would probably have been it. Perhaps they would have
supported me to do an honors year, which would be a fourth year in
Australia, but that would have been as far as I went.
Waldron: That’s interesting. It seems like coming to Stanford changed your trajectory.
Quinn: [00:12:58] Yes. The move to the U.S. for me was an incredibly freeing
experience because it opened up the windows of a much wider world to me.
Also, it moved me from Melbourne which was a very small town with a very
structured society. You had to behave in certain ways and belonged in certain
places at certain times. When we arrived in the U.S., all of a sudden, my

19

parents didn’t know all the rules. Whereas in Melbourne, they certainly knew
all the rules. [Laughter]
[00:13:40] Both, for my brothers and for myself, I think coming to the U.S.
opened a wider spectrum of ways of living and ways of thinking and ways of
behaving than we ever would have met had we lived all our lives in
Melbourne.
[00:14:00] My older brother and I had started Melbourne University at the
same time, because I was a year ahead and he’d repeated the matriculation
year, even though he was two years older. Essentially, because I was young, I
lived in his shadow socially speaking. His friends and my friends were very
much an overlapping group, and the dynamic was such that I was kind of the
little sister tagging along. I was only sixteen when I started university, and
socially I felt a little bit out of my depth.
[00:14:40] When, two years later, we came to the U.S., I was a lot more
confident and now we were going different ways. He went to Foothill
College, I went to Stanford. The records we had developed up until that
point, directed the paths we could follow at that stage. All of a sudden I was
on my own, finding my own path in a completely different environment than
the one I’d been in before. I was still living with my parents. In fact, I lived
with my parents until I married, even as a graduate student because they lived
in Palo Alto.
[00:15:19] But the ability to be who I wanted to be was helped by being a
foreigner. When you’re a foreigner, nobody has any particular expectations of
what you should be like, whereas, when you grow up in a small town closed

20

kind of society, people have a lot of expectations of what you should be like.
When we arrived at the beginning of 1962, I knew nothing about the
American university system. I got a book and looked up the universities close
to where my father would be working. His company was in Belmont.
[00:16:03] So I applied to Berkeley and to Stanford. I was admitted both
places. But Stanford gave me a year of credit for my last year of high school
in Australia, based I think on one letter from one professor at Melbourne
University, which said that I would have a bachelor’s degree in a year if I
stayed in Australia and should be put in a similar position here. Perhaps
based also on the fact that they’d seen some small number of Australians
come as graduate students with bachelor’s degrees from Australia and do well
here. They admitted me, gave me three years of credit, but they put me on
academic probation because they said they really couldn’t quite evaluate my
record, but it looked OK for a foreigner.
[00:16:54] [Laughter] They also sent me to take my notes from my courses in
Australia to a professor in the physics department and to other departments.
I was trying to figure out what major could I complete within a year. It
happened the person I was sent to in the physics department, whose name
was Jerry Pine, was very open-minded about it. His attitude was, “Well, why
don’t you go audit some courses because you’ve got most of this quarter
before you actually register as a student, figure out where you fit. If you think
you’ve had it, I’ll say you’ve had it.
[00:17:29] If you think you need to take it, you take it.” And because I liked
that attitude much better than the attitude at Berkeley which was trying to

21

make a one-to-one match and only giving me credit for a course where they
could kind of see in the course description that I’d covered everything with
the courses I had taken in Australia, I decided to come to Stanford. I could
see I could get a degree sooner. I registered at Stanford for the spring quarter
in 1962 and then got my degree in June of 1963, so I was actually there for
four quarters as an undergraduate, whereas at Berkeley, it would have taken
me at least a year more repeating what I’d done already.
Waldron: You were pretty young when you got your bachelor’s.
Quinn: [00:18:18] I was just twenty. I’d turned twenty in May and got my degree in
June. That year, as a senior, was a kind of strange year, too, because I was
taking general studies requirements. I had the English requirement covered
by my high school English courses, but I had to take all of the other kinds of
general studies requirements. I was taking basically graduate level physics and
math courses, and freshman level general studies courses. I didn’t know
anybody, practically, in my own class except for one or two of the most
advanced physics students who were also taking the graduate level physics
courses.
Waldron: You said you explored because you didn’t know which course you wanted to
take.
Quinn: [00:19:15] Yes.
Waldron: So physics wasn’t the only major you explored?
Quinn: [00:19:17] I talked to people in physics, and mathematics, and applied
mathematics, and engineering. It wasn’t very far and wide. But physics clearly
was the easiest major to complete, given the courses I’d taken, the second

22

year at Melbourne University. I think I took pure math, applied math,
analytic chemistry, beginning organic chemistry, and a full year of physics, a
second year physics, and so that was kind of a good background for a physics
degree.
[00:19:55] The applied math was more like advanced mechanics, and the
physics included some modern physics. So I took the third quarter of the
junior year physics courses and then moved into the senior year courses.
Waldron: Physics was something you were prepared for.
Quinn: [00:20:18] It seemed easy and natural. Right. It was a place where I could
quickly find my feet, and I found myself, to be one of the better students in
the classes.
Waldron: What made you think to go to graduate school?
Quinn: [00:20:38] I was encouraged to do that by some of the faculty. Actually, there
was a young Australian post-doc, Tony Hearn, in the physics department at
that time. The faculty sent him to talk to me, to convince me that I should
apply for graduate school. [Laughter] I don’t know whose idea it was, but he
was the one who came and said, “Are you thinking of applying to graduate
school?” And, you know, I thought, well, maybe I’ll be a high school
teacher. And another year of physics wouldn’t hurt. But if I apply for a
master’s degree, I know that the schools, or the best ones, wouldn’t accept
me. So I’ll apply for a Ph.D. and I’ll do a master’s degree and then I’ll leave.
[00:21:26] I applied and Stanford accepted me. I wrote to Princeton, and
Princeton said they did not normally accept women. At that point, actually,

23

the only women they accepted were wives of faculty members in their
graduate program. [Laughter]
[00:21:51] I finished up deciding to stay at Stanford, mostly because that
seemed like the best choice. That was the cheapest because I could continue
to live at home. Also my relationship with Dan, who’s now my husband, was
beginning. He was a graduate student at Stanford, and that seemed like a nice
thing to do to stay close to him. [Laughter] So I did. Having spent one year
and a little bit as an undergraduate, I just stayed on at Stanford as a graduate
student in the Physics Department. I’ll tell you another gender story. This is
the attitudes of the time. My undergraduate advisor, Mason Yerian—this is
the most backhanded compliment anybody ever gave me.
[00:22:40] He said, “You know, graduate schools are often reluctant to accept
women because they get married, and one thing or another, and they don’t
finish. But I don’t think we need worry about that with you.” [Laughter] I
don’t think he realized what he was saying to me. I was thinking, did he mean
what he just said? And what did he mean to say? [Laughter] Stanford,
having seen me as a student, was happy to have me as a graduate student,
and I stayed there and finished. I got my undergraduate degree in June of
1963, and my PhD in September of 1967.
Waldron: Would you like to talk a little bit what it meant to be a woman in physics in
1960s at Stanford?
Quinn: [00:23:41] Women in physics in my age group, PhDs are 2 percent.
Waldron: Now, or then?

24

Quinn: [00:23:49] Then. Today it’s 15 percent. Most of those 2 percent were not
American born. That’s another interesting thing I noticed, and then I
checked the statistics and it’s true. There was one other girl accepted into my
class as a graduate student, and she left within six months.
Waldron: She was American, or from somewhere else?
Quinn: [00:24:25] She was American. Yes. But she decided for some reason or other,
that this was not a comfortable place to be and so she left.
Waldron: Two percent meant you and one other maybe?
Quinn: [00:24:36] There was me and one other. In a class of thirty, two was a large
number. And pretty soon there was only one. There were a couple of other
women, graduate students a couple of years ahead of me. But essentially, you
know, yes, it was like in a hundred graduate students, there were two or three
women.
Waldron: In the whole department?
Quinn: [00:24:56] In the whole department. No women in the faculty. I had to
decide that I could do what I was doing in a totally male society. That’s
where I think my arguing with my brothers and my father put me in a good
position to be willing to put my voice forward and stand up for what I
thought was interesting. I could become a part of the study group with other
students my own age and make gender not an issue. I think if I had been
concerned about gender as an identity, as an issue, it would have been much
harder. [00:25:45] I had to go outside the physics department to find any kind
of female company, and I found a few organizations where I could find
women to be my friends, but mostly I lived in a totally male world.

25

Waldron: What kind of organizations had women?
Quinn: [00:26:02] As an undergraduate I sang in the chorus, and I stayed with the
chorus as a graduate student. I forget really, there was some other club-type
activity that I got involved in, but I don’t remember what it was. [Laughter]
Waldron: No doubt it will come to you.
Quinn: [00:26:24] There were various kinds of, interest groups I guess you’d call
them. I was part of the Stanford Alpine Club. But again, that was pretty male
dominated, too. I guess I just didn’t really look for a lot of female company,
so having a few places where I met with other women was good. The other
thing, as graduate students, the second year a group of us formed a graduate
student association and provided a process to help arriving graduate students
find places to live. We got a room in the Student Union where we had maps
and housing listings and a place for people to just come and meet one
another because, you know, when new students arrive they don’t know
anybody, they need to find somebody to share an apartment.
[00:27:27] So we set up that. We met people as they arrived, and some of
those people became our friends. Dan was part of that activity, too, and a
few other friends. Some of the people that we helped became our friends and
we went on a camping trip to Yosemite with them. So there were different
ways you got to know people other than going to class with them.
Waldron: Men seemed to accept you as a colleague then?
Quinn: [00:27:57] Yes. I think because it was not an issue for me to be in male
company and not have it be about relationships between the sexes, have it be
about whatever was going on. I managed somehow to be not completely like

26

one of the boys, but at the same time, not to make gender an issue in our
relationships. I remember, actually, some years later, the wife of another
physicist saying to me, ‘You know, I hear the physicists talking about some
of the women in physics, the men talking about the women as women.” But,
she said, “I never hear them talk about you that way.” [Laughter]
Waldron: You put them at ease, seems like.
Quinn: [00:28:59] Yes.
Waldron: You mentioned Dan, your husband now, was a graduate student with you
through these activities. Tell us a little more.
Quinn: [00:29:06] Yes. He started graduate school in 1962. The year I was a senior,
he was a first year graduate student. We were taking some of the same
courses. That was when we met.
Waldron: You were close to Dan because you were dating him, whereas all these other
students were not. Did that affect anything?
Quinn: [00:29:27] It didn’t. We were on sufficiently separate tracks. He was an
experimentalist, I was a theorist. Among the theory students there were no
such relationships. One of my best friends was a Jesuit, and he and I would
go to concerts together. I always remember pulling into the gas station and
he’s wearing his Jesuit collar, and the gas station attendants looking at us and
wondering what’s going on here. [Laughter] Then there were a couple of
other, you know, students that I did things with, but it didn’t ever become an
issue.

27

Waldron: Would you like to share a little bit about your dating experience with Dan
and how it influenced you to marry? Because at one time you said you
expected to be married.
Quinn: [00:30:24] Yes. And now I was going to graduate school, but I think I still
expected that I would get married. It never became an issue of making a
choice of stopping, we thought we would just work this out as we go along.
Our relationship evolved and grew and eventually we decided to get married.
We were married in 1966. I got my PhD in 1967. He actually got his at the
beginning of 1968. Since we were both in school and studying, there wasn’t
any decision to make about that. It just worked out that way.
Waldron: How did your parents react?
Quinn: [00:31:17] My parents were very happy. They liked Dan. I think they had the
assumption that we would have children and when we had kids, I’d stop
working. When we didn’t for a few years, then my mother would ask, “When
are you going to have children?”
We’d say, “Well, when….” You know, we went off to Germany for post doc
positions for two years and it didn’t seem like the time to do that. We actually
were far away from family for that period when we were married but without
children. It just wasn’t something we talked much about.
Waldron: You felt you had a choice in when and how to have children. Did you
encounter the women’s movement? What did you think about it?
Quinn: [00:32:22] Not really aware of it. I mean perhaps at a very small level, but I
had my head down studying physics and was really not much aware of the
rest of the world in many ways. We left Stanford before the major unrest

28

around the Vietnam War really came to campus. But, the Free Speech
Movement, the kind of changing of attitude towards authority in this country
was happening around us. To some extent we were involved, but not greatly.
We spent the years of 1968, 1969 in Germany. [00:33:13] We came back to
Boston once during that period and marched in an anti-Vietnam War march
in Boston in that one week, and then went back to Germany where it wasn’t
really nearly as much an issue. We were not particularly political, either of us
at that point in our lives, and we were just living our lives.
Waldron: What was it like being a post doc as a woman physicist in Germany?
Quinn: [00:33:44] There’s another story. After we applied for post docs, and
decided we wanted to go overseas, we got a telegram from the lab in
Germany that said, “Applications accepted. Letter follows.” Foolishly on the
basis of that telegram we turned down our other offers, one of which was in
England at Daresbury. There we both had a job offer. When the letter from
Germany came, it was addressed to Dan. It offered him a job and a salary.
Then it said, “As long as your wife works for us, too, we will increase your
combined family salary to….” The difference was less than half of what
they’d offered him.
[00:34:36] And it never mentioned my name. Right? But we were stuck.
We’d accepted, [Laughter] basically, so we went. It turned out there was a
kind of strange logic to this offer. At that time the lab in Germany paid such
low salaries… remember that Deutsch Marks were four to the dollar, so in
dollars their salaries were low. In order to bring some American post docs
they had a higher salary for American post docs. They figured we didn’t need

29

two American salaries, so they offered him the American salary and me the
difference between that and two German salaries.
[00:35:24] The second year I was there they realized I really was seriously
doing physics. When I had arrived they told me, “Well, you know, we’re not
really paying you, so you really don’t have to work,” [Laughter], I was coming
for a post doc, but maybe I really didn’t want one! So the second year I was
there they paid me a full German salary. The attitude was, OK, you’re here
and you’ve got a PhD. You could do physics if you want, but we really don’t
expect you to. Actually, the two years in Germany were some of the hardest
of my career in terms of…partly because I made mistakes in judgment. The
senior professor sat me down and using a very physics language said, “Well,”
he said, “As a zeroth approximation, everyone here does what they wish. But
there is a first order perturbation on that. There are certain things which
must be done.” And then he put a list of problems on the board which must
be done. As a new PhD, I probably should have continued working on the
things I’d been working on before, but I felt I was being told I must work on
one of these problems, which were actually just his favorite problems. I tried
for a year to work with him on one of those problems, and we never saw eye
to eye on the physics …and today I can say it, he was wrong. [Laughter]
There were things he wanted to…there were approximations he wanted to
make which were simply not valid for the situation.
Waldron: He wasn’t hearing you.
Quinn: [00:37:06] He wasn’t hearing me. So it was a wasted year. It took me quite a
while to recover the momentum of my career having spent that year trying to

30

work with him. Second year I was at DESY. I worked much more
independently and began to do more things, but it was a bad move on my
part. In fact, when we left Germany, Dan got a job offer at Tufts, and I said,
“Well, you should accept, it because if there’s any city in the country where
there’ll be two jobs, Boston’s a good one because there’s so many universities
with physics departments in Boston.” But I did not get any job offers. We
arrived in Boston; I had a year without a job.
[00:37:58] They offered me a desk in the physics department at Tufts, but I
knew that was a dead-end path. Instead I went to Harvard because I knew a
couple of the faculty there. When we were in Germany, I’d gone to a
summer school in Sicily. At that summer school I’d been awarded a prize as
one of the best students, so the faculty knew me. I went and talked to the
faculty member, Shelly Glashow, who’s since then won a Nobel Prize, and he
said, “Well, I’m going on leave next year in the coming semester, so you can
have my office.”
[00:38:41] This was actually the second thing I did. The first thing I did was I
went back to the idea, well, maybe I could teach high school. I took
education courses at Tufts and I did student teaching in a high school. I
loved the teaching, I love working with the kids, but I really didn’t like the
intellectual atmosphere of the high school. I didn’t like things like having to
supervise the kids in study hall and make them be quiet when they were
working. [Laughter] One of my friends, who’d been at Stanford, was now a
junior fellow at Harvard, and I met him one day and he said, “Why don’t you
come back and do physics. Interesting things are happening.” [00:39:22] I

31

came to Harvard. The professor gave me his office for the whole semester.
By that time I was pregnant with my first child. She came and she slept on
the floor in the office after she was born. That time at Harvard was just when
particle physics was taking off in a new direction. I entered at the very
beginning of that new growth in the field at Harvard and my career took off
from there.
Waldron: This is early 1970s?
Quinn: [00:39:55] This is early 1971. Yes. We came back in 1970. So 1971. My
daughter was born in March of 1971, so it was actually the second semester
of 1971 that I was at Harvard without a job, but I had an office and was
doing physics. They got money for a post-doctoral position for the next year
and offered me that position. Then I became a post doc at Harvard, and the
following year I became a junior faculty member at Harvard, and eventually I
became an associate professor. [Laughter]
[00:40:39] But associate professors at Harvard are not tenured. Again, Dan
got another job opportunity. He was changing fields, moving out of physics.
He got an opportunity to come to SRI as a decision analyst, and I had a
Sloan Foundation fellowship which I could use to pay my salary. So I took
leave of absence from Harvard and came to Stanford with that fellowship for
a year while he tried out the new career and the new job at SRI.
Waldron: Before we go to Stanford, tell us a little bit about the culture at Harvard in
physics, which was same or different than what you had experienced at
Stanford?

32

Quinn: [00:41:24] No. Very similar. Again, there were no other women faculty. There
was one woman who should have been faculty, but she was a senior research
associate or something like that in the department. But essentially, it was a
completely male department, and I was an anomaly in that department being
a woman. Not only a woman, but a woman with a baby. Right? Because by
this time I’d come in pregnant and had my child, so I kept the child in the
office and carried her with me to seminars and nursed her in the back of the
room when I was the only woman in the room. I didn’t feel as if I was being
radical. Right?
[00:42:14] But I was being radical in my own way, doing what I needed to do
in order to do what I wanted to do. [Laughter] Both of my kids spent the
first six months of their life in the Harvard Physics Department. People
actually liked having them around. It was an interesting relationship. But then
there were situations.
[00:42:42] When I was pregnant with my son, I was working on a paper with
three other physicists. After lunch we would come back. There was a small
office that they would sit and talk in, so I would go talk with them. They
were all smoking cigars. [Laughter] I would feel so sick. But I never said,
“Oh, I have to....I really….” I would leave the conversation if I absolutely
had to. [Laughter] There was no concession made to who I was or what I
needed in that process. It was just expected that if I wanted to be part of it, I
just had to make myself part of it.
[00:43:28] That was the way I approached it all the way through. There was
definitely a gender bias in many of the individuals about women. You know,

33

I had to prove myself. But once I proved myself, then I would be accepted in
the group as a person who was contributing to the conversation. Physics is a
field where people are so intent on the ideas that everything else falls aside. If
you contribute interesting ideas, then it really doesn’t matter how peculiar
you are in any other sense. The fact that I was peculiar in the sense of gender
did not matter to people once they felt I was a contributor in the work.
Waldron: Yet you felt you could not express your own personal need, like cigar makes
me sick.
Quinn: [00:44:28] I never even considered it. [Laughter] You know, smoking was an
accepted thing back then. Three people smoking cigars in the small office
was an extreme version of it. [Laughter]
Waldron: With a baby.
Quinn: [00:44:43] With me pregnant. Yes. You know, there were few times when
people would say things that were consciously…you know, a putdown on the
basis of gender, and I would just ignore it. I never pushed back. I just sort of
kept going and let those people have their own opinions. I didn’t say, you
know, I’m going to stand up for women’s rights and I’m going to have my
position. I think I became more confident over time. I mean as a student,
when I was first entering graduate school I was very tentative. I did not know
whether I belonged.
[00:45:39] But as I became somebody who…was contributing to the work
and when other people found I had interesting contributions to make and
wanted to work with me, then I became more confident. I never made
gender an issue throughout my career. Sometimes I probably should have.

34

Waldron: Tell me more.
Quinn: [00:46:08] You know, when somebody…when people acted in ways that
were really unacceptable, I should have called them on it.
Waldron: Can you think of an example?
Quinn: [00:46:19] A case where somebody got angry and was yelling at
me…right…and in a way that was totally unprofessional. I think they were
basically claiming that I was using my gender to get my own way, which was
simply not true. I just turned and walked away. I mean I just wasn’t going to
have that happen to me. My way to deal with it was to basically, for the most
part, act as if I didn’t notice it. And if I couldn’t do that, then just to avoid it.
Waldron: Did you talk to Dan about that?
Quinn: [00:47:10] Probably. I don’t even really remember that. Certainly having Dan
made a big huge difference. That I had a husband who supported me, who
thought my career was interesting, who was willing to try and take on his
share of the load at home, although I think, you know, it’s always true when
you have young kids that the women’s share is more than the men’s.
[Laughter] It’s still true that he did a lot. We had good daycare at Harvard.
All of those things made it possible for me to do what I was doing.
Waldron: Tell us a little bit about daycare. You had two children by now right?
Quinn: [00:47:54] I had two children. So when our daughter was born, as I said, the
first six months, she was in my office. As soon as they start to crawl, that
doesn’t work. Right? [Laughter] They got to move around. As long as they
stay put, when you put them in a basket, that’s fine. But once they’re starting
to move around, I found somebody who did home daycare for a while. That

35

worked for about six months. Then it became clear that there was some
tension in there. It wasn't working. The woman had a child of her own who
was a little older than my daughter. I think what really happened was that
Beth was maturing faster than her child, and she was getting jealous and she
was putting Beth down.
[00:48:47] And Beth was clearly not happy. Then I found a daycare situation
for Beth, if I remember rightly. Then when James was born, again, we had
homecare situation for a while. Then eventually they were both going to the
childcare called Radcliffe Child Care Center, which was in the basement of
the School of Education. It’s a funny story there. Beth was about four at this
point. She was sitting in the park in Cambridge, turning the pages of Curious
George. Somebody stopped her and said, “Oh. You’re a clever little girl.
[00:49:38] Can you read?”
She said, “Yes.”
Then the person said, “Oh. Where do you go…? Do you go to school?”
She said, “Yes.”
Then the person said, “Well, where do you go to school?”
She said, “Radcliffe.”[Laughter]
The guy was looking at her. [Laughter]
Waldron: You mentioned that at that time Dan was moving out and got a job at SRI
and wanted to move to Bay Area.
Quinn: [00:50:09] Yes.
Waldron: What was that for you? You were a professor at Harvard.

36

Quinn: [00:50:14] He went and called his friend who was working at SRI, actually to
see if there was an option for a summer job. He came downstairs and he said,
“Well, Terry says there are no such things as summer jobs at SRI. But if I
wanted a real job I should apply.”
I said, “You go back upstairs and call him again and tell him you’re
interested.” [Laughter]
[00:50:41] Right? We both knew that California was where we really would
prefer to live. I had a pretty clear idea that junior faculty at Harvard didn’t get
tenure at Harvard. Right? You could become an associate professor, but that
was the end of the road. You could see it with other people ahead of me that
path was like that. At that time it was extremely rare for somebody who was
junior faculty to be…stay on the faculty at Harvard as a full professor. When
they had a full professor position, they did a national search. And, as I said, I
had this fellowship that I could take a leave of absence without giving up my
job, come here and see what I could figure out. I came with the Sloan
fellowship as a visitor in the physics department at Stanford. I’d done some
work at Harvard, which is some of my well-known work.
[00:51:43] Also, in the year that I was at the Stanford physics department I
did some work that got quite a bit of recognition. It’s called Peccei-Quinn
symmetry with Robert Peccei. When I knew that the job was working out for
Dan, and I went to my friends at SLAC and said, “Well, is there any chance
of a job for me at SLAC?”
They said, “On short-term notice, the only job we can offer is a post doc.
But you’re an associate professor. You wouldn’t be interested in a post doc.”

37

I said, “Yes, I would.” I said, “I need a job for next year. And Dan wants to
be here.”
[00:52:30] They said, “Well, OK. We’ll see if we can turn this into a staff
position.” And eventually they did. But I went from being associate
professor at Harvard to being a post doc at SLAC. Then within a year I was
promoted to being a staff member at SLAC. Most of my career I was a staff
member and then a senior staff member. I don’t actually remember when I
got the transition. I may have even been appointed senior staff which meant
a permanent position when I was first appointed.
Waldron: You said fellowship at Stanford. That really was SLAC, not Stanford?
Quinn: [00:53:13] No. The year I came from Harvard to Stanford, I was in the
physics department for that year. Then when I got a job….
Waldron: The physics department didn’t have a job for you then.
Quinn: [00:53:29] No. The physics department had no openings that I even could
think of applying for. I probably talked to people but I don’t remember
exactly what conversations I had around that. I talked to people at SLAC, to
Sid Drell, in fact, who was the head of the theory group then. And he said,
“Well, we’d love to have you here, but all we can do is offer you, at the
moment, a research associate, a post doc position, and I’ll do what I can to
turn that into a staff position.” And then like within the year, and I don’t
remember exactly when, they came and said we can offer you a permanent
staff position at SLAC. That was when I became a staff member. I had that
job for most of my career. I only became a faculty member at SLAC after I
became a member of the National Academy.

38

Waldron: Did your parents have something to do with the move because they were
here in Palo Alto?
Quinn: [00:54:42] Partly it was that, partly it was because Dan grew up in San Jose
and his family was in San Jose. So it was partly family. But it was also just we
knew we loved this area, that the climate and the surroundings, the hills, the
places to work, and the feeling of this area is very different from living in
Boston/Cambridge area. And the weather. Not having to deal with snow in
the winter when you have small children is a big deal. [Laughter]
Waldron: Did the childcare situation get help because you had family in the area?
Quinn: [00:55:18] No. Well, occasionally my mother would babysit, or the kids
would go and stay with Dan’s parents for a week or two in the summer,
because Dan’s parents lived up…moved up to the mountains in Arnold,
which is funny, because Arnold is my maiden name. [Laughter] They lived in
the town of Arnold in Calaveras County. No. We had to find day-to-day day
care situations and school. I mean when we came back to California, Bethica
was in daycare, and then she started kindergarten.
[00:56:03] Then it’s school and after school care, and all of that until the kids
were old enough to be by themselves after school, that something had to be
organized. It was just part of what you have to do as a parent--to figure out
what are the kids going to do after school.
Waldron: Which year was it when you moved to the Bay Area?
Quinn: [00:56:27] We came back in 1976. We bought this house, moved into it in
1977 and we’ve been here ever since.
Waldron: In Portola Valley.

39

Quinn: [00:56:42] Yes.
Waldron: You mentioned your mother, but you don’t mention your father.
Quinn: [00:56:50] In terms of looking after the kids?
Waldron: Yes. In terms of being a grandfather, grandmother.
Quinn: [00:56:55] He certainly was a grandfather, and the kids adored him, but I
never would have thought of asking him to care for them. [Laughter] That
was just the way the world was in that generation [Laughter], if someone was
going to care for small children, at least. As they got older he would do
things with them. I mean James, for example, when our son came here with
his daughter when she was like six, he said, “Come on. I have to take you to
the Cable Car Museum in San Francisco.”
I said, “Why do you pick that particular…?”
He said, “Because papa took me there when I was six.” [Laughter]
He remembered my father taking him to the Cable Car Museum, and that
was a big deal. So he was going to take his daughter and show her the Cable
Car Museum.
Waldron: Was there different grand-parenting from Dan’s father who was American
and your father who was Australian?
Quinn: [00:57:46] Pretty similar, I’d say. You know, mothers do the caring, and
fathers play with the kids was the kind of idea that they had. Maybe fathers
disciplined the kids, too. But the idea that they would take responsibility for
cooking a meal for them, for example, my father never cooked anything
more than an egg in his life. Or maybe sardines on toast. [Laughter] And

40

Dan’s father, the same way. Dan’s father loved doing things with the kids,
but, you know, in terms of who was looking after them it was Dan’s mother.
Waldron: All the domestic things.
Quinn: [00:58:41] Yes.
Waldron: But Dan is different?
Quinn: [00:58:45] Dan, we got him trained. [Laughter] When we were first married
we had this deal that we were going to be very even about it. Each week one
of us would be the cook and the other one would wash the dishes. Then I
realized that for Dan cooking and washing dishes were both equal chores. He
wasn’t a terribly good cook. [Laughter] For me, cooking is interesting, and
washing dishes is a chore. I said, “Look. I’ll cook, you wash dishes.”
[Laughter] That’s the way it’s been for the rest of our marriage. [Laughter]
[break in recording]
Waldron: We were talking about your moving to Stanford, and you had fellowship. But
then they didn’t have a faculty position, and SLAC offered you a staff
position.
Quinn: [00:59:32] Right. The Sloan fellowship covered my year at Stanford and
Stanford was not paying me, I was being paid from that fellowship. But I had
a visiting position in the Physics Department. Then when I got the job at
SLAC, it was a post doc that became a staff position. What I didn’t really
realize when I took the staff position is that there’s really not a path for
promotion from staff to faculty in SLAC or in any situation in the university
where people who are on a non-tenure track position can get from nontenure track to tenure track. That is a relatively rare event. [01:00:18]

41

Generally, the way it happens is, somebody who’s doing interesting work
wants to become a faculty member, they have to get a faculty offer
elsewhere, and then maybe they’ll be considered and given a faculty offer at
Stanford. But a faculty offer at Stanford won’t appear even if you applied for
the position that was advertised because it’s much more advantageous to the
group to hire in somebody new. I realized that the first time there was a
faculty position open in the theory group at SLAC. I applied for it. What I
actually found very offensive was that I found out who was offered that job
from a visitor.
[01:01:06] Somebody else who was not a SLAC staff person knew about it
before me, and the job offer had been given to so-and-so, whereas I think
the faculty at…in the theory group at SLAC should have told me before they
let anybody else…before anybody else knew about it [Laughter]…
Waldron: Was that a man who got it?
Quinn: [01:01:25] …at the time they made the offer. It was a man who the offer was
made to. Yes. As I said, I became a faculty member only after I became a
member of the National Academy. Dan always laughs because the Stanford
Report had an article about the new academy members that said, “Five Stanford
faculty elected to the academy.” But I wasn’t a faculty. I think that election, plus
the fact that I had won an international prize, began to make it a little
embarrassing to Stanford to have me be staff and not faculty. There was a
review, actually.
[01:02:11] I think the president of the university maybe even asked for it.
They were actually three women at SLAC who were staff who were

42

considered at that time, and two of us were promoted, became faculty that
had been there a long time.
Waldron: Which year was that?
Quinn: [01:02:33] That was 2004, if I remember rightly.
Waldron: Both were women who were promoted as professors?
Quinn: [01:02:47] Yes. We were what was called Rubber Band Billets. [Laughter]
Waldron: Tell me more about it.
Quinn: [01:02:53] One of the ways the university controls its budget is it rations
faculty appointments to departments. Departments have some number of
billets. If they want to hire somebody new, it’s either because someone
retired or is about to retire, or because the university has decided to grow
that area and has given them some new billets. It’s a rationed system. Right?
SLAC has, although its budget is separate from the university in that
everybody at SLAC is paid out of a big contract with the Department of
Energy, and everybody’s salary came out of that same contract. [01:03:44] It
wasn’t an expense issue for the university, except if SLAC were to evaporate
and they had some number of tenured people to keep track of. This is a long
history. But eventually the Physics Department, what’s now called the
particle physics and astrophysics group at SLAC, had twenty billets. Some
number of billets. That’s it. Those were all full. When the university decided I
really should be faculty, they had to create a billet for me. It’s called a Rubber
Band Billet because it sort of stretches the capacity and it springs back when
I retire. In other words, my retirement didn’t open up a position for anybody
else.

43

Waldron: So it was a special… position for you?
Quinn: [01:04:37] Yes. Stanford looked and said there’s an inequity here and it needs
to be corrected, so you have a billet to correct the inequity. They said you can
have one more faculty member because you have this person who really
should be a faculty member and make her a faculty member, and then when
she retires this inequity will no longer be there. The other interesting piece
of that is, when the lab director came to tell me I was being made a faculty
member and tell me my new salary, the salary was about a 50 percent raise.
He said, “This is not the difference between staff salaries and faculty salaries.
You have been underpaid for years.”
[01:05:23] And again, this is what happens to women.…They earn less not
because anybody’s deliberately underpaying them, but because they don’t ask.
Right? Women tend not to go and look for salary increases. I don’t know.
Have you heard the fiasco the other day about somebody at Microsoft, I
believe, saying, oh, no, they shouldn’t ask, they should just wait and let good
karma come to them? [Laughter] The point is that men are more comfortable
pushing for what they think they’re due than women are in general,
apparently, because women tend to finish up with lower salaries simply
because they don’t get the raises that other people do. That happened to me
over the years and nobody had particularly noticed that I was falling behind.
Waldron: Did you never think to ask?
Quinn: [01:06:16] I never thought to ask. I mean each year I got a raise, that was told
to me this is your raise this year, and I figured that’s the system and that’s
what I got. [Laughter] Or I didn’t get a raise. Whatever it was. It never

44

occurred to me to check, was I getting a lower salary than other staff
members at the same level of seniority or not.
Waldron: What about Dan, who started same time as you.. Did your salaries compare?
Quinn: [01:06:43] Because he’d moved into a different field and was doing different
things, so it wasn’t a comparable job. Right? I mean yes, as I told you, when
we started as post docs, I had less than half of his salary [Laughter], but that
was a special case. Throughout my career, and I don’t really know when I fell
behind, but clearly I had been being underpaid simply because I hadn’t said I
should be being paid more. I think this is something that happens to women
very frequently.
Waldron: Do you think if you had asked, they would have heard you?
Quinn: [01:07:23] I think if I had made a case for it, I probably would have gotten a
correction in my salary earlier on. Because, you know, people try to be fair.
They look across, and in fact, Jonathan Dorfan, who was the lab director
when I was promoted, said, you know, “We do general checks to see if the
women’s salaries are in line with the other salaries, but it is done on the
averages across many roles….” And actually, I’m not sure how clearly that
works when there are very few women scientists. They’re probably looking
more at other positions and they didn’t notice that I was out of line until they
went to do this promotion.
[01:08:07] He was kind of embarrassed to say, “Well, you’re getting this
bigger raise because now you’re getting a faculty salary. But in fact, faculty
salaries and staff salaries shouldn’t be this different.”

45

Waldron: You mentioned that women were 1 or 2 percent when you were in graduate
school. At the time you were SLAC as staff, were there many more women
in physics?
Quinn: [01:08:38] Gradually the number increased. If you look at overall in the field
and look at the fraction of women among PhDs granted, it’s been gradually
increasing. It’s now around 14, 15 percent, and seems to have flattened out
there. It hasn’t gone up much in the recent few years. But, you know,
statistics of small numbers, it fluctuates somewhat, so [Laughter] hard to be
sure. The trend has definitely been up over time but flattened recently. In
almost all the fields which are math intensive, the numbers are like that.
Women in engineering, women in physics, women in chemistry, women in
computer science are all around 15, 16.
[01:09:35] Maybe a little bit higher in some fields and a little lower in others.
Computer science is interesting because when computer science was a brand
new field it was around 30 percent women. People transitioned. People were
not trained as computer scientists, they kind of found their way into it by
starting to work with computers and finding they were good at it, and so the
field had higher fraction of women. When it became an educational path to
computer science, somehow it dropped to be parallel to all the other math
intensive fields.
Waldron: It seems you’ve had a long and illustrious career, including National
Academy of Sciences. You want to tell us a little bit more about the
contributions you have made to the field?

46

Quinn: [01:10:33] About my work? I’ll talk about… basically three things. When I
was at Harvard, one piece of work which is a very highly recognized piece of
work, so highly recognized now that it’s quoted without being cited.
[Laughter] It was very highly cited, but now people just talk about it. It’s
just…it’s an understanding everybody has. And that’s… there are strong and
weak electromagnetic interactions. As we look at them on scales they’re very
different physical phenomena as seen in the world.
[01:11:11] But mathematically they’re very similar. The idea is that they’re all
different aspects of a single interaction. The idea that that could be so
requires the strength of the interaction to change with the energy scale,
which it does. What we calculated was, yes, we can look at them and we can
look at how they’re changing with scale, and then we can predict where they
come together. Where they come together is an incredibly high scale way out
of anything we can measure. But it fit with the idea of Grand Unified
Theory.
[01:11:49] So it’s called, you know, the hierarchy of interactions and how they
come together. That paper which I wrote with Howard Georgi and Steve
Weinberg is one of my most highly cited pieces of work. That piece of
understanding is kind of a fundamental understanding everybody has about
the way the world works with these interactions today. That’s one piece of
work. Then when I first came to Stanford, a second piece of work…and
most of my career from then on was around a related set of issues. The
physics of matter and antimatter is very, very similar. We know antimatter

47

exists. We make it in the lab. It seems to obey almost exactly the same
physics rules as matter, It is kind of mirror image.
[01:12:44] It has the opposite charge and we call that mirror imaging CPsymmetry. It’s not an exact symmetry of nature. In the weak interactions
there are some tiny differences between matter and antimatter and how the
weak interactions work. What the piece of work at Stanford was, what is
peculiar is, given that these interactions are all very similar and seem to come
together, how could you have this asymmetry in the weak interactions
without, to some extent, infecting the strong interactions, where we have
very, very stringent bounds from particular measurements that say no matter
and antimatter…strong interactions are really the same.
[01:13:38] We, Roberto and I, came up with another symmetry you could add
to the theory that would protect the strong interactions from being infected
by this matter/antimatter difference in the weak interactions. That, which is
called now Peccei-Quinn symmetry, is still the best answer for that puzzle
today. However, another interesting aspect of it is, it predicts a particle called
an axion, which is a possible candidate for dark matter. So people are
searching for the axion. Up until today they haven’t found it. The original
version of the theory has been ruled out, but you can make a somewhat more
complex version which survives, and so they’re still searching, and claim now
to have the sensitivity that if all the dark matter in our galaxy is made of
axions, then probably within the next ten years they’ll be able to find them.
That’s a very fascinating thing.

48

[01:14:43] The rest of my work has been about the matter/antimatter
asymmetry and weak interactions, and experiments to really pin that down
and test, and planning, and thinking how can the experiment test the theory
in that range.
Waldron: Wonderful. Would you like to share all the awards you have received in your
illustrious career?
Quinn: [01:15:10] All? I’m not sure. [Laughter]
Waldron: Some important ones.
Quinn: [01:15:14] I have two major international medals. One is called the Dirac
Medal. It comes from the International Center for Theoretical Physics in
Trieste, Italy. It’s a medal that’s given every year for contributions to particle
physics. Dirac, of course, was a famous particle physicist. He was also one of
the founders of this institute in Italy which is an institute that works on
supporting physics in third-world areas. He worked with Abdus Salam to
create that institute. That medal is an international recognition.
[01:15:57] The second international medal is called the Klein Medal. It comes
from the University of Stockholm and the same Swedish Royal Academy that
presents the Nobel Prize. The Klein Medal is also for particle physics theory,
and also given annually. I think I’m the only woman to have received the
Klein Medal even today. I certainly was the first woman to receive the Dirac
Medal and the first woman to receive the Klein Medal. It’s kind of fun
because in physics there’s two fundamental equations.
[01:16:40] The Dirac equation, which is for all the particles that are what are
called fermions, the particles like electrons and quarks and protons and

49

neutrons, and the Klein-Gordon equation, which is for all the particles that
are like the force exchange particles, the photon and the gluon. So those two
are the two fundamental equations of physics. Having a Dirac Medal and a
Klein Medal puts me at the fundamental…both sides of the fundamental
physics.
Waldron: Fantastic.
Quinn: [01:17:17] Then I also have an Order of Australia. I’m an Honorary Officer
of the Order of Australia, both for my work in physics and my work in
education. As you understand there are various ranks of the Order of the
Australia. An officer is this sort of middle level rank. Not the lowest, not the
highest. It’s honorary because I’m no longer an Australian citizen. I could, at
this point, recover my Australian citizenship, but when I became a U.S.
citizen, I had to give up my Australian citizenship.
Waldron: You were also president of….
Quinn: [01:17:59] I was elected president of the American Physical Society in 2004.
It’s actually a four-year job. You are president-elect, then president, then past
president, and for those four years you’re in the leadership--a small group of
the society. It’s a society of forty thousand. It’s probably a few more now,
but at that time it was forty thousand physicists, both national and
international. Mostly U.S., but it has many international members, too.
Waldron: Your National Academy of Science. When was that?
Quinn: [01:18:39] The National Academy of Sciences was 2003, I think. [Laughter]
Keeping all these dates in my head, I have to give you my vitae. I don’t
remember which year was which.

50

[Laughter]
Waldron: That’s all right. The fact that you were elected.
Quinn: [01:18:58] Yes. I was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences
earlier. I’m a fellow of the American Physical Society, and a member of the
American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and then a member of the National
Academy of Sciences.
Waldron: Fantastic. Congratulations. Let’s now move onto your science education role.
Was that a way you mentored women and other people?
Quinn: [01:19:26] During the time I was a staff member at SLAC I decided to
put…rather than supervising graduate students when I really couldn’t be
their thesis advisor because I wasn’t a faculty member, I put my educational
effort into running summer workshops for physics teachers. I got to know a
number of physics teachers and worked with them and mentored them. Yes.
I also helped develop a poster which is in many, many physics departments
around the world, which is kind of a graphic display of what we understand
about the world in particle physics. That became a small nonprofit which
also developed posters in other fields of physics. I helped in founding that
nonprofit.
[01:20:22] Then when I became a member of the National Academy, Carl
Wieman, who is also now at Stanford, is a Nobel Prize winning physicist, but
he’s also been working in physics education research for a good fraction of
his career. He was the chair of a group within the National Research Council,
which is the working arm of the National Academy, called the Board on
Science Education. The National Research Council is divided up into boards.

51

For example, there's a Board on Physics and Astronomy, and that board
organizes studies that are needed to sort of determine the future of the field.
[01:21:08] You know, the Decadal Study in Astronomy is a very famous
effort and there are smaller ones in each area of physics where they take
every ten years and look at the field and say what directions should we be
moving, and how. And it’s kind of advising the government. When the
National Academy of Sciences was founded, Lincoln said this body will not
just be an honorific body; it will work in service to the nation and provide
nonpolitical advice. So the Board on Science Education’s job is to provide
nonpolitical advice on science education.
[01:21:45] What should happen? How do we bring the knowledge that’s
developed through research on learning into how science is taught? We
organized studies. Carl asked me to join the board. Then when he stepped
down from the chairmanship role because he was going to Canada to work at
UBC, he asked and they invited me to take over as chair. I was a member of
that board for ten years. I’ll bring you a little momento they gave me…just to
show you the work.
Waldron: Yes. That’s wonderful.
Quinn: [01:22:28] During the time I was a member of the board, these are
the….This is a picture that has the covers of one, two, three, four, five, six,
seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen,
sixteen….about eighteen…. Actually, it’s sixteen studies, and then two
volumes which are a more popularized version of the study for teachers,
studies that are about science education. I was part of several of these,

52

chaired a couple of them. The most important one is this one, which is the
Framework for K-12 Science Education. In 2010, when I retired from Stanford,
right about the same time I was asked to chair this committee whose job was
to say, what should every student, kindergarten through 12th grade in the
U.S. learn in science.
[01:23:24] We had a committee that was nine scientists, academy members,
two of them Nobel Prize winners, and nine education researchers, or people
who’ve been like the state superintendent for science, or working in
education in those areas, and those eighteen people put together this report
with consultants and others outside working, too, to say this is what’s
important for every student to learn in science. Based on that report, another
group then developed what are called the Next Generation Science Standards.
That work, the report and the Next Generation Science Standards is driving
changes in science education across the country.
[01:24:12] Twelve states have adopted NGSS, the Next Generation Science
Standards, plus the District of Columbia. And more states will. And other
states are adopting much of what’s in the framework, but because of politics
not adopting the official Next Generation Science Standards. It’s really having a
very big influence on how science is taught across the country. I spend all my
time these days sort of propagating the ideas in this document.
Waldron: Fantastic. You are listed as a STEM [Science Technology Engineering
Mathematics] grandma on the web. How has your career in physics in K-12
education influenced your children and grandchildren?

53

Quinn: [01:25:00] Certainly, both of my children grew up with an idea that education
is important. Right? Our daughter is a teacher. She chose not to go into
physics. She graduated from Yale with a major in English literature and a
minor in environmental sciences from the Yale School of Forestry. She had
some science there. Then she went to teach for America, and then did a
master’s degree in early childhood education. Her role is teaching. She and I
spend a lot of time talking about ideas about teaching.
[01:25:39] What she does with preschool children is very much what I’m
saying students should…the way our children should be learning, and
learning science throughout their school year. Where it affects her is her
thinking about learning. Our son, at age forty, has gone back to school. He’s
a graduate student at Harvard in statistics. He was always very interested and
very good at science and math throughout his schooling. But, you know, his
path has been more self-directed. He graduated from Oberlin with a degree
that was a self-design major in cognitive neuroscience with a minor in
computer science.
[01:26:29] He worked in terms of earning his living in the computer science
side until he went back to graduate school to do statistics. Yes, I think our
attitude, our interest, our talking about mathematical problems had some
influence on his interests. And grandkids? Well, certainly his daughter is also
very science oriented. That’s as much him as us, I would say. Even from the
time she was quite young he would read Science News to her, which means he
would get Science News and they would look at the pictures and he would talk

54

to her about what the science in the picture was about. From an early age she
was very, very interested in science ideas.
Waldron: You mentioned he took his daughter to Cable Museum to talk about how….
Quinn: [01:27:27] Yes. To talk about the engineering and how they pull the cable
cars up the hill. And she was fascinated.
Waldron: From doing this theoretical physics and this wonderful things in quark space
and all the particle physics to K-12 science education is so broad.
Quinn: [01:27:53] It’s broad but not as deep, perhaps. Actually, it is deep, but it’s just
deep in a different way. The choice I made when I retired to put my energy
in the education side rather than the science side was….you know, I could
write a few more science papers and it wouldn’t change very much in the
world. But if I could put my understanding of science into helping science
education do a better job in getting kids to be able to think, to argue from
evidence, to analyze information and data, I thought that would probably
have more impact on the world.
[01:28:37] It’s kind of a choice to say I know a lot about science, I’m
interested in science broadly as well as the deep narrow science that was my
own personal contribution, and this is something where I can use my
authority as a scientist, as a member of the National Academy, to support the
voices of those who understand teaching to carry further in affecting the way
teaching happens in science.
Waldron: You leave two full legacies. One is your own deep contribution, and the
other is this wider goal for the generations yet to come…
Quinn: [01:29:23] Exactly.

55

Waldron: …with children and grandchildren, and their children and on.
Quinn: [01:29:26] I think it’s important not just in terms of producing new scientists,
but in terms of producing citizens who can face problems that will come and
use the best science available to make decisions about what should one do
about them.
Waldron: We’ve spent an hour and a half. Is there anything else you’d like to add in
closing that you’d like people to know about you that we may have missed so
far?
Quinn: [01:29:58] I don’t really think so. I think we’ve covered it pretty…pretty
widely. [Laughter]
Waldron: Wonderful. Thank you, Helen…
Quinn: [01:30:05] You’re welcome.
Waldron: …for this time and sharing your life with us.
Quinn: [01:30:10] I hope it’s useful to somebody.
Waldron: It will be.
