
Fryberger: My name is Betsy Fryberger, and I’m with the Stanford Historical Society’s
Oral History Program. Today is December 8, 2016. I’m here with Carol
Osborne [in her apartment in Mountain View], whom I knew and worked
with at the Stanford Museum for a number of years. This interview is part
of the oral history project about the arts at Stanford.
Carol, I would like to begin by asking you about your childhood-where you grew up, where you went to school. If there are certain things
you haven’t answered, I’ll ask some follow-up questions.
Were you interested in art at an early age? And did you do any art,
like any particular art classes?
Osborne: [00:01:00] I grew up in Great Neck, which is a suburb of New York, and I
lived there until I left at the age of twenty.
Fryberger: Tell us when you were born.
Osborne: I was born in 1929.
Fryberger: And so you went to high school in Great Neck?
Osborne: I went to high school in Great Neck. Great Neck schools were touted as
being very good, and I think they probably were.

13

Fryberger: And did they offer any art courses?
Osborne: Yes, they did. They offered practical art classes. In those days, we could take
art and music also, which I did. But I was not particularly exemplary in
either one of those subjects.
Fryberger: [00:02:00] And did you go into New York to see exhibitions at the Met and
so on?
Osborne: Yes, I did. My mother was a New Yorker, and she loved taking me into
New York to see the museums. We went not only to the Met but also to
The Frick and perhaps other places. I can’t remember.
Fryberger: Do you have any particularly specific memories of paintings or particular
works of art that impressed you?
Osborne: Well I was afraid you would ask something like that.
Fryberger: In my case, growing up in Chicago, we went to the Art Institute. The Seurat
painting made a big impression on me as a child. But actually some of the
early Renaissance paintings did, too.
Osborne: Well I would have to go back to my books to come up with the names.
Fryberger: [00:03:00] No, that’s fine. So then when you went to college, you went to
Barnard?
Osborne: I went to Barnard, yes indeed. But I’d like to say one thing in terms of my
early childhood, and that was that my father died young. I was only seven.
And it was a suicide. It put a terrible constraint on my poor mother who
had to go to secretarial school and learn to do something so that she could
support me and my little brother. That situation colored my life in an
important kind of way.

14

Fryberger: Yes, certainly understandable. But you still did go to Barnard. Was there any
other place you considered going?
Osborne: Well no, there really wasn’t. I had thought of going to secretarial school, but
I was advised that that was not such a good idea for me to do. So I applied
to Barnard and I got a fellowship to go there, and I commuted from Great
Neck on the Long Island Railroad and the Seventh Avenue subway.
Fryberger: Long commute.
Osborne: Long commute, and exhausting. I think it took a lot out of me.
Fryberger: But you probably could do homework on the train.
Osborne: A little bit of homework, yes, certainly. I can remember reading
Dostoyevsky--Brothers Karamazov--on the Long Island Railroad.
Fryberger: So at Barnard you obviously took some history of art classes?
Osborne: You know, I did not.
Fryberger: You didn’t?
Osborne: No. Government was my subject, and the war had just recently ended. I was
interested in fascism and Hitler and all of the terrible events that had
preceded in the early part of the century. And so I wanted to continue the
study of government.
Fryberger: But that actually forms a very good background for the history of art. I
think that most people who take history of art really should have taken
history courses before they get into history of art.
Osborne: [00:05:00] That’s true.
Fryberger: So as an undergraduate majoring in government, you didn’t necessarily go
much to New York museums, or did you?

15

Osborne: Well because of my mother’s great affection for New York City--she had
grown up there and knew all of the museums very well, she wanted me to
have the opportunity to take them in. Not only was it my mother who made
sure I got to the Met a lot, but also at Barnard, the course assignments
often--say in the French Department, you would have to go and look at a
certain painting and write about it in French, but with the setting in the
museum. I was very accustomed then, and quite taken by the Metropolitan
Museum, I think. In my family there was a reverential attitude toward it.
When I was commuting to New York from Barnard, I became
friendly with Albert E. Elsen [later professor of art history at Stanford]. In
fact, we dated quite a bit during my freshman year, and I came to know his
mother and father. Since I had to wait at the train station, they would often
come and take me out to dinner. With Al, I was taken to lots of galleries in
the city--the Betty Parsons Gallery, for example, and others. And he also
took me to his class with Meyer Schapiro at Columbia so that I was exposed
at that point.
That was my freshman year. I wasn’t studying art, but I was involved
in it through Al. And I think that opened up a lot of points of view.
Fryberger: Al’s lectures were so logically constructed.
Osborne: Right.
I was very fond of his mother, as it happened. She was a terribly nice
woman.
Fryberger: Was Al’s father a lawyer?
Osborne: Yes he was.

16

Fryberger: Was he an only child?
Osborne: Yes he was an only child.
Fryberger: So you took some French courses?
Osborne: Yes, I did take French courses.
Fryberger: But you didn’t spend any time in France?
Osborne: Not at that point, no.
Fryberger: Then when you graduated from Barnard, what did you do?
Osborne: I didn’t graduate. I was married after my second year there and continued to
live in New York; my husband, Howard Young, was getting a doctorate at
Columbia. And so we lived--well, I don’t know where to go with this--we
lived on 72nd Street, which was near The Frick and near the Met, and also
near Central Park. The Central Park exposure was interesting because after a
while when my first child was born, I went often to that little playground in
Central Park.
[00:07:00] And there I met people who were involved seriously in art,
among them [the abstract expressionist] Mark Rothko and his wife, Mell,
who became very good friends. They often would take Howard and me to
see exhibitions with them. That was certainly interesting, and as the years
went by, I was very appreciative of that friendship.
Fryberger: Certainly. Now, Howard Young, what was his field?
Osborne: He was studying Spanish literature.
Fryberger: And so did you spend more time looking at Spanish art? Was he particularly
interested in art?
Osborne: Not necessarily. He wasn’t particularly interested in art, no.

17

Fryberger: So you have two small children and you’re living in New York.
Osborne: [00:08:00] We had one small child and we were living in New York. And
then in 1954, after we had lived there for about five years, Howard was
appointed to teach at Pomona College. So then we came to California.
Fryberger: At Pomona, you worked in the slide library or something, isn’t that right?
Or that’s Riverside?
Osborne: I did work in the slide library, yes. No, I was not at Riverside then; that was
later.
Fryberger: So you obviously learned about a certain amount of major monuments of
art history if you worked in the slide department.
Osborne: That’s true. Yes, right, absolutely.
Fryberger: Did you take any courses at Pomona?
Osborne: I did take courses at Pomona as an auditor.
Fryberger: [00:09:00] But you didn’t get a degree from Pomona, or did you?
Osborne: No, no, no, I didn’t. Strictly as a faculty wife, I would participate in various
projects. That was it.
Fryberger: So at Pomona did you go into Los Angeles? Did you meet some of the
contemporary artists? There wasn’t a whole lot going on in the mid-fifties,
probably, in contemporary art in California.
Osborne: Well there probably was, but I saw only a bit of it. And of course at Pomona
there was a gallery, and we would have exhibitions there. And actually I did
become quite friendly with the gallery director, Helene Winer, who later
went on to do some rather important shows in contemporary art.
Fryberger: So then you’re in Pomona for how long?

18

Osborne: Let’s see, I can’t remember how long.
Fryberger: Did you move from Pomona to Riverside [University of California at
Riverside]?
Osborne: No, I didn’t. There was a divorce in there. Well, we’re skipping a lot of years
here. After that divorce was when I decided that I wanted to get a degree of
some sort, and I commuted from Claremont, which is where Pomona is
located, to Riverside. Does that make sense?
Fryberger: Yes. And so you got an undergraduate degree, or a master’s?
Osborne: No, actually both a BA and an MA from Riverside.
Fryberger: [00:12:00] Who was on the faculty?
Osborne: Richard G. Carrott [professor of art history] was on the faculty, and he was
a great fellow.
Fryberger: And his field was?
Osborne: American art with an emphasis on the Egyptian influence.
Fryberger: Really?
Osborne: Yes.
Fryberger: I think of him in a French context. Why don’t you explain about his love of
France and French art?
Osborne: That’s right. The other thing about Richard was, he had a house in France in
the middle of the country, and it was a big house. He was very generous
about inviting students to go and spend time there. And then he would take
us around. We would go to Chartres, or we would go to wherever there was
a monument of importance. That was a very interesting exposure for me,
and I enjoyed it thoroughly.

19

Fryberger: You kept up with him later.
Osborne: Yes. He and Bates Lowry were colleagues.
Fryberger: Bates Lowry, now that’s an interesting connection too.
Osborne: They were good friends.
Fryberger: Bates Lowry went on to be the head of the Museum of Modern Art in New
York.
Osborne: Very briefly, that’s right.
Fryberger: Did Richard Carrott collect art?
Osborne: He did. But I can’t remember anything specific about that.
Fryberger: I suppose it was French art. Somehow I want to think it’s French eighteenth
century art.
Osborne: I can’t be specific about that.
Fryberger: The next step is, I guess, after Riverside and you’ve gotten these degrees,
then you decide to go on and get a PhD.
Osborne: [00:14:00] Well yes. We’re collapsing some years there. I got a divorce as it
happened, and I married a fellow whose interest was in English literature, so
we spent a lot of time in London and other places.
Fryberger: Was he interested in art?
Osborne: Not particularly. His focus, and he wrote many volumes on it, was about
Boswell and Johnson. That was his sphere of interest.
Fryberger: So what else would you like to talk about before you get to Stanford? Or is
that where we are right now?
Osborne: I think that’s about where we are.
Fryberger: You arrived at Stanford in--

20

Osborne: 1975.
Fryberger: [00:15:00] Can you describe the Art Department at Stanford? And the
graduate students, the program, and some of the courses. Had you decided
what in particular you wanted to study in greater depth when you came to
Stanford? Had you decided you wanted to study French art?
Osborne: No. I had decided by then that I wanted to study the history of art. And I
was enormously impressed by the program at Stanford. Lorenz Eitner, who
was the chair of the department, was an exceptionally interesting and good
lecturer, and really put across what he wanted to have people know.
Fryberger: Did you take a course from Al Elsen?
Osborne: I did not take a course from Al, and you know, the curious thing is, I
completely forgot that I had known Al so many years before when I was a
freshman in college. Completely forgot it. In fact, it’s only as I’ve been
thinking about talking to you today that my mind flashed up Al Elsen.
Fryberger: Who else in the Stanford Art History Department impressed you? Did you
take a course from Dwight Miller?
Osborne: I did take a course with Dwight, and the material Dwight presented was
good. But he was not a good lecturer; it was difficult to really know what it
was he wanted.
Fryberger: Who else was in the department then? Was Kurt Forster still there?
Osborne: No, Kurt had left.
Fryberger: Alessandro Nova?

21

Osborne: I didn’t take a course with Alessandro. Suzanne Lewis--could she have
taught the Renaissance too? She might have. They were sort of filling in
with what they needed to have taught.
Fryberger: [00:17:00] But then you must have taken some seminars from Lorenz
Eitner?
Osborne: Yes, I did.
Fryberger: He gave one particular famous seminar where he brought students over to
the Museum to look at drawings primarily.
Osborne: Yes, that’s right.
Fryberger: To help them construct context?
Osborne: How to write. Exactly. And that was enormously helpful to me. He was very
good at that.
Fryberger: He was very clear.
Osborne: He was.
Fryberger: But also with a level of enthusiasm and his love for what he was talking
about.
Osborne: Yes, exactly.
Fryberger: It was contagious. So tell us about your dissertation. You spent some time in
Paris, obviously, doing research?
Osborne: I did. I wrote a dissertation that covered art of the Classical style at the end
of the eighteenth century, the school of Jacques-Louis David.
[00:18:00] There was interest in the support of those artists coming
from the publishing world. Pierre Didot the Elder was the one who was
publishing those particular artists, so my dissertation was on Didot and

22

those books. [Garland Press, from the 1970s-80s, published outstanding
dissertations in the arts. Her dissertation, Pierre Didot the Elder and French
Book Illustration, 1789-1822, was published as part of this series.]
Fryberger: Didot’s books were beautifully and lavishly illustrated.
Osborne: They were.
Fryberger: And some of the artists who illustrated them--Lorenz bought several
drawings by Girodet [Anne-Louis Girodet de Roucy-Trioson]. Had he
bought those when you were taking that seminar? Or maybe that was later?
Osborne: It might have been later. That was one thing. Lorenz was very good; he
always bought something that pertained to a graduate student’s dissertation.
He bought a copy of Didot’s Virgil, a major early nineteenth century
illustrated book.
Fryberger: [00:19:00] Beautiful book.
Osborne: Yes.
Fryberger: How much time did you spend in Paris? You must have spent many hours
at the Bibliothèque Nationale?
Osborne: I did indeed. I know it well.
Fryberger: Which in those days was sort of difficult to navigate, I’ve heard.
Osborne: Well the large part of the library was. But the Bibliothèque’s cabinet des
estampes--the print room, which was then curated, I guess, by Jean
Adhémar--was beautifully cared for and Adhémar was enormously helpful
to me and to other American graduate students in particular. And the
engravers’ books, the oeuvre catalogues, were just a wonderful source of

23

information for my topic, and they were easily available. So that was a good
experience.
Fryberger: [00:20:00] After you finished your dissertation, when did you start working
at the Stanford Museum?
Osborne: Pretty much as soon as I graduated. Since Lorenz was not only the chair of
the department but also my principal advisor and director of the Museum, it
was sort of natural to get me into that picture. So that in 1979 when I got
my degree, I went to work as the assistant director of the Museum.
Fryberger: What about other graduate students at the time that you were there? It was a
small department?
Osborne: It was a small department, but they were good--the other students were very
good.
Fryberger: What was happening at Stanford when you came here in ’75? How would
you describe the University? I arrived in the early seventies at the height of
political unrest; so the University was going through a bad period. By the
time you arrived, things were much calmer, right?
Osborne: I think so.
Fryberger: One of the graduate students was JoAnne Paradise-Osborne: Thank you, JoAnne Paradise, my good friend. Yes, absolutely.
Fryberger:

--who went on to work at the Getty Research Institute. Any other graduate
students that you were close to, or that you followed their careers or that
seem of interest? Well, Kirk Varnedoe, of course.

Osborne: [00:22:00] He was gone by then, actually.

24

Fryberger: The only person I can think of, Pat Maveety [Patrick J. Maveety, later
curator of Asian Art at the Stanford Museum]--he and you overlapped as
well.
Osborne: We did overlap, and we were friends, but Pat was not particularly interested
in late-eighteenth century French art.
Fryberger: So when you came to the Museum, what were some of the first
responsibilities that you had, and first publications?
Osborne: Yes.
Fryberger: The journal The Stanford Museum, which we co-edited, published articles by
faculty and students, mainly at Stanford. In later years, the scope changed
quite radically.
[00:23:00] When The Stanford Museum journal started, Anita Mozley
[registrar and curator of photography] and I were co-editors. It started as an
extraordinarily modest publication. But with time, it really became, I think, a
very interesting publication. It became more descriptive with longer listings
of exhibitions and acquisitions.
Fryberger: Do you remember your first exhibition that you worked on?
Osborne: [0:24:00] No.
Fryberger: We had an exhibition of the Domenico Tiepolo Punchinello drawings in
1979. Those were wonderful.
Osborne: Oh, yes.
Fryberger: That was a loan exhibition, and that came out of the dissertation of Marsha
Vetrocq.
Osborne: That’s right. It came from Indiana, from the university museum.

25

Fryberger: Right. And a Mendelowitz exhibition--Daniel Mendelowitz: A Retrospective
Exhibition--in 1979. Did you have anything to do with that?
Osborne: I did have something to do with the Mendelowitz. Yes.
Fryberger: In 1980 you worked on an exhibition of Salon art of the 1880s in Paris
during the Stanfords’s visit.
Osborne: Yes, I did.
Fryberger: And Tamara Rickman, an early fellow (1979) at Carl Djerassi’s Foundation.
She made small drypoints of California’s coastal landscape in the Art
Department’s printmaking studio. You worked with her in 1980 on an
exhibition of her prints and sculptures.
Osborne: Yes.
Fryberger: [00:25:00] Did you become friendly with Tamara?
Osborne: I did, yes.
Fryberger: In the early 1980s you started research on the Stanford family and what they
had collected fairly early, right?
Osborne: [00:26:00] Yes, but Lorenz was not particularly interested in what the
Stanfords had collected. In fact, he was rather discouraging about that
project. But it seemed to me that since it was part of the Museum’s history,
it was important to get something on the record about what part the
Stanfords had played in the Museum. And it turned out, actually, that the
building of the Museum was what was so astonishing about their
accomplishment. It was an enormous building, larger by far than the
Metropolitan or the Boston Museum of Fine Arts, even in the 1890s, and
grew larger until Mrs. Stanford died in 1906.

26

Artist unknown (U.S.A., 19th-20th C.), Untitled (Panoramic view of the Leland Stanford Jr.
Museum from Lasuen Street), before 1906. Photograph. Cantor Arts Center collection;
Stanford Museum Collections, 2012.542

Fryberger: And you wrote a wonderful catalog, Museum Builders in the West: The Stanfords
as Collectors and Patrons of Art, 1870-1906. (Stanford University Museum of
Art publication, 1986.)
Osborne: There are some good photographs in there.
Fryberger: [00:27:00] Tell us about objects that you especially like, and which led you to
several other exhibition projects, particularly the Venetian glass exhibition
of 2002 for which you wrote the catalogue Venetian Glass of the 1890s: Salviati
at Stanford University. The Museum once had close to five hundred pieces of
Salviati glass but today there are only 245 objects because of the damage in
the 1906 earthquake.

27

Salviati & Co. (Italy, 19th century), Footed Gondola, 1890-1903. Blown
glass. Cantor Arts Center collection; Gift of Erede Dr. A. Salviati & Co.,
JLS.11021

Osborne: Mrs. Stanford got involved with Maurizio Camerino, the young man in
charge of the Salviati glass works at Murano that was making glass objects
for her collection at the Stanford Museum. After her death, he sent off a
great crate of Venetian glass made by that firm to replace what was damaged
in the 1906 earthquake. The 2002 exhibition of the Venetian glass traced the
history of glassmaking from Roman times through the Renaissance.
Fryberger: [00:28:00] The Salviati glass exhibition was actually mounted after the time
that Lorenz Eitner was director. Tom Seligman [Thomas K. Seligman], the
succeeding director, nurtured the project.
Osborne: Exactly. That’s right. Lorenz couldn’t have cared less for Venetian glass.
Fryberger: And also for some of the paintings the Stanfords collected, he didn’t have
much interest.
Osborne: Well he was not interested in American art. We’ll just leave it at that.

28

Fryberger: Okay, that sounds good. Tell me, when you worked at the Museum, did you
work with any of the graduate students in the Art Department on any
exhibitions?
Osborne: You know, I probably did, but I can’t remember.
Fryberger: But you did work with Paul Turner [Paul V. Turner, professor of
architecture]?
Osborne: Oh yes, Paul Turner contributed a major essay to the exhibition catalogue
that we did about the Museum, pointing out its concrete formation. [The
Founders & the Architects: the Design of Stanford University, 1976]
Fryberger: In his retirement, Paul Turner has written a book [Frank Lloyd Wright and
San Francisco, 2016]. Did Debbie Shepherd tell you?
Osborne: No.
Fryberger: Debbie Shepherd was an undergraduate at Stanford who then worked for a
while at the Museum, I think, both for you and for me. Isn’t that correct?
Osborne: That’s correct.
Fryberger: And that was the period when we were doing research on the drawing
catalogue.
Osborne: Yes.
Fryberger: Debbie was very interested in American art.
Osborne: She was. She had left California and gone to live in Washington, and worked
at the National Gallery.
Fryberger: And she worked for Annemarie Pope, who ran a program of traveling
exhibitions and who, in her day, was famous and highly admired. So Debbie
had a certain amount to do with some of those exhibitions.

29

Osborne: She also worked with Nick Cikovsky [Nicolai Cikovsky], a curator at the
National Gallery.
Fryberger: [00:30:00] What about the docents at the Museum?
Osborne: I was impressed by the docents. They were serious women. I guess there
might have been a man or two in there as well. They paid close attention to
what was going on. They audited classes in the Department, which I
understand they are not allowed to do anymore.
Fryberger: A lot of changes have been made.
Osborne: Yes.
Fryberger: What about other departments at the University? When you were a graduate
student, did you take any history or French courses?
Osborne: I took some French courses. But I don’t think I took other courses that
were credited. I may have audited others, but I don’t remember.
Fryberger: In terms of the artists in the Art Department who were represented in a fair
number of exhibitions, I think you had something to do with Matt Kahn.
Osborne: Matt, yes.
Fryberger: But let me just go back to the exhibitions that you worked on.
Contemporary art--Paul Harris, for example. You worked on an exhibition
of World War I posters with Cecile Whiting, a graduate student in the Art
Department. And the other was The Art of William Gropper.
Osborne: [00:32:00] Yes.
Fryberger: Those didn’t have catalogs, but they were interesting exhibitions.

30

François-André Vincent (France, 1746–1816), Portrait of Marie-Gabrielle
Capet, c. 1782. Black and white chalk on paper. Cantor Arts Center
collection; Purchased with funds given by Ann Bancroft Dickinson,
1982.137

Fryberger: Let’s talk about the drawing catalogue, which wasn’t published until 1993,
but the research dated back more than a decade. [The Drawing Collection:
Stanford University Museum of Art, Lorenz Eitner, Betsy G. Fryberger, Carol
M. Osborne and others, 1993]
Osborne: Yes, exactly.

31

Fryberger: And you spent time in Paris. We got an NEH [National Endowment for the
Humanities] grant for travel funds.
Osborne: Yes, we did.
Fryberger: Was it the NEA [National Endowment for the Arts] or the NEH?
Osborne: The NEH, I think it was.
Fryberger: And the grant included travel funds for both yourself and me, and you spent
time in Paris and I spent time in London.
Osborne: Yes.
Fryberger: Do you want to talk about your research? You must have gone back to the
Bibliothèque Nationale.
Osborne: I did indeed. I spent a lot of time there. As I say, the print room--the
cabinet des estampes, and Jean Adhémar, they were really helpful people up
there.
Fryberger: That’s wonderful. Because I understand that sometimes they’re not so
helpful.
Osborne: Well that could be.
Fryberger: [00:34:00] Of the drawings in the drawing catalogue, can you describe one
or more that held a particular interest? Among the artists you wrote about
were Jean-Jacques-François LeBarbier’s book illustrations, François-André
Vincent’s portrait study, and William Trost Richard’s watercolor landscape
studies.
In 1992 you worked on a catalogue of Yankee painters in Spain for
an exhibition organized by the Spanish Institute in New York, which also
published the catalogue [Spain, Espagne, Spanien: Foreign Artists in Spain, The

32

Spanish Institute, New York, 1992]. How did you get involved? You spent
time living in Spain, and we didn’t really cover that.
Osborne: No, I haven’t covered that. That was certainly important, because the Prado
was wonderful to see. And I was surprised that Mary Cassatt, Thomas
Eakins, and a number of prominent American painters spent time at the
Prado and studied the paintings. So that led to an essay. Not, perhaps, to the
show, because we didn’t borrow anything from those artists. I think that
was beyond the means of the Spanish Institute.
Fryberger: [00:35:00] At the same time, actually, we’re working on the catalogue of the
drawing collection at Stanford which included some one thousand and five
hundred drawings. When finally published, it numbered over four hundred
pages. I curated several exhibitions related to the drawing catalogue after
you had retired in 1993.
Maybe we should discuss the 1989 earthquake now.
Osborne: Oh, the earthquake, in ’89. That was unfortunate.
Fryberger: Understatement. Why don’t you describe where you were when the
earthquake happened?
Osborne: I think Wanda [Wanda M. Corn, Professor of Art History] and I were in the
Museum main office. And we got under the table, whereas Betsy had just
gone out the door and was able to see the building shaking.
Fryberger: Never forgotten.
Osborne: Right.
Fryberger: Scary.

33

Osborne: [00:36:00] And Lorenz was there, too. [He had retired two months earlier
before the October earthquake.] Lorenz and I walked around the building to
see if the acroteria--architectural ornaments--had fallen off the roof, and
people shouted at us, “Get away from the building. Get away from the
building.” That didn’t faze Lorenz. He wanted to see that stuff, and he
stayed there.
Fryberger: After the earthquake, the whole collection [of more than thirty thousand
objects] had to be moved to the Old Gym, and then moved back to the
Museum in 1999.
Osborne: I had retired by then.
Fryberger: You had retired by then, so you missed that wonderful decade in the men’s
gym.
An American artist you were particularly interested in was Elizabeth
“Lizzie” Boott who married the American painter Frank Duveneck. I know
you did a lot of research about her. Lizzie’s father, Francis Boott, rented a
villa near Florence where they met Henry James. A large watercolor of this
villa was given in 1988 by Francis and Betty Duveneck, who lived in Los
Altos.
Now let’s talk about William Trost Richards. You were still working
at the Museum when the gift of close to two hundred drawings and
watercolors by William Trost Richards was offered to the Museum in ’92.

34

William Trost Richards (U.S.A., 1833–1905), Coastal Scene, Cuttyhunk, Massachusetts, c. 1870.
Watercolor, gouache, and pencil. Cantor Arts Center collection; Gift of M. J. and A. E. van
Löben Sels, 1992.55.115

Osborne: [00:38:00] I think ’93 was the year I retired.
Fryberger: Describe the gift, because it was somewhat improbable, right?
Osborne: Yes. M. J. and A. E. van Loben Sels, who had no previous connection with
the Museum, gave a major body of drawings by the American landscape and
marine painter William Trost Richards that documented his development
over some fifty years. The gift included pencil, watercolor and gouache
studies as well as two sketchbooks. They were kept in a shed in the back of
their house. They were wonderful drawings. Much later, in 2010, I wrote a
catalogue for the exhibition, William Trost Richards – True to Nature: Drawings,
Watercolors and Oil Sketches at Stanford University.
Fryberger: [00:41:00] Tom Seligman was by then the director of the Cantor Center
when you did an exhibition of the William Trost Richards material.
Osborne: That late? Yes, I guess so.
Fryberger: Interesting artist. But this is a very substantial catalogue.

35

Osborne: Yes. That was one of the big differences between Seligman’s running the
Museum and Eitner’s. Seligman was big on catalogues. He liked to get
something out into the world so that you could see it. And the other thing
was, American art was good as far as he was concerned.
Fryberger: He had a much broader range of interest. And also I think by that time he
had raised a fair amount of money. When Lorenz Eitner was director, there
was never much money for publications.
Osborne: I think that’s right.
Fryberger: Lorenz Eitner was not particularly interested in fundraising.
Osborne: Exactly. He wasn’t.
Fryberger: [00:42:00] Eitner wanted somebody else to do it, whereas Tom enjoyed it, I
think, and was quite good at it.
Osborne: Yes. But I could remember a visit to the Museum by a couple of trustees
who wanted to know what we needed to do to raise some more money.
And Lorenz said, “We don’t need to do anything; we have everything we
need, and no problem.” So that put the kibosh on raising money for shows.
Fryberger: Looking back, when Wanda was the acting director, you and I collaborated
on The Stanford Museum Centennial Handbook: 100 years, 100 works of art [A
Stanford Centennial Publication, 1991]. The point is we thought we were
going to have a traveling exhibition that would help raise the profile of the
Museum while all of the objects were in storage after the earthquake.
Osborne: That’s right, of course.
Fryberger: But that never happened.
Osborne: Why didn’t it happen? Do you remember the details?

36

Fryberger: I really don’t. New York was the place they wanted to have it. It may have
been an issue of funding. This publication is very useful. It highlighted
works in various collection areas: Asian, European, Modern. I wrote about
prints, drawings, and photographs which comprise about a third of the
thirty thousand objects in the permanent collection. I think it’s a lovely
publication, and it gives insight into the Museum’s collections. I’m sorry the
essays weren’t a little longer; well I can see why they weren’t. But there was
generally more to say about the objects than could be said in one hundred
and fifty words.
Osborne: Yes.
Fryberger: Did you have anything in particular you wanted to say about this
publication?
Osborne: Not at the moment, no.
Fryberger: The transition from Eitner to Seligman was reflected in what was
purchased. Do you have anything you want to say about the range of
material that the Museum bought while Lorenz was the director, as opposed
to Tom? Of course, Tom was much more into contemporary art and
African art. Older European art was not very high on his list.
Osborne: Yes. Lorenz did buy a number of important prints, did he not, during his
chairmanship?
Fryberger: Oh yes.
Osborne: But he also bought a lot of portraits of British men.
Fryberger: That’s true.
Osborne: And that got to be rather dull.

37

Fryberger: [00:46:00] And he bought many fine drawings, too.
Osborne: Yes.
Fryberger: He was very interested in English art. Among my favorite English drawings
are John Constable’s small study of Salisbury Cathedral from a sketchbook,
and two watercolors by J. M. W. Turner from his trip on the Rhine River.
Osborne: Yes.
Fryberger: I think Lorenz was actually more interested in drawings than prints, but
prints, being less expensive, served a purpose. As the collection continued
to grow, The Stanford Museum journal published articles about objects in the
collection. Some were written by, for example, Elizabeth Guffey, a graduate
student in the Art History Department, about Edouard Manet’s sheet from
a sketchbook. [00:47:00] Lorenz bought a number of drawings from
sketchbooks. They’re generally small; they’re not highly finished so they’re
less expensive. But I think he liked this kind of exploratory drawing because
it showed insight into the artistic process.
[Break]
Fryberger: The Cantor Center, but also museums generally, how have they changed?
Osborne: Well, the emphasis on contemporary art in historically oriented museums is
not the happiest thing as far as I’m concerned.
Fryberger: Emphasis in fundraising.
Osborne: Yes.
Fryberger: I think museums have become more and more important as entertainment.
Osborne: Yes, exactly.
Fryberger: Anything else that I’ve overlooked that you want to talk about?

38

Osborne: I don’t think so.
Fryberger: Thank you very much.
Osborne: Thank you.
