
Priest:

This is a project of oral history, sponsored by the Santa
Cruz County Health Services Agency, Public Health. The date
today is August 9, 1985, and the purpose of our oral history
interview is to interview Miss Josephine Hawes, who was the first
public health nurse in Santa Cruz County Health Services Agency,
forty-eight years ago. Participating in the interview today are
myself, Rhea Priest. I'm the assistant director of nursing. To
ray left is Betsy McCardy, chief of Public Health and director of
nursing. Torayright is Nancy Shanfeld, director of health
education.

Priest:

. . . back to Stanford, where she was a nurse in the Women's
Health Services in the Student Health Services for a year. She
then went east and was a nurse with the New Haven, Connecticut
Visiting Nurse Association. It was at that time that she came
back to the county of Santa Cruz, and in 1937 became the first
public health nurse in the county of Santa Cruz. She was here
from 1937 to 1939. From here she went to Kern County, where she
was the director of public health nursing, from 1939 to 1941.
After her time there, she returned for more formal education and
went to the University of Washington, for a Master's in nursing
education and sociology. Daring the war years, she was with the
War Relocation Authority, in Manzanar, and provided public health
nursing services to ten thousand Japanese who were interned in
camps. In 1945 to 1947, she joined the New Orleans city health

2

department, where she was educational director, and provided
education direction for public health nurses in nine southern
states. From there, she went in 1947 to New York Metropolitan
Life Insurance Company, and was a territorial supervisor of
public health nursing services, which at that time were sponsored
by Metropolitan Life. In 1951, she joined the Territorial Health
Services in Department of Interior in Alaska, to develop public
health nursing services there. In 1953, she joined the faculty
at Stanford University School of Nursing, where she eventually
became a full professor of public health nursing. She retired
from that position in 1970. I was fortunate enough to be one of
Miss Hawes1 public health nursing students in the '60s, and it's
a real pleasure for me to welcome her to the health department,
where new I'm the assistant director of nursing in the same
agency where she was the first public health nurse forty-eight
years ago. Upon retirement, Miss Hawes joined the Project Hope
and spent two years in Peru. She now lives in Santa Clara
County. Our interview will begin with Betsy McCardy.
McCardy:

It's such a pleasure to have you here, Miss Hawes. You
honor our department by coming back.

Hawes:

Well, thank you, it's my pleasure to be here.

McCardy:

I'd like to ask you something about Santa Cruz in general
and about the health department at the time you were here, and
I'd like to start off asking you, in your opinion, what were the
primary public health problems at that time, and to ask you if
you could sort of divide them up into program areas, starting
with maternal and child health. What were the primary problems

3

for mothers and children then?
Hawes:

I think maybe you need a little bit of history about why we
were doing all of this. The federal government had a project for
the betterment of full-time health departments. In this area,
there were city health departments, which were part-time, and
there was no coverage for the county area, and so I was invited
to come as a fully trained public health nurse. You had Red
Cross nurses, who carried on both in the city of Watsonville and
also in Santa Cruz, but it was not carried on under the auspices
of a health department, so that we were four individuals brought
here to start a public health full-time service. Our physician
was full time, and our nurse was full time. We had an
engineer/environmental person, for sanitation, and a
recorder/secretary. And this was our group that started the
thing.
So the care was being given in both cities by the Red Cross
group, and they had child health conferences, so it was a little
difficult to come in and take over, but that was the eventual
plan, to have the doctor be our chief and be working under the
jurisdiction of a full-time health department. The problems
were, as you will find in most places, prevention was the actual
thing that we wanted to do. It was teaching and getting people
acquainted with what health problems a community could help
with. We had . . . to initiate them into the service that would
be given. The doctors were in both the cities, where our baby
clinics or child health and welfare clinics were held. We did
some crippled children services, which I enjoyed particularly.

4

With a small county, you didn't have an immense area to try and
find your cases. They were really quite easily found if we got
acquainted with our community. It wasn't very long before we had
a second nurse, and we divided the county between the two of us,
so that we didn't have to drive quite as far. We did case
finding, bringing them in to services that were being given
regularly, such as child health conferences, tuberculosis
clinics. We hadn't gotten into nutrition, things of that kind,
in the beginning. One of the things that was lacking was
records, and one of the things that Doctor Fuller was extremely
interested in was to unify the record-keeping. We had as our
family folder, a sheet that is like this size [gesture 8 x 10], a
folder in which the whole family's history went, whether it was
tuberculosis, maternal hygiene, communicable disease. It was all
in one folder, with one family name, and this was a beginning
which was extremely strong, because it was facing the problems as
a family, not as individuals. Then we had two other sizes, a ?
card and an 8 by 5 card. But other than that, we kept our files
very simple, and when you went out to a family to make a call,
you did not look at just the child health services, but you saw
the other things as well which was very helpful.
We did lots of education, and the schools were quite
demanding. We had many one-room schools, and those teachers were
very in need of having somebody to talk with, and so we started
one of our programs with tuberculosis. One of the reasons why
tuberculosis was a major problem to us was that they were giving
us the money, they were paying for our secretary. They were very

5

much interested in having things move in their direction, and we
were too. In fact, I'm noticing the record that says we were
having the state tuberculosis meeting down here, a conference,
and we were getting ready so we'd be polished and shined up. We
worked and made graphs of our work. That was one of the things
we did quite a bit of. We graphed many of our cases, because
records weren't kept before. We were very much interested to
prove our growth in child health and such. I can remember one
case which to me was just fascinating and I used to use it in my
class, in teaching. Doctor Fuller had seen a mother with a new
baby that came from Watsonville area and her child had clubbed
feet. Both of them were curved in. And she was distressed, of
course, with this child who is handicapped, with both feet. She
was told to come back in two weeks, and the doctor would be
putting the legs in a cast. She was an older mother, this was
her first child, she didn't say very much, and went home. She
did not reappear at her appointment time, so Doctor Fuller said,
"Will you please go out and call on this mother? She hasn't
returned arid she must." I went to see her, in a very neat little
house, simple, and the baby was very well taken care of in a
basket crib, and I saw the child and I said, "We've missed you.
You haven't been back to see Doctor Fuller again." "I'm not
coming." And I said, "But why?" And she said, "I'm not going to
hurt that baby." She didn't really understand what we could do
with two little clubbed feet, and I talked about it and said,
"Why don't you come back to see the doctor and he will give you
more information about what can be done." But my punch line was,

6

"Well, when this child is six years old, and he walks with club
feet which turn in and he cannot run like a normal child, and he
learns that he could have had them corrected when his bones were
soft and he was growing, he will never forgive you." And she
came the next time, and the casts were put on, and, of course,
the child came out with good, straight feet. But this is the
illustration of what follow-up in nursing can do. The two of us
were just as busy as could be, following cases, because we did
very detailed work. We were able to do it. All of us were alert
to the things that should be done.
McCardy:

Could you tell me, Miss Hawes, if you feel your education
was appropriate for the practice that you eventually did here in
Santa Cruz.

Hawes:

Yes, we always were proud of what we learned at Stanford.
We felt that we were hand-picked and we had a very close
association with the faculty of the School of Medicine so that we
did have a good background. At that time Stanford was very
strong in its approach to public health. It has long since left
that strong feeling, and is maybe swinging back new to community
health, but it was a period that had very little use for it. We
had to take a course at Stanford later to fulfill the
requirements for the certificate in public health nursing. None
of us really realized what certification meant, or accreditation
meant, and many of us graduated at that time, went into public
health, and found we had to return to school. When I went to get
my master's I had to stay one more quarter for the school at the
University of Washington to accredit what I had had before, and

7

supplement just enough so that they would be willing to be give
me a certificate. You could not enter the U.S. public health
service, you could not enter World Health, WHO. It was amazing,
and we did not realize the reason why. We had never been
accredited in public health, because our president of the
university didn't want to be dictated to by the NOPHN, which was
the leading group that was standardizing nursing throughout the
United States in public health. It was done later, but it wasn't
done at that moment. We weren't aware of it, we thought our
certificates would hold, but they did not. It's very interesting
how we grew by experiences. Our clinics were teaching clinics at
Stanford, so you had lots of experience of helping the doctors in
pediatrics and in OB and in mothers' clinics and that type of
thing that was useful in the field. I think you learn a great
deal when you're in the field, to give you strength and courage.
McCardy:

One of the things that has undergone a great transition is
the relationship between physicians and nurses, and I'd like you
to comment from your perspective, of hew you saw that when you
first started here in Santa Cruz and possibly a little bit about,
if you saw a change, hew did that relationship change?

Hawes:

Well, to me, public health nurse is another species of
nursing. She and the doctor are a team. In a hospital, the
nurse—in fact, one of the most difficult things for me to accept
one time was, we worked very closely with social workers, and the
social workers spoke and said, so the doctor opens the door for
the social worker, but the nurse opens the door for the doctor.
In other words, our positions were quite different in relation to

8

how the doctor treated us. And it's true that in the hospital,
the nurse is servant to the doctor and jumps at his commands, and
it hasn't changed in many ways, but it was very definitely that.
Except, in public health nursing, you became a team member, and
your opinion of field work was just as important as the
doctor's. He couldn't go out into the field as much as you were,
and consequently, what you brought back to him from the field was
incorporated. It was a team approach, and to me, one of the
reasons why I enjoy nursing is the team approach. My area is as
valuable to the health of the family as his is, and we work
together. This whole area here was just a game of being
co-operative. The sanitarian was just as fascinated with what we
were doing. Bat the interesting thing was that we did so well
that it wasn't very long before we were reviewed by both the
state Department of Health, because we were being funded by them,
and the federal agencies, and also by UC. UC saw it immediately
as an area for doctors, so we had practicing fieldwork doctors,
nurses, statisticians, and also sanitarians during that very
short two years that I was here. I don't think it was more that
six months before we were accredited in their minds to do the
job. So our ableness doubled itself, because these people were
well qualified people, who came in to get their fieldwork and
were anxious to do good work. One of the projects of two of the
nurses was to write a manual for us, and I worked very closely
with them. So all the things that were budding at that moment
were just enthusiastic kinds of things. We used TB movies in the
schools, which was a very difficult problem, in that there wasn't

9

that much electricity out in one-room schools. But we had all
kinds of things that we were doing that were really very
progressive and hadn't been done before in most areas. We were
interested and willing to work on it.
McCardy:

One last question. I'd like to ask you to comment on the
status of women when you started with the health department, here
in Santa Cruz in particular, and any other comments you want to
make about the status of women in the '30s.

Hawes:

We were in a difficult position with the two very fine Red
Cross nurses. I don't know whether they had gotten certificated
in public health or not. They were just R.N.s. I don't knew
whether the requirement of Red Cross was that you must have a
P.H.N, as well. They had done a very fine job over a long
period, and we were threatening to them. Their jobs became ours,
and we did not include them, as their education was not of the
same type that we had had, so that they found something else to
be doing. This was difficult for us. We were friendly, but it
wasn't an easy kind of thing to have somebody dissolve what you
had been doing and take it over. But as for doctors in town, I
think there was a bit of hostility, there always is, wherever you
go. Doctors are not quite sure of what you're doing, and they
aren't that much believers in education. But the world looks
differently now than they did in the 30s. But I think Doctor
Fuller was able to adapt. He was part of the community, which I
understand is one of your goals with your employees today, and he
really had a lot of fun persuading people to cooperate. For
instance, I was just telling Rhea coming down, as we passed Pas

10

Tiempo[?], they were in the making, and a very swank golf course,
and we needed a lot of help with trucks and pickups and things to
clean up the whole area of debris. We were ashamed of what
people were doing in the 1930s. Even renowned people would take
their garbage and litter and dump over into a ravine. We were
hunting them up. I mean, I can't tell you hew many tons we took
up at that time. We had a two or three month campaign on it.
Sometime, you'd find letters of people that they'd be ashamed to
be identified as doing this. That was the easiest way of getting
rid of garbage and debris, and we cleaned up the place. We all
were busy in helping and explaining and doing things of that
kind.
But I really wasn't well acquainted with hospital nurses.
The field was all that I had time for, and it's been more or less
that way in my life. I have not been a hospital nurse. I think
the doctors depend on how much time you spend talking with them
and seeing them as carrying their cases in the field and going
back and saying you might be interested in what's going on in
this family, or something. Does that answer it?
McCardy:

Thank you very much.

Shanfeld:

Miss Hawes, as I understand it, you were appointed to your
position in October of 1937.

Hawes:

So you tell me. [Laughter]

Shanfeld:

What can you remember about this county in 1937? Do you
have a picture of it?

Hawes:

Well, the main street, and we entered the annex in the back
door and we had an office for the four of us. Dr. Fuller still

11

had his position with the county hospital, which was up here on
the hill. We had telephones so we could talk back and forth.
The secretary was scared to pick up the telephone, and I said one
time to her, "You're frightened of it." Yes, she was. She
hadn't used a telephone, they didn't have a telephone in their
home, and I said, "But you represent our new department, and you
have to not be afraid of the calls that are coming in, because
you're the first person that makes the impression." And she
certainly learned. Dr. Fuller helped her with her dental
difficulties which changed the whole look of her mouth before she
left. It was wonderful. But anyway, she was a good secretary
and very willing, and her money was going back into the family,
because they didn't have very much. He was protective, getting
her more interested in getting herself out. She gave a lot to
our group.
A funny story came up about the place. Somebody had read it
in the paper, and so a lady came, tall, thin, her name was Mrs.
Livingston. She had on a hat, which people didn't wear very
much, a navy blue dress, white blouse, and she said, "I have come
in to see what you are doing here. I am interested in all that's
going on." And I happened to be there, and so I of course was
the spokesman. She was from Boston. She had been an artist who
painted faces, and made masks. She went with one of the leading
physicians, I can't recall his name, from Boston who went to the
first world war and as the fellows were shot up and ruined and
brought to the hospital, she made masks for their faces so that
they'd go out in public. She worked hand in hand with them, and

12

so it was a very interesting kind of life that she'd lived. They
don't do that kind of thing very much new, but it was all they
could do in those days. It put them over the bandages, and
such. Well, she became our great friend, and she was very active
with us, but it was her own interest. Her Boston accent was
really very interesting.
The Red Cross was active with us, because they wanted to
help. But it was the chapter of the Tuberculosis Association.
In the 1930s, tuberculosis still was pretty rampant, and we had
lots of help and needed it, and they, as I said, financed some of
our girls that we couldn't get otherwise.
Shanfeld:

Can you tell us a little bit about what the county was like
at that time? I understand that there were something like 60,000
population in the county at that time, about 15,000 in the city
of Santa Cruz itself. What can you remember about the local
politics of that time?

Hawes:

I don't remember.

Shanfeld:

What about economics? What about the local funding for
health services? Was there any trouble, did Dr. Fuller have to
go before the Board of Supervisors and convince them that we
needed more?

Hawes:

In time, but, you see, this was created because the
government said if you had fully qualified people, the minimum
personnel (a doctor, a nurse, a sanitarian, and a nurse), from
there you could branch out. I'm sure as time went on that you
had to go before the board, but of course city government had to
accept this project. To start with, it was financed completely

13

by the federal government. The government worked through the
state, but we would have people from all of these agencies coming
to call, to see what we were doing. We were always such prized
people, it was amusing, such a prize. It's a gem of a county to
be in. They always had to see all the beaches and the trees, and
the rest of it.
Shanfeld:

A mainstay of the area, I'm told, was very much tourism,
even maybe more so than new, because people tend to live here
year round. It wasn't so much the fact at that time. Did you
remember a swelling of the city during summer?

Hawes:

I was only here two years. Oh, yes. Yes, it was, and that
was quite a problem for the health department. In fact, in this
report here of '39, they mention the mussels incident. They
controlled it very carefully, and the difference between our
county and the neighboring county was really quite something,
because people were dying from eating mussels that were not
edible. I just happened to be up here—on the hill—once when
somebody came in as an emergency, to Dr. Fuller. It was a man
and his wife who had just consumed some mushrooms. They had been
poisonous mushrooms, and it was very fast working. I was helping
Dr. Fuller at the time, because they had to have treatment
immediately, it was very exciting, and I was interested. Doctor
Fuller immediately got a hold of the biological people here in
Santa Cruz, and they had specimens of it examined. It turned out
that they were deadly poisonous. I think the woman died, but the
man we got to soon enough to get the stomach emptied, but he was
quite sick.

14

Shanfeld:

It sounds as if you had to respond to a variety of things
and cases of all kinds.

Hawes:

Well, that's the part that makes it so rich. I can remember
a man going berserk in the hospital and he cornered me. I was
trying to get away from him and I was walking into a hallway when
I realized he was not going to let me get out. And he was
throwing glass at me, and such, and that scared me to death. I
was of course, quite young then. It was in the '30s. My first
job was in '31, so in '37 I hadn't been around very long.

Shanfeld:

You were probably seasoned by the time you left here. Do
you remember anything about the process of determining the needs
of the community and the priority of services?

[END OF SIDE A]

[BEGINNING OF SIDE B]

Hawes:

The areas were maternity and CD and tuberculosis, which was
not considered under CD at that time. And VD. Those four
areas. And of course we did what planning and teaching we could
do in those areas, but I don't think priorities are as
sophisticated as you have today, at all. As to old age, I really
can't remember doing very much about old age, and this was a good
place for older people to retire, a good climate and mild and it
wasn't expensive in those days. But I don't remember having real
areas that we worked in.

Shanfeld:

My knowledge of the history of that time, the late '30s,
brings me to thoughts about the Great Depression and an influx of

15

people to live here from the Dust Bowl, the Grapes of Wrath kind
of era, and I wonder if that influx of population precipitated a
lot of the public health problems that were occurring at that
time.
Hawes:

Well, I can speak very fluently on Kern County. That was
where the Bowl people came, and our whole department had to
change. That was my next position, was there, and it was right
in the midst of the Grapes of Wrath. We made many changes to
accommodate that influx. I don't know what they did here, but it
was during the Depression period.

Shanfeld:

Roosevelt, for example, the president in 1937, the New Deal
was being cut.

Hawes:

Well, full-time health departments were very much in need,
you see, all over the country, and California was quick to say,
"We've got to do it too."

Shanfeld:

When you got here, I think that you said before, Watsonville
and Santa Cruz both had city health departments.

Hawes:

But they were part time, and very unorganized. The records
were kept, for death and births and communicable disease
reporting, but really it was very weak. As I remember it, of
course that was more Doctor Fuller's position. We didn't have a
statistician for a long time, so Dr. Fuller taught our secretary
about things, and we all kept graphs. He was a great man for
showing progress by graph.

Shanfeld:

Improve your effectiveness. Do you remember why or when
those functions of the city health department transferred to the
county?

16

Hawes:

No, I don't. I don't think they were, I thirik we'd taken
the child health conference, baby clinics, as they called them,
very soon, but I've forgotten the real details of it.

Shanfeld:

In 1937, Dr. Fuller, who was the first full time health
officer, as you said, convinced the Board of Supervisors that we
needed to hire our first time public health nurse, which became
you, and. . .

Hawes:

Actually, you see, it was written in the regulations of the
grant, that the department had to have these four personnel. The
city or county board of course would have to give their
sanction. You couldn't bring it in without knowing that they
were taking on a responsibility. So I don't knew whether he
really persuaded them. I think they were interested. I think
probably the state came in and said, "We have these funds, we
want them used," and talked to boards of Supervisors. After they
got started, then the state knew where to go for the kinds of
people they wanted, because we were brought in. They didn't use
somebody local, except for our secretary. I guess Conway, the
engineer, was living in the area. Is he around now?

Shanfeld:

I believe he may have been a supervisor later on. It seems
to me I have some homework to do about that, but he was here for
many years and became a supervising sanitarian, and brought other
people, other sanitarians in with him. What attracted you to
this position? You came from outside the county.

Hawes:

I would have been in Beirut, Syria if I'd had my choice.

Shanfeld:

Is that right?

Hawes:

In '37, I was given a paper which said that this position

17

was being offered, and I went down—I was in New Haven then—and
I went down to New York City, to the Rockefeller Center, to the
office that was interviewing for it. There were three of us, and
I was the first to be reviewed, and apparently he said, "I'll
have to tell you after I interview the other two." And I said,
"Well, I'm going home to California, and I'm going through the
Canal, because I've never seen the Canal and I wanted to go home
by ship, but if I was going to come back, I couldn't afford to go
home by canal, and I would take the train home in a hurry."
Well, my family were very opposed in the 1930s to my going into
the area of Beirut, Syria, even that which is Lebanon now. They
hoped I wouldn't get it, and I didn't. So somebody from the
State Department called me at home and said "What are you doing?"
and I said, "Nothing. I'm waiting to hear about Beirut, Syria,"
and they said, "Call them, or wire them. It's been too long a
time." And I did, and the answer was "Position filled." And they
hadn't bothered to tell me while I was waiting to know. So they
said, "Well, we have a job for you, in Santa Cruz County Health
Department." So it was the State Department that got me in
here. Dr. Fuller didn't know me and I didn't know Santa Cruz,
but it was a charming place to be.
Shanfeld:

Well, I can tell that your experience as a public health
nurse was very broad at that time. What would you say were your
major accomplishments in that two-year period of time in Santa
Cruz County?

Hawes:

Well, a good round department, service of public health
nursing, because Lois Howarth was equally as able as I was. I

18

just happened to have come first. If they had gotten her first,
she would have been the supervisor. They enlarged very rapidly
after that, because they needed more help. By that time, they
were on the county funds, probably, after five years.
Priest:

Well, there's a large clinic service in Watsonville. There
are the two separate ones. There is a complete clinic service in
Watsonville and then one in Santa Cruz.

Hawes:

Did I understand you to say that you were going to bring the
clinic services in Watsonville and Santa Cruz together here,
rather than the two?

Priest:

I'm not sure what we were talking about. The nurses all
report to Betsy McCardy, who has centralized nursing
administration. But there definitely, you know, is a supervisor
at each end of the county, nursing supervisor.

Hawes:

That's quite a distance for people who are with children and
such.

Priest:

I can't think of just what we were talking about, but there
are two separate staffs, although we do came together for overall
program direction.

Hawes:

Then maybe it was the city, you weren't going to have city
departments, is that right?

Priest:

It's all county, right.

Hawes:

And having been that way for quite a while?

Priest:

Yes.

McCardy:

I'd like to ask you one more question, Miss Hawes. If you
could give advice to people working in public health today, what
would you advise us?

19

Hawes:

Well, I think it's very, very, very important to never lose
sight of the family. The family's made up of individuals, but
the family service is important. Today we knew that cancer has
to be supported by the whole family: their acceptance, their
help. Tuberculosis, in the days when I was in Alaska, the people
went and hid when they knew we were coming because they knew we
would send them down to the sanitarium in Juneau, over across on
the island, and they never came back, so they weren't going to
let them go. Finally, we had one or two that recovered and went
back, and that was a help but not enough, because the news
spread, and most of the time it was negative. Of course, they
were so sick of tuberculosis, they had no chance of recovering.
They would have died at home, but we wanted to break that chain,
and it was very difficult. But that was when the chemotherapy
came in, and we started handing out pills and pills and pills and
pills and pills, up in Alaska, and it was amazing. We were able
to almost stop sending them down to the sanitarium. I was up
there two years, and it was very interesting to see what
happened. Here, we were still doing skin tests, and X-rays, and
putting them to rest, and this kind of thing. But we did try to
teach the person the line of infections, so that the family would
not be infecting the other members, particularly younger members
of the family.
I had a degree from Stanford in sociology and I also took
some courses down when I was in New Orleans at Tulane University,
I have always been interested in the family—in sociology, which
goes hand in hand. It is very much like what a social worker

20

would be taking, to study and knew the people, except that you've
added health to your group, as to hew to help them. In public
health nursing, you have the advantage. As one social worker
said to me one time, "I envy you." We have the background and
knowledge, but we also have the use of our hands. We can go in
to the home and do something with those people. Social workers
go in and talk, and that is what they have. So the difference is
that, and I think as long as you keep in mind that you're serving
the family as a whole, and education is one of the things that is
very important, that you want the people to say, "We did it
ourselves." And if you teach them enough to do it "ourselves,"
they remember.
Priest:

Well, we've enjoyed this time with you so much. It's
wonderful for each of us to hear about the field of public health
forty-eight years ago. We thank you for the time.

Hawes:

It was a pleasure being here. It's really quite an
emotional visit. I haven't been back to the office since those
days. I've met different nurses that have been in here, and
they'd say, "Oh, we saw your record," or something of that kind,
but actually I haven't been back. I haven't seen Dr. Fuller. I
saw him only once or twice after that. But I kept moving and
moving north, south, and east.

McCardy:

We're delighted you're back today.

Hawes:

Well, it's a pleasure.

[BREAK IN VIDEOTAPE]

21

Hawes:

Bat I'm always interested in a better way when it comes to
organization, and sometimes it steps on people's pet ideas and
that kind of thing, but if you can get an organization that works
and includes the necessary thing and doesn't have all the
unnecessary things with it, that's good. And I have done that in
I can't tell you how many places. The job I had up in Los
Angeles County was a four room health center that was just
opened. I had to set up the whole thing, and work it out, and
because I wouldn't do my reports correctly, I was taken down to
the City of Los Angeles. This was IBM, believe it or not. In
those days you had to rent the great big machine, and I had to be
taught. They said, "What is your number?" and I rambled it off,
it was four numbers, and she pulled it, and then threw the cards
into this machine, and they came out, and she said, "These are
the categories." Now I had to code every clinic, and the people
that came and the things about those people, because everything
was being coded, and when it came time to fire poor Dr. Pomeroy,
he couldn't be fired because he had statistics that showed
everything, and they didn't lie. They couldn't impress me with
the importance of filling out all these punch card things. I
didn't punch them, but I had to fill out a sheet, like this, and
I was so busy I didn't want to do it, and they just decided the
way to make me learn. So, being an individualist and in places
alone, I always got some special help. That one was really
funny, because they just said, "Well, we'll bring her down here
and we'll show her why we're doing it," and that of course is the
real reason for it. Teaching people is giving the reason so you

22

understand why you're doing it. But I knew I couldn't stand
there and do it, but that was Los Angeles County.
At Stanford, I was there for one year, and I worked until 7,
9, 11 o'clock at night. I have never seen such a disorganized
service in my life for nursing. I had some friends there. One
had stayed two years, one had stayed three years, and they had
three doctors on the staff. And this was all women; men and
women never would meet on the campus in the '30s. The hall was
completely women, and they said, "If you could do something about
this, we would appreciate it." Well, I couldn't work with it as
it was, and so one of the doctors spent time with me, and they
decided they could use me in a better way, so I was taught a lot
of lab work. I was very incensed, because I didn't feel that
that was my job, but I did blood counts, I did basals, I did a
lot of things besides care and assisting doctors. I didn't make
a very good office administrator, but I left that in a year's
time. I wrote a letter to the dean of women, she got very angry
with me. Later, I learned that they'd put two nurses in, and
they did not have to live on campus. I lived on campus and was
on duty call 24 hours a day with one weekend off a month and one
night a week off, and I was paid $100 a month. I said, if
anything, put a telephone in the room where the nurse is living,
because I ran up and down three flights of stairs to get a
telephone that some girl wasn't sitting on with her boyfriend. I
just could not get an empty telephone, they were busy with a
sorority or something of that kind.
Priest:

With all of your years of public health, I would just like

23

to have an addendum, as your former student, that out my class of
twenty-two students, eighteen of us went into public health.
Hawes:

I wish I could really put that into perspective, I don't
know these facts at all.

Priest:

Well, I do, because I'm in touch with my former classmates,
and I think we all found you a very inspiring public health
leader, and made career choices based on your teaching.

Hawes:

Well, it's amazing. I think you have to have courage to be
in public health, and you have to like to be in a world of
pioneering. There's still a lot to be pioneered in this world.
I found Peru just full of it. It was just fascinating. I went
after retirement from Stanford. I was sixty-five, so they
wouldn't have me any longer, and I went with Project Hope to
Peru. I was a consultant in public health nursing at the school
which the Project Hope had organized about, well, almost ten
years before. They came in, and there was a medical school and
not a nursing school. So they sent about eight nurses, who were
one or two Ph.D. 's, in there, for two of three years, to set up
their school of nursing, and it was very well run. They did it
in '62 and I came in '70. It was eight years later. But there
is still pioneering work there.
In Kern County, let me tell you one funny story. They had
little cards that were this big for heart conditions, I believe.
Then they had a card this big for TB, and then they had a card
this big for maternal and hygiene. I was new and I was taken out
by one of the best nurses. And she was leaning over boxes and
boxes and boxes in the back of her car. And I said, "What are

24

you doing?" and she said, "Well, I have to pull all these to go
into the family." And I said, "They're all related, or what?"
And she said, "Oh, this is this condition, this is this
condition, this is this condition." Well, it didn't take any
time at all to start in using the state health department's
folder which was like this, only it's folded over, so you carried
a folder like this, and it had everything in it. It was a
combined record. And that made the greatest change. Also, they
were going around with a shoebox, and it depended on the nurse,
what it had in it. This was in '39-'42.
This place here was just beautiful. And I walked in to here
where there's plenty of money, and there wasn't anything being
done properly. Anyway, I said, "May I please order nurses
bags?" And the doctors said, "Well, order bags for us too." So
they got the kind that goes back this way, and you have all these
shelves on this side. I got them all, which of course cost
plenty of money, and then the chief of the chief came down and he
said, "Why didn't you get me a bag?" I said, "I didn't know you
wanted one." But anyway, he said, "I would like one, too."
Because he was the health officer, he might go out, sometime.
But I think it's just meeting the needs, and these girls just
were so excited, because they could see that having boxes,
shoeboxes was inefficient. We did lots of things. We put
ourselves not into uniforms, but smocks, and we decided to use a
pearl grey, and so we carried a grey smock which buttoned down
the front. You put it on if you felt that you were going to work
with a family. If you were going to work over a bed or with a

25

baby or something of that kind, you'd put your smock on. It was
just like a lab coat, only it was lighter and a thinner kind of
material. But we didn't put ourselves into uniforms, which many
people do.
Manzanar was, oh my goodness, that was a world of its own,
because they had ten thousand people. The Japanese actually do
so much for their families, they're well knitted together but
they will not display their handicapped people. And people could
be your neighbor and they don't know you have that child. They
may hear him screaming or calling or something of that kind, but
they do not know that child. They never see that child. And of
course, they brought them with them to the camp, and so the
interpreter and myself for days, went up and down the rows.
There were three hundred in a block, and we took histories. Then
the state health department came to us, because we couldn't go
out, and we ran a child health, crippled children's service that
was second to none, up in Manzanar. And because they had so many
children in casts and being helped in one way or another, we made
a schoolroom out of the last ward. We had seven wards, like an
army hospital does, and it was where the children slept and ate
and went to school. The schoolteacher was excellent. She had
known handicapped children. Well, the parents were so thrilled
that they have these children improved. A lot of it was
orthopedic. And the doctors were extremely excited. They wanted
to come in every time we had a schedule for it they'd come. The
state furnished all this for us, so there was lots of stuff.
New Orleans was an experience. I didn't feel very secure in

26

being the director of education. But nurses came from Florida,
Mississippi, who I can't understand, from Georgia, from North
Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee. There were lots of girls
from Tennessee. We had a room where they'd brought the state
library. It was a building. It was a building for fairs, and it
was really to show stock, and it was done in tile, beautiful tile
that had little runways for water to run down to wash the floor
and such. They had a center place that we brought the library
in, the whole state library and health was down there. And then
around it we had rooms and places for all these students. We had
nurses and other people, such as sanitarians and such, getting
their field work down there, and so we had a good staff. We
really had lots of fun. So I was acquainted with the nurses.
We'd send them out into. . . We both had completely black areas,
where the supervisor was black as well as the people. It hadn't
gotten so that you mixed races, but they would go out into the
homes of the blacks. But that was kind of fun. Only that thing
blew up. The politics got very difficult, and I left just before
it blew, so that I was glad I didn't go through it, but went to
Alaska.
Alaska was an interesting place. I had at least two-thirds
of Alaska. Juneau had its area, which was quite small and
compact, and that's the state health department city. The bigger
city is, of course, Anchorage, and I was asked if I'd like that
job, or if I would like Fairbanks. And I said, "Well, what's the
difference?" And they said, "Well, you will have quite a bit of
administration at Anchorage, because they're far away and they

27

have lots of problems, a bigger city, more busy than Juneau."
And I thought, no, I like to work with the people, I want to get
out and work with the people, and so I had the area out of
Fairbanks. I went all the way to St. Lawrence Island, which is
forty miles from Russia. The experiences I had I I went down the
river, I went to Eagle[?], where the breakup of the river is one
of the most tremendous experiences in the field. It's just
beyond words. Alaska was just full of all kinds of things, and I
loved it. I lost my health up there. By the time I regained it,
they said "Get out of here." I was going to settle there. It's
a beautiful country, and a warm group of people, but I can't take
that cold, so I had to leave, and came to Stanford. That was a
surprise, because I had never planned to teach. I like
organizing, and I didn't feel that I could teach well. The job
was open, and it was my field, and I apparently have had more
experience than most of the girls. They were so varied. You
were one of the best students.
Priest:

That's because you rode me hard.
