
LC: Right; there you go; OK, now it’s recording. This is Melba Beard Johnson, who will be doing
an interview, and I am Lucille Carley, Lucille Orsolini Carley, who will be asking her questions.
Thank you. And we are at the Stanford nurses’ luncheon. Thank you. Melba, what were your
motivations for becoming a nurse?
MJ: A Red Cross nurse, in grade school.
LC: Could you describe your pre-nursing education?
MJ: Yes; two years at Sacramento Junior College in Sacramento, from 1929 to 1931.
LC: And why did you choose Stanford?
MJ: Because I considered it one of the best schools of nursing that was close to where I lived.
LC: What were your first days like at the nursing school?
MJ: Oh, I was very impressed. I lived on the first floor of the nurses’ residence; I felt the room
was very adequate; I was most impressed with my surroundings and the nursing school, also
the nurses’ residence.
LC: Were you impressed with some of the students who were here too? And the faculty?
MJ: Well, I was impressed with the fact that we had such a large class. I didn’t know any of the
faculty at that time.
LC: Well, that’s very good. Who was dean at that time, and could you describe the experience
with the administration?
MJ: The dean of the university was Dr. Ray Lyman Wilbur. The dean of women of the university
was Dean Mary Yost. The superintendent of nurses when I entered was Maude Landis. The
physician of the hospital was Dr. [Ralph Berger] Seem, S-double E-M.
1

LC: What historic events occurred while you were in nursing, like oh, that could have affected
your future, you know, the Depression or earthquake?
MJ: The Depression; the Depression.
LC: It was hard on all of us, wasn’t it?
MJ: Indeed!
LC: Tell us your memories, as a probie, in the med section, surgery, psychology, OB, pediatrics,
or whatever.
MJ: Well, I was most impressed with the teaching staff: Miss [Margaret Jeanette] Busche, who
did most of the lecturing for our class; Miss Buchardie, who was head nurse on pediatrics; Miss
Cavernetti, who was in the outpatient department; Miss deForest, who was in the supply room.
LC: And didn’t we have wonderful times with her?
MJ: Oh, my, I should say we did, and we were scared to death of her. [they laugh]
LC: Oh, dear!
MJ: Miss [Grace] Ringressy, who was our student instructress.
LC: She was wonderful, wasn’t she?
MJ: She was excellent. Also Miss Allen, who was the director of the private nurses, on the
private section of Stanford University, hospital, I should say.
LC: You remember a lot! [a few words back and forth] Tell us about people who influenced
your career, like the faculty, or the administration, or the patients, or your fellow students.
MJ: Well, I was extremely impressed with the faculty. I was also impressed with the fact that we
had three superintendents of nurses: when we came in as probies, we had Miss Landis. In our
second year, we had Miss Dora Saunby, and in the last half of the second year and all of the
third year, we had Miss Edith Smith, who I was most impressed with. I certainly was. And then,
we also had a new director of the hospital, Dr. Loren Roscoe Chandler. And he was a real
sweetheart.
LC: Yes, everybody loved him, Dr. Chandler, that’s for sure.
MJ: I was most interested in obstetrics and pediatrics.
LC: Did you have the privilege of delivering any of those little babies?
MJ: With help, yes.

2

LC: Tell us about the difficult times of the student, and how you resolved these difficulties.
What kind of support were you able to get, intellectually or emotionally, during these times?
MJ: Well, I felt that some people were always very helpful. Others were only interested in their
own problems. So I tried to solve my own. And I was always interested in what I was doing, so
as far as studying was concerned, I did the best I could do, and that was all I felt I could do.
LC: The most important thing to do was to want to become a nurse.
MJ: Well, this is so true; do the very best you can do.
LC: Very wise. What values did you learn in the school, in addition to the content of the nursing
curriculum?
MJ: I felt the school was very well organized, and the quality of the supervision was excellent.
We, at that time, did what we were told. We didn’t question our authorities; when we were
told to do something, we did it. If we didn’t do it, we usually got in trouble.
LC: Did you feel that the teaching was thorough enough?
MJ: Yes, I did.
LC: I did; personally I did. I thought it was adequate.
MJ: Wonderful, very adequate.
LC: describe the MD-nurse relationship during the training, and the relationship that you
observed among professionals who you came in contact with during your training. You might
discuss the changes you have observed, the experiences during your years as a nurse.
MJ: Well, I felt the supervision on the floors was excellent, and that the little contact that we
had with the physicians, certainly to me, was always most professional. We were scared to
death of some of them. Well, we were! That’s right. Especially when Dr. [Arthur Leonard]
Bloomfield had grand rounds: we were afraid to breathe. [laughs] It’s true. That’s about all I
can say about that, I think. I was impressed with many of the men in Pediatrics; I thought they
were excellent, especially Dr. [Harold Kniest] Faber who was head of the department.
LC: He was a wonderful man.
MJ: Yes, he was.
LC: Were there any funny things that occurred at this point, I wonder, among the nurses with
whom you contacted, or your professional people? Or the patients?
MJ: I really can’t remember that.
LC: Really?
3

MJ: No, I can’t. I really can’t.
LC: No little episodes that were really humorous?
MJ: No, I really can’t remember that.
LC: When we get off the tape, I’ll tell you the funny one I experienced. What were the strengths
and weaknesses of the curriculum, would you say?
MJ: Well, to me there were no weaknesses. I was very impressed with the curriculum, and I felt
that we had an excellent training.
LC: More with patient relationship, would you say?
MJ: Both with patient relationship, and also with our lectures and our instructions in class.
LC: How was the nursing school and hospital organized? Who were your supervisors? Who was
the quality of that supervision; what was the quality of that supervision?
MJ: Oh, I did, I certainly did. And I mentioned the supervisors on the floors.
LC: Describe your memories of the state boards.
MJ: Well, I studied, and went and took the state boards, and passed it, and that was the end of
that. I was very happy to graduate, so that I could go to work.
LC: You mean you didn’t stay up late on those state boards, bone up real hard?
MJ: Well, once or twice … I fell asleep if I did [laughs]
LC: I remember them too, with horror; I was scared to death of them.
MJ: I was when I went to take them, but I thought “Well, this is it. So I don’t pass it,
LC: You’ll review later …
MJ: I’ll do it again.”
LC: Describe your graduation and emotions at that point. How would you describe the
differences, if any, between what you experienced and learned as a nurse in training, and what
your expectations had been?
MJ: Well, I wanted to go to work right away after I graduated, and I was offered a job on
general duty on third floor Stanford, which I took. At that time, on night duty, we were working
ten hours: we went to work at nine and we were supposed to finish at seven in the morning.
We didn’t always finish at seven, but you did not leave until your work was finished. I was on
third floor Stanford, and Mrs. Hutchins was the nurse in charge of this private floor. And Mrs.
Hutchins had been an army nurse, and she ran an excellent floor and everything was in order. It
was hard work because of course at that time we had to do all the sterilizing at night, and
4

setting up of trays, and be sure that everything was in order when we left in the morning. And
of course when you had all private patients in private rooms, it was hard work.
LC: But also very interesting work too, wasn’t it?
MJ: Yes, it was different of course, because we had done very little work on the private service,
so of course this was somewhat new, though we’d had some training on the private floors, but
it was a bit different. You had to spend a little more time with people, and you had to be a little
more careful about how you took care of them, to be sure everything was in order when you
left.
LC: Could you describe your first job in nursing?
MJ: That was it, my …
LC: Oh, on that floor.
MJ: my first, on third floor Stanford, from ten at night until seven in the morning.
LC: I feel from you a real appreciation of that experience.
MJ: Yes. And I worked … then there was a law passed, and I believe it was close to six months
later but I’m not sure of the date, when we were told that the state law now was that we could
only work, they could only put us on a shift for eight hours, which changed my hours then. And
so, of course, I went to work a little bit later, then on that. Then I was transferred to another
shift. Miss Smith called me in -- she was the director of nurses -- and said that they wanted me
to do night duty where I would relieve on six different floors at night. So I did that for six
months, and at that particular time I had Lane Maternity Ward on a shift, too, that I did also a
part of the private floor with Mrs. Howard, who the head nurse on the private floor, the
obstetrical ward. So this was a very good experience at that time.
And while I was there, one of the doctors I knew well was a resident, Dr. Martin Bancroft, asked
me if I would be interested in going to Mills College. And I said well, I didn’t think I would
because I was very interested in what I was doing, and I liked what I was doing. He said, “Well,
think about it,” because he said “my mother needs a nurse at the beginning of the next
semester, which would be in September, and I have recommended you to her.” He said “you
may be getting a call from her, and if you do,” he said, “I think it would be very nice if you
would go over for an interview.” So I thought about that for a while, and then I decided maybe
I would like to do that. So I worked until September, and in the interim I had an interview with
Dr. Bancroft, and I was extremely impressed with the Health Center, and my living quarters, and
the salary, which was a little more than I was getting at the time, and so I decided to go to Mills.
I went to Mills, and I was at the Health Center for two years, and Miss Smith called me back,
and said, “We want you to come back to take the position as evening supervisor.” And I said
well, I didn’t know whether I would or not, because I was enjoying Mills thoroughly, and I had a
chance to do some more academic work, and I thought maybe I’d stay a little longer. And she
5

said, “I think it would be to your advantage to come back to the hospital and accept this
position.” So I thought about that, and I liked her very much. So then I decided that I would do
it; that’s when I came back and was evening supervisor at the Stanford Hospital.
LC: That’s very, very interesting. Now, let’s see here: that was a good description. Well it says
here, tell us something about the professional organizations to which you belonged and their
role in your nursing.
MJ: Well, I belonged to the California State Nurses Association. And when I was at Mills College,
I always – of course, school closed from June until September – then I came over to San
Francisco, and put myself on the Registry, and did private duty the first year. The second year
the Registry called me when I went on call, and said that Dr. [Rea Ernest] Ashley and Dr. [Aubrey
Gatliff] Rawlins wanted a nurse for the summer to relieve in their office, and “would you please
go over for an interview, if you would be interested?” So I liked Dr. Ashley and Dr. Rawlins very
much, because I had contact with them in the hospital, both as a student and when I was on
Third Floor Stanford, so I went for an interview with Miss Aragona, who was the secretary in the
office, and I took the position for that whole summer. So I worked for them that summer, and
then went back to Mills. And after that was when, the next year was when Miss Smith asked me
to come back to Stanford.
LC: What year was that?
MJ: Let’s see, that was … 1938, was the last year at Mills. And I came back to Stanford in 1938 in
the nursing office, and stayed there until 1941.
LC: Oh, good, quite some time. Did you do any nursing beyond that?
MJ: Oh, yes, I should say I did. Yes, I did. Let’s see – then I was married in 1939 and the War
came along in 1941. We weren’t in war as yet, but my husband at that time was on the road for
a pharmaceutical company, and he had traveled a great distance, but they said he would have
to stay only in his own district, which they had just given him, and that was the whole East Bay,
down as far as Livermore. So it was either I give up my job, or he give up his, because we had to
move across the bay. So we moved across the bay – that was in 1941 – and I did some more
relief work at Mills College. Then I was offered a job at Children’s Hospital of the East Bay, and I
went to work at Children’s Hospital of the East Bay in 1945 as evening supervisor, and I stayed
there until 1948. In 1948, Dr. Chester M. Wiesman asked me to come and work in his office. He
was an otolaryngologist, and I went to work for him, and worked for him from 1948 until 1973 –
1963, I’m sorry.
LC: You’ve had a long career. Oh, my.
MJ: Then I retired. Which I thought was long enough.
LC: Indeed. Now, if you were to think of the future of nursing, what would you tell a young
person, what could you tell a young person about, saying you were either glad or not so glad
about taking on the profession?
6

MJ: I was always very glad that I took on the profession. I certainly think if anyone is interested
in nursing that they should go for a school of nursing program. And certainly today, it is very
advantageous to get your degree and finish your program in the school of nursing.
LC: I think maybe you’ve really answered this next question: what future would you like to see
the nursing and nursing education at Stanford?
MJ: I would like to see another school of nursing at Stanford.
LC: Well, I agree with you there. Have you any other things that you’d like to share with us
about your nursing?
MJ: I think nursing has changed a great deal, in many respects. I think that the RN in many,
many hospitals has lost contact with the patient, because I’ve been a patient several times
myself, and I feel that there are far too many LVNs and nurses’ aides on the floor, instead of
RNs. Now I certainly approve of RNs in supervisory positions and also in running of the hospital,
but I still think we should have RNs on the floors. That’s my opinion.
