 Little Thunder  My name is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is Sunday, February 2,  2014, and I   m interviewing Anita Caldwell Jackson for the Oklahoma  Native Artists Interview Project, sponsored by the Oklahoma Oral   History Research  Program at Oklahoma State University. We   re at the  Tulsa Indian Arts Festival where Anita has just won First Place in  painting this weekend.  Anita, you live in McAlester, Oklahoma. You were a teacher in the  Kiowa Public Schools for many years, and you are now retired, doing  art full time. You work in acrylics, watercolor, pencil. Even before you  began doing sculpture, I remember seeing three-dimensional effects in  your paintings, mixed-media works. You are well-known at the Trail of  Tears art show, the Five  Civilized  Tribes Museum, Red Earth where  you   ve won a number of major awards. Thank you for taking the time to  talk with me.  You   re welcome.  Where were you born, and where did you grow up?  I   ve lived in southeastern Oklahoma my entire life. I   ve actually lived  within a twenty-mile radius of McAlester my entire life. I lived in a little  town called Bache, which is east of McAlester. I was actually born in  McAlester, and presently I live on the same street where I was born.  Oh, that   s amazing. (Laughs)  I lived in Kiowa for most of my life in 1960. I moved to McAlester; I  actually lived in McAlester for the first time in 2001.  What did your folks do for a living?  5  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  My dad worked at the ammunition plant. He was a timekeeper there. My  mom stayed home for the most part. After the kids got a little bit older  and teenagers, she worked in one of the sewing factories there in  McAlester, and she did different things with sewing.  Any brothers or sisters?  I had two brothers. One is still living. They were two older brothers.  How about your grandparents on either side?  My grandfather, my Native heritage comes through my Grandpa  Caldwell, and I didn   t really get to talk to him much. He was alcoholic,  and he wasn   t around. Never lived with my grandmother the whole time  I knew him, so I never really got to talk to him. At the time I was  growing up, I didn   t even know to talk to him. Then my mother   s folks, I  knew all the other grandparents and everything, but the one that my  Native heritage come through, I didn   t really get to know too well. He  died when I was thirteen.  What was your first memory of seeing Native art?  My first memory of seeing Native art. I have a degree in art, and when I  went through college, I wasn   t influenced by Native American art. The  Native American art shows, it   s kind of worked in reverse because it   s  taught me about my Native culture. I didn   t learn it through family, like I  said, because I never really got to talk to the relative. My parents grew  up during the Depression, so people were just worried about getting by.  Art was just something that you didn   t do.  I remember when I was doing a local show there in McAlester for years,  and I was doing Native American people. Someone asked me why don   t  I do a Native American show. I didn   t even know they had them, and I  got to asking around. That   s how I found out about the Trail of Tears  show and the Five Civilized Tribes. That   s where I started doing the  Native American shows, so probably my first influence with Native  American art would have been at those shows, although at art shows,  you do see a little here, a little there, but I was actually doing some.  Of Native art.  Yeah.  What is your first memory of making art?  Oh, we grew up where you didn   t have a lot of toys. You didn   t have all  6  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  the games. People my age, probably, a lot of people did the same thing,  so we had to make a lot of our own things. My mother used to entertain  me by drawing paper dolls. She taught me how to trace and make  clothes, so I designed their clothes. I remember one day she was just too  busy to draw my paper doll for me, but I had watched her draw it, so I  drew that face. I can almost still remember what it looked like. From that  point, when I did finally go to school, I went to Bache School. They had  first, second, third, and fourth in one room with one teacher, and then the  fifth through the eighth in one room with one teacher. That was the  entire school.  There was two teachers, so we had a lot of down time while the teacher  was working with the fourth graders. I wound up drawing pictures of  girls. I always drew faces for the older kids, the fourth graders, and that  gave me that encouragement. It felt good, so I wanted to do it. I would  make mud pies, but my mud pies would be faces. One of my jobs was to  rake the yard after my brothers mowed the yard. I would rake it, the  grass up, and I would rake it into little piles of pictures so that if an  airplane flew over, (Laughs) they   d see a pretty picture. At a young age,  I was always doing something like that. I think my mother   s influence,  making toys, just something to entertain us, we did our own  entertainment, and I believe that   s why.  That   s a great story about that.  The airplanes? (Laughter)  Yes, that they   ll see the art from the air. You sort of described your art  experiences in, basically, elementary school, I guess. Any art classes  that you had in secondary school or high school?  When I moved to Kiowa in 1960, I was in the fourth grade. In the ninth  grade, we had a gentleman, (Clark Ryan was his name) and he was  actually a mentor to Reba McEntire because Reba went to school at  Kiowa. He was musically inclined, but he was also artistic. They started  an art program when I was in ninth grade, and we had to draw a picture  to get into the program back then. I started with the art program there at  Kiowa school in the ninth grade. When I graduated, I came back. I  taught art there. When I retired, they stopped the art program. I was  there at the beginning and at the end of that art program. They did start a  music and drama program, so they still stayed with the arts, but the  visual arts, as far as I know, they don   t have a visual art teacher  anymore. It started in the freshman year, high school.  That   s pretty unusual for that day. So you decided to attend college. Can  you kind of walk us through how you chose?  7  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Okay. Growing up in a small school, we had no counselors. I actually  became a counselor, too, so while I was teaching art, I was counseling.  An academic counselor or     Just in high school counseling. Since I had no guidance, my parents gave  me a choice. I could have a car, or they   d pay for my college. I decided I  would take the college, and just take what you want to take. Well, I  always loved art, so I   m going to major in art (I didn   t know what I was  going to do with it) and minor in PE because I liked to play basketball. I  went to junior college, and I started with those two majors. Then when I  transferred from a junior college to Southeastern  Oklahoma State  University  in Durant for the four-year college, I enrolled late. I couldn   t  get all the classes I wanted. I got into mechanical drawing because it was  drawing, and I thought,    Well, this may help me.    I really loved the  mechanical drawing, so I have a minor in drafting. I actually worked as a  technical illustrator for a couple of years before I became a teacher.  When I graduated college, I did not want to be a teacher because I didn   t  want to be a teacher at the time. Then after I worked for two years, I got  married, and my old high school art teacher, Clark Ryan, he told me that  if I would go back and get my certificate, that we were going to have a  position open. I went back and got my teaching certificate and then went  on and got my master   s in counseling, but that   s how I wound up being  an art teacher.  So aside from mechanical drawing, did you feel like you got a good base  in college?  For art?  Yes.  You know, I would have done art with or without the college. There  were some things   I didn   t want to do, necessarily, what they were  doing, but I did learn things despite myself. (Laughs) I just wanted to  paint what I wanted to paint, and sometimes you have to do what they  want you to do, but in doing that, I can see where it helped. Now, could I  have done it without it, as far as the art? Yeah. You can take a class. I   ve  not had very many art classes other than what I had in college. I took  one workshop with Troy Anderson, and I only got to take half of it.  Was it an acrylic workshop?  It was, yes. It was acrylic painting. It was going to be two weekends; I  8  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  could stay for one weekend. Then I think I had one other little course  with another artist. Other than the college, the rest is self-taught,  basically.  And how old were you when you took the workshop?  I was in my twenties, late twenties, probably.  And in college you   re still doing some Native subject matter when you  get a chance on your own, or     In college?  Yes.  No, in college I hadn   t gotten to that point yet.  So you wouldn   t be able to     There might have been some things.     you didn   t really have a style of any kind that you     I was trying to fit into college, so I was trying to do what they wanted  me to do, too     Right.     and it might be non-objective art. The Native influence did not come  until I was well into my twenties and I started doing the art shows, the  actual art shows, started showing my work. I actually started painting on  leather. I   ve always experimented with different mediums, so I stretched  chamois cloth. That   s when the macram   thing was big, so I was using  those big macram   rings, and lace and chamois cloths, and making  fringe. I painted Native American people. I mean, I just did. I don   t  know why I did. I   ve noticed since then there   s been   I know you  haven   t asked this. I   ve painted some things that I don   t know where  they came from. They just happened.  I meant to ask you, too, do you sew? So did you have that sewing  background from your mom?  Well, I could have because my mother was a good seamstress, but  because she was such a good seamstress, I didn   t have to sew. (Laughs) I  did learn how to.  9  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  But you had the love of materials.  The fabric, if you   re going to get into the fabric, no. I can tell you how  the fabric thing came about. I was at the Trail of Tears show. I had just  started showing there, and it was in, probably, 1995,    96. The first  painting that I did, I did a oil painting, and it was Indian blankets, Native  American blankets. They went off the edge of the canvas. I entered that;  I think that was the first thing I entered. I don   t think I won anything on  that one. Then I got to thinking about when you   re in bed, and you   re  laying in bed as a little kid. I had two brothers, so we always had little  cars. Well, you make the mountains, and you drive the car up the  mountain. I thought,    I   ll make blanket mountains.    Then I did my  Blanket Mountain Series, I called it, and I painted mountains that looked  like blankets.  Then from there, I started seeing the calico cloth in some of the other  paintings from other artists that they were painting the Native in the  calico. I thought,    Oh, maybe I   ll use calico.    I thought about painting     I thought,    That   d be hard to paint, all those little flowers. There   s got to  be an easier way.    (Laughter) I started experimenting with the cloth.  When I first started, it was three-dimensional. I wrinkled it up and tried  to make the folds out of the cloth, but it didn   t look right. Then I tried  cutting it and putting it on top of each other, and it still didn   t look right.  Finally, I got it down to where I   and I still do this. I have so many  things that I do that I don   t always do it all the time. I need to do some  more pieces. I piece it together like a puzzle, so each piece is, it   s flat. It  sits together flat, and it   s smooth that way. Then I can, I go on with the  process from there.  It came from that blanket picture. It went to the blanket mountains. Then  I saw the calico, and I was going to make calico mountains. Since then I  have made faces and animals and whatever I wanted to out of the calico  material, but it was really good for me. I haven   t seen anyone do it  except one guy, and I was at the Eiteljorg  Museum of American Indians  and Western Art  show. This was years later. He was from the  Southwest, (I can   t remember) New Mexico, Arizona, somewhere. I  looked at his stuff, and he looked at me. (Laughter) We eyed each other  suspiciously, but neither one of us knew each other. That was the calico.  Must have been on parallel tracks. (Laughter) Who were some of the  Native artists that you admired when you first started showing?  Well, Troy Anderson, of course. (Laughs) Anyone that was at that Trail  of Tears show, Gary Montgomery, Troy Anderson, these people, they  were winning all the time. I sort of started the same time Jeanne Rorex  and Dorothy Sullivan. I can   t even think of some of their names now,  10  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  but there was a group of us, of women. We actually had a seven  Cherokee women Legends show that traveled. I just lost her name. Bert  Seabourn   s daughter.  Connie.  Connie, I think Connie was in it, and Mavis, the basket maker     Doering.     Doering. We had seven women in it. We just did legends. I met all  those people from the Tahlequah show, so that   s probably the ones that  influenced me the most.  Now, who put together the seven     It wasn   t me. (Laughs)  Was it hosted by a museum, do you remember? I remember     Siloam Springs had the museum there, and I know we went to a show  there. I don   t think the gallery   s there anymore. It wasn   t a museum.  Oh, the Indian Paintbrush Gallery.  Yeah, Indian Paintbrush Gallery. It was one of the seven girls, or two or  three of them that got together.  That helped     Yes.     produce the show, and then you all traveled with it?  Actually, our work traveled.  Just your work, okay.  The work traveled, and then we did a few shows where we actually  went.  What were some of the places you went?  Well, the Indian Paintbrush Gallery, for one. It   s been quite a few years  ago. I   m not sure I could remember all of them. We didn   t go to that  many places.  11  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  You didn   t go back East at all?  No, no, it wasn   t too far, but it was a great idea. It   d be a good idea to do  again for somebody, the seven and the legends.  Right. Sometimes the business side of art is the hardest to get a handle  on. What did you learn about business, the business of art in those early  years? Of course, I realize you   re teaching during the week, too, but     In the early years, I didn   t do that many shows. I didn   t have a display to  even set things up. Sometimes I would even ship things to a competition.  I   m very competitive, so I like the competitions. I would take and leave.  The business part of it, I wasn   t in it to make the money because I did  have a job and I taught school. Since then, I   m learning. I   m still  learning about the business, and I don   t think anybody really enjoys the  business part as much as the creating part.  How did you figure out how to price your work?  I think that comes as you do it. Like, I started out cheaper, and as you  go, you see what something sells for. You see what other people are  selling it for. I want people to have my art. I don   t want to keep it all. I  paint rather quickly. I can produce quite a bit, and I don   t think I   m  overly priced. I think probably I   m underpriced on some of my stuff, but  like I said, I want it to get out there. I think as an artist you price it as  you get better, as you win more. You know how much work you have in  it, what it means to you, so you price it there. Would I rather have that  piece of art or this much money?  While you were teaching, did you have family responsibilities, as well?  How did you juggle that and the artwork?  By teaching school, I had my summers off. I have one son, and of  course, as a schoolteacher, it doesn   t end when the day   s over. It  continues on and on, and I managed to do it. Like I said, I can work  rather quickly with art, so I had no problem producing the art. I loved it,  and I didn   t mind doing it. There was no problem juggling the family,  the art, and the job.  When you were teaching, what kinds of things did you try to pass on to  your students in terms of art?  I think one of the things is the creativity part. You don   t tell them what  to do. You give them an idea and encourage them to be creative, just to  let them know all the good stuff that can come from being an artist or  12  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  doing art, even if nobody else likes it. If you like it and it makes you feel  good, it   s a great thing for kids and adults. People should do art even if  they   re ninety. You don   t have to do it when you   re six. You can start  now if you want to. I think everybody can be an artist in their own way  and do what they are proud of, what makes them feel good. Of course  I   d love to teach to be better artists, and I had some really good students  go through. Some of them went on to do art, and some of them still are  novice. Yesterday, I had a young man come by my booth. Well, he   s not  young anymore; he   s fifty-two. He   s still drawing, but he won   t show his  work anywhere. I   m still trying to encourage him to show his work.  How did the teaching impact your own artwork, do you think?  The teaching? Well, a time or two, I   ve done a few paintings that you  could tell I was a schoolteacher. I did one called (let   s see if I can get  that title right) What Will Be Left is What is Taught. I had a book open  and there was a little Native boy there. Then I had faces in the  background. In that way a time or two, I   ve done a painting or a piece of  artwork that might look as if I were a schoolteacher, but as far as it  influencing my art personally, I   m not sure that the teaching influenced  my own art.  So what was your first major award, and how did it impact you?  I think the first major award, probably the one that I remember, was at  the Trail of Tears show. The judge (it was about the second year that I  entered) was the editor of Southwest Art Magazine. Suzanne     Susan Hallsten McGarry.     yeah, and I did a picture. I had a little elderly man holding a chicken,  and I called it The Brave and the Chicken. I think she liked the title; I  won a Merit. I think they had merit awards then. Because it was her and  it was that book, I think probably that was the first one that really meant  something to me.  What was one of your important galleries early on?  You know, I   ve never really done a lot of galleries, but the best gallery  was in Sapulpa, Shirley Wells. Name of the gallery     Indian Territory Gallery.     Indian Territory Gallery. I love Shirley. Shirley and myself and Bert  Seabourn all have the same birthday, so that was kind of cool. I did get a  piece that went to Paris because she took a exhibit to Paris one time and  13  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  I had a piece. That was a big deal for me, to have a piece go to Paris,  France. She actually sold some things for me, and I really didn   t go into  too many galleries. I lived so far away, it was hard for me, teaching  school, hard for me to go back and forth and change things out. I really  haven   t done a lot of galleries. Still don   t.  Did you do any out-of-state shows, or probably not until you got into  this...  No, I did out-of-state shows. I mailed to South Dakota directly. (Laughs)  I shipped things for competition. Lawrence, Kansas, I shipped up there  just for the competition, but I didn   t actually go and set up until I started  doing it full-time.  Right. So maybe just in terms of the art show landscape rather than  galleries, how did the Indian art scene change, do you think, from (and  you   re just dropping in on it, I understand, periodically during the   80s)  like from the   80s to the   90s?  Well, I think that when 9/11 happened, that changed a lot. I would find  myself going to a show for the first time, and everyone would say,    Oh,  this used to be a good show.    I would seem to be getting in on the end of  it when it was dying. Before 9/11, I had some of the better shows I   ve  ever had, and since then, something happened. I   m not sure. There   s  been some good shows since, but I think that was probably the biggest  change I   ve seen in the landscape of the shows, from that event.  In 1990, the Indian Arts and Crafts Act was passed that required artists  to provide proof of tribal enrollment, or be certified by their tribe as  artists who could represent that heritage. Do you remember the impact  of that bill on galleries or individual artists or shows?  Well, because I wasn   t involved with galleries, I know that it has  affected some individuals. When I was in McAlester, I did one art show  a year. It was the Italian Festival. That   s when I was doing the leather  work with the Native Americans on it. Someone, I don   t even remember  who, came to me and said,    Why don   t you go to   have you ever  thought about doing a Native American show?    I said,    I didn   t know  they had Native American shows.    I didn   t know anything about them. I  said,    I   m Native American, but I don   t have a card.    They said,     They   ll take you on your word.    I said,    Oh, okay,    so I started going  to the Five Tribes Museum in Tahlequah to the Trail of Tears show.  Then, when the law came, I thought,    I   m going to have to do something  here. I   m not going to be able to go.    Talking to family members, I  actually met a great-aunt that was, she was married to my great-uncle  14  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  who I never met. Her father-in-law was my Native grandfather. Her  name is Winnie Gibson, and she was about eighty at the time. She   s  actually in Charles Banks Wilson  Search for the Purebloods . She   s one  of his subjects. She   s full-blood Choctaw, and she was married to Adam  Gibson, who was my great-grandmother   s brother. My great-grandmother  was the first child. There were four wives, and she was  with the first wife. There was actually twins: Adam and Eva. They were  the last two children from another wife.  My mother, when we moved to Kiowa in 1960, told me about Aunt Eva,  but I was eight years old, so I didn   t really care about it, and I didn   t  even think at the time to ask questions or anything. It wasn   t until I was  in the twenties that Aunt Eva had already passed away, but Winnie  Gibson, the wife of Adam, was still alive. I went to her house and visited  with her, and she signed an affidavit that her father-in-law was Native  American, who would   ve been my great-grandfather. With that  information, (that   s all I had) I   m a state-recognized Cherokee, Echota  Cherokee, and that   s what I have. That   s all I have right now.  I understand after you retired, for a couple of years you still taught art a  couple of times a week. As you   re transitioning from teaching into doing  art full-time as a profession, did that sort of help to have that teaching a  couple times a week?  I think the teaching was purely for financial reasons. I had retired on my  own. I wasn   t sure, financially, and so I thought,    That   ll give me three  years to see how I   m going to do, just doing the art and on teacher  retirement.    I loved the job. I kept an elementary art program going for  three years and did their yearbook. It was great. I went on Tuesdays and  Wednesdays, and then I had a five-day weekend, so it was great.  Uninterrupted art time. You   ve been going to the Cahokia Mounds show  for several years, and you won the People   s Choice Award there, I read,  two years in a row. What do you like about that show?  The people. I love the people. Of course, it was exciting to go and learn  about the mounds, and the museum is a wonderful museum. It   s a small,  intimate show. The people are so nice. We made a lot of really good  friends through that show. It   s a good place to get to know artists better.  At every show, there   s a group of artists that go, and you get to know  them. Every year you sit with someone different. You get to know them;  you make friends. I think it   s just the fact of the people, basically, that I  really like that show.  Is there a funny show story or travel story that stands out for you?  15  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Well, I love humor. I   m not sure if there   s a funny show story that I  could tell, or a travel story, but I can tell you about some of the humor. I  love humor in paintings, and I   ve had several paintings that were  humorous. I would love to have a whole display of just humor, but I tell  everybody I   m just not that funny. I can only do, like, three, and then  I   m not funny anymore. (Laughs) I had one that I had a little baby  raccoon and a can of Libby   s corn. So you know what the title was. The  titles, I think, are real important to it. I called it Cancun, and I spelled it  C-A-N-C-U-N.  Well, I had it the same time I had Custer   s Last Stand, and Custer   s Last  Stand   I had a hard time finding these because it   s politically incorrect,  little plastic cowboys and Indians like you would buy. I still have them  because I saved them. I may need them again. I painted one little plastic  cowboy. I think he was green. Then I had these rows of Indians, red,  yellow, and blue. It was a huge painting. I had some, it looked like  tooled leather. I called it Custer   s Last Stand. They were all aiming at  him. (Laughs) I   ve had several really funny   I have one called There   s  a Hare in My Soup. I think I had one, it was Old Wives    Tales. It was  just three women bending over, picking up logs. People love humor. I   ve  noticed a lot of humor in Native work, and that   s a good thing.  One of the three-dimensional effects that I enjoy in your painting is  when you use wild turkey feathers. Sometimes you put them on your  women, and they sort of function as a cape, which, in fact, wild turkey  capes are traditional capes.  Yes.  How did you get the idea of using the wild turkey feathers?  I saw people painting on feathers. I thought,    I can do that,    so I did.  Then because I didn   t want to be just like them, I started cutting out the  edge of the feathers. From there, people started giving me feathers. I had  the beautiful little feathers, but they weren   t big enough to paint on. Just  looking at one one day, I saw the fringe on the end, and I thought,    Oh,  that could be a shawl.    I turned it upside down, used the scissors a little  bit, and from there, I started using all the little feathers I could find for  their capes. I haven   t seen anyone else doing that yet, but it works really  well. If you see one of my pictures and it has a cape, it   s probably a  feather.  Yes, we   re going to look at one here in a little bit. What   s an object or  material you   ve begun using lately that   s relatively new for you?  The leather. I   ve always wanted to do three-dimensional. I haven   t had  16  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  the equipment. I   m not in a good area as far as foundries. I   ve taken  some clay classes. I   ve wanted to do three-dimensional. I   ve taken some  wood-carving classes, but that takes a little long. I found leather, and I  love the leather. In July, in fact, I   ve been doing it about six months  now. It   s been pretty successful. I   ve won some awards with it already in  3-D. I   ve never entered in 3-D before. I   m also incorporating paint with  the leather, so I   m using my painting and 3-D. You could probably, in a  month or two, see some feathers in there or some cloth. (Laughter) I   ll  put it all together one day. I   ll have everything right there in one piece.  Although it can be expensive.  Well, you know, when you think about it, I can get a lot of money in a  frame because I don   t   I may buy a frame and put something in it, but I  don   t make any frames. I don   t do it, so I go to a frame shop. I may have  three hundred bucks in a frame. The leather is expensive, but when I  think about taking it and having it framed and matted, it   s probably not  any more expensive than a painting.  You recently illustrated a book, So We Bought the Farm.  Oh. (Laughs)  I wondered what that process was like.  I didn   t know you had that information. (Laughs)  It   s a cute title. I found it on the Internet.  Well, actually from Cahokia Mounds. One of the guys that we just love  so much was always telling these funny stories. He decided he was  going to do his first e-book, so he asked me, would I do some little  sketches for it. I said,    Sure.    I loved him, so I thought,    I   ll help you  out.    So I just did them. In fact, I gave them to him     So they were pencil sketches?  No, no, I did little   everything I do, it sounds like    a little sketch,    but it  gets into something else. No, they wound up full-color little pictures. I  wound up doing, maybe, more than I thought I was going to have to. I  was just doing it as a favor to him. I mean, he could have paid me or  whatever, but I just gave them to him. The editor that did the book, he  shared his percent with me, so I   ve actually gotten a little a bit of money  from that project. It was fun to do the book, and since, I   ve learned that,  hey, I get a little check  I   m thinking maybe I ought to do some more  book illustrations. (Laughs)  17  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Your first royalties, yeah.  I didn   t realize that was out there.  You have the name Two Nations. Is that right?  Two Nations Art.  Two Nations Art for your business. Can you explain why you chose that  name?  There   s a couple of reasons. Well, actually three, I guess. I was looking  for a name, and the Two Nations because in my Native blood, an eighth  is all I could be. That means I   m seven-eighths something else. If you   re  seven-eighths something else, there   s two nations involved there. Then,  my boyfriend who was from Canada, he was going to be my business  manager. We still work together. He does art, so there   s two nations:  Canada and the United States. It   s both of those things. It was the  Canadian-United States; the Native American and whatever else I am,  which I   m not sure of. (Laughs)  You work in a variety of media, as we   ve mentioned, acrylics,  watercolors, pencil. You sculpt. What is your favorite and why?  I think my favorite   s what I   m doing presently. I tell everybody I   m like  a kid on a playground. I   ll play with the feathers for a while, and it  sparks something else, another idea, and I   ll go to the leather, or I   ll go  back to the fabric, or I go to the regular painting or drawing or a  combination of all these things. I think it   s whatever I   m working on.  That   s my favorite thing to do.  In terms of acrylic paintings, how has your palette changed over the  years?  My palette?  Yes.  You mean my color? I   m not sure I have a color. Do you see a color?  Your range of colors.  I know this has always confused me, myself, about my work, is that it  doesn   t look all the same. I don   t think I have a palette. Some people,  you can tell their work because they use a lot of the same colors. Maybe  18  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  I do and I just don   t notice it because I   m too close to it, so you   ll have  to tell me if I have a palette. I   m not sure I have a certain palette that I  use.  What role does story play in your work?  Oh, I think it   s very important. Story playing   I   ll do little paintings that  I call my sellers. They may not always have a story, something you just  do and people like them, but the big pieces, the competition pieces, I  think they all ought to have stories. I think it   s very important. Some of  those stories, that   s what I was saying, some things have come out that I  didn   t know was in me, things I didn   t know about my own heritage.  One thing, I did a picture of a woman in a corn. She was coming out of  the corn. I knew seven was a sacred number, and I had seven babies in  the corn, almost like an Ann Geddes type of thing. They were in there.  Dorothy Sullivan said,    Oh, you did Selu,    and I said,    Who   s Selu?    I  didn   t know who Selu was. Then I did a picture once, and this isn   t my  own heritage. I did a coyote, and I had a man   s face in the coyote. Then I  find out that that is (I   m not sure which Plains tribe it is) where the  coyote can change into a man. I   ve done several pieces like that, that  I   ve done, and then someone   s told me the story. There was a story  there, and I didn   t even know it was there.  I do stories. In fact, I   m working on the leather pieces. I   m trying to do  some with legends, and I would love to have stories. I   d love to do just a  Cherokee legend and have a whole display that   s just legends. Whether  it be painting or sculpture, I think it   d be a great teaching tool and a  great way to preserve what the Native culture that I think these shows  are attempting. That   s the purpose, one of them.  You   ve sort of talked about your titles, how some of them are plays on  words and humorous. Do they always come easily? Is it sometimes a     Sometimes it does, and sometimes it doesn   t, and names do change from  time to time. (Laughs) I   ll think,    What did I name that,    and it   ll get a  different name. A lot of those names come, driving down the road.  You   re thinking,    What am I going to name that?    Like, I just did a  piece. I just finished a huge, the biggest sculpture piece I   ve done. It   s  over four foot tall. I did it with the Three Sisters: the corn, beans, and  squash. At the time, I knew corn, beans, and squash. I had forgotten it  was called Three Sisters, so I was doing some research to see. I   d  already had the corn, beans, and squash on it, so since it   s a woman, I  call it The Fourth Sister. Names sometimes come easily. I have had the  title before the picture before.  19  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Do you keep track of them in a notebook or     Well, after a while, they   re committed to memory. I haven   t kept track  of my art as good as I should have. There   s pieces that have gotten away  that I can   t remember.  How about your signature? That   s sometimes an art, to place your  signature on a painting.  Right now, mine looks like a stamp, but it has evolved. In high school,  because I started doing artwork in high school, sold a few little things in  high school, I had    A. Caldwell.    Then when I got married, I took the  Jackson name. I went to    A. Caldwell Jackson.    Then from there, it   s  evolved to    Caldwell Jackson.    It just looks like I said, a stamp, and  sometimes I   ll write something in the middle of the stamp. That   s where  it is today. That   s on original work. I considered on the sculpture. I  thought,    Am I going to do the same signature as I do on the paintings?     I   m not sure. It   s too new, yet.  How important is sketching for you as a preliminary process?  You know, I do very little. My work, I have an idea in my head, and I  will sketch some things. It depends on what it is, but for the majority of  things, it develops as I go. If I have a sketch, I feel like I   m limiting  myself, and if my mind sees something else and wants to go there, then  I   ll go there. I   m not going to let that sketch stop me from doing what I  feel needs to be done.  Now, you mentioned that you   re working quite a bit with leather in your  sculpture. What other materials are you using?  In the leather, because I   ve only been doing it since July, six months,  I   m still experimenting with it myself, but I have figured some things  out. I want it to be solid. I have found that I can fill them full of  Styrofoam, and the Styrofoam will swell up. Even though the leather is  hard and it would probably be okay, but I travel with these things and  pack, so the more solid it is the better it is. I have found that if I fill them  full of Styrofoam, it   s lightweight; it   s going to be durable. If it   s true  what they say about Styrofoam plastic cups in the landfills, it   s going to  be there for thousands of years. I figure maybe that   ll be there for a  thousand years, too. (Laughs) That   s my thinking on that.  And then for the faces are you using something like Sculpey, or are  you     No, no, the faces are leather.  20  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  The faces are leather, too, okay.  Everything is leather. I   ve done a few clay pieces, and it was usually  faces when I   d do. I have to mold the leather, wet it and mold it. I   ve  found that I can carve in a hard Styrofoam easily and get a shape, and  then I can mold leather over that, and then manipulate it with tools. But  no, there   s no Sculpey involved. It   s all leather. I   m still playing, so ask  me in six months, and we   ll see what I   m doing with it.  Yeah, it   s a really interesting technique. Describe your creative process  from the time you get an idea.  There   s always ideas running around in my head. (Laughs) When I go to  a show, because all other distractions are gone, if you   re looking at your  work, sitting and looking at your work, you   re bound to get some ideas,  seeing other people   s work, too. I sit and look at mine, and I think of  what I want to do next or what I want to change. The creative process,  you just can   t make any rules. If you set limits, you   re going to stop  yourself from doing something. That   s why I   ve always liked to  experiment with the mediums, and that   s how I come up with the calico  material. Whether someone   s done that before or not, I hadn   t seen it,  and so that was creative for me. That was my creative idea. The feathers,  using them the other way. The leather. I did see one little piece of leather  in a guy   s house, and I thought it was a piece of driftwood. I asked him,     Is that wood?    and he said,    No, it   s leather.    That was in July, and  that   s what got me thinking about leather. The creative process is  continually going up here. (Laughs)  What is your creative routine? Do you try to work every day? Is it  mainly in the morning or night or     Presently I   m living by myself, so I have a lot of time. My best time is  early in the morning because my mind is fresh, and I can get up and I  can start working on stuff. I can work as long as I want. Either that or  late at night. I can work all day. I mean, it doesn   t really matter, but  early in the morning I   m the best, I think.  Well, looking back on your career so far, what has been a pivotal  moment when you might have gone down one road but you took  another?  I   m not sure because I don   t know if I feel like I   ve gone down too many  roads. Maybe some personal things, but not in art. I can   t think of, art-wise,  any roads that I haven   t gone down that I didn   t want to go down,  or if I even had a choice. I don   t think I   ve gone down any wrong roads  21  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  in art that I know of.  What   s been one of the high points of your career so far?  The high points of my career. It   s almost like the painting you   re  working on is the one you like the most. The thing you   re going through  is the one you like the most. I still have some goals. Like there   s been  some shows I   ve been in, I   ve never won Best of Show. I haven   t won a  lot of Best of Shows, but I   ve won a lot of awards. I did get the  Governor   s Community Service Award this year.  Oh, well, congratulations.  And that was     In the arts.  In the arts, and that was because of the work in McAlester. We opened a  gallery, and I had designed an eighty-foot mural. Myself and another  guy painted it for free. We worked from May until August one year. It   s  probably twelve foot tall, eighty foot long, and it   s trompe-l   oeil,  outdoor. It looks like a art show going on underneath the building. Then  we had local artists come and paint the little pictures. I think doing that  mural, even though it wasn   t Native American in nature, it certainly has  opened some doors.  I   ve done some other murals since then. The community just appreciated  it so much, and I   ve had a lot of people say how good they think it is for  the community. I   ve always wanted to give back something to the  community, so that is probably one of the highlights. I   m not sure if it  was doing the mural or getting the award. The award was nice, but the  mural, I think the people appreciated it so much, that was good. And  opening the gallery because we have a non-profit gallery now. It   s not  just my gallery. I   m one of eight that help run it.  A co-op kind of?  We pay rent. Some people just rent spaces, and they don   t work. It   s just  to keep it open, having a gallery there in McAlester, a lot of new people.  I think the teacher thing comes out in me because I   m wanting these  young people to come. We have a wall for newcomers can hang for free,  and we only charge 10 percent commission. It   s there to promote the art  and the artists in Southeastern Oklahoma because we don   t have a lot of  galleries down there.  That sounds wonderful. What   s been one of the low points in your  22  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  career?  Low points in my career. Maybe when I first started because   and I tell  this to students. In fact, I told it yesterday to some of the students that  were showing their, or, whenever the students, Friday morning possibly,  when they were walking by and looking at the art. I told them, I said,     I   m glad you entered because even if you don   t win, if you don   t enter,  you   ve lost. You   re a loser.    I remember my first show there at the  Italian Festival, and this was when I was doing the things on the leather.  The first year I entered, (I would probably have been twenty-three,  twenty-four years old) I won an Honorable Mention, and I sold a  drawing for seventy-five dollars. I was so disappointed that that   s all I  did because I wanted to win a First, a Second. I wanted to sell a lot of  stuff. I was so disappointed. I entered that show seven more years. I  didn   t win anything; I didn   t sell one thing for seven years. That was  probably my low point. I mean, I did zero that whole time. You kept  going, and that was the only show I did. I really looked forward to that  show, and then I was always disappointed every year. That may be my  lowest point.  But you persevered.  I did, and it paid off. (Laughs)  Well, is there anything else you   d like to talk about before we take a look  at three of your artworks?  I can   t think of anything that I probably haven   t already said.  Okay, we   re going to pause a minute and take a look here. So we   re  looking at your painting that you won First Place on here at the art  show, in painting. Do you want to tell us a little bit about this?  Okay, the name of it is Time for Cobbler. I do a lot of women. I  probably paint more women than I do men. I do a lot with the fact that  they gathered the berries and the nuts, and they did a lot of the crops and  the food making. I try to incorporate some of the cloth, even though I  didn   t use the actual cloth on this one.  Yes, and your folds that you     Yes.     always love to represent. These are huckleberries? Is that what you     Blackberries.  23  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Little Thunder  Jackson  Blackberries, yeah.  Blackberries.  That   s nice. How about this sculpture?  Okay, this is one of the leather pieces. It   s one of the smaller pieces. It   s  also one of the pieces that is describing a legend. This is The Race  Between the Hummingbird and the Crane. If you   ll notice, there   s a  beautiful woman on the front, and then as we turn it around, (I don   t  know if the camera will pick it up) there   s a crane painted here. You  have the hummingbird here. This is just artistic design, but it does  represent the story.  Oh, there   s a crane inside.  The crane   s inside.  Oh, what a neat     The leather is very lightweight, and I think I have a design on the top of  it. This piece happens to be hollow inside.  That   s really going to be a neat path to continue exploring. And how  about this piece, Anita?  Okay, this is one that has the feathers for the capes. They   re turkey  feathers. It was done on a photograph that I had printed on a watercolor  paper. The photograph was trees, a burned-out forest. There was no  snow, so I went back, and I painted the snow. I painted the orange glow  in the back and the orange sun in the back and the women. This is one I  have   I do different things to the photograph. I call it one of my sellers,  things that I can sell because I can do them a little quicker. I   ve painted  it with campfires and maybe three women, two women, horses, houses,  just whatever I want to put into the photograph.  And we can see your signature there, too.  That   s my little stamp.  Your little stamp, yeah. Well, great, really neat. And the title on this, did  you mention it?  I normally don   t   these are my sellers, and I don   t always have a title  for them. I don   t consider this a major piece, and I really haven   t titled it,  24  Little Thunder  Jackson  but you   re welcome to name it. (Laughter)  Well, thank you so much for your time today.  You   re welcome.  -------  -------   
