 Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University  Library. Today is Thursday, September 3, 2009 and we   re at the  Muskogee Public Library in Muskogee, Oklahoma interviewing  Reverend Ben Noble. This interview is being conducted as part of the  Muskogee African American Heritage Oral History Project, part of the  Spotlighting Oklahoma Series. Thank you, sir, for joining us today.  Good to be here.  Reverend Noble, could you begin and tell us where you were born and a  little bit about your early life?  I was born in Victoria, Texas. That   s in south Texas, on October 21,  1919. I went to grade school there at F.W. Gross High School. I sang in  the choir there and I played basketball and I took industrial arts and I  took cooking and building houses at the school. Then I accepted Christ  at an early age and was baptized in the Palestine Baptist Church by  Reverend W. A. Joshua when I was the age of ten. I grew up in the  church. I was a part of the choir there, shepherd boys and the Starlight  Band and all the youth auxiliaries and whatnot. We were members of the  YMCA Young Men   s Progressive Club where we were taught good  citizenship and I was part of the older boy   s conference where we   d go  each year to a meeting. One year we   d meet maybe with Bishop and  another year with Wiley  College  and another year and whatnot. My  daddy did carpenter work and was a minister. He was the king pin. He  didn   t have to call them, like the Department of Human Services. He  was all of that. He didn   t spare the rod. He kept me out of jail and out of  the penitentiary.  And your mother?  My mother, she was the best mother in the world. She did all the  5  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  washing and ironing. She took care of us and there were seven of us and  she knew how to stretch it because I grew up during the Depression era.  She could take whatever my daddy brought and my daddy was a king  pin in the woods. He didn   t waste a shell. When you heard the gun go  off, you knew something was going to go in the pot. She was a beautiful  person. And Dr. Shields was the leading white doctor there. But he  always counted on my mother. She would sit up at night with the sick  and see that they had their medicine on time. I had three brothers and  one sister. We were all raised in a three room house but we got along   Amen.  Was your house in the city or in the country?  It was down on the south end, it was across the last track. It was a place  that we called    under the hill.    It was just mud streets. No pavement, no  gravel and whatnot. And when it would rain, the water would come up  and sometimes it   d fill the ditches and whatnot. And when the river  would overflow, it would come up into our house and whatnot. We had  to move to my aunt   s house or my grandmother   s house during that  period. But we made it through the Depression. We were never hungry  and my daddy was never on welfare. He would always scramble and  make a living. He sent us all to school, that wanted to go.  And when you were growing up, did you always feel called to the  church?  Called to the church? Oh yeah. When I was a little fellow, I always  played the part of the preacher. My dad raised chickens and I would get  the corn and take to the back of the yard and throw it out and I   d preach  to the chickens. And then I would have baptism and I   d baptize the  chicken. I baptized everything but the cat  (Laughter) Everything but the  cat. Then we   d have the funeral and everything. I didn   t think that I  would be one day a pastor, but Church of God and Christ organized right  across the street from my house and they would have service at night. In  the daytime we kids would get over there and we   d have church. We   d  sing like they sang and dance like they danced and just have the time.  Good days.  Well tell me about school growing up.  School. Oh yes. We had I think one of the best elementary schools. My  first grade teacher was Ella May Bowles. I thought she was my  girlfriend  They would take time and put the letters on the board and  then they would come around and we had a big chief, a tablet with the  lines. And you   d have to push, pull, push and if you didn   t they   d catch  your hand and push and make an    o   , take it round and round. In first  6  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  grade you learned that. And you   d go home and say,    I learned C-A-T is  cat. And B-A-T.    In second grade you   d get three or four letter words.  Mrs. Sydney was that teacher. Then we went to Mrs. Gracey. She would  teach you and you had to learn, that switch   if you didn   t have it next  day you   d have that. That switch would bring it to your remembrance.  And I wished they   d put it back in school today.  We then went on to high school and our principal was Mr. Sheffield.  You know back then we had segregated schools. We only got the used  books from the white school. I don   t remember having a new book. It  was always a used book. But that teacher could take that old book and  teach you. In science, we   d get a broken down apparatus. And in  chemistry, Mr. Murray could take that and teach us how. From that  classroom some of us came out doctors, some farmers and lawyers and  whatnot. And football, we got old togs, old football suits, but some of us  went on and played professional football.  I go back every year. I went back this past year, after every year   s  Homecoming school reunion. 74 years. 70-something years ago. I  finished in 1938 and every two years we have Homecoming and we  reminisce. There were 22 in my class in    38 that graduated and there   s  only six of us now that   s living. Just two of us were at the reunion. I   ll  tell you one impressive thing, when I was in about fourth grade they had  the commencement. Then they would have the baccalaureate sermon at  one church, they   d have graduation at another church, the Baptist  church, the Methodist church. And one year at the graduation, they had     the man.    He was Dr. Bowles from Houston College for Negroes. He  had this cap and hood. I didn   t know what that hood was, but it was so  pretty and attractive. I said,    I want to wear that, I want one of those.     And then I heard my aunt and my grandmother saying how wonderful it  was and I said,    One day I want to wear that.    I never knew what it  would cost. Years passed after I finished high school, finished college  and was teaching. They invited me back to be the baccalaureate speaker.  And that day, I stood on that stage and several of the old teachers were  still there. And I said,    I   m back and I   ve got it.    He motivated me. And  I visited him at his office. He   s a medical doctor also. I told him how  seeing him and hearing him motivated me to go.  Well tell me about what happened after high school?  After high school I worked. I got married and had a family. And in  between that time then the Lord called me into the ministry. And I  worked for this wonderful family. They were Catholic. A very rich  family, the O   Connor family. And at her house, Mary Vivian O   Connor,  she had Jews that lived over here, Mexicans worked there, black folks  worked there. But everybody had to respect one another at her house. If  7  you wanted to go to school, she   d help you. And when I was called to  the ministry, she was Catholic, but she sent me to Mary Allen College to  be a Baptist preacher. And when I was being ordained   it was a hot day  in August   she was there. She helped me build this church here. That  family still   I talked to one of the daughters yesterday, is still there.  They say I   m their black brother.  They   ve been very nice and when she passed and went to be with the  Lord, they called me the Wednesday before Thanksgiving 1980 that  she   s very ill. I was going to have guests in my house here for dinner. I  had the turkey out, I had the stuff out, my cakes on. But when they  called me that Mrs. O   Connor  was ill , I left everything. I went to  Tulsa. Marie, the daughter, said,    Benji, you can   t make it. This is the  heaviest travel time. You can   t make it. You can   t get here. We just  wanted you to know Mother was ill.    But I said,    I   ve got to get there.    I  had them come and carry me to the airport. They put me on standby. I   m  praying all the time,    Lord, please let me get there.    They called standby  people   I had a ticket   and they didn   t call my name. I got up and I  went and I said,    Did you call my name?    They said,    No, what   s your  name? Do you have a ticket?       Yeah.       Get on the plane.    I jumped on  the plane and we went on.  I prayed all the way. I said,    Lord, let me get there.    I had to get to  Houston and then to take a bus 125 miles to Victoria. Usually when you  get to Houston you   ve got to wait and get one of the busses that go  around to every station. That night, by the time I walked out that bus  was there and carried me directly to downtown Houston to the bus  station. They were calling the bus to go to Victoria. I went in the line.  This was the night before Thanksgiving, along there. I couldn   t get  there. I went back out. They say,    You can   t ride this bus without a  ticket.    I said,    But the line is...       I don   t care.    I went back in, no ticket,  couldn   t get it. I went back and I said,    I   ve got to get to Victoria     He  said,    Have you got  2,  5?    whatever it was. Whatever he said I gave  him. I jumped on the bus and I got there.  When I got to Victoria, no one knew I was coming. But when I got off  of the bus, a Rip Terrell young boy worked there and he said,    Reverend  Noble, there   s a car waiting right over there for you. Clair and them are  waiting for you.    They said,    How did you get here?    Marie, their  daughter, said,    Ben used his God   s passport.    And that got me there.  When I got to the hospital she was asleep. She said,    When Ben comes  back, you wake me up.    So I went back and talked with her and we had  prayer. That Friday night she went to be with the Lord but it was her  request that Sunday afternoon, this boy that had cooked for her, the  Baptist that she sent to school, preached her funeral at the St. Mary  Catholic Church downtown on a Sunday afternoon. Never happened  8  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  before. But God did that.  Last year, Marie, their daughter, went to be with the Lord. They called  me back. I preached her funeral at the Catholic church. And whenever  there   s a wedding, a funeral... So they are my people. It   s really good for  everyone. This is just a color. It   s in here. So not only did she help me,  but she sent Emillo   s   s kids through school, educated them. She sent  Vera Mae   s kids to school and educated them. Anybody hungry, she fed  them. So if anyone   s in heaven, she ought to be there.  That   s a great story.  Oh yes, yes, yes.  Well tell me how you got to Muskogee, Oklahoma.  Okay. I was teaching. I was graduated from Mary Allen College. When I  graduated, they hired me there to teach. The dietician, Mother Reece,  was from Oklahoma. I had built a church in Crockett and I pastored at  another small church, two small churches. And on the way from Victoria  that Friday evening, I said,    Lord, I sure would like to preach at a full  time church.       Well Philip   s got one, I think.    That Saturday night I was  sitting on the porch at school. I heard some talking. I thought it was kids.  You know how kids break in the dining room on the street. But it was  Buddy Reece and his family, they were visiting. So that Sunday morning  I noticed that Oklahoma car and I said I would visit with them  tomorrow. I went by and I talked with him. He was talking about tithing  and whatnot. I said,    I   d like for you to come by Wednesday night and  talk to my people about tithing.    He said,    Oh I   d be happy.    So that  Wednesday night we went out there and he taught. While he was talking  the Lord said,    I didn   t call you to talk about tithing. I called you to  preach the gospel. You tell them about me, you   re talking about money.     So I got up and preached. On the way back he said,    Reverend, I  enjoyed your sermon.    He said,    We don   t have a pastor, would you like  to come up there and preach with us?       I   d be happy.    He said okay.  That next Sunday morning I had showered and I was getting ready to go.  I went out there and I was just thanking the Lord, just praising the Lord.  I didn   t know why, just praising the Lord, and one of my students was  going to go with me. When he came up he brought me out of that  ecstasy. I got in the car and I started   Mother Reece hailed me and said,     Brother Noble, you   ve just got a call from Muskogee, Oklahoma and  they want you to come up there and preach next Sunday     That would be  the second Sunday in August. The second Sunday would be  Homecoming at this new church. And that was the first year that we had  it. I built the church and they   d come back from New York and you  9  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  know how people in the country come back for Homecoming. I said,     No, how can I       But they taught me down in grade school,    Truth is  honest, truth is sure, truth is strong, and must endure. If thou were  wrong, be still the same. Speak the truth and bare the blame.    Tell the  people the truth. Don   t just tell them you   re going to preach at a full time  vacant church. I told them.    Oh, but Reverend     They didn   t want me to  go. I came and I preached. I taught the Sunday school lesson. I reviewed,  I preached. And on the way out, a lady met me at the door and she said,     Young man, you will be back.    Scared me to death. And I came back,  went on back.  This very next week on Sunday I   m leaving for Chicago, going to  Chicago for a convention. But in 1955 they met me there  at the  convention  and said,    B.W. Noble from Victoria, Texas has been  unanimously called to the Antioch Baptist Church of  Muskogee .    Dr.  S.S. Jones, one of the historic preachers, pioneers, organized and built  that church. So I came here, this is my 54th year. That   s how I got here.  When you first came to Muskogee, what did you think?  I didn   t know anyone here, but I said,    God sent me here and he   s going  to take care of me.    I made friends. People black and white have been  nice to me. But I worked. I didn   t just come to pastor the church. At that  time I had my two children and I had them to put through school,  through college. The church wasn   t able to do all that, so I did some  catering. I catered for most of the rich white people here on some  evenings. I fixed dinner out at the Country Club for them. I made cakes  and pies. And I still cook some now. So that   s how I got here.  And when was your first year in Muskogee?  In 1955 I came here. It would be the first part of September that I  started. And you know, back to my school, when I was in college I had  to work my way through too. And at one time, I wanted to give up  because it was pretty hard and one of my teachers, Ms. Azies, she  instilled this in me and said,    Brother Noble, this is not the end. This is a  means to an end. Now you go on through these four years and get  prepared and when your kids get ready to go to college, you   ll be in a  position to send them to college.    And my son Stanford, when I moved  here, that was his senior year in high school.  60 dollars a week, I  couldn   t see how I was going to clothe, feed,  pay for  college for my  son, but I wanted to send him to college. I was sitting there in the office  and I heard these steps. It was Coach Cox and Zip Gayles, the football  coach from Langston. And Coach Cox said,    Brother Noble, we   ve  come here to give your boy a scholarship.    I only had to pay  42. That   s  what that old lady told me.    He   ll open a way.     10  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  When I got ready for my daughter to go to college, I sent her. She  finished from Northeastern. She got her first two degrees from  Northeastern. She also has a degree from OU and now she is the Deputy  Secretary of Commerce of Oklahoma.  That   s great.  But when she finished Northeastern, that day I always prayed,    Lord let  me live long enough to see my kids get a degree.    They can make it.  When she walked across that stage and got it, I only had ten dollars left.  I came down to the Citizen   s Bank, Justin Campbell that had been with  me all through and helped me get loans, he was my collateral. I didn   t  have nothing. He would sign,    Oh, that preacher.    Never called me  nothing but preacher.    Go get some money.    I went in there, I opened up  a ten dollar savings account. I came back to the house and I called her  and I said,    Norma, this is all that I have, I wish that I could give you  more.    Some parents were giving them cars, some were giving them  trips abroad. She walked in her room and picked up her degree and she  came in there and she said,    Daddy, what   d you mean this is all you  have?    She said,    You gave me all of this.    That degree. That shot me  up. They haven   t given me a minute   s trouble all these years.  Well tell me a little bit about your church when you first arrived here in  Muskogee. How large was the congregation?  It was much larger than I have now. Then people had a lot of pride. And  we had sections. We had the south end, we had the west side, we had  Reeves Addition, we had the central zone. And we had leaders in all of  those areas. And you had men that had something. They were  businessmen. This is something you might want to read. This is a history  of all old Muskogee.  Oh wonderful.  You might want it. And they were businessmen. They owned their own  hat factory. They owned furniture stores, grocery stores, and they had  barber shops and they had beauty shops and clothes stored. They had the  funeral home and so on. They would take care of you. They wanted to  know that you   and they had some for everything and they had some  every week. They   d bring something by the house. Some of it was good,  some of it wasn   t. There was one old lady every Sunday night, she   d  have brownies and macaroni and cheese and chicken. They took care of  the preacher. And see my daddy, you know, was a preacher. He had  seven of us at home, but he   d always bring somebody home. And Mama  didn   t cook but one hen. But we didn   t have chicken and dumplings. We  had dumplings and chicken. You had more dumplings, and in that pot,  11  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  the neck was in there, the feet, and everything. All of it was a part of the  chicken. And I was a full fat man. I   m still fat.  You look good though.  Well, 89 years, God has blessed me. The secret is to love people and  help people. I have, just like they helped me, I   ve helped many a boy  and many a girl. Every year I dress a boy up. I didn   t have a suit when I  graduated because we couldn   t afford it. But now every year, I try to  dress a boy, when he goes across that stage. I help them in school. I got a  girl now down in Vanderbilt. I   m helping her, see.    Oh I hope she   ll  help you.    I say,    That   s not important. Show me that you help  somebody else. I don   t need the help. Help that girl or boy behind you.     But yeah, I do.  Tell me about the role of the church, from when you first arrived until  now, how it has changed through the years.  Well I say that the church, when I came here, was a heart of the  community. It was segregated. See, we had our own church, we had our  own schools, and you had to hang together. But we didn   t have buses,  you walked. If you   ve got a car, you   re going around picking up the  kids. But now, we scatter. Some kids here, and you see when I came,  right across the street from me was Sadler Junior High School, right  here. Right here was Dunbar Elementary School. Right up here was  Manual Training High School, see. So all I had to do was stand right  here and kids coming from Dunbar had to pass my house. I called them  in the church and I called it Thirty Minutes with God. I led a many kid  on a Wednesday evening. I taught them bible stories, and baptized them  and Thirty Minutes with God. Then when we integrated, I organized city  wide youth choir and had kids, hundreds of them   Lansing Lee that   s  down at the library, he   s one of my kids. He got my first award from     he was Sadler for a Friend of Education Award. He was with the city  wide   and Steve Wiley, he went to OU. He   s teaching out at Bacone  now and he pastors at church here. All those kids, they were my kids.  And nowadays, is going to church different in the community?  It   s different, yes. Yes, it   s different. And it seems as though this  younger generation don   t have the love for   well I don   t know what it  is. See then, it wasn   t,    Do you want to go to Sunday school?    You  would go on Sunday.    And do you want to go to school?    No, you are  going to school. And you   re going to get that work. I   m going to work  with that teacher. The teacher, the preacher, and the police department  all, in the early day, we all worked together. You didn   t get by. You  couldn   t go down to south end, because they   d get you, see. So what  12  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  they called integration was good, but in a way, it   s set us back. See, we  lost that self-help. I can   t tell you, sometimes some got lost in the  shuffle, see. Then, when you left Manual Training High School, if you  took advantage of what was offered, you were prepared to make a living.  They taught barbering, they taught shoe making, cosmetology, the food  service and typing. You could make it.  Now, I read that when Manual Training High School closed in 1970 you  gave the last commencement speech there. What was that like for you?  What did you tell the graduates in 1970, do you even remember? It was  a long time ago.  Yeah, I know one thing I told them. I tell them every time, it   s a little  quote that I got when I was in college. The verb is twisted, but the point  is straight. And it goes like this:    I must be careful what I be now for the  time will come when I can   t be what I want to be because of what I   ve  already been.    You get that thought? You   ve got to be careful. See,  Obama is president today. But had he been a rascal, he couldn   t be there.  That record will follow you. And you know, when I go back to Victoria,  I   m respected.    Ben   s in town.    Fellows that I grew up with, ran around  with, if they say a bad word,    Oh excuse me, Reverend.    They know,  you see. Now one thing I told those kids, you can make it in spite of  handicaps, if you want to. It   s in you. You   ve got to realize you can do  it, see. And don   t hang out with the wrong crowd. Don   t even hang on  the phone with the wrong group. As old as I am now, when people get  on the phone and they   re negative, I say,    Let me call you back please.     See they   ll hinder you. It   s catching.  I need to remember that.  Yeah, yeah right.  How did the community feel when Manual did close?  Oh we were sick, we were sick. And we   re still sick. We hurt. We   re  hurt because the pride was gone. The teachers are good. Most of the  teachers at Manual, they knew the background of a kid. You are this.  And then they carried you up, you see. Some kids didn   t have  professional folks, but that teacher at Manual knew how to take that kid  and bring them up, make them feel. Give them sometime some hard  work, give them lead roles in plays. If they could hear a little difference  in their voice then take them in music studio and work with them, see.  You can   t do that now, because they really don   t know them. Then, we  knew one another. But they just don   t know. And they   d work with you,  you had them. And it was just different. It was just different.  13  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  Well tell me about the first time you met Dr. King.  Oh yeah, oh   long before he made his speech    I have a dream    when he  was   he   d come to the Council of Churches and to different meetings  and talks. He was getting funds and whatnot to help the movement. He  always had something to say and knew how to say it. And Martin wasn   t  about Martin, he was about others. You know, I wrote a letter the other  day to the editor where John and Martin and Robert and Teddy, how  they had the same thing. They wasn   t about themselves, they were about  others, see. Those Kennedy brothers, they were Catholic, but they  treated Jews, Catholics, Gentiles, all race, creed and color, and that   s the  way Martin was. And so that day, when he gave that   and I had just  gotten back from Washington. My brother lived in Hartford, Connecticut  and I   d gone east with him. I got back that Saturday from Connecticut. I  stopped in Washington. I got home, and that Monday I went to Tulsa  and we got on this bus and went right back for that March on  Washington. When I got back I could hardly walk. But it was great.  And then I was thrilled when I went this January for Obama   s  inauguration. Eleven degrees  It was so cold that day. But the Lord had  blessed me to see those historical things. See a change. I never dreamed  that I   d see a black boy be superintendent of schools here in Muskogee.  He and my son graduated from high school together. I knew James and  so   but he   s a product of Manual Training. God has blessed. And if you  want to, you can. See you can   t use    because I   m black    or whatever. If  you want to, you can go for it, see. When I came here we had the black  Ministerial Alliance and the white Ministerial Alliance. And so we  eventually integrated. One of the fellows, they wanted me to be  president and the guy said,    No, you can   t be that.    But George Gilmore,  used to be a pastor of Bethany Presbyterian Church and Don Ruth was  pastor of First Presbyterian downtown here. I was the vice president  under Don and so that day Oren Nichols was the reporter for the  newspaper and I had had this plaque made to present Dr. Ruth for his  work. I was presenting it to him and they took the picture   that was  long before the election   and when they held the election of who it   d  be, George Gilmore made the motion that the name Don Ruth would be  stricken and Ben Noble   s name be put there as president of the Alliance.  And so I was the first black to be the president but Dr. Doff, he was  pastor of St. Paul, he was the president and for years I was vice president  under him. But he groomed me. And I told him the other day, Dr. Doff  was one who   somebody to get you ready. You don   t jump in the  saddle. Somebody lets you ride bareback and teaches you how. So when  I went in, we have good relationships here, see. But the main thing, stay  humble. Humility is the best way up, see? If you stay humble, if you fall,  you don   t break your neck.  14  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  Well, as far back as you could remember, can you tell me some of the  early community leaders?  Here?  Yes.  Oh yeah. Jake Simmons, Bertha Williams, Ted Ragsdale, Sr., Grant  Smith.  And if you could, tell me what they did?  Jake Simmons was the NAACP president and he was in the oil business.  Bertha Williams was a school teacher and a politician with the  Edmondson   s. Grant Smith was a businessman, he owned Grant Smith  Furniture, Grant Smith   s Garage and whatnot. And Loula Kiff was a city  federation leader. She had around 10 or 12 ladies    groups all over town  and their motto was    lifting as we climb.    It wasn   t like a sorority  because wash women all could be but they   d lift those women and gave  them pride and helped kids through college and school. And we had Ted  Ragsdale, Sr., he owned a funeral home but he was a big NAACP man  and Vera Rays. A.A. Twoll was NAACP and a businessman, a church  man. Ruby Standback, she was over the girl   s training school. She was a  great educator. Emmarine Moore, she   s a librarian here and she was  head of my women   s mission in my church. Great educator. There are so  many. This, I   ll tell you, this tells you about all those doctors, the nurses,  the hospital, the business people, all those people I was naming. This is  it.  Good. I   ll definitely make a copy of that. Are there any local, national,  or world events that have really impacted your life?  National events that impacted my life? World events? Yeah, John  Kennedy   s  death  had a   it   s amazing. I was in Detroit, Michigan. No,  I was in Bay City, Michigan running a revival and we had a service at  10:05 and then we went out and witnessed and had one around one or  something. And at 10:05 that morning Reverend Mathis kept praying,     Oh Lord, bless President Kennedy.    They were done in the prayer room  and I was up here. He just kept praying,    Lord bless President  Kennedy.    He was going to make that trip to Dallas that day. We went  on and witnessed and came back to the house and I went in my room and  he went in his room. And in a few minutes he said,    Noble, they shot  Kennedy.    I rushed in there, and the priest was coming out and  announced it. It just took something out of me. In other words, it was a  turning point. A lot of stuff under that.  15  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  And then the night they killed King, that was important. I was speaking  that night at Wheatley Elementary School. Back then they   d have the  operettas for little kids and whatnot. They announced he had been shot  and we had to calm things that night, cause it was just bad. See at that  time, and you had a whole lot of un-Christian people. And they didn   t  think like Martin Luther King. Some of them thought violence. And they  wanted to do some bad stuff. But it took the Christians to    Be still, my  soul, God is moving.    And Robert Kennedy, the night when Dr. King  was being memorialized, that night when I went to Atlanta, as far as you  could see this way, people. This way people. This way people, this way  people. And they let this line go so long and just file by the casket. You  stood in line   I guess I got in line about 5:30 or 6:00. It was midnight  when my line got by that. And it was a full casket, his shoes and  everything. The only thing that I can really remember, I don   t remember  his face, but it was those feet. I thought about how many miles those feet  had walked for freedom. How many times that dogs had yapped. How  many times the water hose had been knocked from under them. And it  was for King. And so that day, it was after one and then that next  morning early we went for the funeral, in that basement. And then that  walk from Ebenezer to Morehouse. It was hot. And one little lady, she  was an old lady   like I am now, she was old then. But she was just  stepping. She said,    I   m stepping today not for myself but for my great-grandchildren.     Think about that. You don   t forget those things.  Those are powerful memories.  Oh yes, yes, yes. And I was standing right as far as from that picture  there, I was standing right there when he made that speech    I have a  dream.    Oh that 28th day of August, it was so hot. Every now and then  we   d go to the fountain and put our feet in that water to cool off. And  after, we got back on that bus and Clara Luper was our leader. You   ve  heard of her?  Oh yes.  Yeah. She was a strong woman. She   s in a wheelchair now but I admire  her because she   s a fighter. So we made it. God   s been good. Isn   t he  good?  Oh yes.  Better than good.  Amen.  Yeah, better.  16  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  Were you involved in a lot of civil rights activities?  Yeah, listen, long before Martin when I was in Victoria, see working for  voting rights and whatnot, we had to march for that. Yeah, see Martin  came on, he was around Philip Randolph and all those guys paid the  price. He put the icing on the cake. But it was a whole lot of shoulders  he stood on, but we thank God for him. And you know, a whole lot of  whites stood at that March on Washington. We were there, but a whole  lot of Catholic   everybody was there. Like when we had Obama, they  were there. You see, it   s just some people is good people, see. If you   re  Christian, you don   t look at color. You look at the content of the heart.  And aren   t you glad you love everybody? I don   t know a soul in this  world that I can say I hate them. Some I don   t like their ways, but I don   t  like all of my own ways  (Laughs) But I love them. Amen.  I want to get back to your church. Is it in the same building that it   s  always been in?  Oh no, no. The Lord blessed it. My first church was Beria Baptist  Church. You talking about   I have a picture of it. It had no steps. They  had a tub, it was way out in the country. It wasn   t in Crockett, it was  about nine miles in front of Crockett. It had a big hole in the floor. Most  of the lights and window panes was out. The big old wood stove in my  office was about this here. And it had a little seat there and apple box  turned upside down with some little cloth on it and a glass there with a  dead dirt dobber   I never forget   in there. But that was my first church.  Good people. And I loved those people. And every now and then I go  back there. The Lord let me be there. And first thing, I had some steps  built. I had the lights put in, some open window panes. We built a little  place out there for the ladies to go to the restroom. We cleaned out the  alley and whatnot. And then we got the choir going and we got the youth  going. We built them up. But we wanted to build the church. And some  said,    You won   t ever build the church.    But the Lord told me to build  it. And we built that church there and got them out of there. It   s a  beautiful building up on a hill right now. Every now and then, and you  see the note was  200 every three months. Back then     That   s a lot of money.  Yeah. Yeah.  Back then, that   s a lot of money   But I said I wanted 19 people to pledge  10 that they   d pay. And I   ll do   20 and as long as I   m able, whether I   m here or not, this will be paid.  And so I was up here a long time. But every time I sent that  10 back.  17  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  And when they finished paying, they sent for me to come back to burn  the note there.  But when I came here, Antioch was down. The building was dilapidated,  was pulling apart, and the centipedes were coming in. But the Lord let  me clean up the basement, clean up the   but you should see it now. The  Lord let us build it and some of them say if you build it, you ain   t going  to get it paid for. Been paid for, and we still have a little money. If God,  honey, is for it, nobody can stop him. The Lord that we serve, he doesn   t  have plenty of money, he has all money. See, he doesn   t have to   but  make sure whatever you do, get His permission. And if He tells you you  can   t, you can   t. But if God says you can, you can, see.  What   s your favorite part about being a preacher?  Is witnessing somebody to Christ; getting someone to baptize them. Like  I baptized everything but the cat   (Laughter)  But that   s the joy. Here Easter Sunday morning I baptized a guy 40-  something years old. He   d never accepted Christ. He   s a football coach.  To lead them to Christ, that   s it, and to help somebody to accept healing.  Doctors are wonderful. They   re doing a wonderful job. But always know  they   re practicing medicine. They never tell you I   m perfecting it. Say  I   m practicing medicine. But the man upstairs, he perfects it. See, he has  something that has never been in the lay out. See he specializes. And if  you have the faith and he wants to, he   s not going to let you die because  you can   t get your prescription filled. He   s not that kind of god, see? He  is water. Whatever you need, he   s that. And I believe him. The doctors  here know that. Dr. Tawakina, my family doctor (you have to have a  family doctor), if he says,    You need this,       No, I don   t need that.    Dr.  Gaston, did you ever hear   you   ve never heard of Ben Gaston? His son  just died here a few weeks ago. He was walking his dog and I think he  was 46 years old. He and Michael Jackson died the same week, same  time, see. And if Michael had depended on the Lord, he wouldn   t have  all them drugs and stuff. He   s weak. That was the drugs wiggling.  Well what is it about Muskogee that has kept you here all these years?  Love. Love.  What do you love about it?  The caring people. It   s a family town. It   s just love. They come to one  another   s rescue. It   s care, see. That   s all. That   s the only way I can say  18  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  Nykolaiszyn  Noble  it. And real bad actors can   t stay here. They   ll put them out. See when I  was coming up from Texas, Victoria, if you   re bad actor they   d float you  out of town. You didn   t stay in town. You leave, don   t come back. So  much love, and so much togetherness, bad actors really can   t stay here  too long. They just can   t get a foothold, see. Cause the people, we love  one another, love the town. Have pride. Well I guess pride is the word.  Not lifted up in pride, God can   t stand a pride look, but be proud.  Is there anything else that you   d like to add that I haven   t asked you  about today?  No, I think we   ve     Any words of wisdom for the youth of Muskogee?  Yeah. What I gave,    Be careful of what you be now. For the time, young  people will come when you can   t be what you want to be because of  what you   ve already been. God is looking and God   s booking.    That   s it.  Well thank you so much Reverend for joining us today.  Okay.  -------  -------  
