 Finchum  Stinchcomb  Today is June 2, 2010. My name is Tanya Finchum. I   m with the  Oklahoma State University Library, and we   re doing an oral history  project on Women Extension Educators. Today I   m in Altus, Oklahoma,  to talk with Zen Stinchcomb from Hollis, in the neighboring county of  Harmon.  Right. It is to the west.  She started with Extension back in 1953 and retired in 1987. Thank you  for coming today. Let   s start by having you tell us a little bit about your  childhood, where you were born, and then we   ll work our way forward.  Well, it was a different childhood, I think. I was born in Loraine, Texas,  and later lived in Ballinger, Texas, in Dallas, Texas, and in Fort Worth,  Texas. But when I was six years old, we moved to Roger Mills County,  which was quite a different sight. That was my mother   s home county  and it was the Depression. We moved there because she hadn   t finished  her degree yet, and you couldn   t teach in a lot of schools if you didn   t  have your degree but there, there were places. I attended, in the first and  second grades, a one-room school with first to eighth grade, and then for  three years I lived in Strong City, Oklahoma, which was where my  grandfather and grandmother had settled. After that, though, we moved  to Oklahoma City because my dad put in a print shop there. I attended  one year of grade school, junior high, and senior high there, and  graduated in 1949.  Then in the first year of college, I went to Oklahoma College for  Women, the name then, at Chickasha. After my freshman year there, I  transferred over to the University of Oklahoma to the school of home  economics, and after the three years there, I graduated. I guess that a  different thing was still in me, and there are other people that have gone  to OU and worked for Extension, but I applied for a job when I  5  graduated with the OSU Extension, only it was Oklahoma A M College  then. I   d had an uncle who graduated there and a cousin, and so I knew  some about it. After I graduated about the first of June, the first of  August I started as assistant home demonstration agent in Jackson  County and lived here in Altus. This was for the next two years. Then I  married a Harmon County farmer and moved over there. For a year I just  worked at home, and then for about a year and a half, I was cashier for  Harmon Electric Association.  Then the position of home demonstration agent came open, and in a  county the size of Harmon, there was not an assistant. There was a  county agent for the farm instruction and a home demonstration agent  for the home economics instruction, and we both worked with the 4-H  clubs. At the time, there were about 8,000 people in Harmon County,  and there were five first through twelfth-grade schools and one school  that was a grade school. By the time I retired, December 1987, there  were still three twelve-year schools, but within the next couple of years  two of those had to close due to lack of attendance, so there were maybe  4,000 people in that county by then. And the one school since then has  shrunk some more. But, there is still one good school there.  As said, I started to work in Jackson County and did just 4-H club work,  and there were a lot more schools over here then. As I said, when I  started in Harmon County, there were five twelve-year schools, plus one  grade school, and there were ten home demonstration clubs. Then it was  a different world there. If you farmed about half of a section of land, you  were really farming something for  it was common to  raise families on  a quarter of a section. But after fifty-five years, very few people live in  the country. All the farming and ranching has been taken over by just a  few people, and it is a different population. There are, of course, many  farm laborers and, as mentioned, the schools have closed except for  Hollis, and in Hollis, which is the county seat, if you drive through town  you can see many stores have closed. It is still a nice place to live, but it  is geared toward senior citizens anymore. (Laughter) So, I guess we   re  just going to be there.  As for what was done in Extension work, as said, there were the ten  homemaker groups, and I think, even though there were five schools, we  had more 4-H clubs than that, and I didn   t count up. But, at Gould, we  had junior and senior clubs. At Arnett, we had two. At Hollis, we had  three clubs. At Vinson, we had two clubs. Out at Ron school, I think  there were two, but  at each school  we were divided into junior and  senior groups for the 4-H clubs and had some wonderful 4-H leaders.  We really had great 4-H clubs. I know the first year that I worked there  when we went to 4-H Roundup, you had to be thirteen by the first of the  year and two eighth-grade girls from Gould entered a demonstration.  6  Then, at Roundup, it was really a competition. There were, in their  room, about twelve demonstrations. I went there to listen to them, and  the judge never asked them a question, and I knew this was either the top  or the bottom, when they   re not being asked any questions. And  whenever the results were announced, they were the top-placing   demonstration  in that particular group out of the twelve.  And, of course, how you got to Roundup was different, because some  school loaned you their bus and different years were different. You  could take twelve or fourteen boys, and that many girls, and every year  we had a competition because we had more than that many who wanted  to take this trip and go there. We had so many good members that we  did always have a competition at the time. Then after my lacking a  month and a half of working thirty years there, it was quite a bit  different. As I said, we were down to three schools, and the groups were  organized around schools, and that was for 4-H work. In the adult work,  we had, when I started, I believe, ten. They were home demonstration  clubs then. Then we organized two or three more, but when we   d  organize some, we   d lose some. By the time I retired, I think there were  seven Extension homemaker groups and, sadly enough, now that we   re  consumer science groups, we   re down to two groups. But for the  population we have, I have to say that that is much better than some  counties, three or four times as large as we are have zero groups. They  are still doing educational programs, and these of course are being done  in Harmon County, also.  I brought some items here because some of the special things that we  had were (and this was back, of course) needlecraft workshops and were  programs that were open to everyone in the county. A lot of times we  reached people that did not belong to organized groups, and we used  local leaders. Like, this was a needlecraft workshop, and then we were  discussing previously how now we have all the computers and things,  but these are just some examples of things that we had on posters. And  we used to have wonderful housing tours that many guests  attended ,  but sadly enough, because of thieves that like to visit houses when no  one was home and all, we quit that because people didn   t want their  homes put on a tour anymore. When this is an event that is open to  anyone who wishes to attend, you get ones that come and see what is  there, and then they   ve been known to come back later. Anyway, this is  a 1985 housing tour.  Showing pictures.   Then we had special-interest workshops and people would come, and  here was a bread workshop. Like a one-time thing was bread-dough craft  that some of our Extension homemakers taught. It was open, of course,  to anyone, and they   d have quite an attendance, and then a specialist  came, and we had furniture refinishing. A program that reached a lot of  7  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  people that were not in organized groups was the Weigh-Off program  that we ran for several years, and the other counties around had that, and  it   s mentioned right there. Also we had things for fun. A lady that had  been a former home demonstration member taught a quilting workshop,  and then when Mary Lou Swander came, we had Denims and Things.  Mary Lou was the Extension clothing specialist. So, you can see that we  did have quite a variety of programs. Then as we   ve mentioned before,  individual help, like people making phone calls or coming in to the  office to get information, and we always tried to fulfill whatever their  request for information was then.  Was your office in the courthouse?  No. Our office was on the courthouse square in what we called the Farm  Building at the time. The OSU Extension Office and the Soil  Conservation Office, which now is Conservation of Natural Resources,  and the ASCS office that controls the acreage allotments and things like  this, those three farm agencies or farm-related offices were in the Farm  Building. They still remain there to this day.  In    53 when you started, did you have a car?  No, because I had graduated from college, and the last three years I  worked and paid all of my expenses. The first year I had paid some, and  when I went to school, I had between two and three outfits of clothing,  and that   s all I had. I didn   t have any money because at school I had  worked in an office, but it took all of it for the room and board and the  books and things, and then I   d have other jobs. Like on Easter weekend,  I  worked at a  florist and later it was Easter and Mother   s Day, and so  when we   d get a holiday, I   d work a place. And I had other jobs, too,  like clerking in stores whenever I wasn   t at school. Anyway,  when I  started to work for Extension  my dad co-signed with me for a loan to  get a car, and that   s how I had my first car. It was not a new car but it  was one that ran very well and served my purpose then. I had never had  a car until then.  What kind was it?  It was a three-year-old Chevrolet, and it worked very well for what I  needed. (Laughter)  In high school had you been involved with 4-H?  Not really, but see, from living in Roger Mills County, I knew about  this, because I   d been involved with things like that there. Even though I  really just had a couple of years up there that I was old enough to be in a  8  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Finchum  group like that.  How did you get interested in it, then?  Well, I just had always liked it, and if you want me to be honest, I think  that living in Roger Mills County was the highlight of my life. I still  have friendship with my best girlfriend from there. But I have this from  other places, too, because then when I moved to Oklahoma City, I still  have that friend. When I attended OCW, I met a friend and she passed  away last year, but then we both went to OU the next year. All these  years since 1953, we have been friends and known each other   s families  and all. Then, in Extension I still have friends, if they have not passed  away, that I had when I first started working for Extension. Ida Fay   Winters  was always a wonderful friend after she started working for  Extension, even though she was about twenty-some years younger, but I  always enjoyed her. She was so sharp and helpful like with some of the  workshops and classes I   ve mentioned.  Those were  just a few, because  every year we would have events, if you want to call it that, and of  course we helped always. Well, we were in charge really.  In the Extension office we were in charge of the county fair, to get all  the superintendents and get the catalog ready and, as mentioned, the first  copier that we had, you could not read anything. We copied off of it  because it used a special paper. It was the only paper that would copy. A  lot of these things were mimeographed, and this was our source of  duplicates before we got the first copier. Now I go back in there  sometimes, but I have to get the secretary to run the copy because this  machine is so complicated (laughter) and I don   t use it enough. But  sometimes I do go in there if I want copies of something. They happen  to have the same secretary that worked there when I retired. She   s  always been my friend, too. The others that have come in there and  worked have usually been friends, personal friends. Well, at first, they  didn   t have ones that stayed very long, and they   d move on to another  place, and I didn   t know them as well. Lynda Burns was there about ten  years, and she was one who grew up in that county and then left because  she married a career military man. After he passed away, she came back  to the county. So, she was there. I had known her. By my marriage and  her bloodline, we   re related to some of the same people.  Speaking of marriage, in    53 did you have to do anything special to get  permission to get married?  No. I married in    55. 1953 is when I came to  Jackson County .  I know for a while Extension workers could not be married, right?  9  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  They were over that by then. But see, I moved over there, but some of  the things that were different, when I started, there was no health  insurance, and when  Extension  first had health insurance the men that  were working for Extension could insure their families but the women  could only insure themselves.  In 1960  I had the second maternity leave  in the state of Oklahoma, so that gives you sort of an idea. I mean, no  one thinks anything about taking a maternity leave anymore, but it was  different then, and I think on the insurance, I was still the only one that  was insured. But it worked out, because then later the women could  insure their families, too. I mean, it was really a different world.  At that time, how easy was it to get promoted up to the next level, being  a woman?  Not very easy and some of it depended on who was supervising you.  Because, I won   t mention any names, but we had an Extension director  that I thought didn   t know what was going on part of the time. He   d  been transferred from another place because they didn   t think he was  doing good there, so they transferred him over to us. His personality was  different. Later he went to work for another government agency, and I  happened to know somebody in the county where he worked for the  ASCS, which maybe won   t be too telling. It was a larger county, and  they had clerical workers in there, and he turned all their desks so none  of them could see each other when they were there. I mean, he had ideas  like this. (Laughs) So, anyway, I applied for the director   s job to get in  after he left, and it was a no-go with the district director that we had.  You could do this, then. We had a woman director or two of a county,  but you weren   t going to get it here with that one. (Laughs) I mean, he  was nice to me, otherwise, but that just wasn   t his thing, for women to  be directors.  I was trying to think, then, what year, but for about the last six or seven  years that I worked, I was the county Extension director. In a way, it was  better working without being that, but I found that you needed to be that  sometimes, but then you could really run into some problems  sometimes. I know it   s like one person that had his own land and things.  He sold calves, and he wanted to advertise this. You know, I don   t care  who you were, if you were an ag agent or a home economics agent, you  were not to push forth your own private  business , and a lot of times,  they didn   t want you doing jobs on the side. I know when he came to  work while I was the director he posted a poster  for his livestock  business  on his office wall. The district director came and that poster  soon disappeared, but the next thing we knew it was posted in front of a  4-H club. So, you know, people do what they want a lot of times in spite  of what they are asked to do. And I may even have done this sometimes  myself, but I always tried  to do  whatever they asked  me  to do.  10  Finchum  Stinchcomb  But the most enjoyable part of working for Extension is all the people  that you meet. This is only a teeny, tiny number of the programs that we  did, and you learn so much yourself, and work with such great people  overall. I always felt you shouldn   t comment on people, and I will tell  you one funny situation. (Laughs) We had a secretary who was a very  good one, and her mother was the home demonstration agent over there  before I came. After a while, we hired her as the Extension clerk in our  office in our county. In every county there are all types of people and all  kinds of housekeepers, but this was just really a great family, and they  pushed forth in 4-H and all this, and their kids did things and they  wanted you to visit their house. So I had been  to their home , but I don   t  know when they   d ever cleaned it or anything. (Laughs) Anyway, this  secretary   s husband and another man were in the appliance business in  Hollis, and I think it was a new washer that this family bought. They  lived in the country, but I   d never commented to anybody about how  their house was. They had these really good 4-H members and a couple  of them are still my friends today. Anyway, I never said a word in our  office about how their house was because it was a pretty nice house. It  was just that it needed cleaning so badly.  One morning I heard our secretary walking in, and I was already at my  desk and she came in there and she said,    Why didn   t you tell me about  so-and-so and so-and-so?    and I said,    Now you know I don   t say  anything about people.    Anyway, her husband and his partner had been  up there to install a washer or whatever it was, and they   d gotten sick.  They kept all these dogs, and there were old food things and bones that  were smelling, and the dogs had carried some under the house where  they had to get under  the house to do the installation . I mean, it   s  humorous now and funny, but it really wasn   t because it was really sad  that that family, because they were so sharp and talented, could do so  many things but that they lived in a situation like that.  Really, the things that I think I liked the most about Extension, first of  all, the people, because, as I said, there were the organized groups like  the homemaker clubs and the 4-H clubs, and then our 4-H leaders and a  lot of parents were involved in that. There was that, but I liked all the  program material. I probably learned as much as anyone, because, as I  mentioned about the sewing machines, over the years everything has  changed.  Do you want to talk a little bit about the dental project?  Yes. That  pointing  is the photograph of the tooth pillows, and the  homemaker groups made those, and then some of them helped with the  programs. When we started, I would go down with the programs, too,  and then they   ve carried that on. I mean, after I quit, they still had the  11  Finchum  Stinchcomb  dental programs, but it was just one of the things that we liked to do, and  it was fun. The children loved the tooth pillows, and it makes them pay  more attention to the information that you   re giving them about good  dental care. At the time, we had a dentist who would go up sometimes  with us if he could get away from his practice, if we scheduled him, and  he would go up and help with the correct brushing and all that. He would  bring a toothbrush for each child, too. And, of course, maybe with our  county being small, it helped to not have as many, and someone would  come up and do that then. We did cooperate, because there was really  only one dentist in the county, and, as said, we tried to schedule him so  that he wouldn   t have appointments when we were having these  programs that he could go up and  present .  You had all kinds of programs, various topics.  Yes, we have. We have, because Extension is really a truly educational  program and it, in a way, is informal, and it   s not only you teaching, but  it   s helping people to be leaders. Did I show you  the photos of  the  needlecraft workshops that we used to have? Some things were for fun  but then other things were for information. Like, a relative of mine that  lived in France for a year, I asked her to come into town  to present a  program on France . We  once had  buffet luncheons and had programs  with those, and they really would bring a turnout because the Extension  homemaker members would each bring a dish of food to serve. Then,  usually the Homemakers Council would provide the meat, and it was  open to the public, and as you know when we had a meal like that,  (laughs) it really enticed people to come in  for the educational  program .  But we   d have the educational programs. Some were on how to do  things, and right now I cannot recall a lot of the topics. Sometimes we  cooperated with the other counties around us, too, like Jackson and  Greer and Tillman, and at the time Kiowa County was in the group. This  was the five-county group, and each home economist had a special area  that they covered, and they   d do a leader lesson, the same one in each of  these counties. Some of that is still going on today, but even though I   d  been a clothing textiles major and had sewed, I started getting a master   s  in housing and interiors and this is when there was a really good  teacher   Chris Salmon in the Housing and Interiors department, and this  was my area of knowledge for this five-county area, and I started getting  a master   s in that. It   s not easy when you live in Harmon County and  you either are going to Weatherford to Southwestern State or to  Stillwater to Oklahoma State to get your courses. To get the master   s  you have to finish all of this in seven years and you could take a little bit  of correspondence, I believe. Then I had a health problem the last  summer that I was going to finish up, and I never did really finish it, but  12  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  I learned a lot going to these classes that helped me. Some, even over  here at Altus at the college they would have by film, and I got even  some hours like that, when you could come at night and  take a course .  But I guess that   s one disadvantage of a small county that   s so far away  like that. You have to work around it, but it worked out.  What years were you trying at OSU?  Well, really at first, I didn   t even really start trying to get a degree,  because they wanted you to keep updated. So, even the two years I  worked over here, I think I took a course or two, but they   d just be  maybe a week-long thing in the summer, and it just updated you on  things. Some of the years, they would have an educational leave, like a  couple of weeks or three. For a while, I didn   t even try to start putting it  into a degree, and I can   t really think what I did. Then I had all this lined  up, had all this problem that caused surgery. And it made me lose quite a  bit, because, see, if you didn   t get it in seven years, you were out. Well,  you know, and you could   ve added some more, but I just never did do it,  because really if I   d gotten the master   s I would   ve made  100 a month  more about the time I quit. It was costing me quite a bit more than that,  because you were responsible for your own travel and tuition.  At OU when you were in college, did they have a practice house or home  management house?  Yes, I lived in it. It was very different up there then. OU and OSU really  had, so I learned later, pretty similar things. Well, and as said, I had a  cousin who went to Oklahoma A M and graduated right about the time  I started. So, I knew some about it. They had about the same courses, or  a lot of the same courses, and you lived in the home management house  when you were doing that, and OU had one, and I sort of doubt that they  do now and OSU may be a lot like this. I haven   t looked into it, but you  would be doing interior design or fashion design or something like this,  and it wasn   t just an overall program in a way. Back when I went to  school, no matter what your major was, you took a lot of courses in that,  but you had to take the basics. If you were a clothing and textiles major,  it was a home ec degree, but you still took all the basics in foods and  home management and interior design. And even a language, because it  was in the College of Arts and Sciences, or at least where I got mine it  was. It was a different day.  Did you do Spanish, then?  I took Spanish, and I won   t even tell you I barely passed, but the teacher  was a graduate student and he could    buh buh buh buh    and we did not  have all the Spanish people that there are around now. I was never good,  13  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Finchum  and I think he knew I had to get that to get a degree. I mean, it just  ruined my grade point average. But anyway, I think he just gave me that,  and I   ve always been behind on pronouncing words. Even in high  school, I could hear some snickers at some words that I pronounced.  (Laughs)  So the coursework pretty much prepared you for your Extension work?  Yes, I think that it did. And then we had good specialists that helped us  in areas and you had to go to little workshops to get you started on what  you were going to be doing. And specialists came out to the counties a  lot. When I started over here in this county, we had a county agent that  liked 4-H as much as he liked anything else. We didn   t always have a 4-  H ag agent. We had an irrigation specialist. Irrigation was just being  developed in southwest Oklahoma then, and wherever it was, he went.  From this county, and he   s deceased now, but Leonard Solomon was  County Agent, and I can   t remember if they called him Extension  Director, too, then. But anyway, he was in charge of the office, and Mrs.  Elma Garner was the Home Demonstration Agent and we had some  different 4-H men and the irrigation agent. And then Leonard  Solomon   well I guess we didn   t have an ag 4-H agent then, because he  was really interested in 4-H.  Have you ever heard of Larry Derryberry? He  has been the Oklahoma   Attorney General, but he was one of our 4-H boys, about an eighth  grader. Anyway, he was not the only one, because Leonard Solomon  really enjoyed 4-H, and he helped so many kids, but Larry Derryberry  was one of them, and he was really a speaker and turned out to be a great  public speaker, and then as an adult he was elected as the attorney  general of this state for a term or two.  I   ll have to look him up.  Well, because it was the hundredth anniversary of 4-H from 1909 until  2009, he was on TV. Do you watch the seven o   clock ag programs on  Saturday mornings?  Sometimes.  We watch those about every week, and they had two full ones with  Larry. There were other former 4-H members, too, but he was on quite a  bit on both of the segments. They took two Saturdays to give the 4-H  history in this state, and they had many people that had been state 4-H  officers, district and all, and it was really enjoyable.  So, you did some of the youth, and then you also did adults?  14  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Yes.  Did they have adult camps?  Yes, they did at first. Oh, and the women loved those. That was their  way of relaxing and getting away, I guess.  Where would they be?  Well, at Quartz Mountain State Park at Lugert Lake, there were two  group camps. At first a lot of counties had theirs by themselves, but as  time went by and more women went to work outside of home and all,  we   d go with other counties like Jackson and Greer and sometimes  Kiowa. Those are the main ones that Harmon went with, but then  eventually they played out, because there just were not enough women  that were going to take off and go.  Would it be a two, three, five-day camp normally?  Sometimes, you could get into the camp about two o   clock, and I think  you were supposed to be out by one the next day. It would be either just  a one-day or a two-day camp. And, of course, this is where we had 4-H  camp, too, and the same way at first. It was like each county for  themselves, and then as attendance went down, due to people moving  and combining and all this, Harmon County, Jackson and Greer had  camps together. Then we   ve had five-county ones with Tillman and  Kiowa in it. I   d have to look at the records to tell you all these, but we  always had fun and good educational programs, I think. I hope that the  youth got a lot out of it, received a lot of information.  Did they go swimming?  Yes, but, I   m trying to think. I think there had been a swimming pool  with the camp once. I remember some of the time they   d usually have a  school bus, and they took some, over to Mangum. That lodge was not  over at Lugert then. I mean, just a lot of things have changed.  What about the women? What were some of the activities they would do  at camp?  Well, they   d have crafts and various programs and recreation and     Sing-alongs?  Yes. They would really be educational programs, but they would usually  be things that were fun to do, too. But it just helped you. I can hardly  15  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  remember a lot of those, because they   ve been gone for so long. You just  did not get the attendance, at least out here where it   s less populated. I  think I mentioned to you, though, when I started with Extension if you  had half of a section of land that you were working, families were living  on it, but you can   t do that anymore. It   s just a different world,  particularly in a county that agriculture is its major vocation. Why, you  just can   t do like you used to. It takes so much more land.  One of the things in Harmon County that   s really super, though, and  they   ve always had it, is the livestock sale barn every Saturday. Unless  it   s a holiday, they have a livestock sale. I think even Jackson County  doesn   t have one anymore and for several counties around, and we   re  bordered on the south and the west by Texas. If you start over that way  and it   s a day or two before Saturday, you will meet trailer-loads of  cattle coming into Harmon County to that sale barn. It is well known and  a very good sale barn, I must say.  Can you recall some of the names of the homemaker clubs?  Yes, I can, and I probably could look, but let   s see. We had Arnett once,  which was in the Arnett school district. We had Tea Cross, and I think it  was the first one to disband when I was over there, but this was an old  community. There used to be a school there, but it was out in the Ron  school district. We had Lahoma. This was another school district. We   ve  had Gould. We   ve had Shrewder, which was another neighborhood  district. Also Halsmith, another neighborhood. Let me think, because  there have been slightly more than that. I should   ve written some of  those down and brought that, but I don   t know what I   ve done with some  of the yearbooks that I saved.  Did you do cookbooks?  Yes, we did, and I wish I   d brought that, because while I was there we  did at least three. I   m trying to think if it was four, and I still use some of  mine. Like, the first one has a big envelope to keep it in because it   s  falling apart, and the second one is nearly as bad.  Was the name of the cookbook Harmon County Cookbook or Harmon  County Homemakers, or     Usually. I wish I had thought and brought some of the things like that. I  thought of these things that were away, but those recipe books are up on  my recipe shelf, which I   ll never use all the recipes I have because it   s a  whole shelf as long as one of these tables, plus some more. I took two or  three sacks up to the Salvation Army. Well, you get started on things  like that, and other groups besides Extension homemakers made  16  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Finchum  cookbooks, too, and then you just naturally would buy it. I used to cook  more. I   m not much of a cook anymore. We had some really excellent  cookbooks, and they still like them because they   ve published one since  I didn   t work anymore. It   s a very good one, too. That   s a county that  has lots of good cooks in it, I must say. (Laughter)  You just about have to be, because there are not too many fast food  places out in that direction.  No, there are not.  You mentioned earlier about Weigh-Off?  Weigh-Off. This was a weight-reduction program that anybody in the  state could do, and they trained the home economists on what to teach. I  believe that you met like twelve times with your group, and it really  drew a lot of audience that was not like an organized group, because it  came out right out after   let   s see. What is probably the most popular  weight-reduction program?  Weight Watchers or Jenny Craig?  Weight Watchers. I believe it came out right after that, or not too long,  and we really drew a lot of audience for that.  It was probably less expensive than Weight Watchers.  Yes. They did pay a fee, but see, there were quite a few publications that  went with it. In our county, probably when it came out, we were down  maybe to 5,000 people, but I had literally no trouble having a group at  Gould, one town, and they still had a school, and Vinson was one. Then,  Arnett is not a town, but it was a consolidated school, and then Hollis.  And we had groups going in all of those, because people were interested  in it, and some were going all at once, but others were staggered. Some  of them would go ahead and keep coming back, because weighing in  front of all the other participants every time and everyone reported if  they   d lost or gained or whatever. It really helped a lot of people, but the  dieticians at OSU are the ones who wrote the program and prepared the  materials for handouts and taching. I can   t even think what the fee was,  but I know we charged one, because it was not just the basic book. We   d  have things along, and it was a day when sometimes we were having  difficulty getting the Extension funding that we needed. But it was a  really good program.  Sounds like it.  17  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  One of the things I might mention is how well all the Extension agents  that we   ve had out in our area  have been , and I imagine they do in the  others too, but how we could get along and have all these multi-county  programs going, because each one had their specialty and we really  enjoyed that. Every year each of us would have a special program for  that year that we went to the other four counties in our area. It really was  a joy and I mean, the people that participate or that attend the programs  in your county, they like things like this, too.  A different face?  Yes, and you know the information that comes up and I thought we  always had such good friendship among the ones who worked out here.  You   d have to travel quite a ways from your place to their place.  Well, but if you just do this say once a year     That   s not too bad.  Like, to go give their leader   s lesson. Sometimes we   d have meetings,  but a lot of times, too, say like Jackson County was sort of in the center  of that, and maybe if we had a meeting among these to plan what we  were doing that year, the others of us would come here. About thirty-five  miles to forty or less was good for each one, and so it didn   t add up  that much. Then we   d get the lessons prepared, and sometimes we   d  have two counties in one day where we presented the leader   s lesson.  We didn   t go and present it to each of their organized groups. We  presented it to the leaders from each group, and then they took the  materials back and presented it to their own group.  It just spreads out.  Yes. A lot of things worked like that. Even for 4-H leaders and all that.  So, you   d build up quite a network.  And you know you start thinking about that because, talking about  budget, one year I worked   well, it was eleven months really. I worked  half-time in Greer County and half-time in Harmon because of budget  problems. Then they got that straightened out, but a sad thing about it  one of our oldest homemaker groups, because I couldn   t go to their  meeting, they disbanded. And about ten years later they were  recognizing twenty-five and, I think, forty- and fifty-year members of  the homemaker groups, which was home demonstration when they were  in it. We put it in the newspaper what was going on.  A Harmon County   18  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  lady, who of course is now deceased, wanted to get in on this and have  her name sent in for it because you sent it to the state Extension office,  and of course they had a list, and I said,    Well, I   m sorry, Mrs.   , but  we can   t do that because we don   t have you on our roll lately.    See, in  her mind, because she belonged for forty years before that, it was sad. I  tried to talk with them and tell them, but that eleven months just  wrecked several things, you know, because I know people should stand  on their own feet more, which is what they were trying to get us to do,  but they get accustomed to something and people like that lady  remembered all the home demonstration agents that came before I  arrived, I   ll guarantee you that. (Laughs) I would guarantee it.  Let   s talk about a typical day. About how early would you get started in  the morning and then what were some of the things you would do during  the day?  Okay. Well, it sort of depended. Our office opened at eight and closed at  four-thirty, so I was usually there by then. But then some days if you had  to go somewhere else, you might leave well before that. We always kept  a calendar and wrote down some things as much as nearly a year ahead  of it so you could organize around that. I know in a small county like  that, I didn   t have the problem that some in larger counties had. I mean,  because you just can   t do everything always requested. You would go to  the office. I would work on a program that was coming up if I didn   t  have a meeting of some kind. But in a county like that, and I think like  this too, we used to have   they are no more. There are no more  federated study clubs in Harmon County, but there used to be a lot. And  then there were other types of groups, too, and they would ask the  Extension office to come and give them programs, maybe like once a  year. So, you would work on that. And then, info for our 4-Hers, we  might have a record book school when it was nearing time to turn 4-H  record books in. And, of course, if you were going to present a leader   s  lesson, you had to spend time researching your topic and think what type  of handouts you would have and all this type of thing. There was just  always something to do in there, and people would pop in or just come  in. They would have questions, and they   ll come in and ask that, or they  may want a bulletin or to find out when some event is going to happen.  Or they   ll phone you,    How do you sew this thing?    like put this tape on  or something, or they may come in and see about it. There was just  always something to do, even in a small county. But, as I said, having  two program things like 4-H and youth and then the adult programs to  prepare for, and then go to meetings and all, you were busy all the time.  Did you have to do much at home to prepare for some of these?  Sometimes I really did. I spent quite a bit of time at home. But, it just  19  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Finchum  seemed like that was part of the job that you were doing. You know, you  try to do as much as you can there, but you do need to. And see,  whenever I retired, I mentioned to you the copier that we had, and I  don   t know if I even have a piece of paper. It just disintegrated after a  year or so, and it would fade out. So still, as far as a poster or anything,  you were doing it still like this, on like a mimeograph or whatever.  And your research was before computers, so you had to     Yes, that   s true. Books, books, and in our county (this lady lives in  Stillwater now) but she was an excellent Extension homemaker, and,  see, as an Extension agent you weren   t supposed to get out and  campaign for a particular thing. We did not have a library in our county,  but to get one you had to pass extra on, I believe, the ad valorem tax.  You could not get out and campaign for anything like that yourself, but  we had this lady, and she thought we needed one. She was there because  her husband worked for another government agency there, but see, the  Extension homemakers could do it if they did it themselves, but you  could not get out there with them and do anything like this, and they got  the library started there. But that was back in    74 or    75, because then   Harmon County  didn   t have a library. But even today that is so busy  and all. If you go in there, for a little county like Harmon, it   s a branch  of the one  at Altus which is  like a central library  for Southern Prairie  Library System .  A system?  Yes, so it   s still there. That   s a thing that our Extension homemakers did.  Most people were really happy with it, but there is one man who has  acres and acres and acres of land, and his family did, even when they  started this, but all the time, he   s added more. I don   t think he was too  happy with it because naturally he had to pay taxes on all  this land . He  survived it. He   s now a macular degeneration victim. It is sad, really.  But that   s one thing our Extension homemakers did.  That   s good.  Yes.  When you retired, did you get a quilt, too?  No. When I retired, I received a serger because I didn   t have one.  Some have said that their homemaker women got together and made a  quilt for them when they retired.  20  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Winters  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  I have two quilts that two different Extension homemaker groups made  for me, but I took them to our museum, because I asked my two sons  and one   s wife. (Just one is married.) They said they didn   t know those  people that much, they didn   t think. Because, see, they   re like forty-four  and fifty now and they   ve been gone because one works for conservation  of natural resources. He is the district director up in Lincoln County, and  the other son is an engineer on missile programs and things for  Lockheed Martin. And I did not find out until about three or four years  ago that when this younger son was about a junior in high school, he told  his dad he just wanted to stay there and farm, and because farming had  changed so much, his father said,    No, you   re not. You   re going to  school and going to get a job.    (Laughter) So, anyway, he   s a design  engineer and they cooperate, but they have patents on several things,  because they do all these military things at the one where he works.  Well, and the one stayed into farming in a little different capacity.  Yes, he did. Oh, and he can hardly wait for the next two years, because  he   s coming back. (Laughs) But I think he doesn   t know how some of it  is, really. And I   m smiling about it, but it truly is sad. Like I told you,  fifty-five years ago, you could feed a family for a year off of a quarter  section of land up there, and there wasn   t that much irrigation or  anything. It has just totally changed, and you can   t do it anymore. So,  that   s that.  Still have to have farmers.  Oh, I know it, I know it.  To Ida Fay Winters, also a retired Extension  educator:  Ida Fay, I have about talked myself out.  Never, never, never     If you want to come around the two of you can banter back and forth for  about thirty minutes, and then we   ll call it quits.  That would be great. I brought this so she could see it.  There is so much work, volunteer hours. That   s what they always  recorded: the amount of hours. That reminded children about taking care  of their teeth. And there was a house fire once, and out of the whole  possessions, that   s what the family said their child wanted was another   tooth  pillow.  Oh, my goodness.  Yes. How did you get information on us?  21  Finchum  Winters  Finchum  Winters  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Research.  Research? (Laughter)  Actually, we have a Daily Oklahoman archives online, so we can go  back and find a little bit.  Oh, really?  Not a great deal, but some.  That is a job, isn   t it? Because the Daily Oklahoman will not deliver in  Harmon County anymore.  Yes, all rural sites. Here, too.  I know it, and even Altus wouldn   t have gotten it if they hadn   t put up  such a howl about it. We take it online, but it takes forever to get around  to those things like that. I don   t know if the things back then   I think  that we can get it for as long as we   ve been taking it, which has been  about a year.  Online?  Online. I thought Ida Fay was in one of them but then I couldn   t find  her.  Points  Because these were our needlecraft; for several years, we  had these and used local leaders. This lady, she was just good at it. She  did not belong to a group. I never recall her coming to any other  Extension program, but she did tatting and here   s   you know who that  is? Roz Eckman.  Oh, yes.  I knew you   d know her. And then Betty Motley, a home economics  teacher. She taught at Arnett school. Then, for quite a few years she was  at Hollis. But she did the t-shirts, and she is really a clever person about  so many things.  Remember, that was when people had so many skills, and it was in the  eighties that it was like trying to push people into entrepreneurship. The  governor   s wife then, Mrs. Bellmon, was very supportive of Extension,  getting in that line of work. What year did you retire?  At the end of    89, I think.  22  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  I think it was in the eighties that Mrs. Bellmon met with several of us  and Dr. Burns,  State Clothing Specialist . She had a meeting with us at  the Governor   s Mansion, and we went up there, and Mrs. Bellmon  forgot  our meeting as  she had a hair appointment. And they called her  and said,    Your folks from OSU Cooperative Extension are here.    And  she said,    You just tell them to come on down here to the beauty shop.     And we went there while her hair was being blow dried and fixed and  everything, (laughter) and she talked the whole time, telling us what she  wanted, because...  She was quite a person.     she could sew and do all this. She was saying they needed the  management skills and how to promote their products. There was a lot of  research that was given out to business people, men and women.  Now, how long have you lived in this state?  Since    96.  Okay, but what you don   t know, because her husband was governor two  different times, and like in the county I live in, when I moved there, you  better not express a Republican thought (laughter) whether you worked  for Extension, and I wasn   t working for them when I moved there. But  you better not. I mean   and still, for the local offices, if you   re not a  registered Democrat, you are not going to get to vote for the local ones.  That   s right. You are not allowed to vote unless you registered in that  county.  Yes, and some of them, they think Republican things but they are still a  registered Democrat. But it   s changed a lot. I still remember, and this is  when I was working up at Rural Electric, before I started to work for  Extension over there. We   d gone to this restaurant one day to eat lunch,  a couple of us that, we staggered lunch hours when we were there. And  here came Henry Bellmon with people that were campaigning for him,  and he was so nice. I know we were in a booth and there were tables in  the middle. He went to every booth and every table, and I recall saying  after he walked out of there with those people that were helping him,     Isn   t he a nice man, but you know he will never get that in Oklahoma.     And he won it  (Laughter)  Yes. As a Republican.  Yes. He was the first Republican governor, and then he came back later  and was governor again.  23  Finchum  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  And his wife had some input in Extension?  Through the years, different governors have been very supportive.  Yes.  Governor  Frank  Keating supported marriage enrichment and training,  so that if people came to these counseling-type lessons that they would  be able to get a discount on their marriage license. Then, Mrs. Bellmon  was so supportive of entrepreneurship and helping people use skills to  market across our state and across the United States. OSU just stepped in  and you know, people that were able to market a product and, again,  Extension was at the forefront of that experience.  And look at our safety project, you just forget some things after a while,  remember that?  Yes, buckling up. Seatbelt safety. And, of course, being neighboring  counties, we borrowed things back and forth. Our homemakers made a  bear costume that would   ve cost about  700. We priced it. And they  made a papier-m  ch   head, thanks to Zen. You helped with the head.  I forgot all about that.  And Maureen Ballard of Duke did the lined costume that zipped up the  front with a real seat belt that had been taken off of a car, and this bear  with a happy face went to children   s events. We showed little films  about buckling up. Make It Click. And then we had the seatbelt safety  clinics where people would drive into a car dealership and check to see  if that car seat for that child properly fit the right size, even installed  correctly. Things to help people have a safer and healthier life. Those of  us who were older who never grew up with that habit, it was harder  to  buckle up , and I think that   s part of the difficulty of our job, was out  preaching the good things that we had to practice.  I   ll tell you, I can still remember Jon Stinchcomb,  my younger son,   when the railroads still ran. He could always see everything, and he was  about, I don   t know, two years, maybe not quite that old. We were going  to Altus, and he was standing up in the middle of the front seat. See, no  restraints, no anything, and the railroad tracks still ran up to Wellington,  Texas. Choo-choo, choo-choo, choo-choo. Here we let him stand up.  When I started, it was more general. Everybody had to know everything,  whether it was how to roast a pig or how to make soap. It was just such a  wide thing, and then through the years it was becoming more  24  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Finchum  Winters  Stinchcomb  specialized, and I thought that was the hard thing.  That   s the idea, like I was mentioning to her how each of us had our area  of expertise and     We shared across the lines. But it was hard to have time to develop those  skills when you had the public wanting everything. Yes, the seatbelt  safety was probably influential in getting that state law passed about  buckling up, because we did  surveys  where people drove by and  our  volunteers  counted how many had seatbelts on. There was a lot of work  done by volunteers, 4-H, Extension Homemakers. No matter what it  was, we were successful with good volunteers, whether it was young or  older people. That   s what we relied on people spreading the word or  getting the need out.  Well, and I had been mentioning to her how some people would come to  these special-interest things that never would   ve thought of joining a  group.  Because many of them had other jobs, too, and could not take off     Well, that   s true, too. That   s true, too.     or had other family obligations and maybe couldn   t come to a club.  Sounds like if you had to do it over again, you   d do it the same.  Oh, I would.  I would. Listen, it was great, and I brought this, because mentioning our  current small population, in 1909 there were about 14,000 people in  Harmon County. But see, a lot of it isn   t around Hollis anymore or in  that part. It   s really good irrigated land and all, but once, really the sand  hills were the place before there was irrigation, because there was more  moisture there. There were big orchards that people came up to buy  fruits from, and they picked their  fruit  and would take it to town and  south because down in that tight land they couldn   t grow that much. And  now, because, with irrigation around Hollis and not just there but that  strip through the county, there you could make really good crops. One of  our neighbors up on the hill has put in this underground system making  five bales of cotton off of an acre, but somebody in Texas is farming  this. This irrigation system is all underground and comes out, and I think  they   ve made a contract where he gets his percent off the first three bales  and then anything after that they get the whole income. Well, but Ida  Fay, I bet it   s going to take five years to pay for the underground system  they put in that   s making this be so good now. And, as I said, it   s just  25  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Finchum  Winters  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  times changing, and did I mention that we didn   t know what we were  going to do with  400 a month when I doubled my salary by moving  from  a coop business  to Extension? (Laughs)  Really?  Really. (Laughs)  Wow. I was the same way. I thought  8,100 a year was a lot of money.  (Laughter) And plus, there was travel allotment on it, but I never  realized that it took gas and your tires to get there.  Yes, I know.  I was such a beginner. I didn   t even know all these things about benefits.  Now, I   m so thankful for  the benefits .  But I was telling her it wasn   t this way when you started. First there was  no health insurance and then when they got it, the men could insure their  families but then women couldn   t. They could insure only themselves.  I missed that time,  so I   m glad I started later .  I know it.  I came in at the close when maternity leave had just been granted.  She said she was the second.  Yes. It had already been accepted by the time I got there.  And let me think. There were going to be three, and one had twins and  she didn   t think she could manage. But Virginia Cole was the first one.  Not only was she the first one, but none of us knew that she was  pregnant. She was wearing a tight girdle over her tummy for ages. I  mean, she was about seven months before she told anybody. But they  never came back after that, then.  Would they have made her quit if she had told earlier?  I   m not sure. I   m not certain. But it was just that sort of a situation.  It was just not allowed or  you changed jobs .  I know it. But see, before us, you couldn   t even be married.  26  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Working, out with the people,  has changed our careers .  So, times change. Bit by bit by bit.  But Zen probably didn   t tell you, she designed Pat Coffey   s house that I  live in, based on Zen   s house.  Pat was Extension Home Economist in  Jackson County prior to me.   That   s when I was getting this housing     See, she has housing experience. You have a lot.  I was about to get a master   s degree, remember, when I had the surgery.  She knew how to make the efficiency of the pipes and electric and hot  water. And so, when the house was built over here, it was just kind of     I learned this up at OSU.  Yes, I think that   s what   s neat. Things we learned     All your plumbing. In our house, I   m trying to think. It   s in less than a  twenty-foot square in the house that I   m in, and I guess yours is, too.  Yes, same thing.  I mean, and it   ll run out. Like, a pipe goes out to an outside pipe. But,  it   s just all there.  To all the sources needing hot water, they   re all confined in a small area,  whether it   s the dishwasher, the washing machine     I   ll get a pencil and show her, because it   s not that long.  But I   m thankful again for Zen   s influence on that, because that helped  with our house, which is total electricity, and our electric bill in the  wintertime is like  100. We have a fireplace with an insert. Energy  conservation was a big project in the eighties, I think, and we had some  federal grant money and hired paraprofessionals to go out that would  teach lessons in homes. The first thing they did was talk about the west  windows, putting foil over the windows so that the summer heat, and  even on the east if it was coming in real direct. And they taught people  how to sew I guess you call it a log, and it was filled with sand or maybe  stuffing, and it would be put down at a door frame where the underflow  of hot air would come in in the summer and how that was done. Things  that were just economical but very effective.  27  Finchum  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Finchum  Winters  So can you remember when you first met Zen?  (Laughter) Let   s see.  I don   t know if I remember when I first met her but she   s always been a  joy.  Probably at the county fair, because it seems like you came over to judge  that first fair.  I may have.  But everybody was new to me. I mean, I had her phone number very  close at hand. We shared judges. If she was having a dress revue or  speech contest, I would take volunteers or leaders to go over and judge,  and she, likewise, would have volunteers to come over. All of us in this  cluster here in the southwest really relied upon each other.  And we really got along well, was one thing.  I guess we didn   t have any other choice, because we were so far from  the campus or even far from the district office. Our 4-H camps, when I  first started, we did our own Jackson County  4-H Camp at Quartz  Mountain State Park , and that was hard, doing everything. Getting the  food, getting the programs, watching the kids     But you had so many kids, you needed to.  I know. We finally decided it would be better to go together, and we  have the best memories of 4-H camp and kids from other towns being in  the same cabins with kids from other towns that normally they may be in  competition against each other. You must play balloon volleyball. Have  you ever done that?  No.  We   d take balloons and fill them with water. And a lot of sports, it   s  based on athletics, the tallest, the strongest, the fastest. Well, volleyball  done with a water balloon relies on teamwork. Each team on each side  has a sheet, and they hold the sheet among the team, and they put the  water balloon in the middle. Remember all this, Zen? And we would flip  that sheet up to get the balloon ball to go over, and the other team would  have to go run together as a team and catch it. And, of course, if it  landed in the sand, it would bust, and the other team would get the point.  That was a highlight of camp.  Looking at Zen   s drawing  My house is  28  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Finchum  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  this plan turned over. She   s getting the idea.  It   s all out of proportion. I think it will give her the idea. That   s linen,  and this is a hot water heater. Well, and see, because there   s a stool. I  have it out of proportion, because this is the bathtub over here, and  there   s a stool here, and then there   s a cabinet here, and this is the hot  water heater, and then this is the linen storage, and there are a couple of  lavatories there. And here   s the bathtub in here, and it has a shower, but  then in this other bathroom, well, and of course, there   s not a big wide  door like that, either. Then there   s a bedroom right here, and these are  just cabinets, but there   s a shower here, just a shower in that, and a stool  and one lavatory in that one. And the kitchen is right here.  It   s behind it, so your dishwasher, your laundry room is right next to  that. So, all of it is where she   s     All the plumbing     What is it? Twenty feet?  I think so, but I can   t remember now.  Twenty feet of actual line of water to every room in the whole house,  whereas sometimes you might have a kitchen down at one end and a  laundry room in another end. So, she planned it to where the north, there  were walls that were solid. Mine is on the north, and the north wind  would come     And the builder listened?  Yes, the builder did, because she had built it at her own house, and it  worked.  Well, but I tell you, we had that house plan drawn up     You did it as part of your class, didn   t you?  Well, I added all that, but then we took it to a professional architect and  he drew it, made the blueprints. So, we had it, and the first builder we  took it to didn   t even like that, because he wanted to build the house that  had the front door in the middle, and if it had two windows over here, he  wanted two over here, and it   s just not like that. Anyway, that   s the  shower. Then, this is all storage here in the utility closet.  Her storage goes from the floor to the ceiling. That   s what people  commented about in her design.  29  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Of course there   s a cabinet. But this is the dishwasher, and here   s the  sink right here. Everything that takes water is right like this, and I can   t  remember the feet now, but it   s not very big. About a twenty-foot  square, probably, close to it, and your water just gets warm, like, if  you   re going to do the dishes and all, or run the dishwasher it   s just  warm like this.  You don   t have to wait. Yes. She put the kitchen in the middle of the  house. Does that tell you anything about it? The maverick way, because  you know, that   s not a traditional way of doing that, but the way she   s  arranged it makes sense.  But I could tell you some things that happened in spite of all the  measurements. When we built that house, you couldn   t get anyone into  that kitchen, except     Because it was small?  No, because they wanted their food fixed and out. And now Joe goes in  there, and well, here this is but you know how this counter bar is from  the den, this table runs out. Now we meet each other going and coming  in there, and Ed really gets with it anymore. (Laughter)  Well, I don   t care. I still brag about Zen   s floor plan, thanks to  Extension.  Chris Salmon was a teacher at OSU in Housing.  See, I didn   t go to college there. In    74 they were desperate, and I got  hired even though I didn   t have a degree from OSU.  I didn   t have a degree from OSU, either.  See, I was thankful they hired me.  What about OU?  Did you have your degree     From OU.  Oh, wow.  That   s worse than yours  (Laughter)  That would make a difference.  30  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  The competition is never ending. (Laughs) See, I had lived in a small  town and all.  But she also lived in a big city. Oklahoma City is where you grew up.  Well, yes, but Ida Fay, I was telling her  my childhood friend  is still up  in Roger Mills County. She has been my lifelong friend. I say     lifelong        She remembers you from     Oh, we visit each other. She remembers me since the third grade is when  I first knew her.  Wow. We   re members of FEW, Faithful Extension Workers. And that   s  what   s neat is we did finish our jobs where we were paid, but still, we  have ties yet, these bonds of friendship with people who have remained  here in Oklahoma or have moved elsewhere. The FEW group meets  about twice a year, goes to the state Family and Consumer Science  meeting, and so they even have a fall retreat, and our district also has a  retreat for all Extension workers. Did you get that letter yesterday?  Yes.  In October, we   ll all meet together. It   s really fun seeing people that in a  different time period were doing different things.  Have I ever told you that just about three years ago I learned about Jon.  When he was about a junior in high school, he told Joe how he was  going to stay there and farm and Joe said,    No, you   re not, either.  You   re going to school where you can get a job.    And it   s a good thing  he did, because all the sand hills, even though you have several farms,  aren   t producing like that.  But the oil is coming. Get ready. (Laughter) In our county right now is a  lot of excitement about oil drilling in the south part.  I know it, and they may lease up where ours is, and one place, they   ve  leased right across the fence, but the reason they did is because that guy  had some more land that was down south of that, and that   s the farthest  north that they have come or that they have gone.  I think because we worked for Extension we had to know what was  going on in our immediate neighborhoods, but county wide, in the area,  you had to know whether it was politics, kind of what was happening,  31  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Finchum  Winters  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  but not real vocal. You could be an advocate but you couldn   t be a  lobbyist.  Yes, like I was telling her about the library.  It was good to know what was happening, because they could help you,  you could help them, for different causes. I mean, I think it   s such a joy  to be able to have had that teaching experience, that education.  Well, and I   ll tell you one of the very greatest parts. It is great, the  people that you   ve helped by having these programs and things, but it   s  the people  with whom you become acquainted .  This kind of has triggered my thinking about even for family reunions.  That was one of our homemaker lessons years ago about family  reunions, making them more enjoyable and lasting memories, and I was  thinking I should do something like this at some of our reunions  because, like Zen says, we are now getting to be the older families and  the older people in the Extension work. So, we should be doing some  more of this kind of taping and hearing some things.  At your FEW meetings, too, would be good.  Yes, we should. At our meetings we   ve talked about this, but I always  thought you were going to get the old, old people.  Ida Fay, you   re not old yet. (Laughter)  No, she   s not. And you   re not either.  How old are you now?  Next week I   m going to be seventy-nine years old.  Really?  Yes.  Can you believe that?  No, I can   t.  Seventy-nine. You sure? (Laughter)  I am certain, Ida Fay. (Laughter) You   re not near there yet. I already  know that.  32  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Winters  Finchum  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  I was kind of mean to her the first time we went to 4-H Roundup. In    75,  we were in those dormitories, and I said,    Oh, we   ve got to be in shape,     and I was going up and down these steps. And you did it. She got a little  bit sick at her stomach, and she blamed it on me for making her  go up  the stairs . (Laughs) I made her go and do those steps and I didn   t realize  the campus was   it just seems like it grows every year. And that   s why  we always like to come back to OSU from time to time.  I tell you, I found out in those new dorms up there at the north that are  nearly a mile away, they   re walking down there on wintery days.  Unreal.  I mean, I   m certain they must have good wraps and coats, but still. That  is cold.  Well, they must get there fast.  I guess they do. Anyway, I want to tell you this has been an enjoyable  time. I am sorry I did not prepare enough. I was not paying enough  attention.  You were great.  I always just loved Extension work.  Yes, we did.  You have to be people   s people, I think, to do the job, especially to do it  thirty years.  Yes.  How many years did you work?  Well, I lacked a month and a half working thirty-two years all together,  because I lacked a month and a half working thirty years in Harmon  County, and I worked exactly two years over here.  Yes, she was an assistant.  Yes. Anyway, they gave a buy-out thing, because they were trying to get  some of those that had worked a while off of their pay list is what it was.     Give us a rest.    That   s what they call it. (Laughter) Give us a rest.  33  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  But it   s worked out, and I   ve always been thankful, because farming  doesn   t always bring in the same income every year     It   s inconsistent.     because you cannot control the weather and things like that. And I can  still remember, though, when Ed was born, that little house that   were  you ever in that, that we lived in on Eula Street down there?  No.  It was about 800 square feet or something. Our eating place was a  breakfast nook, and sitting there and telling Joe I didn   t want to go back  to work, he said,    Just go up there and try it and see if you can.     (Laughter)  With a little one?  Yes, when I had Ed.  You have to have a support system if you worked Extension, especially  for childcare, because you may get up at four o   clock.  But I will say I always did have a mother-in-law who was eager to keep  my kids.  Oh, that   s nice.  She did. And you never found out anything that they did that was     Go ahead. Tell us. Is it something that they did, bad, that she wouldn   t  tell you?  Well, Ed, when he was small, when we were at my sister   s in Houston,  when he was, let   s see, I guess it was right before he was seven. My  sister   s washer wouldn   t work and we went to the help-yourself because  there weren   t disposable diapers, and Jon was a year old. My brother-in-law  went to work, and Joe stayed there with her four children and Ed,  and they didn   t know where we   d gone to the laundry. When we got  home, there was a neighbor lady there with her four children, and we   d  taken Jon with us. And another neighbor person had taken Joe with Ed  because that BB had glazed across his eye when that kid picked the gun  up and shot it on the cement sidewalk.  It ricocheted back.  34  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Finchum  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  It didn   t totally blind him, but he couldn   t manage with that eye alone,  even today. And the many wonderful things that have come up, because  see they didn   t have lens implants, and we bought insurance on it but no  telling how much we spent on lens replacements. They were always lost  or scratched. We can laugh now.  Yes. Some of the traumas you   ve had to go through     But everybody   s had some kind of a thing in their life.  Probably so.  They have. I mean, it wouldn   t be human if everything was perfect.  Yes. You have to be understanding, like when somebody doesn   t do  something that you thought should   ve been done because they had  situations. You did have to be flexible and move things around, change.  Now, don   t you wish you could go to work right now?  No, but really, and I have to be really so thankful that I got into  Extension. You can see I can   t even remember all the things I   ve  learned, and it has helped my family.  Right. Personally and for our careers.  Touched a lot of lives.  I   ve never counted.  Well, it is impossible to count. Just impossible. And, particularly since  it   s been so long since I started, people   you mentioned Vivian  Cochran,  a 4-H leader in Jackson County who lived in Harmon  County . That is one person that meant so much everywhere she went,  and I was trying to think what it was that some of her kids made a place  on. The other winners were all from huge schools somewhere, but I  cannot think what it was now.  Her little rural school, Duke, had kids that performed so well.  And I want to ask you, were you working when Robetha Masters Darby  made that plaid coat?  No. I   ve seen the picture of that plaid coat. Did she make it with wool?  Yes, she was in that, and anyway, I   ve been going to go up to the  35  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Stinchcomb  Winters  Finchum  Winters  Stinchcomb  pharmacy and see her, because what it was, she was a really good  seamstress and her mother was also one.  Oh, yes, the best.  And there was this plaid about this wide, and they didn   t buy enough  fabric. And so where the plaid went across her here, well, then it was  down here, because there wasn   t enough to cut the sleeves like that.  Just being creative, yes. I   ll have to pay attention next time I see that.  Well, it was in the Altus Times lately. It was  a reprint from  back in the  seventies.  Like    Do you remember when,    and it was showing her outfit.  Yes, and she had made   it was a perfect job, making it, and I know she  did it because they didn   t put up with Mama doing it. Anyway, as soon  as I saw that, I knew that coat, and I can   t even remember who else was  a judge.  Did you tell her about the dental health program? Did you talk about it?  A little.  Okay, good, because that was such a neat program.  Yes, we covered it. Well, thank you both for coming. It   s been great.  You   ve got the best one to visit with here.  I   ve enjoyed it.  -------  -------  
