 Myers, and I   m with Oklahoma State University Library.  Today is April 4, 2012. I   m in Tulsa, Oklahoma meeting at Oklahoma  State University-Tulsa with Bill Gotcher. I   ll be interviewing Bill today  as part of the Spotlighting Oklahoma oral history series of the  Oklahoma Oral History Research Program. Thank you for meeting with  me here today.  Glad to be here.  Let   s start off, Bill, would you tell me a little bit about your family and  what your childhood was like?  Well, I grew up in Oklahoma City. I was born in St. Louis. My mother  got a divorce when I was young, about three. Of course, they were trying  to live through the Depression, and that was kind of hard on a marriage,  I guess. So, she remarried and I moved with my father, Wilbur Landis,  to Oklahoma City. I grew up there. I went to public school in Oklahoma  City. I finished at Northeast High School. When I finished high school  in Oklahoma City, I went to college at Central State College in Edmond.  On July 27, 1950, I got married, and a week later they came to the  campus and told me to drop my classes, I was going to Korea.  My goodness.  So, I was in the Marine Corps Reserve, planning to be in the States a  good long while    (Laughter)  Did you have any brothers or sisters?  No, I   m an only child.  Going back just a bit, what was school like for you back in those days?  5  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Oh, I really enjoyed school. I was the typical kid, I guess. I went to  school to play sports. (Laughter) I played football and tennis and golf.  Wasn   t much good at football, I was too little. I did pretty well with golf  and tennis so I enjoyed that very much.  So you say you were in school, is that right?  Yes. I enrolled as a pre-med student at Central State, and my trip to  Korea changed that. (Laughs)  Pre-med, were you hoping to be a doctor?  Yes.  Was there a specialty that you were going to go into?  No, just a general doctor.  Okay. And you had just gotten married. What was your wife   s name?  Claretha.  Where did you meet her?  Actually, we went to the same high school. She was three years behind  me, and I never knew her there. Actually, I tried to pick her up one day  after school. (Laughter) My friend and I were coming back from  Edmond and she was getting on the bus. He had met her someplace and  wanted to introduce me to her. So, we tried to charm her off the bus and  take her home and she said,    No, way. I   m riding the bus home.    So,  when she got home, we were there. (Laughter)  Oh, waiting for her. (Laughs)  So that   s how we met. We had a date the following night and we   ve  been together every night, since.  My goodness. Do you have children?  Three children.  What are their names?  My oldest boy is Gregory. My middle daughter is Gina. She   s a student  out here, actually, for the third time, I guess.  6  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Here at OSU Tulsa?  Yes. And my youngest daughter is a nurse and her name is Suzanne.  She   s at St. Francis Hospital.  Grandchildren?  Yes, I have four grandchildren. I have three grandchildren   Suzie has  three children. Ooh, I   m on the spot now. (Laughter) Brian, Blake and  Snicklefritz is what I call her. And Gregory has one daughter. Her name  is    That   s terrible. Sorry.  It   s okay. So, kind of talk about, I guess, the social climate in the lead-up  to the Korean War. What was that like? Because it was just past World  War II, in that era     Well, we were all trying to recover from the recession, growing up in  poor conditions that we had lived through. It was a pretty good time,  pretty happy time. The farthest thing from my mind was a war. I kind of  joined the Reserve to have a little extra money. I was going to get  married and I thought,    Well, I   m still going to school,    and that   d be  sort of a little extra income. But as far as thinking about going to war, I  joined the Marine Corps because it was glamorous. (Laughter) I didn   t  think about getting shot at and shooting at other people.  So, the marines were glamorous. Was that just from films and movies  and things like that?  Yes, yes. John Wayne and that kind of stuff, those Marine Corps films  that they had.  What was that one that they had back then?  Sands of Iwo Jima?  Sands of Iwo Jima, right.  Several of them. Guadalcanal.  Yes, Retreat Hell.  Yes, that came later.  So, you were in Korea. You were eighteen years old, is that right?  7  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Well, I was twenty. I had just turned twenty when they called me to  active duty. That was quite a quick trip. They came to the campus, told  me to drop my classes and report the next day for issue of uniforms and  armament. We were there about three days, and we trained for Camp  Pendleton on the West Coast.  So, you had to report to the Reserve Center in Oklahoma City. Is that  correct?  That   s correct.  And you drew weapons at that point. Did you transport by train?  That   s correct. Boarded the train and went directly to Camp Pendleton.  We were there two weeks, had combat training. (Laughs) Ha  Boarded  the ship and left for Japan within two weeks.  Had you been to basic training before?  No, I   d never been to boot camp, but I had been to two summer camps.  If you   d been to two or more, that qualified you not go to boot camp.  How long were those summer camps?  Two weeks.  Two week summer camps. Where did they     At Camp Pendleton.  Okay. So, everyone would transport out to Camp Pendleton for those  two weeks for summer camp.  Everyone west of the Mississippi and everyone on the other side goes to  Lejeune on the other coast.  I   m interested in those summer camp experiences because I haven   t  heard a whole lot about those. What exactly would you do during those  summer camps?  I think they tried to give us a smattering of what it   s like to be in the  service. We did field trips and, of course, long marches and bivouacking  and went to the rifle range and heard a little bit about combat training.  Personal defense and that kind of thing. And a lot about armament. Took  apart machine guns and rifles and put them back together and that kind  of thing.  8  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Nowadays, it   s called an MOS, Military Occupational Specialty. What  was your   ?  Mortarman.  Mortarman, okay.  Yes, 311. 0-311.  Was that on an eighty-one millimeter?  No, this was a sixty. That   s a private company mortar for the company. I  think they   re used a little differently in the army, but with the Marine  Corps, each company has a mortar company.  You mean a mortar platoon?  Mortar platoon, yes.  So, for those folks who don   t know, how many individuals make up a  mortar platoon?  Eighteen, plus a staff sergeant and a lieutenant.  And those are all divided into     Six-man crews. A gunner, the assistant gunner, and then three ammo  carriers.  You said it was the sixty. Now, as far as a mortar, does that denote the  size of the barrel?  Yes, sixty millimeter. It   s about a little bigger than this bottle. (Gesture)  Okay.  And has fins on it and increments. It   s a little bomb. That   s what it is.  They come in a lot of forms, white phosphorous, shrapnel, percussion  and concussion.  Could you fire illumination rounds with those?  Illumination rounds. The idea, at least with the Marine Corps, each  platoon has a section of mortars that goes out on patrol with them so that  they have a convenient artillery piece with them.  9  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  So, it was a six-man mortar team.  Yes.  How did you divide equipment and armament?  The gunner usually carried the tube, and the assistant gunner the base  plate, and the rest of us carried ammo.  Those, again, we   re getting into an area of technical knowledge that a  lot of folks don   t have. We   ve seen in movies, films, the mortarmen  dropping the mortar round into the tube. Exactly how does that fire out  of there? Is there a firing pin or something like that?  Yes, there   s a firing pin at the bottom of the tube. The mortar has a firing  device under the bottom. When it drops and hits the pin, it explodes and  shoots that out. The increments around the fins determine how far it  goes.  Those are packets of explosives around the pins?  Right.  How long was that mortar training? You learned to fire the mortars  during those summer camps?  No. (Laughs)  That was during your boot camp at     I learned to fire an M1 rifle at summer camp.  And that was it, okay. So, you picked up the     It was on-the-job training.  O.J.T.  Learning to shoot the mortar. (Laughs)  So as far as the mortars   again, we   re going to get into some technical  stuff here. A lot of folks don   t understand the principle of indirect fire.  Right.  10  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Can you explain a little bit about that? Talk a little bit about that?  Well, of course, there   s direct fire, like an anti-tank gun fires directly at  the target. Well, a mortar is essentially made to shoot over trees and over  the back of the hill. So, if somebody is on the reverse side of the hill,  then they think they   re protected. But you can take a mortar and shoot it  over the hill and come back behind them or on top of them. That   s the  idea, is to shoot it around objects or over objects that could be shielding  troops.  Did you operate through a fire control center to do that?  No, usually the corporal in charge of the section set the stake in the  approximate direction, and then he estimated the distance. The gunner  would put the correct amount of increments on the mortar shell.  So, that was your aiming stakes.  Right, that was the aiming stakes.  And then from there, you could adjust elevation and declination.  Yes, exactly.  Just to clarify as far as what elevation and declination are. Can you  explain that for us?  Well, elevation determines the range and declination determines the  scope of where you   re going to turn.  From right to left.  Right to left.  Again, kind of sticking along the lines of training, do you remember any  instructors? Any of your sergeants come to mind that you may have had,  then?  During training?  During training.  No. I got very little training. I would expect   we were getting shots and  getting ready to go, and we were only in Pendleton a week before we  boarded ship. We went out one day and climbed down the cargo nets on  a ship in the bay. (Laughs)  11  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  To learn how to climb down cargo nets?  Right. I got one trip down the cargo net. As you can remember, perhaps,  or maybe if you   re not old enough you won   t remember, but we were  pretty desperate for troops. They had told all the troops, had taken  almost all of them out of Korea. There was nobody there to defend them  except the South Korean Army, which was, in my opinion, very poorly  trained and equipped.  The South Korean Army?  South Korean Army.  Now, there had been a large reduction in troops after World War II, is  that right?  Yes, they took all the troops out. I think they left five hundred American  army soldiers there, I think, throughout South Korea.  Five hundred. That   s like two companies. Is that right?  Yes. They were mostly peace time corps. I mean, they weren   t trained  troops. They were just military police, essentially.  Okay, so, they weren   t line troops or anything like that.  In fact, the Marine Corps had to scrounge all over the world. They  brought the Seventh Marines through the Panama Canal and directly to  Japan. They were on med crews, and they took the Fifth Marines in first,  directly from Pendleton to Korea, directly to Korea to the Pusan  Perimeter while they gathered up the rest of the Marine Corps from  around the world and put them on troop ships toward North Korea.  Can you tell me anything more about what your first impressions were?  Well, let   s back up. Your trip over, as far as once you headed out from  California     We spent the time tearing down and putting our weapons back together,  having range fire from the boat out at a buoy or something in the ocean.  So, they didn   t let us lay around and enjoy the sun on the deck. We were  doing, mostly, things to get us familiar with our weapons and  comfortable with firing them and the misfiring, clearing them, and the  emergency kinds of things we needed to do and had had no opportunity  to do.  12  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  So, you   d be firing, essentially, off the side of the ship.  That   s correct.  Picking a target at random or they   d put something out?  Right. Right.  That   s a moving target.  Yes, and a bobbing one on both sides. (Laughter) So, if you could hit  anything that way, well, you could probably hit something.  Who were some of the men that you served with?  Well, my best friend was my squad leader, Larry Strew.  Was he from here in Oklahoma, as well?  No, he was from California, I believe.  And you met him at Pendleton?  That   s an interesting thing. I was a reserve. I was the only reserve and  seventeen regulars. Seventeen regular marines and I was the only  reserve. They were all from the East Coast, training-wise, and I was  from Central Oklahoma. (Laughter) I was an Okie, they were Easterners.  They were regulars, I was a reserve, and I was the enemy. (Laughs) So,  our relationship started off kind of rough. I said,    Hi,    and they said,     What the hell do you want?    (Laughs) I said,    Well, nothing. What do  you want?    So, we got a kind of rough start, but they turned out to be  wonderful guys to be around.  So, there was a lot of initial distrust between reservists and regular  army?  Yes.  Which direction do you think that distrust comes from? Is it more from  regular guys or the reservists?  I think the   if you know marines, they   re all proud guys. They are the  best. They just felt like they were being watered down until they got  them together and some of the reserves from World War II came back.  And they saw they were pretty salty guys and pretty trained guys. Then  it changed. The attitude changed about reserves.  13  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Did you have very many people in your unit that were World War II  veterans?  I   d say 30 percent, probably, were World War II veterans.  Did those soldiers occupy more of a leadership role?  Yes, I think so.  Any of those fellows stand out?  Yes, I still talk to my lieutenant. His name is Ed Snelling. He lives in  Georgia. I talked to him about a month ago. In fact, I tried to get him for  our company speaker, and his wife was in ill health and couldn   t come.  He, actually, I attribute to him living eighty-two years, almost. Quite an  officer.  Do you know any of his history, as far as was he a ROTC guy or did he  go to OCS  Officer Candidate School ?  I think he was OCS, actually. I think he graduated from the University of  Georgia. I   m not sure of that, but I think so. And I think he went to the  Marine Corps Officer School.  How did you guys, all the marines, how did you entertain yourselves  when you weren   t training on the boats, headed over?  I can   t really remember any relaxation. (Laughs)  Really?  Well, you know, it   s a pretty big shock. Troop ship has five tiers high in  the state rooms. I guess they were state rooms. There is just room for  you to lay with the next guy up here. (Gestures) I mean, there is just  space for a skinny man. A fat man can   t get in there. (Laughs) So, I  don   t know what they did with those guys.  So, you were sleeping five high?  Yes, stacked as all that you could get on the troop ship.  On those bunks in there.  Yes. So, during the day, if we had any spare time, we were probably up  on deck in the sun, trying to get a little sun. Otherwise, it was kind of  14  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  like being in a cell with ten other guys, you know. Shoulder to shoulder.  So, the fellows that you were with, specifically, you were the only  Oklahoman that was in your     There was another Oklahoman there. His name was Calvin Rob. He   s  deceased now. He was from Oklahoma City. He was a regular, so even  he wasn   t very friendly until I proved myself. (Laughs)  How did that occur? For those folks who don   t know, what does it really  take to prove yourself when it comes down to it, between a reservist and  a regular military?  Fill in. Just fill in.  Do your job?  Do your job the way it   s supposed to be done. No excuses.  Do you recall any particularly humorous things that may have happened  on the boat or in your time heading over there or during training there,  at Pendleton?  No, I don   t remember very many humorous things. It was all pretty  serious. (Laughs)  What kind of things, as far as the seriousness, let   s talk about that  because I think that   s what we really were hoping to get to.  You know, I think the regular marines were probably   really had a  better view of what was going to happen than we did, the reserves. They  had a lot more training. They   d had lot more discussion about what war  is about, what they   re about. We kind of got the quick gob. You do this,  you do that, we   re going to do this, we   re going to do that-kind of a  discussion and a description of what we were going to do. They had kind  of taken part in some of that. They had had much more training than  most of the reserves. I   m talking about the raw reserves, not the ones  that came out of the Second World War that were the non-coms and the  officers.  What unit were you with when you were in Korea?  Hal Company, Third Battalion, First Marines.  Hal Company?  15  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Hal Company.  First Marines?  Yes, third section of mortars, last peon.  Last peon?  Yes, reserves started the last guy on the trail, bringing up the rear.  (Laughs)    Get that, go get this.       The only thing you can do right is  bring it to me.    (Laughs) Some people might find that hilarious.  Yes, I think so. Let   s talk about when you first landed there in Korea.  What was the initial plan once you landed there?  Well, to take Inchon and then to go on and take Seoul back, to drive the  North Koreans back into North Korea.  So, that would have been MacArthur   s kind of left hook, initially, right?  Yes, probably his greatest feat. He had lots of opposition, he did it  anyway. He actually got in trouble for doing it anyway. But he actually  made the Inchon Landing against the advice of all the people who had  anything to do him, told him not to do it. Actually, Inchon was mudflats  for about twelve hours a day for over a mile out. They had to come up a  very deep trench to Inchon at a certain time of day to even get close  enough to go ashore in amphibious boats. They did that and they  actually hit Inchon in two waves. The Fifth Marines hit Wamego Island,  which sticks out and projects out into the ocean at high tide. We had to  wait twelve hours for the tide to come back in before we could hit Blue  Beach, which was right at Inchon.  Was that where you arrived?  I landed at Blue Beach. There were two other beaches, Green and Red,  also in Inchon.  Did you meet much resistance there?  No, we really caught   it was a brilliant move. Even though he was  advised not to, it was a brilliant move because he caught them totally  unaware, and we had very little resistance. That   s not   very little means  it wasn   t as hot as it could have been. (Laughs) Okay, so, it wasn   t no  resistance, but it was much lighter than they expected.  Was it daytime, nighttime when you rolled in?  16  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  It was just getting dark, dusk, when we went over the sea wall on Blue  Beach. By the way, I was supposed to be the third or fourth wave in and  I was the second amtrac over the wall. Was loaded with mortars,  headquarters man, wireman, flamethrowers. No infantrymen, no  machine guns, no anything. That was the second amtrac over the wall.  So, fortunately, we had rifles and side arms.  So, no heavy weapons were there to lay anything down?  No, and no actual company. They came in on later. This is pretty  standard on an amphibious landing. It   s always screwed up. (Laughs)  You can imagine when you   re trying to get twenty thousand men  together in boats to come ashore in order. So, there is always a snafu.  You just learn to deal with it.  Kind of an organized chaos.  That   s right.  So, amtracs, you might let us know what those     Amtracs have treads that they are both seaworthy and land worthy.  They   re open up above, kind of like a cigarette carton with treads on it,  floating until they reach land, and then the treads take it up and it goes  on land by tread. Slightly armored, it   s made out of metal, but nothing  that will stop anything. For example, it won   t stop a thirty-round rifle  shell.  Like a thirty-thirty.  Yes, it   ll go through it.  Okay. So, that was at Blue Beach. How long did you   so, you  established there?  We secured the beach and the town by midnight. Then we just started  down the road towards Seoul.  How long did that take?  It took about three days. It, each day, got harder. They got more and  more troops there. By the time we got to Seoul, Seoul was pretty full of  North Korean troops by the time we got there.  So, they were backfilling or they were filling with troops from Seoul as  17  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  you were coming     As they were coming back from the Pusan Perimeter to try to stop what  they thought was impossible.  So, you reached Seoul. How many days were you there?  We had encountered several things on the way. In about four days, we  got to the Han River where we crossed. It took us a day to cross, there.  We had a tank battle between the time we left Inchon and reached Seoul.  I might tell you an interesting thing. We were all digging in for the  afternoon and we were going to stop for the day. We started receiving  incoming mortar rounds. A hundred and twenty-millimeter mortar, now,  that   s about this big around and about that tall. (Gestures) So, they   re  pretty potent weapons. The Koreans were firing these at us. So, we had  just been cussing and fuming because we were trying to dig in on this  rocky mountainside and they started shelling us with a hundred and  twenty-millimeter mortars. You can   t imagine how quickly we dug in.  You know, through all that rock, that we were saying,    It   s impossible.  We can   t dig a hole in this stuff,    just a few minutes before. That was  very funny, afterwards. We discussed that, about how hard it was to dig  in that stuff before those shells coming in, and how easy it was after they  started coming in. (Laughs) So, there is humor even with people being  wounded and killed in the action. It still gets to be humorous after a  while.  During that specific encounter, how many casualties do you think your  unit had there?  In that particular incident?  Yes.  We probably had, I would just guess, ten or twelve dead and twenty  wounded.  Okay.  Fortunately, none of our group and immediate mortar section, those  twenty guys, none of those were wounded or killed.  So, your unit was still intact, your section.  Yes.  How was that mortar attack repelled? Did you have close air support,  18  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  or   ?  Yes, well, of course, the marines I guess invented that more or less close  air support. We always had an air wing with us. They really got us out of  Korea, out of the Chosin Reservoir and a lot of scrapes.  For those folks who don   t know, what kind of close air support, what  would that be comprised of, usually?  Usually a flight of aircraft, fighter aircraft also carrying bombs and  rockets. They come down to where they   re close enough you can see  them, you can wave at them. They   re at one hundred     They were F-4s or   ?  No, they were   well, I can   t think of what they were. They were prop-driven.  Oh, prop-driven planes, okay.  But they were down under a hundred feet with strafing and dropping  bombs and firing rockets. That   s pretty devastating to troops who were  on the receiving end. Those one hundred and twenty-millimeter mortars  were nothing compared to what they were getting from the aircraft.  That   s quite an assistance, man, when you have close air support. I think  the army actually learned that from the Marines in Korea, that they   d  been missing something they really needed badly.  How close was that enemy mortar, the hundred and twenty-millimeters?  I imagine they were firing from at least a mile away and perhaps two  miles. Sixty mortars, the maximum is about twenty-three hundred yards,  I think, something like that.  So, from your vantage point, from where you were being fired upon     Well, like I said, they were firing from on the reverse side of a hill about  a mile or two away.  So, you couldn   t see them?  I couldn   t see them. It went,    WOOSH WA     And if you heard the,     WOOSH WA     you were probably all right. (Laughter) Except for the  flying shrapnel of course.  When you were over there   we   ll shift gears just a little bit   were you  19  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  able to stay in touch with family, or how did you stay in touch with  family at that point and time?  Well, we wrote every day. The officers were pretty insistent on that,  non-coms, they were saying,    You need to write. Just say,    Hi, Mom,  I   m okay,    or whatever. But you will write.    (Laughs) They   d gather it  up and send it by mail orderly to see that it got off. We got mail about  every three or four days. I had a lot of people writing me. Unfortunately,  a lot of the guys didn   t. That   s really devastating for the guys who get no  mail. When a guy like me gets ten letters and a cake and five guys sit  there with nobody writing. That   s bad news.  How did those guys deal with that? How do you think they dealt with  that? Was it even spoken about, or just did it go     Well, I think we tried to include them. We tried to share the cake and tell  them the news.  So, you   re in Seoul at that point in time, and then you   re moving up the  road from there. What was the initial order when you moved out from  Seoul?  Well, actually, I should tell you a funny event. In the middle of the  battle, we had to essentially stand down and go stand parade and guard  MacArthur and Rhee to come back in, so he could be re-instituted as the  president of the country. He had given us orders that we would clear  Seoul by the twenty-fifth of September because that   s when they were  going to install the president. Well, the North Koreans had another idea.  (Laughs) So, we were still   the Seventh Marines were in heavy combat  while they were installing Rhee. The Northwest part of Seoul was still in  heavy, heavy combat. In fact, we had probably eighteen or twenty  marines killed over there and one hundred wounded while that was  going on. The rest of us were over there lining the roads, keeping  MacArthur and Rhee safe while they went to the capitol building. That  wasn   t taken very well by the marines in Seoul.  I   ll bet. So, that was just a one day event where everyone stood down,  made way     Except the North Koreans. (Laughter)  So, Rhee is installed. How much longer were the troops there?  The Seventh finished up their action in the next day or two and part of  them remained there and went on north, toward the 38th Parallel. The  rest of us went back Inchon and went aboard ship and went around  20  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Korea to the other side, to the east side, and made the landing at  Wonsan.  That was the right hook.  Right. Of course, by the time we cleared the mines from the harbor over  there, the South Korean Army, then, had run the North Koreans back  across the 38th Parallel. So, we didn   t have any opposition at the landing  at Wonsan. We went up and down the ocean out there for about ten days  while they cleared the mines.  Over there at Wonsan?  Yes.  So, once the landing took place there, what was the plan after that?  Well, to spread across the eastern half of North Korea along the 38th  Parallel and to open those roads to the major cities and keep them open.  My company, third battalion, actually, of the First Marines went to     well, it   s totally gone. (Laughs)  Majon-dong is that right? Is that on your map, there?  I   m sorry, I blocked out. Anyway, we were to keep the road open  between Seoul and Pyongyang, which is the capitol of North Korea.  What the North Koreans did is they just kind of evaporated into the  mines, into hills, into the mountains. What a lot of people don   t probably  realize is that Korea is about 75 percent mountainous. They   re rugged  mountains. They   re very steep and very rough to climb and timbered, in  the north, at least. They   re five, six, seven hundred feet high. The Chosin  Reservoir lies about a mile high. So, it   s very similar to Colorado, those  kinds of mountains and that kind of territory, that expanse, the treed  expanse. So, they just kind of disappeared into the hills, into the timber.  There   s a lot of mining in Korea, so there are a lot of mines and a lot of  hidden things in the trees and things. So, it was very conducive to hiding  a lot of troops so that they couldn   t be observed by the air. In fact, we  told MacArthur for over a month that the Chinese were in North Korea  and he wouldn   t believe us because the air couldn   t find any. They were  all hiding in the mines and the houses. They ran the people out and lived  in their houses, put their vehicles, what few vehicles they had, inside the  houses. They just knocked out a wall and drove them in. They are  masters at camouflage. The Koreans were really masters of camouflage.  You could walk right over them.  Really?  21  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Yes.  My, gosh. So, once you   ve landed at Wonsan and started heading inland,  how long was it before your unit arrived or started heading towards the  Chosin Reservoir?  Well, General Almond, who was in charge of the 10th Corps and  MacArthur   s right hand man, got orders for us to go   our orders were to  go up the single road to the Chosin Reservoir and cross over eighty  miles of what was actually an animal trail to Kwon-gi and to intersect  with the army who was coming up the west side of North Korea. Well,  we got as far as the Chosin Reservoir, and that   s as far as we got. If you  look at the map there down at the bottom, between Sudong and Koto-ri  is the Treadway Bridge. They blew that bridge out and that was over a  chasm two thousand feet deep. It   s the only road to the Chosin  Reservoir. That   s hard for us to realize, but there actually were only  three major roads to the allied border through North Korea. One was up  the west coast, one was this road, and the other was up the east coast,  going through Pyongyang, the capitol of North Korea. The Chinese  figured from the beginning that if they blew that bridge, if they sucked  us up into the Chosin Reservoir and let the whole division get up there,  they could annihilate the First Marine, because they couldn   t get out.  Bad planning. (Laughs) Again, the air force saved our life. They flew in  pieces of a bridge and they put them back up under fire.  They had blown that bridge after you   d already passed over it?  That   s right.  Just trying to cut you off.  Right. And of course, the logistics, one of the reasons that the North  Koreans bogged down is that they outran their logistics. They really  ran   they were going hungry, in fact. They were living off the land in  South Korea. We did the same thing when we got   they started  retreating, and repetitively then we outran our supply lines. Again, the  air force and the air wing saved us, because they dropped food to us.  They didn   t have that superiority. Our air took over what air they had,  and we cut all theirs off. They had to bring it in by pack mule or carrying  it, and that   s quite a difference when you can drop several tons out of the  back of a flying boxcar versus carrying it on a burro. (Laughs) So, the  advantages we have with the mechanization and the equipment that we  have really carried a lot of battles. They were terrific soldiers. The North  Koreans and the Chinese were terrific soldiers. They didn   t have to bow  their head at anybody.  22  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Where did you run into   your unit   run into the first really big scrape?  Actually, my unit didn   t run in, but the Seventh Marines ran into right at  the bottom of Sudong. The Chinese sent a full division, 124th Division,  and intersected them there on November third or fourth, third and fourth.  The Seventh Marines pretty well wiped them out. They just disappeared  back into the hills. They pretty much decimated a full division of  Chinese troops right there at Sudong. In November, and at this point,  MacArthur was still saying the Chinese would not dare come across the  Yalu border. Of course, O.P. Smith, our general, said   we just  decimated, totally destroyed the 124th Division of Chinese troops and he  said,    Well, they were just trying to get back from the front.    (Laughs)  He really just couldn   t bring himself to believe that the Chinese had  crossed the border.  MacArthur?  MacArthur.  Couldn   t believe that.  Yes, so they ordered us to go on up the road to go to the Chosin  Reservoir and to drive the Chinese back across the Yalu border. While  the Chinese were saying,    If you cross the 38th Parallel, we will  definitely come into the war.    So, we did. (Laughs)  So, when did you arrive at   ?  Well, they scattered the Marine Corps over sixty-five miles. They left  most of the first regiment down at Chin Hum Ni. They took part of it,  the first regiment, up to Koto-ri and they dropped them off there. They  took the Fifth and Seventh Marines on up. The Seventh Marines went up  first, and they went to Yudam-ni, clear up at the top of the map there.  The Fifth Marines went over to the east side of the Chosin Reservoir.  They decided that when we were to cross this sixty miles of forest, via  the road, they called it, which was essentially an animal trail, unable to  drive trucks or jeeps or any kind of mechanized vehicles on it. That   s  how bad the road was.  They brought up the Seventh division, Army Seventh Division. They  took the marines place on the east side of the reservoir. That was about  thirty-two hundred men. They were essentially wiped out. They had  about five hundred able-bodied men left that came to Hagaru. They  straggled into this Hagaru. The rest of them, I   m sure some of them are  still buried, laying up there east of Chosin. Right at three thousand men  23  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  wounded and killed on that site. The Fifth Marines then left and joined  the Seventh Marines and started across the trail, across the way. They  got about three or four miles before the Chinese hit them and they  withdrew.  So, we actually had twenty thousand, plus the army, which was about  another thirty-four hundred men up there, strung out across that trail of  about sixty miles. It was in separated valleys, though. A bunch here and  a bunch there, and a bunch here and a bunch there. Totally separated by  a fourteen-foot road trail, dirt. So, they were isolated. Each group was  totally isolated. You could hear all hell breaking loose in the next valley,  but you couldn   t see anything. You could only hear it. You were in your  own valley, you couldn   t leave your own valley because you had to have  a perimeter defense there. The actual fighting started, heavy fighting,  started on the twenty-eighth. Their kickoff, the Chinese kickoff to  annihilate the First Marine Division, according to received  communiqu  s that they intercepted, the twenty-eighth was the day they  were going to begin the total wipeout of the Marine Corps, First Marine  Division.  Where were you?  I was at Hagaru, right here at the bottom  on the map . That   s where the  road divided between the east side and the west side of the reservoir.  That was our supply duct. Munitions and food and medical and all of it  was right there. We had two companies to man a two-mile perimeter.  Two companies, a headquarters unit, a few just odds and ends, motor  transport. We had in total there, probably, nine hundred to a thousand  men at Hagaru, trying to man a two-mile perimeter. You can imagine,  having been in the service, the foxholes were probably a hundred yards  apart, which is not much of a perimeter. (Laughs) We were overrun.  In every battle, there are a lot of key events that could have gone either  way. For example, the hundred and   well, the Fifty-sixth Division was  supposed to hit Hagaru on the night of the twenty-seventh. They got lost  in the mountains, and they were the only division that did not hit their  objective on the twenty-seventh. All the rest of these were hit on the  twenty-seventh. Between the twenty-seventh of November and  December first, this army unit was wiped out. Much of these units were  wiped out. They failed to reach their objective. When they got there, we  were already ready for them and had flown in some reinforcements. We  were still only about nine hundred men, hit by a division, which was     Chinese divisions are about ten thousand, plus supplementary.  And that took place after dark?  24  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Always after dark. They learned not to fight in the daylight, unless it was  overcast where the planes couldn   t fly in the mountains. Then they   d  come out. But otherwise, you could almost count at eleven o   clock. By  ten thirty or eleven o   clock, you were being visited. (Laughs)  Was there anything that they would do to signal they were on the way?  Well, you could smell them before you could see them.  Really?  They hid in the caves and things, so they used   the mineral you put in  water?  Sulfur?  No.  Not sulfur, but     Anyway, they used it to light and it stinks like raw garlic, terribly strong.  You could lie in your fox hole and smell that they were around you.  They were wearing those padded uniforms. It was all in their clothes, the  odor. So, one, by the odor, we could tell they were around, and the  trumpets and whistles. Everybody, I guess, who knows anything about  the Chinese Army, that   s the way they signal. They didn   t have any  radio intercoms, mostly, like us. Maybe the majors and generals had  them, but none of the troops had them. So they used police whistles.     Tweet, tweet, tweet,    attack. (Imitates trumpet noise) Retreat. Bugles,  same way. I started to bring a bugle, but I didn   t today, that I brought  home. That   s as much psychological as it is directional. You have no  imagination of what that   s like to hear those bugles going. All the hills  around you,    tweet tweet,    and the bugling all around you for twenty or  thirty minutes in dead darkness. So, you know they   re saying,    We   re  here, guess where     (Laughs) So, they used psychological warfare pretty  well, you know.  So, the bugles and the whistles, the psychological warfare from the  Chinese     Just pretty frightening.  Did it have a pretty good effect on the guys you knew?  They were pretty stable, but I have to admit it was pretty hair-raising to  know that they are all around you and that they have unlimited supply.  25  Myers  That   s what we thought, that they had all the men they could ever want.  That was the rumor. That they had over 150,000 men up at the Yalu  border, so we knew we were grossly overmatched, as far as man for  man. Fighting in the dark is pretty scary. I was a mortarman, and my job  was, most of the time, was to bring in ammunition. So, they sent me  back the evening of the twenty-eighth, which we were under fire. They  had overrun our third platoon and broken our perimeter, and I told you  they were stretched pretty thin. They sent me back to the ammo dump,  which was about, probably, a hundred yards behind our mortar  placement. In the dark, by yourself, well, another fellow and I. We got  back there and encountered a couple of Chinese on the way that had  gotten through our lines. Fortunately, the Chinese were hungry and they  were more interested in what they could scrounge in the field kitchen  back in the back than they were to kill people who they   d just gotten  through. So, they were looking for food, and we were able to put an end  to their existence.  So, we went into the ammo dump and got ammo and brought it back.  When I got back, the section leader said,    We   re short on white  phosphorous shells, and one of you needs to go back and get more white  phosphorous,    for illumination and other things. So, I said,    Oh, I   ll do  that,    gung-ho, you know. First thing you learn in the service is don   t  volunteer. (Laughs) So, that was out before I could stop it. So, I went  back and they said,    Oh, we   ve killed all those guys anyway.    I said,     Well, let   s hope so.    I got back, I opened the gate into this little hut  where we were storing the ammo, and guess who was standing there. A  Chinese soldier with a Burk gun. Fortunately, mine fired and his didn   t.  So, that was kind of a shock. After I kind of recovered from that, I  grabbed two canisters of white phosphorous mortar shells and started  back to the gunning placement and that   s the last I remember.  A big explosion happened and I came to sometime later with the  canisters thrown apart and me laying there feeling to see if I had all my  arms and legs. I couldn   t get up, and I stumbled and staggered around  for a while. I finally got to my feet and I couldn   t move my right arm,  but it was dark. By that time it was around two thirty in the morning, I  think, something like that. So, I staggered back to the emplacement. And  guess what, I didn   t have the white phosphorous canisters. (Laughs) I  did still have my carbine. But I went back into defense. I was in terrible  pain, but I was more scared, I guess, than hurt. Anyway, at daylight,  when dawn broke, everything quieted down and they just disappeared  into the hills. I have to say, out in front of us by body count, there were  over a thousand dead Chinese in a space of about a hundred yards.  That   s out in front of your mortar?  26  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Out in front of our third platoon that they   d broken through. I have to  share with you the most shaking event that I had in Korea. We were out  there checking to see if there were any Chinese still alive. There was one  guy kind of haunched up like this, and I walked over and took my foot  and pushed him over. When he fell out, his jacket fell out, and in his  hand was a picture of a woman and a man and a child and a cross.  (Cries) Sorry.  It   s okay.  As you can tell, that was quite a shock.  Sure.  First time I really ever thought of those men as people. Sorry.  No, you   re fine.  I   m okay   as I   ll ever be.  It   s difficult. It is difficult.  I think people need to know that war is really hell. It   s not just a slogan.  When you finally realize that those are people you   re killing    It   s one  thing when they   re dots on a hill or at a thousand yards, a figure this tall  (gestures), they   re just stuff. But when it   s close up, they   re just people  like you.  Yes, that   s true. That   s true.  Anyway, I turned in the next morning at the aid station. There were  approximately eight or nine hundred marines and soldiers up there in all  forms of living and dying and death. I finally stopped a corpsmen and he  said,    Well, let me take a look at it. You   re probably all right, you   re  still moving around.    (Laughter) So, we tried to get my parka off, and he  finally just gave up trying it hurt so bad. He said,    I think what you   ve  had is a dislocated shoulder.    So, he popped it, and I guess he popped it  back in or something. Anyway, he put it in a sling and said,    That   s the  best I can do for you. Go on back to your unit.    He said,    We   ve got  more critical ill. This afternoon or sometime, why don   t you come back  and we   ll see what else we can do for you.    Well, I never went back. I  walked out of the Chosin Reservoir thing with the rest of the marines  that were left. They were still flying in replacements. MacArthur finally  said,    Destroy all your equipment and fly out.    O.P. Smith said,    No,  we   re walking out. We   re going to show these Chinese troops that they  don   t know who they   re messing with.    (Laughs) So, we walked out.  27  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  So, you got to come back out through Hell Fire Valley.  Yes.  How was that?  Well, there was a roadblock. There were five days before we even  started. We only started out on the sixth of December. So, each one of  these valleys was in chaos for twenty-eighth, ninth, thirtieth, through the  fourth of December. On the sixth of December, we started from Hagaru  to Koto-ri, which is still on the other side of the blown bridge, inside the  perimeter of being surrounded. There was a road block about every mile  or less that we had to clear. Of course, we had to take the high ground on  both sides and then clear the road. So, that took another five days. We  actually were   I think we crossed over the bridge on the tenth of  December. So, we were out there about twenty days.  The temperature was an average of forty below zero. The wind was  coming down off the Mongolian   through Siberia and the Mongolian  Steps at about forty, fifty miles per hour, at a mile high. So, the weather  was absolutely unbelievable. In fact, it was so cold, you were just numb.  You just didn   t   it was just numb, that   s all. We were wearing  everything we had. I was wearing a pair of grain wool paints, dungarees,  long johns, shorts. I think had on two pair of dungarees, a parka, a  dungaree jacket, a sweater, everything I owned, just about, I was  wearing.  I do a lot of speeches around. The first thing everybody asks me is,     How did you go to the bathroom?    (Laughter) I said,    Well, very  seldom and very quickly and wide out in the open. At forty below zero,  you don   t take long.    (Laughs) So, there are some funny things, even as  bad as it is. One of the funniest is on our way out, another guy was  taking a relief, and he had all his clothes down. As I say, we were all  blue from cold. Every time he   d squat, a sniper would shoot at him. It  was obvious he wasn   t trying to hit him because he   d hit ten feet from  him. He   d yank his pants up and he   d run and hide, try to hide. Then in a  few seconds, he   d go back out and pull his pants down and the sniper  would shoot. (Laughter) That went on for like ten minutes before we  could find the sniper. He swore that we   d found him a long time before  we found him. (Laughter) Funny things like that do happen, and you  find ways to laugh even in tragedy.  Absolutely. Friends of yours over there during that time in the mortar  platoon   well, let me back up. As far as the mortar platoon goes, when  you   re on the road traveling like that, where do you set up? I don   t think  28  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  a lot of folks would understand that. You clearly don   t set up on the  road, so do you back off the road a ways and set up camp there for the  night and wait for attack?  You don   t set up camp once we start. But once we left Hagaru, out, we  were all on the road.  No backing off the road at all?  Well, we put out flanking defense. So, we tried to own the high ground  beside the road along where we were going. Now, when we had fourteen  thousand people on the road, plus tanks, plus trucks, plus all the  equipment, it was all on the road. So, actually, when we left Hagaru, it  stretched almost to Koto-ri, which was twelve miles away, I think. Yes,  about ten miles. From front to back, it was about eight miles long. It was  moving only to the first road block and then to the next road block and  to the next road block. Each time, we had to put out defense out away  from us to keep the Chinese from attacking us while we were on the  road.  Had I been running the Chinese Army, that   s where it would have  ended, right there. It was snowing and the clouds blanketed the  mountains, the planes couldn   t do us much good. I would have stopped  us long before we got to the bridge, had I been running the defense.  They chose not to do that. They thought, number one, they   d blown the  bridge and we couldn   t get out with our equipment, and number two,  that they could do that any time they wanted to. Their prime object   and  none of the other guys are going to like this   but their prime object was  to knock out Hagaru because that   s where all the supply dump was and  where General Smith was and the command post and all of that was  right there. That was the objective and they blew it. The Chinese  division that was given that objective blew it. They were a day late and  that probably sealed their doom because we were able to get in  reinforcements and supplies.  That was the regiment that got lost?  Right.  Okay.  But it was a matter of stop and go for two days from Hagaru to Koto-ri.  Took us two days to do that and to clear all the road blocks. Of course,  the road blocks entailed probably, maybe a company strength around, or  half a company, where they had a road block. There   s more up in the  hills and around, but that   s all that   s right there that you   re in a firefight  29  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  with, probably.  You were talking before, having to go to the bathroom, something that   s  got to happen every day.  Yes.  Eating does, too. Taking meals and     Well, we had C rations. Again, a comedy trying to eat them. You   re in a  high altitude, forty below zero, all canned food is frozen. You put it in  the fire, it burns on the bottom and is still frozen on the top. So, the best  you could do is put it on the manifold of a vehicle. Well, most people  didn   t have any vehicle, so we usually put it in the fire and ate it charred.  The most popular thing was the cocoa. We ate that dry sometimes, just  like candy. Terrible, but better than nothing. Crackers, things that are in  C rations. Most people have no idea what are in C rations, but it   s like  canned food and dehydrated food, that kind of thing, in little packages.  So, you get one of those each day, and it had a pack of cigarettes. Isn   t  that wonderful? We   d furnish our troupe with a pack of cigarettes. But it  was important, then, those guys would almost trade you all their food for  a pack of cigarettes, a lot of them, if they hadn   t had any all day.  (Laughs) It had toilet paper and it had gum, occasionally, and a bar of  candy and a heavy  food like  pork and beans. That was considered a  heavy food. And crackers and cocoa and coffee, instant coffee, sugar,  and instant sugar. That   s what you had to eat.  They gave it to you once a day, and you had to make it last all day and  eat it the best way you could. Most of the time, we ate it in our foxhole.  Had a little can opener that you opened it with, and you did the best you  can. You took a bayonet out and dug it out and put it inside your parka  next to your skin until it was thawed enough that you could chew it.  Then you   d take it out and eat it. Of course, terrible for you, frozen food.  You can imagine eating that for fourteen days. Well, actually, the whole  time we were up there, we were eating frozen food. It was crystallized,  at least, it was never thawed. It was at least crunchy. (Laughter) So, soup  was crunchy.  What about sleep during that period, if you could get any?  Best you could. Up until   in combat, you   re usually on tours of sleep.  They break it up into three-hour periods, maybe. So, you   re on three, off  three, on three, off three. If you   re in a foxhole, then you or your buddy  is awake all the time. One of you is awake. If it   s a third, then one out of  two holes is awake. So, there   s one person in every other hole or  30  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  something. So, it depends on what they   re expecting. So, essentially, you  sleep outdoors, you get it in two and three-hour snatches, you rest when  you can, sleep when you can. Boring, sitting in a hole, looking for the  enemy, mostly is what you do most of the time. Talk a lot. You get to  know those foxhole buddies better than you know anybody else because  you   re there twenty-four hours a day. He sees you at your worst, you see  him at his worst and their best. (Cries)  What are some examples of the best?  I was the only married man in that mortar section. I had people going on  patrol for me because I was married. That   s the best. It   s amazing how a  bunch of tough, selfish, crude marines are so thoughtful and so  sacrificing. I apologize, but you know that I can   t help it. (Cries)  No apologies needed.  I love those guys and you get to know them better than you knew  anybody else.  I understand that.  I   m sure all guys who   ve been in combat come home wondering why  they came back. Hopefully, anybody that sees this will know when they  hear that slogan that    War is hell,    what it means, what it takes for a guy  to say,    Let me go,    when he knows the probability is that he won   t be  back.  I   m sure if the roles were reversed, you   d have been volunteering in the  same fashion.  Well, I did. Yes. They   re all the same. You   re one.  Absolutely.  It   s a terrible experience, but if there were only a pill we could give  people to help them know what war is really like, we wouldn   t have any  of it.  Absolutely. Absolutely. That   s the best of things. The worst of things  that, as far as examples of people   and it could be from either side  because that sort of thing kind of doesn   t have a side. It can show up  anywhere. Is there anything that comes to mind?  Oh, hatred fuels hatred. Atrocities happen. They do bad things to you.     We   ll get even for that,    that   s a common emotion. You think about it  31  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  later and it   s terrible, but at the time, like I say, they   re just ants.     They   re trying to kill me, so why shouldn   t I do something worse to  them?    That   s the way you rationalize it, I guess. It   s just terrible to kill  another human being. But it has to be done and you have no choice. It   s  kill or be killed. We ought to consider those things much more carefully  than we do before we do it easily.  Now, you had gotten to the Treadway Bridge and the Air Force had  flown in a replacement bridge, I   m guessing.  I think what they used were those holey pieces of metal, I forgot what  they   re called, that they make runways with. They flew those in. They  flew in eight of them, they lost two of them to the Chinese when they  dropped them. But they only needed four, so they actually had enough.  They did use   another terrible thing about war is they used Chinese  bodies to shore up the far side to lay the bridge on because part of it was  blowing away. So, they stacked those dead Chinese frozen bodies in  there as a barricade for the bridge to sit on to bring out all the trucks and  tanks and all that stuff over them.  Like a foundation.  Yes. Another un-holiness of war. They used them for stockade to build  on.  I had seen in research and read in research about frozen bodies being  used for sandbags, essentially.  Right. Yes.  Cover, that sort of thing.  It   s hard to use your best friend for a sandbag. (Cries)  I imagine.  But you have to look at it like,    He   s dead and I   m still alive. I have to  stay alive to keep the guy next to me alive.    I might tell you a little bit  about the Chinese. As bad as we had it, they had it real worse. They had  padded uniforms. Most of them had padded jackets and no overcoats  that I ever saw. The prisoners we took, their feet were frozen up to the  knee. They looked like loaves of bread that had split open while baking.  It was a horrible thing to watch them try to walk. We at least had the  road. They were trying to come through the snow and the mountains and  the forest. How they did it, I don   t know. Man, I could barely make the  road, and they were coming through the timber up on top of the hills.  32  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  (Laughs) So, it   s just a terrible experience for everybody. You would  think we   d find a better solution for the problems of the world than that.  Other than the explosion that occurred and then your shoulder that was  dislocated, did you have any other injuries or any other wounds?  Well, I finally finished out my tour and I never was able to use my right  arm much again.  So, it was a little bit more than a dislocated shoulder.  Yes, it was a broken neck and a dislocated shoulder and broken  collarbone and injured lower back and a bad hip, knee, and right ankle.  Broken right toe, big toe, and a broken thumb.  My goodness.  And I walked out.  That was that ten miles or twelve miles to get out   ?  Sixty miles.  Sixty total. It was ten miles to Koto-ri?  To Koto-ri. And about ten miles from Hungnam, where they shipped us  out. They did transport us from there on. But I finished out my tour in  Korea. Actually, I went to the sick bay in Maeson and a twenty-six year  old J.G. doctor told me he didn   t think there was much wrong with me,  that I   d get over it. And go on back to my unit, the soreness will go  away.  Rub some dirt on it. (Laughs)  Yes. Yes. He gave me some pain pills and told me to go on back so I  did. I came home in April or May. I was stationed at McAlester,  Oklahoma at the ammo dump. I went to the sick bay there, and they  gave me diathermy treatment and never even did an x-ray.  That would have been 1951?  And I still couldn   t do the manual arms, so they put me on the main gate  where I had a side arm. I could get it out of the holster after fumbling  around a while and cock it if I needed to. (Laughter) So, when I got out  in 1951, I tried to go to work for the fire department in Oklahoma City  and I had to do a physical. They sent me to a doctor and did an x-ray,  33  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  and they found out that I   d had a broken neck and dislocated shoulder,  that my collarbone had been broken and not reset. So, anyway, from  there, and they rejected my disability in 1951. I   m happy to tell you,  three weeks ago, I got 100 percent disability after a sixty-some odd year  battle.  That   s a hell of a battle. (Laughs)  Well, mostly my fault because I was so mad in 1951 that I came home. I  was mad at everybody about everything and probably had PTSD  Post-traumatic  Stress Disorder  or whatever that is and didn   t know it. My  wife knew it. She said I was hell to get along with.  How so?  Short fuse. Very frustrated all the time at not being able to get it done  now, and why everybody screwed around, and no patience and just  frustrated. Don   t know why.  I can   t imagine.  No. (Laughter) At any rate, I   m still here for some reason. I don   t know  why  (Laughter)  Were you awarded any medals or citations?  I was put up for a Bronze Star, but I got the Commendation medal, Navy  Commendation Medal. It was kicked down, knocked down. It   s  interesting how that happens. You   re recording this, aren   t you?  (Laughs) Well, I find it interesting. The guy I went to get this  ammunition with got the Bronze Star. He was a regular. I got the  Commendation medal and I was a reserve. We did the same thing, and I  went back a second time. So, you figure it out. (Laughter)  I guess it just depends on who   s submitting the paperwork.  That   s absolutely true. Who saw it, who wrote it up makes a huge  difference. It really does. On top of that, most of the guys who deserved  the medal didn   t get one. The ones who did get them probably deserved  something else, whatever that was. (Laughter) They were all doing just  what they were supposed to do, anyway.  Is there anything you carried with you for good luck?  I carried the New Testament.  34  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  New Testament. Was that one of the     In my breast pocket of my dungarees.  One of the little Gideon bibles?  Yes, I still have it. It   s well used. It was well used.  All right.  I was always a little bit on the religious side. In fact, I came home, I  dropped out of pre-med and went into a public school music program. I  was a singer, vocalist. I also played the trumpet and the French horn. So,  I went that route. I became a minister of music and religious education  for the Methodist church. Far cry from being a tough, rough, crying  Marine. (Laughter) That was the result of reading that testament and  being in Korea, I think, going into the church work. I had many  ministers trying to tell me I should have been a preacher and I said,    No,  I   m not good enough to be a preacher.    (Laughter) So, I did a secondary  role as a church musician and education director. (Laughs) So, I never  became a minister, but they did that anyway because I ended up being  the campus minister at Durant College, at the Wesley Foundation when I  was down there at the First Methodist Church. So, I guess God puts you  where he wants you.  That   s right. During your time in the service, did you keep a diary or a  journal or anything like that?  Nothing regular. I did occasionally right down here and there, but not  daily. I wish I had. My grandson is a marine who just got out of the  service, and I urged him to do it and I don   t think he did it, either. Like  all of us, we didn   t have time for that.  So, where were you when the Korean War ended? Here in Oklahoma?  Yes. I was still in Oklahoma City. In fact, I was still going to school at  Central State, I believe. See, it ended in    53, I believe. June of    53, yes. I  was still in college at Central State.  Was your education supported by the GI Bill at that time?  Yes.  So, you had some close relationships, as most servicemen do. Do you  continue any of those relationships, still to this day?  35  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  I   ve tried. My best buddy was killed. Well, not my best buddy, but my  squad leader. He was killed at Hagaru.  Was that   ?  Volo   no, that wasn   t Strew. He took Volo   s place.  What was his name, the fellow that was killed?  Robert Volo, I believe. I only knew him by Volo. He won the Silver Star  that night he was up running around trying to fill those holes that   he  was the squad leader of the mortars, but he was out trying to fill the third  platoon holes.  And he got the Silver Star for his actions that evening?  Yes.  Do you know the details of that?  No, I really don   t. You really only know   I know all the names of the  guys in the mortar section, but I was with them very little. I probably  know more people in the third platoon than I did in the rest of the mortar  section because my section went out with the third platoon of Hal  Company on patrol all the time. So, I knew more of those guys than I did  the rest, and better than I did the rest of the mortar platoon. I know Bill  Wida, he was a machine gunner. I remember George Sagle. He was a  mortarman. He was in another section of the mortars. Bill Randall, I   ve  never been able to reach. He was my foxhole buddy after my first  foxhole buddy was wounded. Eugene Breene was wounded and left  early in the war, before we went up to the Chosin. After we went into  North Korea, but after we went to the Chosin. Bill Randall, I   ve never  been able to reach after our service years. So, two or three of the others  are deceased now. Calvin Rob, I talked to. Actually, he supported my     wrote a letter supporting my injury at Hagaru. He   s deceased. Bill Neff,  he was from Nebraska. I   ve never been able to reach him. Another one  of the guys is deceased, so they   re just mostly gone, my close buddies.  Did you join any of the veteran   s organizations?  No. I shared with you that I was angry about it, and I was really, really  angry about the fact that I was messed up that badly and they had a  nonchalant attitude about it. That just   I mean, I was really hostile about  it. Like I was trying to get something I didn   t earn. (Laughs) Did I share  the   yes, I did, the J.G. at Maeson said,    You   ll be all right, the pain  will go away,    and gave me some pain pills.  36  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Yes. (Laughs)  I mean, that was their solution for my injuries. Again, I say that was  mostly my fault because I quit pushing. I said,    To hell with it. Who  needs you?     That was the VFW guys or the American Legion?  Everybody, anybody. I did what I thought was right, and this is what I  got, so who needs you?  Just cut bait and move on.  Yes. I   ll live my life. I met a guy here in Tulsa who said,    You need to  come out and join the Chosin Few.    I said,    What is it?    He told me, so  here I am, the president of the Northeast    (Laughter) That was about  seven or eight years ago.  Is he still around or has he passed on?  He   s passed on. He was the president. (Laughs)  He was the president that met up with you and recruited you?  Yes.  How often do you guys meet?  We meet once a month at Goldie   s, out on 21st and Memorial, close to  21st and Memorial. And there are about, well, there   s probably about  sixteen or seventeen of us around the Tulsa area in this end of Oklahoma  left. But only about eight or ten still come. Some of them are not  physically able. There are about three or four. We   re passing away pretty  often. So, they   re all over eighty.  Were you ever able to go back to Korea? I know that the government of  Korea has a program where     I   ve tried several times. I got ill one time that we were going. And the  last few years, I just haven   t felt like I was physically able to be gone  and be away from doctors. I   m a diabetic and I   ve got other problems.  That   s a long flight.  Yes. And a long   I haven   t slept in a bed for twenty-five years. I   ve  37  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  Myers  Gotcher  slept in a recliner because of my back and shoulder injury and pain. I   m  on narcotics all the time.  Let me ask you this. I   m just always interested in this from servicemen.  You volunteered.  Yes, sir.  Would you do that again?  Yes, sir.  Why is that? At the core of it, why? And why do you think that   s  important?  I love my country. (Cries) Somebody has to pay the price of freedom.  We like these slogans,    Freedom is not free,    doesn   t mean anything to  most people. It   s just words. It takes somebody to defend it because  there is always somebody who wants to take it away.  Absolutely. Is there anything else you   d like to add that you don   t think  we   ve covered?  No, I just think there   s, number one, service people don   t really want  your praise. They want you to understand that somebody has to do that.  And it   s not fun, it   s gut-wrenching, but somebody has to do it. They  want everybody else to know that they   re willing. (Cries)  I want to thank you for your time, for coming in and speaking with us  about your service. And thank you for your service, as well. I appreciate  it.  Thank you.  -------  -------  
