 Wilson  Bowers  Today is June 20, 2011. My name is Latasha Wilson, and I   m with the  Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at the Oklahoma State  University Library. I am in Cheyenne, Oklahoma, and I am talking with  Leroy Bowers as part of the Spotlighting Oklahoma 1930s series.  We  are joined also by his friend and neighbor Gertrude Flesher.  Thank you  for talking with me today. Would you mind telling me when and where  you were born?  I was born south of Cheyenne on March 6, 1926.  And were you born at home?  At home, yes.  On a farm?  Yes. I had one older brother and one younger brother and one older  sister, and we lived in a four-room house on the farm. Back in the teens  of 1900, my father and two of his brothers bought the farm, and then  later on, he bought their interests out, and then that left him the sole  owner of it. Then he rented some more farm land around there. He raised  cows, chickens, and pigs.  So, how many acres did he end up owning?  160 acres. He never did buy no more, and then he just rented some more  land, adjoined it.  What were his primary crops?  It was cotton and broom corn, and that was the cash crops. And then he  would plant   horse power, everybody farmed with horses then. And  5  Wilson  Bowers  Wilson  Bowers  Wilson  Bowers  they had to plant the majority of their land to crop to feed their horses in  order to make them pull the plows to make their crop.  What were the main crops they planted for horses?  Well, at that time, it would be Kaffir corn and bundle feed, sorghum  feed, and then they   d plant what they call a crook neck maize for their  grain, it and Kaffir corn. And they   d use a row binder and cut the feed  and feed the horses through the winter and the summer, you see. And  they   d milk a few cows and sell some cream to the local stores. They  had a lot of little local stores out in the country, then, and they   d sell  their cream, then buy their cream and eggs. Eggs were a good  commodity, then, for the farm. And during the Depression, that kept a  lot of farmers from starving out on the farm because they could raise  their meat and their eggs and then their vegetables in their garden. And  then what little eggs and cream they sold would pay their other grocery  bill and what other little expenses.  So, what were some of your chores growing up? What did you have to  do to help out?  I think probably the most memorable ones would be whenever I was a  kid, it seemed like all we ever done was cut wood for the fire for the  stove to heat the house with. On Saturday, we   d hook up the team and  wagon with my dad. We   d go down on the creek and cut an old dead  tree with a cross cut saw and a chop axe, and we   d bring it, and we   d  carry our lunch with us, and we   d get back home about three o   clock.  And then every evening when we got in from school, it seemed like, me  and my brother, we   d go chop wood for the stove. Of course, then, the  houses weren   t modern where there   s insulation or anything, and most of  them the dust, the dirt would come on through the windows and the  doors pretty readily. And so, I almost vowed when I got out of school  and left home, if I ever done another thing in the world, it wouldn   t be  cut wood. And then, later on, they got good stoves and good chainsaws,  and I kind of enjoyed it, then. And so, we burnt wood in our wood stove,  our wood inset, and it was pretty good heat. I think the most sad thing  was is whenever the government came in and killed their cows.  What do you remember about that?  I think I was about nine years old, it seemed like, but there was two men  with rifles come, and they killed thirteen cows and yearlings and calves.  And it   s just a   we had a wire lot, barbed wire lot, and they stood out  there, and they wasn   t close to them when they shot them. Some of  them, they   d have to shoot them two or three times before they   d be  dead, and that just kind of weighed on me a little bit. It was just a  6  Wilson  Bowers  nonsense of a waste to other people going hungry for meat. Our  neighbor women would come in, and the younger animals that would be  good eating, well, they   d can them. Of course, they didn   t have no  refrigerators. They had to go right then and can them, and then the ones  when the men left, we hooked up the team and wagon and pulled the  other cows off away from the house, down to dispose of them out in the  pasture where they   d be away from the cows. I   ve often thought that was  the biggest waste I   ve ever seen. And they paid a little for them, but  then   and to tell you how scarce money was, the banks didn   t have any  money. There just wasn   t no money circulating. A stock cow wouldn   t  bring very much, but a good milk cow would still bring about twenty  dollars. And meat cows, beef cows, would bring probably six.  But anyway, my dad had a good Jersey milk cow sale, and one of the  neighbors that lived back a few miles back over there come one morning  and he asked him if   he said, he looked at this cow, and he said,    I like  her, and she   s a good milk cow.    He said,    I   m going down to  Cheyenne. I suppose at the bank, if I can borrow the money...    My dad  told him he would take twenty dollars for her. He said,    Fine.    Bob  borrowed the money. Bob come back so long, late in the evening. He  was in his team and wagon. He went on to Cheyenne, which is seven  miles with team and wagon, come back middle evening, and he told my  dad, he said,    Well, they loaned me enough money.    So, of course, they  had a halter and put the cow and she led, and so he tied her on behind  the wagon and went on home.  The next morning a little after sunup, here he come back, and he said     my dad   s name was Frank. He said,    Frank, I went to town and I  borrowed forty dollars and the only place I ever had my billfold out was  here when I paid you for the cow.    He said,    I don   t know what  happened to the other twenty dollars,    and my dad said,    Well, let me go  look in my billfold and if there   s more than twenty dollars in there, the  other   s yours.    So, he pulled out of there and it looked like there was  twenty, and he shuffled them together and there was two twenties stuck  together. He give this other farmer the twenty dollars. But the point is,  that   s how scarce money was. Neither one of them had any money in  their billfold besides that. And so, he took his twenty dollars. He was  happy, and he went back home. And then I went to Needmore School,  which was about a two and a half mile walk.  And you started when you were about five or six?  I think I started a little before I was five, and walked over there. And  then, of course, they used family labor to gather their crops, and so along  in the first of August, they   d turn out six weeks for cotton picking, and  everybody would pick cotton. And they   d get their cotton gathered, and  7  Wilson  Bowers  Wilson  Bowers  Wilson  Bowers  then they   d crank up this   they   d start school back up along about  Thanksgiving, right after Thanksgiving, I think, and have it over. And  they didn   t have no set time, how many days of school you could go or  anything like that. But then at the end of my fourth year in school, they  consolidated Needmore School into Cheyenne. And at that time, they  had an auction, and they sold the school building and all the surrounding  deals and divided it among the land owners in the district. Now, if a  school consolidates to a larger school, all the assets go with it to the  larger school.  So, I went through Cheyenne through high school, and then in 1944, I  become eighteen in March, and then I graduated from the high school.  And then I think in August, they drafted me in the Army, and that was  right in the heat of the Battle of the Bulge. And so, I took my basic  training, and then they shipped me, I think it was in January, right after  Christmas. I come home for Christmas and then at the first of January, I  went out to Sayre and got on a bus and rode to Camp Meade, Maryland,  and I stayed there a few days. Then I rode on the Queen Mary over to  Liverpool, England. From there, I went over across to Le Havre, France,  and my battle action started there about thirty miles north of Le Havre. I  went on through France, and then Luxembourg, and then Germany, and  crossed the Rhine River with the 353rd Infantry Regiment of the 89th  Division of the Third Army under General  George S.  Patton. I had two  combat battle stars while I was still eighteen years old. So, then after the  war was over, I stayed over there. I had to stay over there about another  year, and then I came home. And then eventually, in a year or so, I think,  I married my wife, and then we had two children. We moved up to Roll  and     How did you meet your wife?  She died about a year ago.  How did you meet her?  It was at a dinner party of my cousin.  And she was from Roll?  She was from Roll, yes. My cousin had a dinner party and invited her  and was helping there. And so, of course, we were both grown adults. I  think I was twenty-three and she was twenty-two. I think we lived  together sixty-three years before she died a little over a year ago. It was  a year ago, April. And we had two children. One of them is retired from  the school system, and the other one has an accounting degree, and she  lives in Yukon.  8  Wilson  Bowers  Wilson  Bowers  Wilson  Bowers  Wilson  Bowers  Wilson  Bowers  And you lived on a farm near Roll?  I lived on a farm. We bought 800 acres to start with, and we expanded it.  We had a hog operation for a while. And at that time, Dr. Bill Luce was  the head of the Swine Department at Stillwater. He came out and helped  me design my building and help me get started in it, and it proved to be  profitable business for us for a while. And after my son got out of high  school and into college, we began to buy some more land and expand a  little more. So, we got out of the hog business then and more cows and  wheat, mainly. And that   s what we did until we retired.  In the hog business, were you slaughtering them or     I started in with sows with baby pigs, and then I fed them on through to  market, and then I sold them at market price. And at different places, I  wound up   a lot of them in Oklahoma City to market, and then I sold  them around here at different markets, too. And our cows, we didn   t run  registered cows, we just run cross breeds, and we   d sell feeder cattle.  That   s where they get ready to go to the feedlots.  What school district were you in?  My children both went to Crawford. They both graduated from  Cheyenne. Crawford lost their high school, and then my son was a first-year.  He come down here one year to Cheyenne, and then he went to  Weatherford and got his master   s degree there in education, and then he  went on down to Altus and was principal down there. He stayed until he  retired. And my daughter then, she graduated Cum Laude at Oklahoma  Christian College.  In Edmond?  Yes, south edge of Edmond, there. And she had a business degree in  business, accounting is what it was. She   s still using it, and she has two  children. One   s in college now, went to Wilburton. She goes to  Wilburton. She got a scholarship to go to Wilburton last year, and she   ll  go one more year there, and then she plans to go on to Stillwater. She   s  hoping she can get another scholarship somewhere. I don   t know where.  So, how far was the commute for your kids to go to Cheyenne for high  school? How long did it take to get to Cheyenne?  Well, it   s about fifteen miles if the bus would come straight to  Cheyenne. By the time it went around, they   d be on the bus probably  about an hour.  9  Wilson  Bowers  Wilson  Bowers  Wilson  Bowers  What year did you move to Cheyenne?  I think in 1989,   88 or    89. My son was already out of college, and I  don   t know, I can   t remember whether Nina was out yet or not. I think  she was.  We were talking earlier about the Roll school. There   s the schoolhouse  now in Cheyenne, but can you tell me a little about that school?  I don   t know a lot about the school other than it was there a mile north  of the little town of Roll. At that time, there was two stores, a grocery  store and a filling station when I knew it. Of course, earlier than that, of  course, they tell me that Roll had a cotton gin and maybe a bank, I don   t  know, and a lot of them little towns have it pretty well. It   s pretty lively,  a lot of people. It surprised me how many people lived in the county. It  didn   t surprise me, either, because I knew them. Then, back up until in  the late    40s, they began to move out pretty heavy in the    40s. That  12,000 to 14,000 people lived in the county. Someone lived on every  160, and a lot of people on an 80 acre farm.  What caused people to leave in the    40s?  Well, they couldn   t make a living on the farm. They would have 160  acres and just changing times, I think. And one reason was, right after  World War II there was an influx of the young men that went to the  military. And then a lot of them came home all at once, and they tried  their luck at farming. It   s just pretty tough to make a living on there.  Times were beginning to change from horse power to tractor power.  You see, used to be it was the horses, if you farmed with row crop, one  row crop with a one-row lister, probably about five to six acres was a big  day   s work for it. So, one man couldn   t farm very many acres. There just  wasn   t enough time. And then the tractor come along, and they weren   t  big tractors, but they could farm several more acres in a day.  Well, what happened then, some   really, I don   t like to really run it  down, it   s our capitalist form, but a lot of the men that didn   t go to the  military, they managed to expand while the majority of the young men  were at war. And then when the young men come back there wasn   t no  farm for them, I mean, to buy or rent. And so, it   s continued up to the  present time. If a farm sold, a person just starting out doesn   t have a  chance of buying a farm starting out. And the farmer that has more, he   ll  buy and add on to his farm. That started in the late    40s, and it   s still that  way. And it   s not only in the farming, then, but it   s also in small  businesses and the small towns of communities. If there   s not any people  there, there   s nothing there, nobody to buy their product in town, and so,  10  Wilson  Bowers  Wilson  Bowers  Wilson  Bowers  anyway, they done that.  And then probably go back in the Dust Bowl days, too. And everybody  now knows the reason we had so much of that was because it was a type  of farming, not only what we did here but the ones in the panhandle. The  black clouds that come in here was the results of the farmland up in the  panhandle where they just used one way to plow their ground up, and  now they   ve changed their methods, their tools, and they don   t rape the  ground like they did back in the    30s. They   d run a row binder over their  soil, their fields, and it was bare, then, to blow all winter until they   d  plow it to make a crop the next spring. And then on their cotton, they   d  gather their cotton by hand and then the first time, and they   d go over it  the second time with some kind of a little sled that would drag on the  ground. Then it would strip the bolls, and then the land would blow all  winter, all over the whole countryside. You can drive over the area now  and where you see this tall grass in the pastures, that used to be farm  ground. That   s the reason that we had so much washing on our fields  and stuff.  An inch of rain would cause all the little old creeks to get up. And then  back in the    50s, then, they started this flood control project and then  taking the farm land out of production. And then in 1958, they come  along with what they call   I believe it   s under Eisenhower, but what  they call the soil bank. And what they done, then, a lot of marginable  land, they put it back to grass. And most of it has stayed grass. That   s  what you see now, and that   s helped a lot of the erosion in the  wintertime, and also the flooding later on down the rivers where all of  our creeks and streams run into the rivers. They put all them dams in  there, and I think it helped a lot.  Do you remember the big flood in    34?  Yes.  Did that affect you, or were you living     I lived out, we just heard about it.  What do you remember hearing?  Well, it was just the people getting washed away. I don   t know how they  got washed away over at Hammon, but up north of town, there, it wasn   t  in the Canadian River, but it was a creek that run in the Canadian. It  washed a family in their house, and they got up on top of the roof and  rode it quite a ways, a man and a woman and a child. I think the man  escaped it, and the little woman and child, and the next day they found  11  Wilson  Bowers  Wilson  Bowers  Wilson  Bowers  Wilson  Bowers  Wilson  Bowers  the little girl over at Taloga. But other than that, of course, most of the  deaths were over around Hammon. And I understand that, of course,  Indians had their camp over on the river north of Hammon, and I think  there were several of them. But a lot of them was that creek just right  west of Hammon. Most people thought they all drown in the Washita  River, but a lot of them was that creek just west of Hammon, right there.  It   s just a quarter, runs right there at the west edge of Hammon. You   ve  been there in Hammon, haven   t you?  No, not yet. I   ve just looked on the map.  Okay. Well, I drive over there and play dominoes some over there, now.  What about Black Sunday? Do you remember, specifically, that day?  Well, we had several Black Sundays, and it didn   t only occur on Sunday.  Well, the first one, I guess I remember was I was going to school over in  Needmore all the time we had them. It   d quit then, but it was about one  or two o   clock, they turned out school, said,    You kids all run home and  trot. Don   t walk. Trot all the way home because there   s a black cloud  coming up in the northwest.    They knew it was a dust storm, and I know  we got about halfway home and the folks come to meet us. My dad had  a Model T Ford, Model T car, and he come in the Model T and picked  us up when we got about halfway home. And then, of course, what they  done then, now, she   d taken quilts and hung over the doors and would  wet a blanket and hang up over there. And the next morning, over the  doors and the windows, and then we stayed in the house. I guess my dad  went out and done the chores, but the next morning there was about that  much silt on top of our eating table, even with a blanket over the doors. I  was mostly pretty small to remember that, but things like that you don   t  ever forget.  Do you remember being very affected by the Depression?  The Depression?  Did it change much?  You mean then and now?  Well, at the time, did you see a difference between before the Depression  and then while it was underway?  It seemed like to me   I didn   t remember much before the Depression,  but it seemed like to me the biggest part of the Depression was already  over in the eastern part of the United States before it hit us out here, but  12  Wilson  Bowers  it lasted longer out here. But the people really didn   t know any better  because they   d never had it any better to start with out here. Now, back  in the industrial part, they   d had it better because a lot of people were  working in the factories, and then when they shut them factories off, I  guess they really went hungry because they didn   t have no garden or no  beef and pork to eat on. And out here, people on the farm   I do  remember distinctly one incident that happened.  You talk about the Black Sunday, about dark, a little after dark, there  was a man that walked up to our house and asked if he could stay all  night. And he had drove   it was all county roads, and they weren   t  maintained like they are now. They were trails. And he had got stuck  where a field had blowed the sand out in the field, in the road, and he got  stuck in the sand. And so, the next morning he walked over there to get  his car, and then he walked back, and he told my dad, he said,    My car is  stuck over there.    He said,    I can   t get it out.    He said,    If you want the  old car, you can go over there and dig it out if you want to.    He said,     I   m going. I   m a leaving.     So, we never did see him anymore. I don   t remember if my dad   but I  do know of going out there in the dirt, it   d blowed out overnight until it  was clear up to the top of the doors, up there, waist high on the old car.  And I imagine it was probably pretty well ruined. I don   t remember what  happened to it, but I do remember him a telling, the words he said, he  said,    If you want it, you can go over there and get it.    He said,    It   s  buried in the sand.    He said,    I   m a leaving this place.    And he walked  out, which was about a mile and a half to the highway, and caught him a  ride. And where he went, I don   t know, but I never did see him anymore.  Did you experience many gypsies or hobos coming through?  We didn   t see that too much. We lived off of the highway that much.  But we used to, even when we moved up to Roll, it was common. We  had a barn over next to the highway on the   we lived on one side of the  highway, and this was on the other side, down the road, and we   d keep  some feed in there for our cows. And we   d see where   I don   t know if  you   d call them hobos or hitchhikers, or something. But then when I was  going to school, a lot of times when I was at Cheyenne, if I got out at  noon, instead of waiting for the school bus to run, I   d walk out to the  edge of Cheyenne. And walking home, somebody   d pick me up, and  they   d pick people up then and let them ride. And then I   d walk off the  highway a mile and a half and go home and then work the rest of the  day. That was kind of common thing.  I remember one time, I was riding with my folks and they went home,  and out south of Cheyenne there was a man that they knew that was  13  Wilson  Bowers  Wilson  Bowers  Wilson  Bowers  Wilson  Bowers  Wilson  Bowers  going to Stillwater. And he hitchhiked when he   d come in. This was on  Sunday, and he was going to hitchhike and get on to Stillwater. My folks  talked to him a little bit, and they knew him, and he said,    Well, I go  down there. I don   t get to come home very often.    But he said,    I come  home pretty often,    but he said,    What I eat all through the week, I buy  these wheat rolls at the grocery store and a gallon of milk. That   s what I  live on all through the week while I   m going to school.     Do you remember your first tractor?  Yes, very well. An old regular International tractor. It had steel wheels  on it.  What year did you get it?  My dad bought that one. This would be in probably 1938, I imagine. My  first tractor I bought when I come home and went to farming was a little  Massey Ferguson tractor. It was a small row crop tractor, and I bought it  in 1949, I think.  Do you know how your parents came to this area? Were they born  around here, or where did they come from?  My dad was born in Arkansas, but he was raised at Mobeetie, Texas.  And my mother and them, I think they came in   my Granddad Jenks, he  didn   t file on a place. Well, I think he filed on it. He either filed on it or  bought a relinquishment, they called it. And he come down, I think,  from Kansas, down that way, I think. And my grandmother was a  Swede, come from Sweeden. My son   s working up a genealogy on that  now.  That   s great.  He went somewhere way back east down there. He and his wife come  home and then the next time, he went down in Louisiana and found out.  It   s remarkable what they can look up and find now.  Oh, yes. Well, what are some of your favorite dishes that your mom used  to prepare?  Back then, Mom could take about anything and whip it up and make it  taste good. She   d take asparagus, and there wouldn   t be enough to braise  it or cook it, and she   d chop it up and make a thickening out of it, and  it   d go further. And that   s the same way with some of the fruits and  stuff. We just about ate off of the farm. Well, my wife and I did that for  many years, and we raised a big garden. I still raise a garden here in  14  Wilson  Bowers  Wilson  Bowers  Wilson  Bowers  Wilson  town. When I bought a house here in town, it had a swimming pool in it,  so I filled it up and made a victory garden out of it. I still got that in  there, and so we enjoy it better than we do the swimming pool. And so,  being famers, why   of course, when we lived up south of Roll, we lived  right on the head of Dead Indian Creek. And, of course, the creek run  lots of water there and it made a good black, loam soil there next to the  creek, and it made a good place to raise a good garden. And there for a  while it helped out financially, but made better eating than what you can  buy in the store.  What about bath time growing up? How would you bathe before indoor  plumbing?  When Audrey and I were going to get married, I worked for a man here  in Cheyenne, and I drove a gasoline delivery truck out on the farm. He  says,    What do you want for a wedding present?    And I said,    Well, I  want a bath tub.    He said,    A bath tub, what?    And at that time, they had  them wash tubs. You know them long wash tubs, about like that?  (Gestures) He got us one of them for our wedding, and we used that for  our bath tub for   well, until we moved up there and bought our first  farm. The man that we bought it from in 1958, he didn   t have it   well,  see, the REA  Rural Electric Administration  come in in the late    40s  and early    50s. And by that time, it was before that you couldn   t have  running water if you didn   t have something to heat the water with, you  see. And so, we didn   t have indoor plumbing until we moved up there.  We   d just have a wash pan and a water bucket.  What year did you move up there?  In 1951, I think.  Do you remember much about the WPA  Works Progress  Administration  or CCC  Civilian Conservation Corps ?  The main thing that I remember about it, men came and planted a shelter  belt for us, and then they came back and watered it and farmed it the  first year and got it to going. And then also, they came back for, I think  it was fifteen dollars, they   d build you a new outdoor toilet. It had a  concrete slab, and they   d dig a hole and set it over that, and they had a  one-holer or a two-holer. I think one   I   m not for sure what one cost,  either seven-fifty and fifteen  dollars , or fifteen and twenty dollars.  Anyway, they put new lumber, new boards, up and boy it was fancy.  People was really proud of them.  Do you remember them digging any farm ponds?  15  Bowers  Wilson  Bowers  Wilson  Bowers  Wilson  Bowers  Wilson  Bowers  Well, are you talking about farm ponds or the flood control?  Maybe flood control, the WPA.  When I got my farming laid by a row crop, I helped build them dams on  sandstone project, where they had big tractors and stuff to dig that with.  And what I did, I drove. I got a job driving a water truck. As they built a  dam, they   d have to water it and pack it, pack the dirt, and that was the  first time that we   d really got a job that paid good. It paid a dollar an  hour. But when I come back from the Army after World War II, I went  to driving a truck down there, a gasoline truck, which was considered a  pretty good job then   it paid 100 dollars a month.  I can remember my granddad, back in the    30s, he hired a man and a  wife and furnished them a house to live in, give them their beef and  probably their chickens, eggs, and milk. But he paid them thirty dollars a  month for the man and the wife, and they milked cows, and then he done  the farm work in the day time and then after they got the chores. They   d  milk cows night and morning, and she would help him do the milking,  but then other than that, the two of them was working for thirty dollars a  month, and they was happy to have a job.  What would you all do for entertainment while you were growing up?  Well, they   d have a family get together on Saturday night and make ice  cream, homemade ice cream. Of course, they   d have the milk and the  cream there at home, you see, and they   d buy the ice at the local store or  somewhere, and they   d have that. And other than that, if one of them  had a radio and the others didn   t have a radio, on Saturday night, they   d  all watch the Grand Ole Opry. That was a pretty good deal.  So, neighbors would get together to listen to the radio?  Yes, and then locally there, we had a place that they had out in one  pasture where they had a ball diamond, and they played. I don   t  remember if it was softball or baseball, but I think it was softball. On  Sunday afternoon they   d have softball games, but baseball games were  pretty popular, too.  What about for holidays?  Well, we   d have our own little Christmas. They   d have a Christmas tree  at the local school. Well, in fact, they   d have their church there, too.  That   s where we went to church there. You see, the school was the main  gathering point. They   d have their pie suppers, you see, and their school  programs, and then they   d have their Christmas tree there, too, you see.  16  Wilson  Bowers  Wilson  Bowers  Wilson  Bowers  Wilson  Bowers  Wilson  Bowers  And that   s where it was at, at the local school. And if they had preachers  that come through the country and hold revivals and stuff, they   d have it  at the school house of a night.  So, the whole community would gather?  Yes, you see, that was the only building big enough in the local  community. You must remember, at that time, eight or ten miles, ten  miles was a pretty long distance for somebody to travel for local  entertainment or anything else, as far as that. You just didn   t drive like  twenty-five, thirty miles to another town like they do now every day or  two for this or that. You didn   t go to town every day. If you lived seven  miles from a town and you got a job in town, you moved to town. You  couldn   t afford to drive back and forth to work. You would move to  town or rent a little place and move to town while you was working.  So, what would they do at the Christmas gatherings at the school?  Well, the school would furnish a program. Kids would furnish their  Christmas program, different stuff like that.  Do you remember being involved in Christmas programs?  Yes, but I don   t know what we did in there. We mostly, the group would  stand up and have group singing or something like that.  What are some lessons you feel that you learned growing up that you   ve  carried with you and passed on to your children?  The only thing that I   ve learned, a lot of times, if I   d make mistakes, I  always figured I couldn   t help it the first time, but if I made the same  mistake twice, it   s my own fault. And I made a lot of them.   How has Cheyenne changed over the years?   Of course, time changes your location and different types of stores and  stuff like that. But we used to have a picture show, and that was the main  attraction on Saturday night because it   d have a preview. And a lot of  farmers would come to town on Saturday afternoon and maybe stay until  the picture show that night, you see, and then wouldn   t get home until  after. If you was young, young couples it   d be after the preview, and it  would be one-thirty before you got home. It seemed like on Saturday, all  day Saturday and Saturday night, the streets would be full of people. I  mean it  was the place to be . And there   d always be a little excitement.  They had two or three beer joints, and they   d have one or two fights.  Men would get a little too boozy and there was always a little excitement  17  Wilson  Bowers  Flesher  Bowers  Wilson  Flesher  Bowers  Flesher  Bowers  Wilson  Bowers  Wilson  going on like that.  Do you remember how much the picture show would cost?  I don   t. Gertrude knows more. I bet she     Well, I think, when I was dating Jim Parks, he had a dollar, and we went  to the first show, and then we went to the preview. So, that would be  twenty-five cents a show. But we didn   t have popcorn and cokes and all  that. He was just a country boy, and he was from a big family and     Along in the late    30s, we had a late snowstorm in April, and it drifted  real high. And around where I lived at home, down the road a ways is a  draw, and they dug a little hole like a silo pit and got clay dirt to put on  the road. They dug it straight down on the thing, and it was about ten  foot wide and about thirty feet long. And they dug clay out of that. But  anyway, the man come by from the thing, stopped to see if we needed  any groceries from the store. He had a tow sack on his horse, and so you  couldn   t follow the road. You had to go in and out of the fields and the  pastures. So, naturally, we watched him as he left the house go on down  the road. And we knew   we seen he was headed right toward   he was  going back toward the road from the field, and we knew he was going to  cross this here trench. Well, it was leveled over with snow, and he was  walking along there, and then all of a sudden the horse and all just went  down, clear up to the horse   s   up to here, in this pit, and we got quite a  chuckle. That was excitement for us, then.  I bet  (Laughs)  That was in 1938.  Yes.  Because Mary Agnes was born, and Dr. Kerry had to walk up to their  house to deliver her.  The snow was about half dirt. I remember my dad pulling the sheet iron  off of the top of the barn and walking up there and feeding the horses  from the top of the barn, and it trapped them in the snow drift.  Well, is there anything that you would like to talk about that I haven   t  asked you?  I think you   ve been pretty thorough.  What about Oklahoma? Do you feel pride as an Oklahoman?  18  Bowers  Wilson  Bowers  Wilson  Well, it   s the only state I know.  All right. Well, thank you very much for talking with me today.  Well, thank you.  I appreciate it.  -------  -------  
