 Higgins  Hildebrandt  Today is Friday, May 16, 2014. My name is Jason Higgins, and I am an  intern with Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at the OSU  library. I am in Broken Arrow to speak with David Hildebrandt  regarding his life experiences, including his military service and  experience at Oklahoma State University. This is part of the Spotlighting  Oklahoma oral history project, and along with me today is Juliana  Nykolaiszyn. Thank you for joining me today, David.  We welcome you all in our home.  Thank you for the invitation. To begin, can you tell me when and where  you were born?  I was born in Enid, Oklahoma on July 5, 1937.  And can you describe your home town?  It was a great place to grow up. You could walk up to old Tasco and get  the fishing supplies, or whatever you wanted. My mom and dad didn   t  have to worry about me being snatched up by somebody or anything like  that. We could just go all over Enid. It was just a great town to grow up  in.  And, who were your parents?  Fred George Hildebrandt and Irene Hildebrandt, and greatest parents  you could ever have, and I say that   they just were, that   s all. They  didn   t have much money, but we had a lot of love.  Are you the youngest sibling?  Yes, there   s three brothers, and we   re all three still alive, and I   m the  5  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  youngest one. I   ll be seventy-seven July 5th, I guess.  What was it like growing up as the youngest, at the tail-end of the Great  Depression?  Well, I just had the greatest brothers in the world, you know, and they  kind of took care of me, and I had a great life in Enid until 1955, when I  moved to go to Oklahoma A M College. That   s the first time I had left  Enid, for a period of time. We just   I don   t know   it was a town that  you didn   t have to be afraid of, back then. Mom and Dad never locked  the doors at night. When it was hot, of course we didn   t have air-conditioning,  and they   d throw a mattress out in the back yard, and we   d  all lay across it and sleep. It was just a great town.  So, what did your family do to relax and enjoy  yourselves , possibly on  Sunday?  We went fishing a lot. Dad, he liked to fish, and he   d catch fish and  never turned them back, I   ll tell you. If he caught one, it was going in  the frying pan. I remember on Monday morning, before we   d go to  school, a lot of the times, Mom would   we   d go on Saturday or Sunday,  and Mom would cook up what we got and we   d eat them Monday  morning, at breakfast time. I don   t care if it was a little old perch, six  inches long, or what they were, Dad kept, and cleaned, and we ate them.  What did your dad do for a living?  In my lifetime, what I remember is, he drove a beer truck most of the  time, and worked for some great people. Two different people, he  worked for. He never made a lot of money, but we always had sirloin  steak once or twice a month. Dad loved to eat, and he liked to cook.  He   d cook, and mom would cook, both of them. I suppose we had some  hard times  however we did not realize it . I guess we thought we was  just as rich as other people because everybody was having hard times.  I   d go on the beer trucks with Dad sometime, in the summer times  generally. I had little league baseball. If I had a game that night, Dad  would always make sure I got back for that game. If he was in Alva,  Oklahoma, and he had two more customers, he   d say I   ll catch him next  time. He   d get me home for the ballgame.  Sounds like a lovely childhood. So, you began your schooling during the  war effort, can you describe what that was like?  Well, yes, about    43, I believe that   s when I started the first grade at  Jefferson School, which was, I imagine, a half mile probably from our  6  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  house. We walked back and forth all the time. I don   t know that   like I  say everybody didn   t have much money, so the family across the street  from us had five kids, and they   the dad was a carpenter, and they   were  really good people. Of course, the whole neighborhood was good.  I remember Mrs. Walsh lived up the street about six houses from us, and  she got a T.V. in 1950, I  think . It was a little ol    round thing, about the  size of a basketball. But, she   d say,    Anytime y   all want to come up and  watch, you come up.    So, we  went there  a lot. We   d watch the Lucy  show and Red Skelton, and really good shows. So, that   s kind of what I  remember most.  Can you describe any other community gatherings, such as cook-outs?  Oh, man, my birthday is on the 5th of July, and on the 4th of July, we  always had fried chicken, and chocolate cake, and homemade ice cream,  out in the backyard, and all the neighbors would come.  Say we might   have fifteen, twenty people there, and maybe more. It was always a fun  time.  I   ve read of there being distributions of certain goods during the war  effort. Do you remember nights where a particular dish was cooked at  home?  On Monday, we always had beans, I remember that. I don   t remember  any special kind of things. Mom, she always cooked beans on Monday,  but that   s the only thing we had regularly. Friday nights, we generally  eat something and go up to the square, what they call the square in Enid,  and park, and we   d watch people go by. Finally, one of the stores up  there got a T.V., and we   d go up there and watch it. Generally, we   d go  to the movie for   I don   t know, on Saturday, I know a nickel and a Dr.  Pepper bottle cap, you could go to a movie on Saturday. On Friday, I  don   t remember what it was, but Dad always liked the westerns. We   d  go up to see a western movie. That was kind of a special time.  So, you graduated from Enid High School?  Yes.  What year was that?  1955. Started Oklahoma A M in 1955.  You went directly to college.  Yes. Graduated in May, started over there in September. I was kind of  like my other two brothers said, I didn   t really have any money, but did  7  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Nykolaiszyn  Hildebrandt  work hard, didn   t have a big loan when I got out of college. I remember  Dad saying,    What are you going to take in college?    I said,    Dad, I   m  not sure I   m going to go.    He said,    Well, I   m pretty sure you are.    And,  that meant I was sure enough going. I said,    What am I going to do for  money?    He said,    Well, you   ll get by.    Mom and Dad couldn   t help us.  We did. We got by. Worked jobs over there, I worked over there at Chili  Bowl for about all four years of my life over there. In fact, I stayed  longer than that. I got a job at a feed mill, which later I   d partner with  him on the elevator in Morrison and Lela, Oklahoma.  So, what was the campus like in 1955?  Well, you could sure walk across it. You can   t now, I   ll tell you. There   s  a lot of new buildings now, and I don   t even know what some of them  are. We   ve been over there quite a bit to football games and stuff. It was  a nice place, beautiful campus. I always thought OSU had the most  beautiful flowers and stuff, you know on their campus. But other than  that, the size is about all that   s changed.  How did you interact with other students, any organizations?  Well, not much. We stayed on Duck Street, 122 Duck, just like my older  brothers said, and we all three stayed there. It was a Hildebrandt at that  house from 1948, I believe it was, until 19   I didn   t leave until 1962  because   no,    61 is when we got married.  So, you got married when you were in school?  No, I graduated.  What year did you graduate?  I graduated in    55 from high school, and graduated from college in 1960.  Took me longer than most people because I wanted to party some     maybe too much.  Can you describe that?  Oh, I could     What were some of the happening places to party?  Well, Anchor Inn is right, not too far from where we stayed on Duck  Street, about two blocks west. But I remember when Hideaway pizza  started in 1957, I believe it was. Then, we   d go from Duck Street every  night about ten or eleven o   clock, and get a pizza after we finally bought  8  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  L. Hildebrandt  Hildebrandt  Higgins  some and got  used to eating pizza . It was a great place to be. When I   began in the fall  it was Oklahoma A M see, and then they changed in  it in 1957, I believe, so I graduated from Oklahoma State.  What did you  earn  your degree in?  General business. Business and administration. Started in geology, had  some real good geology teachers, and Dr. John Naff told me   one day  he called me in and said,    I need to talk to you.    I said okay.    I think if  you want to graduate from this college, you   re going to have to get in  something besides geology.       Well, I appreciate that Dr. Naff, I   appreciate you advising me .    So, I got out of geology and got in  business. I   m glad I did because I ended up buying our own elevator and  grain storage, so it was good. I was in business.  So it seems that particular instructor had an influence on you, has any  educator ever changed your life, or made a significant impact on your  life?  No, not really. I guess, not really. I had some good ones. I had some I  didn   t like, but  overall they were all good .  Do you mind telling us how you met your wife?  No, she was on a date with another guy from Morris, Oklahoma, and  they came by because I was still staying in this house on Duck Street,  and I don   t think it was really a date. They were kind of just friends, but  I thought,    She sure is cute.    Found out, she was still in high school, and  I   d graduated from college. So, we got to going together in February,  1961. June 20th, I think it was, we went out to Yost Lake, out there. The  guy I was working for, he had us out there for steaks. I bought a ring,  and I put it in the glove compartment of the car and opened it up. So, we  got north of Stillwater, I said,    Reach in that glove compartment and get  me sunglasses,    or something out of there. She opened it up, and there  was that ring.   Wife Linda joins interview   You asked me for your check book, and I guess it was night, and it just,  the light hit it, and it just took your breath away. I was shocked, and I  thought it was beautiful, and scared to death, all at the same time.  But, we got married July 22nd.  So, no hesitation?  9  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  No, six months, less than six months. It was about six months. It started  out kind of rocky. I didn   t know whether I was going to make it because  a drunk hit me head on with seven other people in the car, and didn   t kill  anybody, but boy, had a lot of injuries. I had injuries, and I got over as  far as I could, and there was a post there. I couldn   t get over any farther.  He hit us head on. Then, got out of that, kind of survived, lost the brand  new car I had, totaled it.  Then, we found out, President Kennedy called a lot of the units up to the  Cuban Crisis. I sure decided we probably couldn   t make payments on a  car, so we had to buy an older car. Same time, I guess about the same  time, that was a big thing, October 1st, we was going to have to report to  National Guard, active duty, over there in Tulsa.  Can you tell us a little bit about how you joined the military?  Well, there was about five of us up there. We ran around together. Some  of them lived up there where I lived, at 122 Duck, and we decided,     Hey, we   ll go over there and get in this National Guard unit, and by  golly that   ll serve our military, and we can still work, and just go to  meetings once a month, and be fine.    And dadgum, if he didn   t call us  up within four months after we graduated. Didn   t make much money. I  think she got like ninety-seven dollars, and I got like seventy-eight, or  something like that. But we survived, and my older brother   oldest  brother, he knew some people here who had an apartment upstairs over a  garage, and we rented it for eleven months on active duty.  It was a good deal for us, and I really had a lot of fun in the service. We  were in the supply unit. In supply, we didn   t have a lot to do on some  days. Then, some days, it was really busy. On those days, when we  didn   t have a lot to do, we played pitch, or played cards or something,  and met some great guys. Captain Fisk was my officer in charge, and he  was a great guy. He just tried to help you all he could, but he wanted us  to help him, and we did.  What year did you join the National Guard?  In 1960.  And what was the military atmosphere like during that time, as far as the  Cold War?  A little unsettled because we had the Cuban Crisis, and we had several  other things in that same period of time. It was really unsettled, and we  didn   t know for sure where everybody was going to be. So anyhow, we  got through that, and I   d come over here once a month, stay with my  10  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  older brother, and Jack, and Mary. It was really a good time in our lives.  So, did you stay in Stillwater?  Yes, I stayed in Stillwater and worked for this man, that later in life, was  my partner, in grain storage and elevator.  How long was your military service?  Until 1966, so six years.  And how long was that active duty?  Eleven months. It should   ve been twelve, but she was pregnant with our  son, and he was about to come sometime in September, so they opted to  let me go back to Stillwater, or stay in the military. I could   ve stayed in  and did the delivery over here, but I went to Stillwater. The guy I was  working for at the time and would later become partner, he said he   d pay  for Scott if we   d come back to work, so we went a month early.  So, can you describe your training during the Cold War era?  Well, we   d have calisthenics and everything every morning. Went to  Lackland Air Force for my boot camp, and was down there from June,  something until October, something. Come back here in October. That  was in 1960, also.  Was it physically rigorous in the National Guard?  No, not really, pretty  laid back , but we did have calisthenics every  morning, on the weekends when it was their Saturday and Sunday. On  active duty, of course we did like they did in the regular military.  Can you describe any special training in the event of nuclear war, for  example?  No, we didn   t have any.  Didn   t have any, okay.  No, not in the National Guard. See we was supposed to go overseas, and  about two weeks into October, we found out we wasn   t going overseas.  We was going to stay right here in Tulsa. They fly the C-97s, those big  cargo planes, out of here as well as they could anywhere else, and that  kept us right here.  11  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  You said your military occupation was transport, what was that like?  They flew them. I was in supply.  Supply, okay.  Of course, every now and then, we   d go up and ride around over Tulsa  or something. I didn   t know a lot except supply. Anything anybody  needed, we   d get it for them.  So, you flew in the big cargo planes sometimes?  We   d fly around Tulsa or something like that.  What was that like?  It was an experience. You could look down and see everything. Those  are big old planes, lot of room in them. But, it was fun.  Can you recall any specific episode where it was particularly  memorable, any fun or exciting time?  No, we got to know a lot of guys. On active duty, they brought people in  from   well, we had this one kid from Mississippi   Sergeant, he was a  staff sergeant, I don   t remember his name other than that, but yes, we  got to know a lot of people, and enjoyed it really.  Sounds good, up to    66, was there any fear of going to Vietnam, being  deployed to Vietnam?  No, I served my military obligation, and got out in    66. I didn   t have any  more obligations. Of course, if they had a lot of trouble, I suppose they  could   ve called them up  National Guard  in service over there. I  could   ve I suppose, but I was not afraid of it.  At what point was your son born?  We got married in July of    61, and he was born in September 30th of     62. About a year and a half.  Do you remember that day specifically?  Oh, yes.  Can you describe the feeling of being a first-time father?  12  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Nykolaiszyn  Hildebrandt  Yes. We watched Gunsmoke. It was a Saturday night, and she, about two  o   clock, she woke me up and said,    I think I need to go to the hospital.     Well, I had our doctor   s number at that time, and I called Dr. Ripley, and  I said,    Dr. Ripley, what do I do now? She thinks we need to go to the  hospital.    He said,    Well, you ought to take her. Don   t be excited. Just  take her over to the hospital, and I   ll be over there in a while.    This is  three o   clock on Sunday morning. Well, about seven, something, she got  really close to having the baby, and they took her in about seven  something. She had him. Everything came out fine. Dr. Ripley was  there. After it was all over, he came out, and I said,    Did I get you up  this morning when I called?    He said,    No, I always get up at three  o   clock on Sunday morning.    (Laughs) He was a good doctor.  How many children do you have?  Two, boy first, girl second. That   s the way I wanted them, and that   s the  way we got them. Two good kids, the girl   s in Bartlett, Tennessee, and  the son lives about five miles north of us here. He had four kids. We  went over to see our grandson play football, when we moved over here  in 2006. Adam was playing football, and we boy, we enjoyed watching  him. That was good times. And then, our granddaughter was a year  behind him, and we   d watch her play basketball for two years, and boy,  that was exciting. She was a good basketball player.  Did they go to Oklahoma State as well, your children?  Yes, they graduated from Lincoln Christian School, here in town. From  high school, they went straight over there. This fall, we   ll have two more  going over there, twins. He had twins. They tried for a third child, and  found out they had twins. They   re great kids. They   re in Orlando,  Florida today on a senior trip. They   ll be back Tuesday, I believe.  Sounds like you oldest brother began a legacy.  Yes, everybody goes to OSU from this part of the country.  So tell me about learning the grain elevator business.  Well, in 1965, I asked   when I graduated from College, I asked Bob  Ahrberg, from Ahrberg Mill, he said I   ll give you a raise and you   ll  make a dollar and a quarter an hour. I said,    Oh boy, that   s a good deal.     I worked about three years like that, I guess,    60-   63. I said,    Bob, I   m  going to have to have more money or quit.    He said,    I can   t pay you  anymore.    I said,    Okay.    He didn   t think I   d quit, and even on our  wedding day, he wanted me to work.  13  Hildebrandt  Nykolaiszyn  Hildebrandt  I worked until noon Saturday, and then drove to Morris and got married.  But they came down too for the wedding too. Bob has always been a big  part of our life. We love them both. He   s got cancer, now, really bad. He  just found out, and I talk to him about once or twice a week. They  haven   t found out anything, where to go. Anyhow, that   s another story.  On the grain elevator business, I went to work for W. R. Grace  Chemical, and I never missed a day   s work. I quit Bob on Saturday, and  Paul Rigg   s, a guy that lived in Stillwater, was manager of this district  for W. R. Grace. He said,    What are you going to do?    I said,    I don   t  have a job.    He said,    Well, how    bout me giving you one?    He hired  me at more money than I ever made in my life, at that point.  Worked for W. R. Grace until 1965, and Bob and two of his customers  came over here on a Saturday, and said,    I   m going to hire you back.    I  said,    I don   t know about that. I   m pretty satisfied.    So, they took us out,  and wined and dined us, and bought us big steaks. He said,    Now, I want  to hire you back.    I said,    No, not going to do that. I   ll partner with  you.    He said,    That   s all right.    I said,    I don   t have any money.    He  said,    You don   t need any. We   ll be half and half partners, and you pay  me if you ever get the money.    That   s kind of the way we got started. I  worked with him until 1979. That was 1969.  In 1979, I bought the other half of the elevator. I give him  50,000 for  the first half, and we built it up so much that he said,    Put down what  you   d take for it, or what you   d give for it.    He did the same thing. We  agreed on  145,000. I called the banker and said,    I need to borrow the  money.    He said,    Okay, come on up.    I told him. He looked at  everything, and said,    Just write him a check.    So, that   s the way we got  started. We bought the second half. Then, in 1989, I sold it out to the  Perry Co-Op. A little more to the story, in 1992, I bought it back and run  it five years, and got out of it. Sold it to a guy up there in Morrison, sold  it cheap enough to him. I just wanted to get out. I was tired of dealing  with the people.  Why   d you buy it back?  Well, they run it down and closed it up. The Co-Op just run it in the  ground. I knew if I could buy it cheap enough, we could make it, and we  did. They started to sell it to us for  100,000. I said,    No.    They finally  got down to fifty, and I offered them  40,000. They wouldn   t take that.  The board wouldn   t approve it, so I bought it for  50,000 back. Then,  we built it up. We bought a fertilizing spreading rig and everything. It  was good. It got to going good, but the kid that I partnered with, he run it  for a little while.  14  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  One reason, I wanted to get out was I left him there one night to dump  some trucks with soybeans in the fall. A guy called me and said,    You  know your elevator is still open down there, the lights are all on, it   s  after midnight?       No, I didn   t really think he was going to cut that late.     So, I went down there, and he had too many beers, and I said,    You got  to do something different.    That   s when I told him I was going to get  out.  Back to your military career a little bit, did you ever keep up with your  friends after your service?  A short time, yes. Probably until we moved back to Stillwater,  something like that,    66. We moved back over here, of course, but they  was all out of touch by then though.  Have you been in Oklahoma all your life?  Yes, born in Enid, and been here all my life.  So, Oklahoma is home to you? Why Oklahoma?  I just think it   s a great state. Stillwater is a great town, and I think it   s the  greatest town in Oklahoma. It   s pretty, good people. I just love  Oklahoma, and love Stillwater.  Okay, how did the military, your six years in the military, prepare you  for the rest of your life?  I think discipline, probably. There   s discipline in the service, and it  helped me to do be more disciplined in my life. Other than that, I don   t  know a whole lot that it helped. I think everybody ought to go through it.  I think if a lot of our kids went through it, they   d know a lot more  discipline.  I went to Lackland Air Force Base for that period, and we had big old  people, some coloreds and some whites, and boy, you had to keep on  your toes down there at Lackland, or they   d reprimand you pretty hard.  We had to carry flashlights because they had some guys out marching a  week before we got down there. A guy came by in a Jeep and hit them.  Hit the whole unit, and I don   t think it killed anybody, but it could   ve. I  don   t know that for sure.  It was an accident?  Yes, it was an accident. So, we had to carry flashlights everywhere we  went at dark.  15  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  You described your days in the military as fun. Was there anything  difficult, challenging?  No, not really. Like I say, it was kind of a fun period because we was  over there in the apartment we had was only about two miles from the  base. I could run home at noon, or whatever I wanted to do. They were  real good to me because I had a college degree, and it meant a lot to  some of them. I never met anybody in there I didn   t like. It was always  good. Even the captains and whatever, lieutenants, everybody, was all  good.  What was it like being in an integrated unit during the early sixties?  Well, we didn   t have any coloreds up here in our unit at that time, but  when we got to Lackland Air Force Base, there was a lot of them down  there. I don   t think there was any trouble, though. I think everybody just  kind of went along with it, in the sixties even.  Throughout your experiences, what are some of the most memorable  moments of your life?  In my life?  Yes, in your experiences.  Well, when both our kids were born, I think that was probably one of the  greatest times. Our marriage was first. I married a great girl, and several  people said,    She   s just eighteen years old. It   ll never last.    But it   s  lasted fifty-three years this July 22nd, so they were wrong, I think. My  mom and dad, I just can   t say enough about them. They were great  people, and I told you, Dad never made a lot of money, but we always  had love. He always made sure we had, like I said, sirloin steak once or  twice a month, and he liked sirloin steaks.  I could always remember we   d sit around the table, kind of like this.  Mom would cook supper, and we ate, and Dad said,    I want to talk to  ya   ll after we have our meal.    So, we didn   t know what he was going to  say. We thought we might be going on a vacation or something. That  never happened. Dad said,    You know, I made  2,900 this year, and we  didn   t save one penny of it. We got to do a better job next year if I make  that much money. We got to save some of it.    I always remembered that.  But, we   d always, in the summer, Dad might   ve had a vacation three  days or five days, and he   d borrow the beer truck, and it   d be empty, and  we   d take it out to the pond out there. We could sleep on the floor of it.  16  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  You know, it was a good time. Catch maybe just perch or catfish or  something like that. If we was just going out for a little while, we   d go  out to Turkey Creek, west of Enid, and fish, hunt. We   d hunt ducks,  geese, and everything like that.  Did your father teach you how to drive?  Yes.  What kind of vehicle was it?  A    37 Plymouth, I guess is what we had then, I believe. We had a    37  Plymouth and a    47 Plymouth, and the    37 was pretty old. I got old  enough to drive, but I don   t really know what   Dad was just a good  driver. He drove over two million miles in a beer truck and never had a  wreck. He did have   he didn   t hit a kid. A kid hit his car, run out  between two cars at a school and run right into Dad. He hit him, and it  didn   t really hurt him real bad, but they took him to the hospital. Dad  was just tore up. He couldn   t stand it.  You mentioned an automobile accident during your time at college. Did  you receive injuries from that?  Well, they thought I had a split liver and a split spleen. They treated me  for, I don   t know, probably two weeks, off and on. We were on active  duty then. It was a weekend for summer camp, and I had gotten off  because we had our family reunion over there at Enid, and we   d gone  over there at Enid. Like I said, we had a new car. It was a    60 Chevy  Impala. We went on over there. Then, we went to the reunion.  Everything was fine until this guy hit us. He was drunk.  Did the military pay for your hospital bills?  Yes, but they come and got me from Kingfisher. That   s where we had  the wreck, over by Kingfisher and they came and got me in an  ambulance. I don   t know that guy must   ve drove seventy-fives an hour  because I was hurting inside. It was about the next day after we had the  wreck, and they brought me back over here. That was not a pleasant  time.  So, it seems that you   ve experienced a lot throughout life, even living  only in Oklahoma. How has Oklahoma shaped your philosophy on life?  I think it   s just kind of laid back. Oklahoma is pretty laid back, you  know, I think. I   m glad we live here, rather than Chicago, or Los  Angeles, or someplace like that. It   s just great. We   ve been a lot of  17  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Nykolaiszyn  Hildebrandt  Nykolaiszyn  Hildebrandt  Nykolaiszyn  Hildebrandt  places. We   ve been able to go to Hawaii, Caracas, Venezuela, and never  went to Europe. She kind of wanted to go to Europe, and I never did. So,  I guess we just didn   t.  It   s not too late.  Oh, yes it is on Social Security and a couple little retirements. There   s  not enough money. You talked to the guys who had the money, the one  before me, and the next one, the one before him.  You have a strong connection to Oklahoma State. Can you talk a little  bit about   have you gone back much through the years?  Yes, when we lived at Morrison, we used to have season tickets to the  basketball and football both, and we   d go to the games down at  Stillwater, you know. Some out of town, we   d go to Nebraska, when  they played Nebraska, we always went up for football. It   s a great  college. I don   t think you can beat it. Of course, when I started the  tuition was only six dollars an hour. Take fifteen hours, and you had  ninety dollars for your tuition.  Then, we did have a Laverne Noyes Scholarship, through my Dad for  the First World War. It paid some. I don   t even remember what it paid  now, but it was not very much. I worked at the Chili Bowl over there,  and if we needed at noon, he   d give me a sandwich, or a bowl of chili  and a sandwich. And then, he   d tried to give forty or fifty cents, if his  wife wasn   t looking.  That   s the Chili Bowl on the strip, right?  No.  Where was it?  You know where the Anchor Inn is? You know where the Old Central  is? It was right across, really from Eskimo Joe   s it was to the corner  west, about a half a block south. It was back in there. I don   t know  what   s in there now, but it was right along there. Yes, I worked there, I  don   t know, like four years, I think.  Of course, starting out, there   s a grocery store in Enid up on Van Buren  Street, and this lady called and wanted my brother to work, Jack, and he  was busy. He couldn   t do it, and I said I can. I wasn   t very big. I was  about, maybe, I was probably eight or nine years old. I went to work for  them. I worked there until I got out of high school in 1955. They were  good people. They helped me a lot. I got to tell you this story.  18  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  In 1951, I wanted a T.V. because Buddy Champlin, of Champlin  Refinery there in Enid, was in my class. He   d come to class every  morning, and they   d ask him what was on T.V. last night. They   d say,     What   d you watch on T.V.    And, I   d like to have one of them T.V.s. I  went up to Newman   s, and they had a nice T.V. for  278 or something  around that. I asked Dad if I could buy it because I was working down at  this grocery store making thirty-five cents an hour. He said,    Well son, I  can   t help you pay for it, but if you want to buy it, we   ll see what we can  do.    So, I went up to Newman   s and I bought that thing. Back then, I  guess they   d let anybody buy something, and they carried it for me.  I   d have a payment to make every month, and I   d always save enough  money to make that payment on my T.V. You know we had a big old  antenna on top of the house and everything. I finally got it paid off, but  boy, it was a struggle. It was the longest time at thirty-five cents an hour.  My next older brother here, if he didn   t need money or something  because he was still going to college, and I   d just put everything I made  on that T.V., every month paid more than what my payments were.  So, what are your views on technology?  About the same as my two older brothers.  I was curious because     Now, my next oldest one, he   s pretty much the technician, on the phone,  he can do anything on it, but my oldest brother and I, we   re pretty dumb.  She does all my computer work. That   s one thing I failed to mention.  You said, ties with OSU, our son Scott, he was in the band over there for  four years, and played the trumpet in the band.  So, if you had a message to tell 2014 graduates from OSU, what would  that be?  Well, if you   re not a Christian, you need to keep God in your life. I think  that if the younger generation would do that, or graduating generation, I  think that would help our country a lot because I think our morals have  gone down quite a bit. I   m not saying that there   s not good moral people,  but I mean, there   s less of them than there was when I graduated. I don   t  know. We go to church, Sunday school every Sunday, and church. I  think that needs to be   a lot of people need to do that.  I noticed on T.V. the other day, they said that the younger generation,  thirty-five percent less go to Sunday school and church now than what  they did. But, on the second on that, when we was home, when I was  19  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Nykolaiszyn  growing up, Sunday was Dad   s day off for sure and some Saturdays. But  on Sunday, by golly, we got to go fishing, and Mom generally shined  our shoes on Saturday night, and get us ready for Sunday school. First  Baptist Church was just a block and a half from the house, and she   d get  our clothes and everything. We would go to Sunday school, and after  Sunday school, Dad was ready to go fishing. We had the greatest dad in  the world. If I could   ve been a third as good a dad as he was, I think  things   I   d just been a lot happier in life. I just don   t feel like I was that  good.  So, if you had words of wisdom to tell your younger self, graduating  from college, what would that be?  Just always be honest, and trustworthy, and if you tell somebody  something, do it, don   t try to back out on. Just take care of your life.  How long have you been married?  Fifty-three years this July 22nd.  Can you describe how that   s worked for so long?  It   s worked great. I never could   ve had a better, better lady in my life  than who I had. Eighteen years old, and got married, she had to learn a  lot, and I had to learn a lot, but we learned together, and things worked  out. I think they   re going to continue to work out, I hope.  Is there anything else that we haven   t discussed that you would care to  share?  Probably think of something, when you get gone, but I can   t think of  anything right now. I should   ve jotted down. I had two or three things  that I was going to say, but I think I got most of them. Morrison was a  good place for our kids to grow up. We bought a house west of Morrison  on the south side of the highway in 1976. My gosh, of course the mill  was between there and the school, and the kids would rise their bikes off  the highway, and through the addition up there. We never worried about  them. Of course, they always reported in when they come by the mill,  and then when they come back in, and then when they got home, we   d  have them call down at the mill. So, Morrison was a really good town  for them to grow up in and for us to have them to grow up in. My son   s  about three years older than out daughter. From September 30th, to July  22nd. She was born on our fourth wedding anniversary, our daughter  was.  Well, looking back on your life, and your career, your family, how would  20  Hildebrandt  Higgins  you like to be remembered?  Well, I   ll tell you, I was in business twenty years in Morrison the first  time. If you make one person mad a year, you got twenty enemies in  there. I don   t believe we had twenty enemies. We always did everything  we told them we   d do, was always fair. We didn   t try to gouge them and  make more money or anything like that. We tried to be fair with them,  and I   d like to be remembered as a fair person. I guess a fair Christian  person, I hope I   m a Christian. I think I am. I don   t know that I   ve done  a good enough job being a Christian or not. You just never know. So  that   s about all I would have to say I think, unless you all have some  more questions.  Well, I   m sure I   ll think of something later as well, but I   d like to thank  you very much for your time, and your willingness to share your story.  -------  -------  
