 Finchum  Moesel  Today is July 7, 2011. My name is Tanya Finchum. I am with the  Oklahoma State University Library and the Oklahoma Oral History  Research Program. I am in Oklahoma City to talk with Rodd Moesel  regarding his memories of former U.S. Senator and Oklahoma  Governor, Henry Bellmon. Thank you for joining me today. Let   s start  by having you tell us a little bit about yourself. Where you were born,  about your childhood and then we   ll work forward.  I was born in Enid, Oklahoma, and wasn   t there for very long before my  dad went to do his master   s studies at Ohio State University. So I was in  Columbus for a brief time while he did that. Then he went to Rutgers to  work on a doctorate so I was in New Jersey for a brief time. They were  longing to be back in Oklahoma and bought a truck farm. They bought a  farm that they turned into a truck farm at Pauls Valley, Oklahoma. As  they made enough money to put in a greenhouse, they added a  greenhouse. In    63 we moved to Oklahoma City. That is actually when  my path first crossed with Henry Bellmon.  Where did you graduate from high school?  Northwest Classen, here in Oklahoma City.  In what year?  1972.  At that point did you go to   ?  Oklahoma State University. Actually before going to Oklahoma State  University, I did a year   s service as a youth advisor to the president at  the White House following up on some work in 4-H club and then  served on the Young Voters for the President in the    72 election cycle, I  5  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  guess it would be. Then returned to Oklahoma State University a little  bit late to start my studies after taking that side trip for a year.  An interesting one.  Yeah.  What did you major in at OSU?  Horticulture and took some political science classes, too, but horticulture  is my main thing. Actually never finished. Started my business while I  was in school trying to pay for school and got so deep into that I actually  never finished college. Still consider Oklahoma State my home base.  Now let   s back up. When did you get involved in 4-H?  Actually first got involved in 4-H in 1963. I was nine years old when we  moved to Oklahoma City. Mom had been real involved in 4-H. I had  grown up, myself and my younger sister and brothers had grown up  hearing about 4-H so we were looking forward to joining 4-H, which at  that time you had to be nine to join. We moved to Oklahoma City that  summer of    63. We had been looking forward to joining 4-H in Garvin  County and had been to some different events. I think Mom may have  been a former state officer and winner in a couple of national contests,  and so forth, for 4-H. I think she helped out on some Garvin County 4-H  clubs as an adult leader, even though we kids couldn   t join, and judged  some things. We had seen some activity and were looking forward to it,  and they broke the news to us that we moving to Oklahoma City.  Us kids, we were all uncertain about leaving our friends and going to a  new place. So when we got to Oklahoma County, to Oklahoma City,  well they called to see where the nearest 4-H club was. The extension  office gave them an address on N.E. 23rd Street. When it came time, like  September, I think it was when school had just started and 4-H clubs  were firing up for the fall season, well Dad drove me to this address on  NE 23rd Street. We had no idea the address where the 4-H club meeting  was at. They just told us that was the Oklahoma City 4-H club and that  is where they met at. Dad drove me over there, and it turned out to be in  an area by the capitol. The city was kind of new to Dad, too, and he was  trying to figure out where this address was at.  Finally he went east of the capitol a little bit and couldn   t find any  addresses that matched and saw this building which turned out to be the  Governor   s Mansion and pulled in. At that time there wasn   t the guard  shack out front but I remember there somehow was a guard someplace.  Dad thought he was just pulling in to ask where this address was. The  6  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  man said,    This is that address. Are you here for the 4-H club?    It turned  out our 4-H club was at the Governor   s Mansion. It met on the top floor  of the Governor   s Mansion. My first 4-H meeting was actually in the  family meeting room at the Governor   s Mansion. I think they had the  annual elections either that first meeting or the second meeting. I  remember Pat Bellmon was the president, Gail was the vice-president  and Ann was the secretary. (Laughs) The three Bellmon girls were the  three top officers.  I think at that meeting, I don   t remember for sure, but there were  probably ten or twelve of us at that meeting. We met regularly, most  months, there at the Governor   s Mansion. I don   t remember whether it  was the first meeting or the second meeting, but I remember somewhere  along in there the governor coming in and introducing himself to us and  just talking. I had no idea what a special experience I was having at the  time, of course. That led to long-term friendship and involvement in  many things over many years, from just stumbling into 4-H club that  happened to meet at the Governor   s Mansion.  What were some of the projects they were working on?  At that time, and it tied right in with my being from a horticultural  family, Shirley was the club leader, Shirley Bellmon, Mrs. Bellmon was,  and she was in the midst of a big effort to beautify Oklahoma. Out of  that group,    Keep Oklahoma Beautiful,    was established out of Mrs.  Bellmon   s efforts and with the governor   s support. The girls were some  of the first leaders. Anyway, they started a big statewide beautification  effort. Our 4-H club was very involved with tree planting and litter  pickup and so forth. Shirley, beside the 4-H part of it, went out and  started talking. As one of her main subjects when she went places  speaking, our 4-H club was used as an example. We did that, and 4-H  clubs across the state started getting involved in that.  The group Keep Oklahoma Beautiful was born to try to get the business  community and other civic clubs involved. That was kind of the first  major, certainly the first one I can remember, and I have been told by  others that know further back that was the first big statewide push for  beautification and community beautification and community cleanup  efforts. Shirley Bellmon was probably at the front of that with, I think  with, the active support of the governor and certainly our 4-H club. We  didn   t know we were in on the beginning of something but we were in  on the beginning of that effort. For those first several years, that I can  remember, we did a lot of those kinds of projects.  Plant things around the capitol, too?  7  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  We did. We actually, the big round flowerbeds at the capitol on the  south side, our 4-H club, every year that Bellmon was in office, we  planted those. As it happens a lot of those plants came from my parents     nursery. I think Mom and Dad donated those and got some other  nurseries to donate things. We would have planting days out there, and  sometimes after our meetings, or before our meetings, we would have  work days, clean them up or mulch them or whatever. We did several  plantings around the capitol and plantings around other public buildings  in and around City Hall. At that time the extension center for the  Oklahoma County 4-H club was one block east from the county  courthouse which is now Leadership Square. Our extension center had to  move years ago whenever they were working to do the development for  Leadership Square and so forth. In fact I think they moved out on  Portland by the fairgrounds, quite a ways before Leadership Square. We  did lots of those kinds of community beautification plantings and  everything from nursing homes, to City Hall, to particularly the ones at  the capitol, and the Governor   s Mansion, and so forth.  Did he ever come join the work?  He did actually. I can   t remember how many times. We didn   t think of  him as the governor. We just thought of him as Pat, Gail and Ann   s dad,  a nice guy that always had an interest. He didn   t come to every meeting,  but the meetings he came up to he was always asking us how our school  was going. He was always showing interest in us, talking to us. As he  got to know us longer he would know what our 4-H projects were and  would always be asking about our 4-H projects. He just always took a  personal interest in us. He was the governor but we didn   t see him as the  governor or know him as the governor. That just wasn   t the way that we  saw him and dealt with him. So like I say, it wasn   t until later until we  really realized how special and how unusual that opportunity was.  I remember him out helping dig in the south flowerbed, the south round  flowerbed south of the capitol on one of those Saturday work sessions.  He would be out there helping dig, helping rake and help get everything  ready. He truly was a farmer at heart. I mean, through his whole life,  through all the years I knew him, from that time up to long after he was  retired and he was trying to get his pecan grove growing up at the farm  and so forth. He was a farmer, had a passion for farming, had a real  appreciation for the importance of food and the impact it had from his  time serving overseas during the military and traveling overseas. He had  an immense respect for the American farmer and what they were able to  do, and producing not only for themselves but for so many others and  for so much of the world. He often spoke, particularly in later years as I  got to spend more time on policies or issues with him, he was very  passionate about we were going to need another green revolution, and  8  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  the world was growing at such a rate there was going to be a real need  for more food. That whole farmer side showed through all through his  career in every way that I dealt with him.  How early did you get to go to the farm? I am assuming you did.  I did but I actually didn   t go to the farm for really, I don   t think, until  well after he was out of office. I had always heard about the farm and  later when I started my own business we were doing greenhouse  structures and equipment and supplies, supplying to the greenhouse  nursery industry. He wanted, not long after we were in business, he  wanted to add a greenhouse in the back of the house. So he brought  pictures, and we helped design the greenhouse, and he bought the  glazing materials from us to build a greenhouse for Shirley on the back  of the house, which is still there today. We held a 4-H retreat with Pat  and Ann not long ago now. They are doing it as a wonderful retreat.  Actually, the fiberglass we sold them well over twenty years ago. I have  no idea exactly how long it was. That same glazing stone needs to be  changed now, Ann and Pat, but it   s still there and the governor built all  of that with his own hands. When he wasn   t at the capital he was out on  the tractor planting wheat, harvesting wheat, building a greenhouse or  building something else on the farm.  So you had regular contact with him during his whole first term as  governor, really.  I think he was elected in    62 and I first met him in the fall of    63. Our  paths crossed on and off all the rest of his life. I got to see him in many  different kinds of perspectives over the years.  Were you surprised when he decided to run for Senate?  Not really. I knew by then how deep his passion was to serve, and he  really felt called. He had a real gift for it. Probably getting out of order  from what you want to talk but it was always interesting, and I was  always amazed how people through his whole career would always  underestimate him. I mean, he would get written off as a dumb wheat  farmer, and he played to that a little bit I think. I kidded at him about  that. He would never admit to it. I remember later when he was governor  the second time, we were doing a lot of work with him on the  Governor   s Conference on Small Business and some economic things,  and one time, for some reason, I got invited to a meeting where the bond  advisors were flying in from different places. These guys from New  York, Chicago, hot shot MBA guys were talking down to him and  thought they really had to give him a beginner   s education on high  finance and bonds and everything.  9  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  Governor just sat there, and his afternoon meetings sometimes he would  kind of nod off a little bit, and you weren   t sure if he was catching on or  not. Then all of the sudden he would come up with these questions that  were the most get-right-to-the-heart-of-the-matter and be deep that  you   d see guys like that stumble trying to figure out the answers or deal  with it. He really was such a deep, bright person that had such a depth of  understand and all of the things that I saw but regularly people would  underestimate him and not think he had much mental depth or not think  he had that much grasp of issues. His colleagues that served with him on  the U.S. Senate, some of them that I got to know through the years or  talk to, I mean the respect that he had from his fellow colleagues. There  were colleagues that worked around him on the staff, the respect, even if  they didn   t always agree with him, has always made a big impression on  me. The fact that you can disagree and still be friends or respect  someone. In fact I had several significant issues, later as I was an adult,  where I had big disagreements on 1017 and on the Panama Canal. We  had some fairly intense disputes or discussions on those and yet stayed  close friends. So that made a big impression on me, that you can have  those kinds of disagreements and still keep respect or still keep a  friendship.  He was a pretty good listener.  He was a good listener and a lot of times, like I said, on deals like those  finance things, or whatever, he would listen for way longer than you   re  used to somebody of that stature. I tend to go spouting off and talking  when I shouldn   t. Henry was very good at pausing and listening and  letting other people talk their way through it, and then he would pick  out, really get the right question, the right points to come back at some  point in the discussion.  While we   re there, you call him Henry?  No. I usually call him   I hardly ever do that. When he was alive I would  never do that. (Laughs)  How would you refer to him?  I usually called him Governor because that is how I first knew him so I  just would call him Governor. Even when he was a senator I would still  call him Governor just because that is how I know him. I really had to  work to call him Senator during the senator years just because Governor  was how I knew him when I was young. That is how it was etched in my  mind so that is usually what I called him for most of his life.  10  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  Even after he retired from     Yes.     second time?  Yes. To me that is just what I called him.  What did he call you?  Rodd. (Laughs)  Did you help campaign much for the Senate race?  I did. I was still a young squirt. I should look at the calendar and been  prepared to tell you the years. As I recall I am pretty sure that was the  race when I still didn   t have a driver   s license or anything. The  headquarters I think for that race, I remember, was over by 50th and  Western, kind of cattycornered from McGuiness High School. I would  ride a city bus. I would catch a city bus on 12th Street and go and change  route some place and then end up on a route and end up near  McGuiness. I would go up there a lot of times, ride the bus up there,  volunteer and do things. I think that was the race where Al Bodie was  like the county chairman and was there at the office a lot. He was an  architect, I think, in his real life and so forth. He and Charles  Waters , I  can   t remember what Charles   s  last  name was, a lawyer that was the  other county chairman. I spent lots of nights up there after school, or  whatever, riding the bus up there to volunteer lots of weekends.  Nowadays I would probably worry about a young kid riding on the bus  to do things like that but that was just something we did and didn   t think  anything about it.  Just a different time.  I was deeply involved in that race and then deeply involved in his  second race when he ran for governor again. At that time the  headquarters were over on 39th, west of Pennsylvania. That is when  Drew Mason and Joe Allbaugh, and so forth, were deeply involved at  that time.  Did you actually go out on the campaign trail with him?  Yeah, several different times I went out on visits, and I guess by the time  of the, probably the time he ran for governor again, I was out of school,  and I think I just moved to Canadian County. My wife and I had just  gotten married, moved, bought a piece of land and started a business out  11  Finchum  Moesel  there. The county chairman that was there in Canadian County had  resigned. My first meeting I got elected county chairman so I was really  wet behind the ears. I think that was, without getting out old records, I  think that was the time the governor was running for governor so I was  county chairman through that period. He came up to Canadian County  and we would set up spots for him to visit, people to visit, try to raise  funds, having events, bean dinners and one thing and another. We would  host him on several of those, and then I went with him on tours to  particularly more ag areas. I went on several of those kinds of trips.  I would have to get my mind in gear to remember where all I went to,  but I did go on several trips with him when he went on a tour of going to  a bunch of towns. He was great about hitting Main Street in small towns.  I remember just walking from business to business, going inside and  shaking hands and then wherever the small town newspaper was at he  made a stop at the small town newspaper   s editor   s office and go in and  do essentially an impromptu interview right then with the small town  editor. A lot of those towns the editor was also the reporter and the ad  salesman and everything. Sometimes there would be a couple of young  folks there, too. So you usually did an interview in those small towns  and then walk Main Street. Then wherever lunch or dinner was there  was usually an event pre-setup someplace along of the way.  How did people respond to this?  Oh it was different at different times. I mean, for the most part he did  great in small groups, one-on-ones. He was never as gifted as in this era  when we judge on thirty-second sound bites and TV clips and so forth.  That wasn   t his strength doing those kinds of deals, but in the era when  politics was more, instead of so media driven, it was driven by meeting  real people. You could not hardly meet him and not like him or respect  him or not think he was solid and concerned about you and your town  and the issues facing your state. I mean, he did great on the one-on-ones.  Now, I remember I was county chairman during the time when the  Panama Canal vote stuff came up. I mean, the intensity within, certainly  within Republican Party ranks and even voters in general in Oklahoma,  was intense against not giving up the Panama Canal. Things were being  said about the governor that were hard for a young kid like me, that had  grown up knowing him and everything, to hear.  Personally, I disagreed with him on that issue. It didn   t seem right to me,  something we had built and operated and so forth to be giving it up. I  remember just scathing things being said and talked about. I remember  after one county party meeting one night or after some event, I decided I  was going to call him and make sure he knows what   s being said and  what all is on the line. So I called him in Washington and they, as usual,  12  said,    He is busy but he   ll call you back.    When he called back I was  telling him how serious it was and how I personally was not certain he  was headed the right direction, too. I don   t think he had announced his  vote, because it looked like he, maybe, was going to be, and in the end  he was the deciding vote. He hadn   t really announced his vote but most  people thought from the things he had been saying, the concerns he was  expressing, that he was leaning that way.  So I called and was telling him, did he realize how strong the intensity  was and what people were saying. My wife was reminding me last night  that she had been here listening to my end of the conversation, because I  had been all nervous about calling to tell him. I am sure my voice started  out all wobbly and nervous. He ended up spending an hour and a half on  the phone she said. I remember it was long time, I didn   t remember how  long but she said it was an hour and a half. I remember him saying,    We  are a representative government.    He went through the civics lessons.    I  am not here to do exactly what the people say. I am supposed to come  up here and hear all of the information and make an educated decision.  Leaders have to have the guts to stand up sometimes.    That was his view  point on it. Sometimes you are not going to be in agreement with what  the popular opinion is. He said he believed he had more information and  more data and time would prove him right.  I was pretty clear by the time that conversation was done how he was  going to vote even though it wasn   t announced. He was giving me the  whole lesson on representative government and democracy government  and the differences and why you had to have courage to stand up. I was  arguing about,    We built it and it is important to the security of our  country and keeping the worldwide shipping lanes open    and so forth  and at the time I thought I was pretty well read and well studied on the  issue. I think most everybody did because it dominated everything for  weeks and months back at that time. Then he went on to say what his  deal was. He had been down and had visited and somebody sticking  some piece of debris in at that right spot could tear up a whole lot. That  the system wasn   t very secure. There were all kinds of issues that could  easily be sabotaged, all kinds of security issues. If we were going to  keep it in the climate that was down there we had to be prepared to send  a lot more military down there.  In his view it was going to take military intervention, and he had been  involved in military activities overseas, and he didn   t think it was worth  taking that kind of military involvement and the risks, the terrorist type.  I   m not sure terrorism was a word that was used at that time so much. I  forget the exact word he used but he thought it was definitely going to  lead to all kinds of isolated military activity, sabotaging the Canal, and it  wasn   t going to be used for our ships, and cargo wasn   t going to be safe.  13  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  The safest way was for them to have their own control over it and so  forth. So like I said, by the end of the call there was no question in my  mind where he was going, and as the years went by I think he was kind  of using me as a sounding board for all of his arguments, or something,  before going out. I mean, I am still astonished by the amount of time he  spent with me that day on it, talking about it. I still was uncomfortable  with his decision on it. I mean, he really had put a lot of time and  thought into it. He really thought a lot. He knew how bad it was hurting  him politically back home, he knew. In the conversation he said,    I  know if I do this I probably won   t have a chance to be reelected but I am  just so convinced it is the right thing to do.    It was an interesting time  period.  The second election was pretty tough too, if I remember correctly.  Yeah.  Second term.  Yeah.  Maybe because of that?  I am sure that was the case, and then he was out of office for a while  before making the decision to do the second governor   s race.  Did you help much with that campaign?  Yes, I helped. Probably helped even more on that one. Virtually every  campaign since    63 I have been involved in one way or another for some  candidate or candidates.  Had politics been something your family was involved with?  Not been involved at all. Well, I shouldn   t say that. Mom had been a  precinct official with Garvin County. But they had never been involved  in any races. The instruction we got a home was it is important to be  involved in the process, it is important to be voters, and it is important to  study the issues and be involved. But they had never been involved,  never held political office, and never been active, really, on the political  side. Their civic side that I got at home tied with being exposed to the  political process around the governor clearly led to my interest. He  clearly was my main mentor on the political side.  Couldn   t ask for a better one.  14  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  Yeah.  Any favorite memories of time spent with him?  There were lots of them. I guess while we are still on the political deal,  one I would go to that was really interesting and another area where we  had a big disagreement was  House Bill  1017 and that was during his  second term as governor. He had signed on to doing these tax increases  for education, and the tradeoff was going to be some reforms to our  common schools in exchange for a lot more funding for common  schools. There was, again, within the Republican circle, he had really  stepped out because he had almost nobody from the Republican House  or Senate with him. I mean, there was deep intensity and frustration that  he was giving up way too much tax base in exchange for not enough  reforms. There was a real question of how much reforms were really in  the package and whether things needed to be done but we should be  getting a lot more reforms and addressing a lot more issues at the time.  The intensity and debate were unlike anything in my lifetime, except for  the Panama Canal.  Those were probably the two most intense things, public debates that I  can remember here in this state and over the years. HB 1017 I remember  at that time, at some point, we will go back and talk about the  Governor   s Conference on Small Business. Out of that I have gotten to  become, probably, a leader in the small business community, I guess you  would say, and deeply involved in small business things. A lot of times  I   d get invited to things as the representative of small businesses in this  state. The governor was trying to get the business community on board  with him on 1017. The political community was split wide open so he  was trying to get the business community to come aboard. Well, he  hosted a lunch on the top floor of the Governor   s Mansion and he invited  the CEOs of most of all the major companies in the state. I think there  were probably two or three of us small business guys that he invited.  As it happens I end up being seated at the table, there were like eight of  us to a table, traditional round tables up there. The room was packed  from one end to the other. Most of them were people I had read about in  newspapers and all but had never, again, I was still a young squirt.  People for the most part I hadn   t met. I might see things or something  but mainly guys you have read about, heads of OG E, Williams  Company, and just ever major company you can think of in the state was  there. I happened to be seated at the table where the governor was at and  E.K. Gaylord was at, and there were other important people at the table  as well. I had never met Mr. Gaylord before so he didn   t really know  me. I certainly knew a lot about him as the publisher of The Oklahoman  and so forth. Anyway, after lunch the governor got up and made his big  15  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  selling pitch about 1017 and why we ought to do it. Then he said I want  to hear your comments for, against it, and what we ought to be doing.  A couple of business guys stood up, big business guys, that often I  accuse them of going wherever the power, or direction, is going at the  time. Several of them got up and were saying how important it was to do  these things and so forth. I don   t know what got over me but I stood up  and said I thought we needed to reform but I didn   t think we were  getting enough reforms for the price tag, and I thought that 1017 was the  wrong package and we needed to go back to the drawing board. So I  stood up and spoke and nobody else stood up to speak about it after that.  I guess before I say that, I went back to sit down at the table after saying  these comments and Mr. Gaylord turned to the guy next me and said,     Last time that young man will ever be invited to the Governor   s  Mansion.    (Laughs) I thought,    Oh my Gosh  What have I done?    But  that was another lesson, even though I am sure the governor wasn   t  happy about my speaking at his hosted event and contradiction to what  he wanted, we still remained good friends and still visited and still  talked. We clearly disagreed on that issue. Again, he taught me that you  can disagree but still be respectful and get along. I   ll bet you, I went  back to the Governor   s Mansion a lot more times than Mr. Gaylord after  that. That always sticks out in mind of this Mr. Gaylord who you have  heard so much about thinking about I was toast for eternity. (Laughs)  He didn   t know Mr. Bellmon too well?  Well, actually he and Mr. Bellmon had their own very interesting  relationship. I would hear some of that. They would be good enough  friends where they would go hunting together out at Kingfisher, and so  forth, together and other places but yet they would have these fiery  debates, and Mr. Gaylord would even do editorials against Bellmon on  different issues from time to time. They would have this love-hate or  hot-cold relationship but in the end their relationship to friendship  always prevailed even in spite of sometimes. Their disagreements were  much more public than my disagreements were.  You mentioned he started a small business conference?  Yeah. When he got elected a second time, the governor had always had a  passion, I think, for homegrown businesses. He would often talk to  me   I am not sure if he was on the board of Zebco Reels out of Tulsa,  but he had certainly watched their story and been a big fan of Zebco. He  was good friends with the Malzahn   s from Ditch Witch out of Perry.  Loved to tell the story of the homegrown businesses. Businesses that  started here with an idea, or a passion, and would grow into something  significant. He always felt our best economic development   he thought  16  it was important to go recruit other business, and in fact I can tell a story  about Campbell   s Foods in a minute on that. He was very, very  passionate that the best chance for growing our economy was from  growing business that were here or starting businesses here and growing  them. He said what really makes a community or state is having  companies where they live here and their home base is here. Not  reflecting on a Southwestern Bell or First Interstate Bank. I remember at  that time those were two big players.  I remember him being frustrated when somebody would be a good  executive at Southwestern Bell, would be doing good and making a  good civic contribution and then would get transferred to San Antonio or  Dallas or someplace else. He would say this is a problem, why we need  people that really live here, who are going to live here that are invested  here. He had a long-term passion, well before his second governorship,  for that, and I think because he had watched me go out, and others too I  am not saying just mine, he would watch me go out and start my own  business and watch it grow and so forth. He had been a customer of that,  and he had watched that. Co-ops and businesses all over the state, and  ones like Ditch Witch and Zebco I was mentioning and so on, he would  talk about often. He had a real passion for figuring out how to capture  that energy or how to inspire that initiative to get more small businesses  started here.  One time, not long after he was elected, he and I were talking about  economic development. Somehow we got to talking about this idea of  growing businesses that are here. We got to talking about they were  having a governor   s conference this or that or something, he said,    Well,  we need to have a governor   s conference on small business.    And so we  decided to initiate a Governor   s Conference on Small Business, and I  think, formally, after we got a steering committee together I got elected  as chairmen. Really the idea came, I think, out of that discussion that the  governor and I were having on it. That first year, and it never would  have happened on the scale if it hadn   t been for his involvement, when  he would be with some of the big business guys he would say,    You  guys have an interest in getting small businesses growing.    So he  brought to the table guys like Southwestern Bell and First Interstate  Bank which gave us some money to help promote the conference and  bring in some good speakers.  The first conference   and we did the steering committee with a bunch  of small businesses and the representatives from chambers of the  national Federation of Independent Business and representatives from  the state agencies like Vo-Tech and Department of Commerce and  universities like Oklahoma State University and so forth. So we had a  steering committee of eighteen or twenty folks that were some business  17  and public sector serving business in planning this first governor   s  conference. By the time we did it we ended up with over 500 attendees  which was pretty amazing for a first time effort on something like that.  The governor was just passionate about it and kept coming up with new  ideas to make it better. We ended up doing one of those for each of the  four years he was governor. I think the one in his third year we ended up  with over 2,000 people. Even after the first year it started getting news  around the country and within the small business communities.  By the second and third year we were having all these people come in  from other states wanting to see how we were doing or what we were  doing, and so forth. A lot of other states started them, and even our state  has continued to do it but it has never been the scale it was when  Bellmon was involved. It wasn   t that I went out and did anything so  special. I was trying to help keep the train on the tracks. All of this was a  volunteer effort on our part. The real secret weapon we had was that the  governor was actually personally calling people to recruit them as a  speaker. There were some people he wanted as speakers. One year  Elizabeth Dole was in the cabinet, I forget what role she even was, and  he thought,    Well, we need more women business owners,    and so he  called Elizabeth Dole and, of course, she responded to his call and he  said,    I want you here on such and such date.    Before we knew it we had  Elizabeth Dole. That happened over and over on a number of different  speakers.  He helped us, like I said, round up financial support and came up with  ideas. It was really a special experience and lots of good things  happened. Lots of synergy between different small business groups that  hadn   t normally talked to each other. Some of the governor   s programs  got focused and all out of that area. One of the other passions that grew  out of that was at the same time while he was governor I remember him  calling me. This is another thing. I am a late night guy. The governor  was an early morning guy. I don   t know how many times during the  time we were doing that governor   s conference business and so forth the  phone would ring at five in the morning or something like that. You are  like,    Oh my Gosh  What terrible thing has happened?    and you would  pick up the phone,    Rodd, are you awake?    (Laughs) Well you don   t tell  the governor you are not awake. (Laughs)    Yes.    And you would try to  clear your throat. But that is usually when he would call.  It would be like five or six in the morning. He would be in the office  before anybody else so that is when he would get this ideas, or ideas he  had thought of the night before, and he would call and tell you. Tell you,     Go check this out, or do this, or do that, or whatever.    I don   t know  how many of those five or six in the morning calls that we got. I often  wondered who else was at the office. Now Claudia Scribner, who was  18  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  his right hand through all time, Claudia, I would usually hear her in the  background and sometimes she would make the call,    The governor is  on the line for you,    as you are trying to wake up and get your bearings.  I always thought that was his time of day. He was at his peak at that  early in the morning, and that is when the ideas were rocking and  rolling. He would always call fairly regularly with something he wanted  you to check out or think about or bounce off of somebody or  something.  And would you call him?  I would.  Not at eleven at night.  I learned not to call him late at night, which is my peak time. Yes, I did  call him as well but when you call him it is usually during business  hours so then you have to get through Sharon  Sharp  or Claudia   Scribner  or Joe  Allbaugh  or Drew  Mason  or somebody to get  through to him so it is a little bit more cumbersome than when he calls  you. It   s just straight through. (Laughs) I was going to say some of the  things that grew out of that, Tinker is one of the biggest military depot  bases in the country. We are blessed to have that right here in Oklahoma.  It has been a significant contributor to the economy of our state for many  years. To show you his passion for this homegrown idea, he had toured  Tinker many times over the years, but I remember him calling me one  morning after he had been out at Tinker. He said,    It is disgusting.  Tinker is this very important base but they have the lowest percent of  local sourcing of any military depot base in the country. We have the  lowest percent of their buying from Oklahoma vendors or vendors in the  home state.     He had the numbers from Columbus, Ohio. I forget where all the other  depots were at but got the data on those and said,    We got to get more.  This is a real opportunity missed.    He said,    If that   s true at Tinker,  there has to be a lot of other federal agencies and so forth. So we need to  figure out how to get more small business equipped in bidding so they  can provide those services and those materials.    So out of that the Vo-  Tech gave birth to the Bid Assistance Center to try to help small  businesses learn what things were out for bid and find business they  could bid on and try to drive up our local sourcing to places like Tinker  and outside of the state. Another one of his passions was way before  Buy Local was popular. We got to get our own people to learn the  importance of buying from their neighbors, and then we got to figure out  things we can make or sell that we can ship out-of-state or out-of-country,  because that is what brings more cash in. That is how you make  19  Finchum  Moesel  your economy bigger, is buy what you export.  By export to him was not just to Europe or China or Brazil. It was export  outside the borders of state. I can go on all kinds of tangents. I remember  his going on about agriculture. He was so proud of our state   s agriculture  community but he was always so frustrated. He said,    We are a third  world country. We produce all of these things but we don   t process  hardly any of it into finish product here. We ship it all to some other  state to turn into the value added product.    He wanted to get more value-added  processing in our state so he was big on trying to figure out ways.  You know, why can   t the cereal manufacturers be in Oklahoma instead  of in Illinois or Texas or something. Why can   t it be here close to the  farm? All kinds of examples like that where he tried to get the value  added back. I remember being invited to lots of discussions on that kind  of subject of how we can inspire more of the value-added process in  manufacturing.  I   d been at some conference and learned that Campbell Foods, at a  horticultural conference I was at, was thinking about building a new  plant. I mentioned that to him. Well, next thing I know he is wanting the  name of the guy that I had heard it from. I told him. He called that guy. I  forget what state he was in but he called him, got the name of the guy at  Campbell   s. On his own. You had to be careful what ideas you  mentioned around him because he truly was amazing how much action  he could get going. He traced down and got a call into the CEO of  Campbell   s trying to get a chance for Oklahoma to be in the mix on this  new plant they were talking about. In the end it didn   t happen but I mean  you just, a mention of something like that and all of a sudden you could  watch him go off and trying to make things happen, because he had this  deep passion of getting that value-added back here or growing more  Oklahoma businesses.  Did he have any successes then, if that was one that didn   t work out?  That one didn   t work out. On the value-added, on the food side, I would  say it ended up not as much success as, certainly, he would have liked.  Through his time period he was involved in a lot of new businesses that  did locate here but on the ag side, and what happens on the reality side  of it is a lot of those things are so much freight involved in that a lot of  them want to be located closer to bigger markets. In the end Oklahoma  is a relatively small market. We are about 1 percent of the U.S.  economy. Even though we produce way more than that agriculturally,  the consumption is mainly in places like Dallas and Chicago and New  York. These bigger markets. A lot of those value-added things end up  being located closer to those big markets for consumption. There is  actually a lot more bulk involved in shipping the packages of cereal than  20  Finchum  Moesel  there is in shipping the kernels of grain, to use as an example, or  shipping the bread or whatever. So the value-added on the food thing  makes a lot of sense but our numbers end up, the guys that are making  the decisions on where to make the plants, they were basing their  decisions on locating near the consumer instead of near the producer.  For some of these discussions did you have them in the capitol or the  Governor   s Mansion?  All those sites. Sometimes it would be when you were riding to go to  some other session. I remember one time, and again it was an outgrowth  probably out of the Governor   s Conference on Small Businesses, we had  a real innovative greenhouse operation down by Cash, Oklahoma. Edna  Hennessey had an operation where she had put up, at that time, probably  forty or fifty greenhouses growing Aloe Vera. She had a business  making cosmetics and privately labeling them for other people down at  Lawton. Then she put in these greenhouses to grow her own Aloe Vera  so she could control her inputs going into it. The governor loved that  kind of story. It was a business that was started here and kept  diversifying and vertically integrating and so forth. So he said,    I want  to go see it.    He put together a trip to go see Edna   s operation. He went  to both the cosmetic factory and out to the greenhouses.  Goodyear Tires, the big plant down there, we ended up taking a  helicopter from here in the city down to Lawton going to Goodyear and  going through the plant. I remember getting to go with the governor  through the plant. There was one area of the plant that was all  proprietary. They would only let the governor and his security detail go  in, and the rest of us in the party couldn   t go in that one area. They even  made the governor sign a non-compete and confidentiality thing, which I  thought was interesting, to see this one part of the plant. But all the rest  of the plant we got to through with the governor. Then we went over to  Cash and went over to the deal in Lawton. It would be trips like that you  would end up getting to visit with the governor on or some of the times  we were at the mansion or some of the times we were at the capitol. I  mean, it was whenever and wherever, or sometimes it would be those  phone calls.  Another time I remember a trip like that that involved helicopters. We  went to Weyerhaeuser, and southeast Oklahoma has significant forests.  Most people don   t know what significant forest we have in the state, the  southeastern part of the state. Weyerhaeuser ended up with the old  Dierks   s forest years ago so there was a wall of lumber getting ready to  come off. They were trying to decide whether to locate a big plant to  process that lumber in Oklahoma or Arkansas. I remember going with  the governor down there to pitch to the Weyerhaeuser people. I had  21  Finchum  Moesel  some contacts with them being in the horticulture area. We set up and  took him down there to see that and try to make the pitch to them. Later  he hosted meals at the mansion for the folks from Weyerhaeuser, trying  to put the sale on them to put the plant in Oklahoma and thanking them  for the plants they already had down there, because they had several  significant plants and are by far the biggest land owner in that part of the  state but wanted to make sure they located this new factory, this new  lumber mill, in Oklahoma not in Arkansas, because part of the forest  was on the Arkansas side and part in Oklahoma. Ultimately that decision  got put on hold and since then the economy has turned and that still  hasn   t happened but the wall of wood is still there. Days like that were  times when you end up getting to talk about all kinds of things when  you   re transiting back and forth to those kinds of deals.  Always work or was there some fun to it, the conversation?  It was usually about ideas. It usually might be about any kind of subject.  It was usually about policies or people or politics or something, so it was  interesting. Over time I got to hear and see a lot of his ideas on all kinds  of things. That same trip down to Weyerhaeuser I remember flying out  over the Red River and one of his passions I heard about many times  over the years was water. Water is a huge issue in our state right now but  water has been a big issue in our state for a very long time. The governor  had immense respect for Senator Kerr and what he did with the locks  and the waterways in eastern Oklahoma and thinking long-term on  water. He had been impressed with how Oklahoma City had thought  long-term on water to try to take action to make sure there would be  water for the city for a long time. He knew how serious the water  problems were in western Oklahoma so he, at different times, would  float the idea of building canals from the east to west.  One of his real passions was to desalinate the Red River. He often would  try to figure out ways to fund research or to come up with ideas for how  to desalinate the Red River, because the Red River is limited in its  usefulness because it has such high salts. I remember that time on that  helicopter trip down to Weyerhaeuser we ended up a couple times flying  over parts of the Red River and you would be seeing the water coming  from different factories into the river or from different crop production  areas. You would see where there was a lot of erosion. You would see  the red soil and the water mixing with the bigger body of water in the  river and so forth so you would see the different colors and the governor  could tell you a lot of what was going on in different areas.    Well, that   s  so and so, that is too high in phosphorus. That is from erosions, not  talking care of the creek beds.    He could tell you each stream coming in  by the color or the mix, what it was doing. Like I say his big passion  when he would be in a spot was talking about desalinizating the Red  22  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  River. He was determined to get the Corps of Engineers fired up and  serious about how to do that desalinization or to get research done to  make that feasible.  Constantly teaching.  Just ideas on any kind of subject. It was really interesting to me, from  having spent enough time with him to seeing enough of these issues, and  knowing in my mind he was one of the deepest people that you could  talk to on just about any subject you could bring up. Yet how widely he  was viewed as a dumb wheat farmer, and people would underestimate  him. I kind of think he sometimes used that to his advantage sometimes.  You got to see him through all of his terms, from first governor to senate  to second governor. Did people   s reaction to him change much during  that time period, especially after the Panama Canal?  Well, there was a period where it was dangerous to admit you were a  friend of Henry Bellmon in political circles. It was that way again after  1017 for a while. As time goes by and you look at the bigger  perspective, those would be the two things that were hugely unpopular  with certainly at least his political base, at each of those times. As time  goes by and you look at the bigger perspective of what all he  accomplished I think most folks end up with a high level of respect and  appreciation for him.  Did he share any pearls of wisdom with you that you carry with you?  I can   t think of like a quick quote or something like that. Most of the  overriding lessons were: be involved, speak up when you have  something to say but still be respectful, and you can still be friends with  somebody you disagree with. Don   t make it so personal that it affects  you from dealing with them tomorrow. He just had a deep passion for  his family, for our state and for our country. My parents had those same  kinds of things so I would see that at home and then I would see that  from somebody I thought a lot of like Governor Bellmon. Those are  powerful, powerful lessons that stick with you.  After he got out of political office, did you have much involvement with  him?  Continued to see him from time to time. Over the years there have been  a couple of times both when he was in office and he was leaving the  Senate. One of the things he had wanted to get done was to get some  research greenhouses up at OSU, actually USDA  United States  Department of Agriculture  and OSU. There were a lot of pest problems  23  Finchum  Moesel  on wheat and he had been trying to get that in a funding bill for several  years. I guess there was a custom in the Senate at that time, usually  when someone was leaving they would fund some federal building or  fund some highway project and name it after them. He didn   t want that  done. I guess he made it clear to the guys in the Senate that he didn   t  want something done and named for him. They knew he had been trying  to get that project done in Stillwater so ultimately he still didn   t let them  name it after him, but I guess it did pass and the funding went through.  The greenhouses are on Western Road.  The research facility for the wheat research was kind of the going-away  gift from the U.S. Senate for Henry Bellmon. He did finally consent to  speak at the groundbreaking for it but he still refused to name it for him.  Over years there were several entities that wanted to be named after him.  I don   t think until he passed away and they have now named the new  building at OSU for him. But he had to be gone before that could happen  I think because he staunchly resisted that kind of credit or attention even  though he was involved in countless projects that probably were worthy  of that.  Another one I remember, when he was in the Senate earlier, I remember  years ago taking him out to Fort Reno which is a big research station out  west of El Reno and was doing a lot of work on prairie grasses. The  governor had a real love of natural, native grasses and pastures and  trying to get efficiency up to run more cattle per acre, or whatever,  because he felt there was going to be this real need for more ag products,  and so forth. One of their real problems was they didn   t have any feed  mill or any way to process different grains they were raising to do  different treatments for the cattle, and so forth. They didn   t even really  ask the governor for that, at that time senator, for that, when he was out  touring that day. We had him out going through the county for some  other stops and stopped at Fort Reno with Henry, Joe, and some others  that day to help with that tour. When he heard about that need, well he  went back and the next thing we know he had gotten them funding to put  a feed mill in to step up their research and it is still in use to this day.  That kind of thing is repeated numerous times. They had a real problem  and they were trying to tell them it limited their research. Well then he  found out a way to make the roadblocks go away, because he thought  that research had real potential. You   d see all of these kinds of little  footmarks and yet he never wanted any kind of credit, probably only a  handful, because he knew that   s the story of what happened there.  Do you have a few more of those you want to share that are not  commonly known?  I   m trying to think. I made some notes last night. I   ll see if there   s  24  anything else on here that snaps. Another area I haven   t said anything  about but I probably should, another good example for me growing up  was watching the governor and Shirley. I was also blessed to have my  mother and father who had a long and very happy marriage, cared about  each other deeply and were very respectful. I got to see that same thing  between the governor and Shirley. What a great team they were. I do  remember you asked earlier if my parents had ever been involved  politically. The only other thing I can remember my parents ever doing  politically, I remember when we were still at Pauls Valley as a little kid,  I remember my mom becoming a Bellmon Belle, which I guess was her  first thing to do politically down there at Garvin County. Being for a  Republican in Garvin County at that time was, I think, the only reason  she was a poll worker even, because there were so few Republicans.  She has even told me how many Republicans were in the whole county.  Back then there were so few Republicans that they couldn   t even get  enough to do the poll watching at all the precincts. I think they worked  hard to draft what few Republicans there were to help in that role.  Shirley was quite the seamstress; was quite the sewer. I remember all of  the time the girls talking about her sewing their dresses and so forth. I  guess she designed the Bellmon Belle outfit. That was a big part of his  upset win. I guess I was too young really to remember that and wasn   t  involved myself in that first race. I guess that was a big part of that race  and carried over to the future races. She had her own little business  making all of those kinds of things. It was just fun to watch over the  years all the different ways from the beautification projects, to all of her  sewing projects and all of the deep love they both had and how deeply  they were both involved in all three of the girls    lives. It was another  really good family model to watch besides the family model I had at  home.  I was very blessed, and I was blessed with aunts and uncles, too, that  also had good examples. That was good to see somebody in that other  environment like that. Then when Shirley decided she wanted to do  more, to do some greenhousing, well Henry designed the greenhouse  and we helped him some with that and the glazing. It was fun to watch  their whole life and then how he really had not ever showed his age  much, I didn   t think,    till Shirley passed away. I wasn   t sure how much  longer he would last. He took that really hard. He came a couple of  times. Our business has an open house for our greenhouse growers and  nurseries each year. He came down to one of those, and the years were  just really showing on him at that point.  Then when he got hooked up and started dating again with the old  family friend from Kingfisher, I remember it being like years peeled off  and he became like, I don   t want to say a teenager in love again, but it  25  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  was truly remarkable to watch how empty I think a part of him was with  the loss of Shirley. That really hit him hard and then how exciting it was  to see him excited and fired up again when he fell back in love again.  That was another dimension that was good to watch here in the last few  years, and all through that time he was battling the Parkinson   s but his  mind  was sharp , and all of the times I got to talk to him on the phone  and see him in person at something. I remember he and his new bride  came to our open house again not long after they had gotten married and  just how lively and how excited he was. It just made you feel good to  see that transition.  Some of the other projects there in the latter years he had gotten all  excited wanting to, when he was doing the work at OSU, and I  remember all of the controversy when after he went out as governor and  he ended up down at OU instead of OSU, which was shocking and was  hard for a lot of us OSU people to deal with. But anyway, he helped  point out there are lots of good institutions in the state and so we all  needed to be more open-minded and so forth. I do think he eventually  felt more at home when he ended up back doing projects with OSU here  in the later years.  One of the things he gotten all excited about was what all the Noble  Foundation was doing and all the scientists they had recruited and the  amazing work they have going on at Ardmore now. I think at that time  there were up over seventy-five scientists doing plant science research,  which is more than OU and OSU put together. So one of his passions  there in the latter years was trying to figure out ways to tie OSU and OU  and the Noble Foundation more together in this bioscience area, because  he was still convinced that we were going to need another green  revolution and there were going to be food shortages coming and that we  need to figure out more and better crops to grow that need less. He was  often worried about drought and about water so they would need less  water and yet be more nutritious and so forth. Those kinds of things  would come up in most every conversation we had until the end.  Always a farmer and always thinking.  Yeah.  Proactive problem solver, too.  Yeah. He did have a real gift for seeing things that were likely to be  issues we   re going to face sometime way ahead. He would often be,  although he would be talking about and trying to deal with issues right  now, he would often have a channel that when you really got to visit  with him was thinking of what we are going to be facing as a state or as  26  Finchum  Moesel  nation twenty or forty years from now. If he could, if he didn   t have to  worry with the current stuff, I think that is what he would really liked to  be trying to figure out or would have liked to have really been trying to  solve.  I am not aware of some of the projects he did with OSU at the end. Are  you?  He got real involved with a program, that I think Dr. Ray Hunke is  involved with, on bio-fuels. He was deeply involved in the switch grass  projects that OSU had going. He was looking at it both either crops that  you grow to produce energy or crops that if you are leaving a lot of  stubble on the ground from the wheat or corn or something whether that  can be burned or processed or enzymatic action of some type to produce  fuel. In his mind he was running through all these ways of   and he  talked about that. I remember as a youngster he was talking about he  thought that would be an issue we would be facing someday. Before he  died that was an issue as a country, and as a world we are talking a lot  more about bio-fuels. If you go back and look at some of the things he  was saying back in the    70s, he was talking about bio-fuels when nobody  was talking about bio-fuels so he was clearly way ahead of his time on  that. We still don   t know all of the right answers on that, and we still  have a lot of research to do.  Part of what he was really excited about in the latter years was the  progress that this new bio center  had made  that involves OSU and OU  and the Noble Foundation. I think he had a lot to do with getting that  partnership going and getting the state involved to do some extra  funding for those shared actives for those three entities on that front.  Where OU is bringing a lot of the chemistry to the mix of how to  process the things, OSU is bringing a lot of the crop production and  breeding knowledge and the Noble Foundation is at the forefront  worldwide of figuring out the genetic code for a lot of crops and doing  the basic plant science to figure out which kind of genes and so forth are  accomplishing which things and the turn on and off to which things.  Really, Oklahoma and the governor have played a big part in that and   Oklahoma  is in position to be a real leader in whatever direction that  goes. The interesting thing is I remember being passionate about, back to  that Fort Reno and that USDA Woodward, both of those are two really  interesting prairie grass research sites. They are doing a lot of work with  grasses and one of his ideas that is now being looked at is they have  done all of these years of research on different breeding of grasses. Well,  they were looking at all these crops for their efficiency when you feed  them to cattle for weight gain on cattle, and so forth. I remember the  governor speaking some years back about we need to go back through  27  Finchum  Moesel  that whole diary and directory and a lot of things that might have not  being very effective for feeding to the cows we may have the genetics or  may have the varieties already that we have been working with that  when we look through this different lens they might be the right grasses  for doing bio-energy but they were the wrong grasses for this. He was  passionate about we may already have the things. We just need to go  back and look. Use your library example, they may be in the library but  we may not know what we have. We maybe need to go back through  and look at all of these with a different set of lenses and we may already  have the gold bar, it may be sitting in there just waiting for us to look at  it a different way.  Just an amazing mind.  Yeah. That was always one of the great contradictions because when  you judge by the thirty-second sound bite he didn   t come out as good on  that kind of a rating as what a lot of current politicians were, but as far as  depth of his intellect and depth of his interest   I would say he was an  amazing generalist. I remember him getting into big discussions with  Neal McCaleb on highway building. They would be talking about what  size of rock and whether to put Petromat under it or not to put Petromat  under it. Bridge building; I remembering him getting into these exciting  discussions on bridge building, and so forth, that you wouldn   t expect,  but he had grown up in the country, been on the farm. He had built roads  on the farm, much simpler roads. He had watched county commissioners  and then had served in the military where quick roads were built, and so  forth. It was amazing the knowledge he had on even something like that.  I remember being present a time or two when him and Neal McCaleb  were having these spirited discussions about this or that on concrete or  asphalt, or whatever, as far as the road building and, of course, the  turnpikes. One of the things that he had got done that second deal and at  the time that looked a little questionable, especially the two-lane  turnpike down in southern Oklahoma, but to put together the votes to get  the deal done you ended up with that, create the Kilpatrick in Oklahoma  City and the turnpike in Tulsa and then the two-lane turnpike. Those got  done, I think, in his second term there. He would have wanted those to  be free roads I think but there was no funding stream to do that. The two  urban ones were the ones he was really after but he had to do the others  to get the votes to get the thing passed.  His deal was roads, infrastructure is critical to a state, to a society. If you  make a good decision on where you do the infrastructure it really is     build it and they will come.    You look at when the Kilpatrick Turnpike  was first built there wasn   t much out there on that northwest loop. But  it   s amazing if you drive it now, not that many years later. It really has  28  Finchum  Moesel  turned out    build it and they will come.    There has been amazing growth  and development that has followed where the roadway has gone, and the  same thing is happening when you drive the Tulsa Turnpike. That is  another example that comes to mind of where he was thinking  farsighted. I think most can agree they would prefer for it not be toll  roads but a state our size we just didn   t have any other funding  mechanism. He was just so convinced if you get this built, it is going to  cause financial investment and economic grow that far exceeds the value  even though it is a toll road. I would say certainly on those two urban  lengths, having driven both of them within the last few weeks, it is just  astonishing if you look now what has happened along both of those in  this short period of time.  During his public service time, he appointed Democrats to various  things too, to the committees and cabinets. Do you remember anything  particular about those? I am thinking of Hannah Atkins.  Again friendship is a big thing, and he had been friends with Hannah   Atkins  back early on, and people he could respect. He would have  people he had been friends with or respected from both sides of the aisle.  When he was governor the first time, it was the first time a Republican  had ever been governor so there are all of these stories they had sprayed  for Republicans, and it wasn   t just in southeast Oklahoma at that time. It  was everybody. That was quite a stunner for him to win that first race. I  really never heard him speak that much about it but I have heard from  others that the story is he didn   t really intend to run for governor. He had  agreed to be party chairman and was working hard to get the party built  up and then no candidate for governor surfaced and that is when he went  ahead and put himself out there.  The big fight in the Democratic primary that left the Democrats in the  big split gave him an opening. He ultimately pulled the big upset on  Atkins. In a lot of ways you can say he was the first. He brought two-party  government to our state by the work that he did trying to organize  the Republican Party, and he tried to organize it with a real grassroots  county organization. Again, I was too young to know. I saw that just a  few years later. The stories I had heard for years and years even today  there are still people that, I am now one of them even though I like to  think of myself as still as young. I am one of the old dogs because I had  been involved, and there aren   t many people who have been involved in  elections going back to    64 in my case. There are not many that have  that kind of history or perspective.  There are still quite a few around that originally started, some of the  ladies, as Bellmon Belles or some of the guys first as being precinct or  county workers for Bellmon. There are still lots of folks that he brought  29  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  into the process. By being the first Republican where Democrats had  pretty well shut, all of those years before that, pretty well shut  Republicans out of serving in any agency or any role. Henry is a  Republican maybe because there weren   t many Republicans to turn to or  maybe he was trying to set a different example. He did always have a  mindset of involving people across the spectrum but making sure it was  people you trusted or respected that you were involving.  Regardless of party?  Right. I mean, he was clearly a first. There hadn   t been any bipartisan,  the stories I would hear, until Henry, and being the first Republican he  had a chance to start to set that example. Since then Democratic  governors have done a better job about being a little more open-minded  as well. We will give Henry credit for helping with that trend.  Did your mother do the Bellmon Bell for the next campaign or just the  first one?  I can   t remember. I remember her doing that at Pauls Valley. I don   t  remember she did that. Probably she did. I can   t tell you for sure.  Did you parents and Shirley and Henry meet or spend much time  together?  At 4-H events a lot of times. Probably more with Shirley than with  Henry, because she was the club leader. A lot of times Mom or Dad  would donate plants or trees to use for this or that or get other  nurserymen involved to do some of that. I suspect they would say they  saw Shirley a lot more than they did Henry. Even when I was a kid  growing up I remember Henry coming out to, Mom and Dad had a retail  nursery called Moesel   s Hort-Haven. I remember him coming out to  shop at the greenhouse nursery after our introduction to the 4-H club,  and so forth. I remember him coming to buy things to plant at the  Governor   s Mansion or out at the farm.  Then, like I said, later when I had my own business he bought stuff for  his greenhouse and bought a sprayer to spray his vegetable garden and  trees and shrubs around the house, smaller than his big sprayers that he  had for doing the fields. Things like that. I think I had already  mentioned, we had those open houses because I guess he was on our  mailing list. Even though he was not our normal kind of customer he  showed up several years both when Shirley was alive and during the  time when Shirley passed and then again with his new bride. He showed  up several years to that open house just to walk the show and walk  around to see what was new or different. You would see him talking. We  30  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  would have vendors from some of our different suppliers and he would  be picking their brains on this or that. I remember he got real fascinated  one year. We had some guys from Israel there and on drip irrigation.  That was when we were first trying to promote drip irrigation. I didn   t  even think of it a head of time but it was something that caught his eye. I  remember him spending a long time with those guys trying to learn more  about drip irrigation. Later I would hear him talk about the potential for  drip irrigation and that was the kind of thing we needed to do to stretch  our water out.  Connecting the dots wasn   t he?  Yeah.  Do you recall your last conversation with him?  No. Not specifically. The last conversation would have been a phone  call, because I did not see him in person in the last several months before  he passed. I didn   t know at the time it was going to be the last call so I  don   t remember specifically what was in that call.  As you can tell I have been blessed to have an interesting and colorful  relationship with the governor all along. Even at his funeral the girls  were gracious enough to ask me to say a few words. So you got all the  political leader types, the federal judges, the chiefs, Chief Mankiller, and  so forth, speaking and then his little 4-H buddy was there. After a couple  of them had spoke it was my turn to speak at the service and Andrew  Tevington was acting as the moderator. As somebody would sit down  and somebody else would stand up, he would introduce whoever was  next, and so forth. As I was getting ready to go up to speak at the  funeral, Andrew collapsed at the ceremony. Just collapsed on the floor.  We didn   t know if he had a heart attack or whatever. We are sitting there  deciding what to do. He was in the mist of getting ready to walk up there  to introduce me when he collapsed and the last speaker had just left. I  can   t remember. I think Chief Mankiller was the one right before me or  it was either Judge Henry that was right before me.  So I am going up there and already people now can tell things are wrong  and one or two doctors are coming up. So I am walking up to podium  because it was my time to be walking up there right when all of this was  happening. I am trying to talk to Andrew,    Are you okay? What   s going  on?    Somebody had already called for an ambulance, thankfully, and the  doctors are then coming up. He is laying on the floor right in front of the  podium and they are starting to tear open his shirt, starting to figure out,  getting ready to do chest compressions or whatever and having him lay  flat on his back. Then I hear him saying, and all of the doctors that were  31  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  there were already around him, and Andrew is saying,    Rodd are you  there?    I said,    Yeah, I am here Andrew.    He said,    Go ahead and start.  Just talk over me.    (Laughs) I said,    Andrew, the ambulance is coming.  I am not going to talk when you are laying there on the floor. Let   s get  you taken care of.    (Laughs)  He was trying to get me to go ahead and start doing my eulogy or  whatever standing right over the top of him. I would have to straddle  him to speak. Thankfully Andrew ended up being okay. It ended up he  had been going so many hours making all the arrangements and all.  Blood sugars or something had gotten out of sync. He ended up being  okay but we all thought he had a heart attack. Talk about hard, it was  hard to think about what you are going to say in a eulogy anyway for  Bellmon in front of all those significant folks that were there to pay  honor to him and then a guy collapses and tries to have heart attack  before you   re getting up there and he   s trying to get you to speak over  the top of him. So it started with a bang and ended with a bang.  I guess I should say I know one of the things he is proudest about is his  three girls. He was so excited in the last years when Pat came back to the  farm. Pat and Ann both returned to the family farm. That was a big, big  deal to him in the conversations we had in the last few years. He was so  excited to have them back there and to start to hear their dreams for the  land that he valued so much and then to have Gail close by over in Enid.  I know he was very, very proud of all three of them and of their families  and to see them showing interest in coming home to the property that he  loved and cared about had to be one of the great satisfactions of his life.  He came back to farm constantly, didn   t he? From wherever he was.  Yes. Wherever he was at.  He needed to come back.  Whatever time he wasn   t at the capitol, or whatever, he would be back  there on the tractor feeding cattle or building something. I mean, it   s a  home built with his hands.  And while he was away, George, his brother, helped?  Yeah.  Do you have a favorite memory?  I think you probably got most of them out of me. I mean it is hard to top  just how it all started. Innocently going to what you think is your first 4-  32  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  H club and it ended up being at the Governor   s Mansion and it ended up  being with the governor.  And then that probably changed your chart?  Yeah. It changed my life in many, many different ways. You look back  and there are a lot of things. He nominated me to be an intern with the  Resources for the Future group and some other things but I had just  gotten married and just started business. You look back and there are  things he encouraged or opportunities he sat up that just didn   t work out  at the time. You wonder sometimes whether you should have done that  or could have done that. I can   t argue a bit. Like I say it had its exciting  moments of agreement and disagreement but always learning and always  stretching your boundaries.  Another thing, people would think that you have in your mind this is a  guy from Billings, Oklahoma, and has never been more than 100 miles.  That is just the impression that people would have. He actually had this  immense interest in the world. I remember him talking about all  different countries and about politics and affairs in all different countries  and the issues. That is where food and water would show up in his  interest all over the world. He would see these as big issues that weren   t  just our issues but are issues that are even more intense in a lot of other  places around the world. He had this deep international interest. He was  always saying we needed to get better as Oklahoma and figure out ways  whether it was our agricultural products or our oil and gas or other  businesses we build, we need to get better at figuring out ways to sell  internationally as well as outside of our state. I mentioned companies he  was real proud of and used as examples. Williams Company is another  one that he at different points was involved with like being on their  board sometimes. That was another example. He loved exporting outside  of our state, of taking technology or ideas and growing it.  He was a great statesman.  Yes.  Anything else?  I think that is most of things I thought about. The longer you talk you  keep thinking of more things to say but I think that is most of the  highlights. Our state and our country would be well served to have more  Henry Bellmons. Like I say I had some passionate disagreements with  him but he would always talk with you. If you disagreed he could  explain why he thought the way he thought. Even if he couldn   t  convince you, you could at least understand where he was at or what his  33  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  Finchum  Moesel  logic was. He would have thought through or would be thinking through  the issues. I have always respected that even if it   s somebody I don   t  agree with. Partially, probably, he   s taught me that it   s worth having  those conversations with people you don   t agree with, and hearing where  they   re at and at least understanding where they   re from. Sometimes  when you do that they will convince you and sometimes you will  convince them. Unless you have those conversations and talk about it  you will never know.  He definitely had a lasting impact on the state.  I am glad we finally got to name something after him.  Do you think he would be pleased or not?  I think secretly maybe he would be. I mean he really did not want that  kind of credit. Like I say, it was offered on many things I knew about  over the years and he had always resisted. I know how deeply he cared  about research. He had a real passion for research whether it was the  medical research at the OU Medical Center and Medical Research  Foundation or whether it was ag research, which was, of course, one of  his passions or water research or whatever. Knowing his passion for  research, his passion for Oklahoma State University which I guess he  still fondly remembered as Oklahoma A M. Knowing his passion for  each of those things, it is a nice thing to have named after him and  hopefully they will do great work in his honor.  Thank you very much for talking with me today.  Thank you.  -------  -------  
