 Little Thunder My name is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is Monday,  January  18 , 2016. I   m interviewing Molly Murphy Adams for the Oklahoma  Native Artist Project sponsored by Oklahoma Oral History Research  Program at Oklahoma State University. Molly, we   re at your home in  Jenks. You are of Oglala decent. Not Oklahoma born, but you   ve lived  in Oklahoma for a while now. You   ve been working professionally for  about twelve years. You describe your artwork as contemporary Native  sculptural beadwork, and it   s drawn a lot of attention for its strong  conceptual basis as well as its technical prowess. Thank you for taking  the time to talk with me.  Adams Thank you   Little Thunder Where were you born, and where did you grow up?  Adams I was born in Great Falls, Montana, and it   s in central Montana. I grew  up all around Great Falls, and then when I was about nine, we moved to  western Montana to the Missoula area. Then we lived in a variety of  places on and around Missoula. I consider the Flathead Reservation to  be the home that I think of when I think of going back. My mom still  lives in Kalispell, Montana.  Little Thunder What did your folks do for a living?  Adams My mom did a little bit of everything over the years but mostly did her  best to try to raise us without a lot of resources. My father was a  carpenter, off and on.  Little Thunder How about brothers or sisters?  Adams Two brothers that I grew up with, and one sister that was raised outside  of the home. My parents had lots of on-again / off-again relationships,  5  and the half-siblings are hard to count. I told you it would be  complicated. (Laughter)  Little Thunder What was your relationship with your grandparents on either side of  your family?  Adams My mother was given up for adoption as an infant. She didn   t know her  biological parents until right around the time I was born. I was lucky  enough to know my biological grandparents from my mother, her  adoptive parents, and my father   s parents. I had a lot of grandparents. I  was especially close to my dad   s mother, my paternal grandmother. She  was a really strong influence in my life and a source of great stability,  and a person with a lot of charm. Her name was Mary Ebba. She taught  me a lot about sewing and embroidery. Even later when I got into  beadwork and dancing at powwows, she was really supportive of it,  which, in Montana, said a lot for a non-Native person to come to  powwows and be supportive of that. She taught me a real love of  everything that grows, of gardening and flowers. Even as she got older,  I knew that everything was all right as long as Nana was excited about  the next seed catalog that came along. I was really close to her.  I was really fortunate to get to know my mom   s biological parents and  understand that kind of complexity in her life. In fact, I just booked a  ticket to go to California here in a couple of months to visit my  biological grandmother who is from Pine Ridge  South Dakota . I don   t  get to see her as often as I would like, but I   ve got a ticket to go see her  pretty soon. My biological grandparents on my mom   s side, my  grandmother was from Pine Ridge, and my grandfather was half  Lebanese, and he was from Arizona. They met when they were young  and then had a fling. My grandmother got pregnant with my mom and  ran away to Montana and gave her up for adoption. They ended up  getting married and having another daughter. My mom found them later  when she was an adult, and so we   ve had a relationship with them and  with my aunt and my cousins and ongoing.  Little Thunder That   s wonderful, wonderful. In terms of extended family members who  were interested in art that you were exposed to growing up     Adams My mom had an innate interest and always wanted to pursue it, though  her circumstances really didn   t let her do that until she was much older.  She started to learn beadwork as a way to try to reconnect with her  background with being Native. She found a beadwork teacher in Great  Falls by the name of Ruby Stiffarm. It was through the Head Start  program, and a lot of the Native ladies in Great Falls kind of organized  through Head Start. It was a mutually supportive way. Through Head  Start, a lot of the older ladies were teaching the younger women  6  beadwork. Ruby taught my mom beadwork when she was in her early  to mid-twenties. It was something that she took off with and a way for  her to connect back, but she didn   t get to pursue it in a big scale  professionally until she was older. She actually had a grant through the  First Peoples Fund and was doing really well with it, but she has a few  disabilities that have hamstrung her ability to work in it.  The other person that was a pretty strong influence in that respect is my  dad   s sister Connie, Connie Bergum. She is now a professional  illustrator. She went to school, and she actually went to art school. In a  family where I don   t think any of my other dad   s siblings even went to  college. She went to college, and she went to art school, which was a  pretty gutsy move for a poor Irish kid to make. She talked about even  when she was little, using a razor blade to cut out the blank sheets in the  front of books at the library to find paper to draw on and stuff. Every  Christmas, birthday, any holiday growing up, without fail, no matter  where we were, what the circumstances were, she sent me books and art  supplies. Calligraphy pens, pastel pencils, paper, she just sent random  stuff knowing I would like it, and books, lots and lots of books. She is  an illustrator now and also does mosaics and paints. She was a really  strong supporter in lots of little, small ways.  Little Thunder Great gifts she gave you. Well, what is your first memory of seeing  Native art?  Adams Well, some of my first memories were the pieces my mom actually  worked on. She did some large-scale clothing pieces for   Calgary  Stampede. She did a couple of full outfits in the   80s that won some  prizes. Then, even when I was little, she would go to the library to do  research. I think the first time I saw Native art or artifacts in any sense  was growing up in Great Falls. The Charlie Russell Museum was the  mainstay. Every kid went to the Charlie Russell Museum and did the  tour probably every year to the only museum in Great Falls. As a kid, I  thought every town had a Charlie Russell, some guy who lived there  who painted and collected stuff and had a house. It wasn   t until I got  older that I realized that Charlie Russell was important other places.  (Laughter) I thought he was just Great Falls and it was just our thing  because a lot of the banks still had his paintings up and even in the   80s  there were still  inaudible . He was still our local guy.  I didn   t realize he was a big deal everywhere until much later. Every  year at the grade school, there weren   t that many places to go on a  school daytrip. You might go see the place that used to be the Great  Falls. They would point at the water and go,    Well, we have a dam, but  we used to have falls.    Or they would take you to the Charlie Russell.  Maybe they would take you to a Hutterite farm or something. There  7  weren   t that many options for school trips, so every year it was pretty  much the Russell Museum. It was an amazing collection, and you  could, as a kid, go there every year and see something new all the time.  Now I have a much greater appreciation for how any museum would  scramble to have an original.  Little Thunder I understand you learned tanning at an early age, as well as beadwork.  That   s pretty unusual. Can you tell us about that?  Adams It   s less unusual, I think, in Montana just because there   s a lot of skills  that are more common there. I also chopped wood. We had wood  stoves. We had oil lamps. There was a lot of things we did that were  more basic. My mom wanted to learn hide tanning because brain-tanned  hide is the best hide to work with for making traditional clothing. I was  also making regalia for dancing, and you want good brain tan. We also  spent a lot of time at the Salish  and  Kootenai tribal cultural camp. It   s  a camp that is kind of in between Arlee and St. Ignatius, way up in the  mountains, and an elder by the name of Agnes Vanderburg ran it for  years. The idea behind it was that everybody would go and camp away  from town and make their own community for the summer in this place,  the same spot year after year after year. It was a way to have maybe  more of a natural rhythm throughout the summer. For quite a few  summers in a row, my family would go and live there in the summer  and pitch a tipi, and for as much time as we could, just live there.  The other thing is the camp hosted classes for the tribal college, but  because we were there all the time, a lot of us learned how to tan.  George Coffey was an instructor out there. He would rig up the  stretchers. All of us kids helped him pull and hold and stretch. He  taught us how to make scrapers with a coffee can lid that you cut and  fold in half and grind down the edges. My mom became really good at  it, and then she became a presenter and would do workshops at the  places like the Ulm Pishkun State Park in Great Falls at the  First  Peoples  Buffalo Jump. As my mom   s physical disabilities became  worse, I would often go along to help her so that she could do the  presentation of the information, and I would do all the arm work. It is  really labor intensive work, and my mom has a lot of physical ailments  and just wasn   t able to do that kind of   . We discovered there   s a lot of  short cuts, maybe longer work but less intensive. We found a lot of  cheats and shortcuts. I still know how to do it. I can   t say I like tanning.  It   s smelly, and it   s hard, but the results are definitely pretty desirable.  This is the first year I   ve found someone who will sell me hides at a  reasonable price. The other hard part about tanning is that while I live in  a suburban environment now, I don   t have a creek out back. I don   t  have the luxury of a lot of cold weather which is preferable. I don   t  8  have access to hunters who know how to prep hides the proper way.  There   s nothing worse than going through all that time to have  something that   s full of holes at the end because it wasn   t properly  treated. It   s something I   m glad I know how to do. It   s something I   m  glad I spent all that time doing, but it is an intensive, intensive skill.  There   s a reason why a lot of people would rather skip it. I don   t know  if my neighbors would approve of (Laughter) the smell, or the flies, or  the whole thing. I don   t know how they would feel about that.  Little Thunder What is your first memory of making art?  Adams I think it was probably, I would learn to draw   Montana winters are  really long. We would get bulb catalogs in the winter. I would have  small scrap pieces of paper, color pencils, pens, really basic stuff. I  would draw the flowers in the bulb catalog over and over and over until  I could draw an iris, or a tulip, or a daffodil or any bulb flower, not so  much seed catalogs but the bulbs, and they were gorgeous. In the  wintertime when everything   s dark and cold and frozen, here are these  big, beautiful, color blooms, and they   re verdant and succulent and  sensual, and they   re just so big and colorful. I drew them obsessively  until when I was fourteen decided I wanted to draw an entire garden. I  went to the art supply store in Missoula, and I bought what was just the  most obscenely expensive piece of paper. It was a five-dollar sheet of  paper. It was a full-size, watercolor printing sheet.  My aunt had already given me some dry pastel pencils, and I bought  three good pens. I set to work doing an entire garden of irises, daffodils,  and tulips, and every color of tulip. I did it entirely in ink and worked  on it for months. Then I slowly went in with pastel pencils and added  light layers of color over the whole thing. I ended up giving it away. My  mom   s friend in college, Mary BigBow, she was visiting, and she  always kept asking to see it. In a lot of Native traditions, if somebody  asks for something or admires something, then the best thing to do is to  give it to them. I gave it to her. Apparently, I   m told she still has it at  her office at Salish Kootenai College. I really would like someone to go  get a photo of it. I have in my head what I think it looked like, but I was  fifteen or fourteen when I gave it to her. I don   t know what it would  match up to my memory. I thought five dollars for a piece of paper was  amazing. It was a lot.  Little Thunder That was the artist in you coming out. Had you been strongly drawn to  three-dimensional work, though, throughout?  Adams No, first of all, because I didn   t know anybody who did three-dimensional  work. The few people I knew growing up, nobody had a  college education; nobody reached out past that. I knew people who  9  made traditional clothing for powwows, or I knew people who drew.  That was cheap and effective. You could draw on paper. Everybody had  ballpoint pens or pencils. It really was not until college that I began to,  first of all, began to really fall in love with three-dimensional and think  that way. I was already good at thinking spatially, but to think about  how to take the ideas of 2-D and wrap it around   . I had a couple of  great professors who helped me sort of cross over that into three  dimensions.  Also, what naturally led me there is I was trying to, in art school, figure  out how to take what I was learning in school, concepts, ideas I was  really drawn to, and how was I going to make any kind of art that was  authentic to what I knew. That   s the whole struggle with art school,  really. You   re supposed to take all these skills that somebody is  teaching you, and then you   re supposed to filter through that what  makes your work any different or better than anyone else   s. I guess it   s  a path to being authentic to what your story might be. For me, what that  was was this obsession with needle work. The best way to do that was  to try to think of it in three dimensions.  Now I   m going back to two dimensions, but at the time, three  dimensions was the obvious place to do that in, to take everything I  knew about making clothing and parfleche and hide tanning and all  these things and somehow try to find a way to make art with that. The  first step was to make these sculptural boxes that were influenced by  parfleche designs. I ended up getting my emphasis in ceramics. I can   t  really make a pot to hold water, but ceramics was a place where you  learned about three dimensions, and about repetition, and about form,  and really all the subtleties of form. It was also a place where it let go of  those ideas that art had to be a painting on a canvas that somebody put  in a frame and that that was the way you made art. Ceramics just beat it  out of me through trial and error.  Little Thunder You weren   t always on an art track, and we   ll talk about that in a  minute. Were there any experiences you had in school at any level with  art that were significant?  Adams There was. I had a ceramics professor, Tom Rippon, who really taught  me the value of process and multiples.  Little Thunder Now, is this at the college level or is this at high school?  Adams This is at the college. I actually did not take a single art class before  college. I didn   t have an art class, not beyond the two-month time in  junior high where they give you a special class, and I had no art classes  in high school. I didn   t have an art class until I was in my mid-twenties  10  in college. Everything before that was just self-taught. Tom Rippon  convinced me to start working in multiples and helped me through what  I called my food phase, which was, for a while, I was convinced I  wanted to make giant ceramic sculptures in the manner of Wayne  Thiebaud the painter. He indulged me and taught me to indulge myself.  I was feeling so much pressure being in college, being a young mom,  my mother wasn   t stable, I didn   t have a lot of support.  Here I was doing this frivolous thing of art. I felt nervous. I had to get it  right, first, every time. I wasn   t giving myself any space to fail at  anything, and that   s not a very healthy approach to artwork. I did this  project where I made a hundred ceramic cupcakes. (Laughter) They  were all different colors, pop colors. It was ridiculous, and it was fun,  and it was kind of pointless. I learned a lot. It was multiples. It really  fed my idea of working in these grids and pixels, even if they were  cupcakes. That was a really wonderful if pointless moment. He let me  figure it out. There was a lecture by a visiting artist, Dick Notkin. He is  a ceramicist in Helena and has worked with the Archie Bray   Foundation  studio. He came and did a lecture that was mostly on mold  making, ceramic mold making, but he had this moment in there where  he talked about distilling what you do that   s different and maybe  strange and maybe weird, and literally to keep distilling it, to keep  finding out   .  You did this one thing, and there   s this part of it that you like. Keep  crushing it, and remaking it, and reworking it, and going back through it  until you find   . If you keep doing this and keep pursuing what is  absolutely unique about it, then you   ll find what it is that you do that is  worth doing and worth doing differently or worth doing well. He put it  better at the moment. I   ve garbled his quote since then. It was  something that resonated with me at that time. Sometimes you hear the  right thing at the right time, and at a different time it wouldn   t work. At  that moment it was what I needed to hear, which was to do what I was  doing that was different, even if I wasn   t doing it right yet. It started me  off on a    find this thing and keep reworking it and refining it until you  get it to the point where it is working.     Little Thunder Now, prior to getting into art, you were on a science track.  Adams I was. I was.  Little Thunder So in addition to telling us a bit about that, I wonder if you can tell us  how maybe that, whether it provided any kind of base once you changed  tracks.  11  Adams I graduated from high school early. I was sixteen. I did high school in  three years, partly because I was very determined to get out of a  dysfunctional house, and partly because I was ambitious. Everything I  did in high school was science track. I really, I loved science. I love the  theory, the philosophy. I loved this   I had an ideal about science that  science was the ideal. It was rational in a very irrational world, and it  had the potential to do documentable good, unambiguous good. I loved  this idealism about it. When I started college, a friend of my mom   s and  a friend of mine who was Blackfeet, Judy Gobert, she wrote a grant,  and my very first job in high school was working in a laboratory. She  got this grant for more people, for basically diversity in laboratory  workplaces, so I was two weeks shy of my sixteenth birthday and going  for my first job in a lab coat in a virology laboratory.  I was support staff there for the remainder of high school. It was also  my job in college. I worked in a high-function laboratory. That was my  job in high school instead of flipping burgers or washing cars or  something. I loved it. By the end of my first year of college   I started  college right before I was seventeen. By the time I was finishing  college, my first year, I was seventeen. I was completely burned out. I  needed to take some time away from school. I really was quite sure that  I didn   t want to have a career in virology. The downside of working in  the laboratory is I had a real window into their lives and their careers,  and sometimes that can be a dangerous thing to see how someone   s life  will turn out if you pick this path. It might be better to be naive and just  go with it, and maybe give yourself a chance to remake it in a different  fashion. I saw this life, and I didn   t want it.  I thought,    If I pursue this, this doctorate in virology, I   m either going  to be at a university dependent on NIH grants for funding, or I   m going  to have to go to Atlanta and work at the CDC in some capacity,     because there   s not that many job avenues for epidemiologists which is  what I was fascinated with. I still read about it in my spare time for fun.  (Laughter) I quit school and did a variety of things for a long time. I had  this ethical debate about what I was working on. People go into it with  these ideas of what they   re going to work on, but they   re really working  on somebody else   s ideas who was there fifteen years before and who  got the position of power and is writing the grants. I was a little  disillusioned, and at seventeen it   s very easy to be disillusioned and  dramatic.  Little Thunder Right.  Adams That was part of it. I was just really young for the decisions I was  making. Whether I knew that I needed, whether I was taking the time  off for the right reasons, the time off was really necessary. When I went  12  back to school five years later, I wanted to go into the architectural  design program at MSU  Montana State University , but I found out my  credits wouldn   t transfer. In kind of the path of least resistance, I  thought,    Well, I   ll stay here and get my BFA and then go on to do my  master   s in architectural design.    It would actually be less time. By the  time I was finishing my BFA, I really loved it. I thought,    I think maybe  I can do this.    I thought,    I really don   t want to go to grad school,    and  I   d had a child in the meantime who probably was not also very excited  about me going to grad school.  Little Thunder What did you do after you got out of college, then, with your BFA?  Adams Right when I was about to graduate, I was originally planning to go to  Albuquerque and pursue a doctorate in art history. I ended up not  pursuing that partly because my mom had had this grant with the Native  Peoples Fund, and it had exposed her to a lot of people in the art world  and exposed me to a lot of people in the art world. As a result of those  connections and of the work that I was doing, my senior thesis show  was scheduled to travel before I graduated. I just rolled the dice and  said,    I   m going to keep doing this for as long as I can.    Also, my  daughter Anna has Asperger   s. She was still very small and needing a  lot of really intensive attention from me, therapy and appointments, and  work, and stability.  College hadn   t been as stable as I would have liked. I decided to at least  put off grad school and at the time to pursue art full time and pursue  mothering full time and to see if maybe the art couldn   t make it work.  Every time I would do the math over art versus grad school or a regular  job, it just didn   t quite add up. Art was making enough of a living and  improving quality of life a lot to where the math just kept working out  to stick with it, so I stuck with it. My mother   s connection to the First  Peoples Fund made a huge difference. It opened up this big door to an  art world that at that time I didn   t have a lot of contacts in. I had few,  very few.  Little Thunder What was your thesis show?  Adams I did a series of four sculptural boxes that were influenced by parfleche  designs. They were geometric beadwork on wool. I created this method  where I have these wool panels that are mounted over aeronautic  plywood, real thin, thin, used for making model airplanes, and then  using edge stitch as the closing system for these panels and the hinges  between the panels. I did four different kinds of boxes. One, tall and  narrow; one with double doors; one that completely tied with ribbons  and opened up into a flat piece; and then another one that was a long,  low box. Different types of boxes with different types of designs but all  13  with the trade wool cloth basis and then geometric designs and  beadwork on the top of it. That four boxes was the first series that I did  for that, but for quite a few years after that, boxes of all different kinds  and colors and shapes, becoming more sculptural, open, no lids,  multiple lids, magnets. I just kept expanding that form as much as I  could. That   s really what I was known for for a long time.  Little Thunder They were being purchased both by individual collectors and by  museums?  Adams Both, but they also had a traveling show obligation, so they were  getting seen. The first year out of college, I had decided to try for the  Heard  Museum  Indian Market and was accepted. I knew that I wanted  to make one big piece, one show-stopper piece, to try to get noticed at  that show. I made a courting-style blanket with a horse motif on it.  Instead of the blanket being repeating rosettes and then geometric strips,  I took the rosettes, and I made those be the front shoulders of horses.  Instead of the geometric strips, the rosette would be there, and then the  horse head would come out of it. It would meet another horse head  coming from the other rosette, and they layered over each other.  It was asymmetric and kind of moving across, half red and half blue.  Further that by bringing the red and the blue opposite in a landscape and  sky design at the top and the bottom. The beaded strip across the middle  was entirely beaded. I didn   t do it in traditional geometrics. It was all  free form beadwork, so I broke a lot of rules. It was like an opportunity  to try every single color of bead I had, and every finish and every kind  of stitch. It was a real tour de force. It was a lot of fun. My only regret is  the blanket was six feet, three inches wide, and the booths at the Heard  are six feet wide. (Laughter) I was lucky to have an end booth because I  kept creeping out into the lane. One of those small practical details that  you don   t pay attention to.  Little Thunder Did it sell?  Adams It won and Honorable Mention which is a big deal for your first time at  the Heard. It got me on the list; it got me in the award show. That was  incredible. I chose not to sell it because it was asked to be in a traveling  show: Ellen Taubman asked to put it in Changing Hands. I said yes. I  felt it was more important that it traveled than it sold. We had a seller  lined up for it by the end, but it was working for me as it was traveling.  Little Thunder Right. I think I read it was not too long after that that you did a show.  There were some t-shirts there, Tribal Size Me, and I wondered if you  could talk about that show.  14  Adams Yeah, I can. There was a summer Arlee powwow where we went every  summer and camped and stayed up there. There was one summer   no,  it was at Kyiyo Powwow. It was in the spring. I went to go get a t-shirt.  I wanted to buy a powwow t-shirt. I asked for a medium or a small.  They said they didn   t have any left; they just had tribal size left. It was  one of those moments where I looked around at powwow. First of all, I  was completely insulted at the term. I thought that   s really grotesque. I  don   t like to hear that. I looked around, and I saw something that I  maybe hadn   t noticed, and a lot of us hadn   t noticed is that Indian  country had gotten really big. I looked around, and that   s when I  noticed how the obesity epidemic, and with it the diabetes epidemic, the  health issues. The next powwow in a few months at Arlee, I had this  idea. I noticed a lot of   I hadn   t noticed how it had happened.  I went to the next powwow at Arlee, and I went to all these different t-shirt  vendors. I was amazed how many double-X and triple-X and  quadruple-X t-shirts you could buy. This is a niche market. This is not a  small powwow, but I was surprised at that. Finding smalls and mediums  was hard. I bought a selection of these t-shirts, of all these different idea  and concepts on these t-shirts, and one of them I loved. Here   s this  triple-X t-shirt with this graphic design of this totally cut, muscly,  Native guy playing basketball, and it   s a quadruple-X t-shirt. It   s like  the Native baller, and it   s like those basketball dreams of back when.  The person wearing it would be barley ambulatory. I thought this is  really   . At that same powwow that year, I saw that a woman who is a  wonderful beadworker that I admired, her leg was amputated, and she  had lost a foot. I was like,    This is an ugly thing that we   re all going to  have to look at.     I took these t-shirts, and I created these sculptures by doing beadwork  on them that resembles traditional beaded war shirts, nineteenth century  beaded war shirts, strips going down the sleeves and the front and  embellishing them. I called the series Tribal Size Me, 1-4. When the t-shirts  are laid flat and they   re mounted on the wall, there   s foam core  behind them, but you can   t see it. They look like just the shirt, flat-mounted  on the wall with the beadwork on it. First of all, it strikes you  how enormous the shirts are. Then it   s these war shirts by warriors that  can   t be warriors. It   s really hard to be proactive about your community  or your future when you are in fear of your own health every day. Since  then, the issue has become so mainstream.  Little Thunder I was going to say, you were in advance, I think, of   .  Adams That was a while ago; that was 2005, 2004. Since then, almost every  tribe has a health center and a workout facility. The Salish tribe has a  shuttle system that drives elders into the very large gym facility they  15  have. Tribes are aware of it. They   re proactive. The community is  proactive, and it has, I think, changed for the better. Small things, Arlee  powwow used to throw candy to kids, and now they pass out fresh fruit  and water bottles to the drummers. Small things like that, trying to  make the spiritual and social healthy activities also physically healthy.  It   s a wonderful step that they   ve taken, and in hindsight, as obvious as  banning alcohol from powwows. It wasn   t that long ago that powwows  had beer gardens. At some point everybody, as Maya Angelou says, you  do your best until you know better. Then when you know better, you do  better. I think this is a case where tribal communities are saying,    We  know better now, and we   re going to try and do better so that we don   t  have elders missing feet, and we don   t have people who can   t work or  participate because of diabetes, and we   re not subjecting kids to the  same conditions.     I was incredibly worried that the piece was going to be received poorly  because I was taught very specifically that beadwork should be a  positive thing always, and it should never be something you approach  with a negative attitude or mindset. The traditional way of doing  beadwork is to think of it as something that you   re doing as a part of  your community. To think that you   re going to use this skill to be  critical of people was a real question for me about,    Can I use this skill  to be critical of my own community, or is that a negative thing?    I  didn   t receive any negative feedback from it. I think especially after the  first year that I exhibited them, the momentum and the public awareness  was there and has continued. I don   t think anyone would bat an eye at it  now. I don   t think it would be seen as anything out there at all. That was  probably one of those moments that was far more in my head than about  my own concerns about how it was going to be received than the reality  was.  Little Thunder You mentioned a couple of shows that were important: the traveling  show and this particular show. What was another important museum  show for you early on that Changing Hands     Adams The Changing Hands was really important on a national level. The way  that the Museum of Arts and Design did the catalog was gorgeous and  thoughtful and really respectful of Native artists, and where they might  be, or where they might have come from. They did some unique things  which they published. Instead of saying where you were from, they  published where you lived, as though where you are is more important  than where you   ve been. Logical, but not something usually afforded to  Native artists. It projected my work from being someone that was just  trying things out in Montana to being on a national level really fast. A  lot of people heard my name and saw my work.  16  That was an amazing show. At the same time, I had an offer from the  museum in Missoula, Montana, where I lived. They asked me to have a  solo show at the museum there. That put me on the scene locally,  regionally. I had to prepare a solo show, myself, from scratch. I had to  learn   I had to make bigger pieces. I thought they were going to give  me one of the small side galleries which was about fifteen by ten, and I  thought,    Great.    Then we walked into this massive gallery. I kind of  started to stop breathing, and I asked the curator, I said,    Do you know  how small beads are?    (Laughs)  Little Thunder Oh my goodness, yes.  Adams I said,    I can have a hundred-hour piece that would fit in my purse.    I  had to think differently. I had to make some very large, large pieces that  could fill that space if not physically, mentally, critically. I did two  really big pieces just for that show that were more conceptual, less  beadwork, meant to be seen from fifteen feet back, and really different  from the super tiny, precious work that I had been doing up to that  point. Probably the most important piece I did for that was I did a  topo graphic  map of the Missoula County area on red wool, and I did  the topo lines in black beads. Then I did the rivers in blue. It was a map  of an event. Then I did the route that Chief Charlo and his band took  when they were expelled from the Bitterroot Valley which is south of  Missoula. They were expelled from there finally by the military for the  last time in the 1890s and forced north, up into the reservation where  most of the tribe already was, but Chief Charlo had been holding out.  I charted their route. It turned out really well. It was on hand-dyed  wool. I was really playing with materials, and it was a wall hanging for  starters, so it wasn   t functional. It was a topo map, and it looked great  from a distance and up close. The Missoula Art Museum ended up  purchasing it for their permanent collections, which is wonderful  because it   s a map of that place. It was four feet by five feet. It was  enormous. I still made everything in that show. My mindset was still so  much that everything was made and it folded and wrapped. Nothing  was really big or bulky or permanent, so when I dismantled the show I  packed everything in my show into the trunk of my Honda Accord.  Little Thunder That   s amazing  (Laughter)  Adams Everything rolled or folded. I was like,    We   ve got a real nomad here.     Little Thunder Nomadic way.  Adams At one point, I loaded it all up in my car, and the staff came up, asked  me if I needed a trolley.    No, it   s all in my Honda outside.    I might  17  have had to use some of the backseat. Yeah, an entire solo show of  boxes and wall hangings and t-shirts and everything just collapsed and  folded and multi-layered over everything into basically one big tinker   s  bundle.  Little Thunder Now, at this point, how much of your work is coming from individual  commissions?  Adams Well, in some respects I   ve actually slowed down on artwork. I     Little Thunder No, I mean at this point early on, a bit earlier in your career.  Adams Oh, at this point, probably it was about 30 percent commissions and  about 70 percent sales, most of that coming through the Heard Market.  That was a major event for me for a quite a few years. It was at the right  time of year for me. It was something, the time was right to travel every  year to there. The market was good. Also with the issues surrounding  my   because I   m not federally enrolled, I was not welcome at Santa Fe.  In some respects that was okay because I really didn   t have the time to  do two shows here. The Heard was a really good show for me. I kept  winning larger and larger and larger prizes every year. I hit the Heard  show at a good time. The market was actually hitting a downturn. The  greater economy was, but I was new, so I was priced lower than a lot of  established artists. Collectors that were wanting to add to their  collection on a smaller budget could afford me. My stuff was novel. It  was actually not a bad time for me. I kept my prices relatively low and  was happy to be there and working. It facilitated me being able to stay  at home with my daughter. It worked out really well for a while.  Little Thunder Now, do you still do the Heard Museum show?  Adams I do not.  Little Thunder When did you     Adams Seven years ago, I believe, was my last time there. I won Best of Show.  In the controversy after I won Best of Show, it came out that I was not  enrolled. The Heard knew this, but I guess the audience a lot of times  glossed over it or didn   t hear it. The Heard Museum was put into a  really tough spot. They received federal funding, and that federal  funding has become more and more tightly enforced to only support  programs that all the members have to be federally enrolled. I   m not,  and I can   t be. That was a problem. The Heard Museum had every year  reviewed my application and was aware of that and had been okay with  that, but with the added pressure, they had to disinvite me the next year  even though I was the Best of Show winner. It was both the better thing  18  to happen to me and not so great. In the end, what it was is that it kind  of set me free.  The way that you succeed at the market shows is making the pieces that  succeed at the market shows. Doing things that are too far out there or  unmarketable isn   t how you win, it isn   t how you sell, and it isn   t how  you move forward. You can also get caught in the endless spin cycle of     I have to make a big piece for the show, and then I only have time to  finish my commissions. Now it   s time to start the next big piece.    It can  be really hard for an artist to take the time to try new work or (which I  think is even more important) to build up a body of work so that you  could show at a gallery show or a museum show so that you can show  progression or a theme, work through ideas. Single stunning pieces are  really fun to do, but they don   t tell your story. They tell a snapshot. It   s  also a very competitive place. At that point, I didn   t really need to do it  anymore, either. The better thing about it was that after that, I needed to  and I wanted to rebrand myself not just as a Native artist but take  Native out of it and say I   m a fiber artist.  I come from a variety of backgrounds. I   m Irish, I   m Lebanese, and I   m  Native. I   m a lot of things, but I   m a fiber artist. Once I took away the  necessity of being labeled and put into Native-only shows, I found that I  can go a lot more places. I can show and apply to galleries that, as a  Native artist, would never have shown me. I don   t have to only make  work that looks Native for a specific audience. I can do whatever I want  now. You know, it means that you   re cut loose from the reliability of  the Heard shows, those market shows, which are very comforting. They  provide a lot of income to a lot of amazing artists, and they need that  place to show their work. It   s true that as a Native artist, most  mainstream galleries will never touch your work. They just won   t do it.  It   s just too ethnic, (it   s too something) and they won   t touch it.  A lot of Native artists absolutely have to have those venues to show in,  or there won   t be any place to show in at all. In my case, it was better to  step out of that and to step away and say,    I   m going to take off some of  these labels without changing who I am.    The downside about that is  that in the aftermath of that, hearing how people were talking about my  mother and my grandmother, their choices of partners, it   s a really ugly  thing to let people talk about you like a dog breed. It   s a really awful  thing to let people talk about you in fractions. Nobody is a fraction of a  person. To allow yourself to be sort of diminished literally by fractions  and pieces until somebody says whether or not you deserve to be  participating in this conversation or not, that   s a very detrimental thing  to somebody   s physiological wellbeing, much less to your artistic  future.  19  As painful as it was to hear those things said about me, that I didn   t  deserve to be there, that I didn   t belong, that I wasn   t really Native, and  to have people questioning my childhood and my background and my  family, it was also really freeing to just have to say,    Actually, I don   t  care, and I   m going to have to step away from this completely and not  have this conversation. At the same time, I   m not going to have to  worry about whether or not the next show decides I   m not Native  enough because I   m simply going to tell them what I am and what I do.  They   re either going to except it or not, but I   m not going to have to  worry about that anymore.    It   s been freeing, and, honestly, it   s been a  pretty good career move. As uncomfortable as it was at the time, it   s  been a really good career move.  Little Thunder What are the more important galleries to you today?  Adams I   ve worked a lot with the Lovetts Gallery here in town. They   ve made  a point of supporting Native artists whose work they like. They   re very  specific. They choose to support what they like, and they don   t  necessarily feel like they need to justify it one way or another. They   re  pretty brave about that. The All My Relations  Arts  gallery in  Minneapolis has been really supportive of region-wide, even greater  region-wide, shows. I don   t know that I   m working with any one  gallery, although I will say the 108  Contemporary  gallery here in  Tulsa, as someone who   s working towards this different idea of seeing  myself as an artist who works in fiber, it   s been a wonderful, wonderful  venue. I found that a lot of, instead of specific galleries that support my  work or show my work, it   s been contacts with people, and there   s a lot  of independent curators right now.  Then they build relationships with the institutions that they work with.  Then they bring in the artists, and they provide the opportunities. Rather  than just one place, it   s more about right now than the people who are  making the connections between the artists and the places. Sometimes  the place might, through that curator, be receptive to my work where if  it had been presented to them alone, they might not have had the person  there to have that conversation and say,    No, really, you ought to look  at this. This could work with what you   re trying to do here.    The people  that have been working towards that have been Tony Tiger, Bobby  Martin, Troy Jackson, Roy Boney, Candessa Tehee, Heather Ahtone.  They   re just this amazing group of artists and scholars and writers and  curators.  Sometimes they   re all of the above, and they   re all really working  together. The mutual support in this region is amazing. It   s something I  hadn   t anticipated, but it   s been really spectacular that all these artists  really have this attitude of everybody   s boats are going to rise together.  20  They   re curating shows, and everyone   s working together to create  opportunities, rather than just waiting for opportunities to come knock  at the door. They rarely do. There   s some wonderful collaboration and  inclusion. I haven   t seen the slightest bit of a good-ol  -boys club here.  It   s really wonderful.  Little Thunder I   m glad you brought that up. I was going to ask you how you got to  Oklahoma, and then clearly this is   .  Adams I have a good story of how I got here. I was living in Montana, and the  downside about being in such a gorgeous, remote, rural place like  Montana is that is has an incredibly small population base, fewer than a  million people in the state. Don   t tell anyone. Every piece of my work  sold out of state, every major show. I had a solo show at the  Yellowstone Museum in Billings and the Missoula Art Museum in  Missoula, and that was about it. There   s a couple of other venues, but  it   s a real small population and place. I was already traveling a lot. I  was already thinking about my future and my daughters future, being  unwilling to stay in Montana, because it   s a very poor place, seeing a lot  of other really talented successful people there, still living in poverty  and wanting something different. I knew that my work was not going to  go well on the West Coast because my work looks very Western. It has  a very Western feel to it.  The West Coast definitely, even though Seattle is an eight-hour drive  away, they have a very narrow ideal of what their artwork should look  there, and I simply wasn   t going to work well in Seattle or Portland. I  don   t do Northwest Coast. I don   t do carved wood. I don   t. I had visited  Tulsa for a couple of shows, for the Cherokee Art Market and for  another   for two years and was surprised at how much I liked it here.  First of all, Tulsa was green and gorgeous, and it was also a place where  I could wear cowboy boots to an art opening. It was important to me. I  was from the West. I wore cowboy boots and liked that, and I didn   t  want to be in a place where people couldn   t be like that. I had the piece  in Changing Hands, and the Changing Hands exhibit came to Tulsa.  Christina Burke was the curator; she was a new curator at the time.  She asked if I would come down and bring some more of my pieces,  and do a little mini-exhibit, and a lecture, and a masters workshop for  teachers. We focused on printmaking and using their collection,  drawing out geometric designs, and showing teachers how they can  facilitate this in classroom exercises. After three days of all these  obligations, lectures, and Christina driving me and toting me to and fro,  all my obligations were done, and I wanted to go see some live music at  the Cain   s Ballroom I had heard about. Christina was exhausted, and  she bagged out. She said,    I just can   t do it.    I said,    I   m a big girl with  21  a credit card and a cell phone. Just drop me off, and I   ll go listen and  find my way back to the hotel.    I ended up meeting a really great guy  that night.  Little Thunder Oh, my goodness, that is a great story   Adams It is  As he reminds me, I wouldn   t give him my phone number. He got  my email address, though, from my business card. I met him, and he  was wonderful. I went back to Montana thinking,    I   m in really big  trouble.    We started a long-distance correspondence, and eventually I  let him have my phone number. A year later, just over a year later, we  were married in Missoula. Put all my stuff in a U-Haul and drove here. I  was already thinking about this place. I liked everything about it. Tulsa  was, there was financial opportunities here, and it was pretty, and it was  the West. I could still wear cowboy boots. There was so much  happening here. You could just feel the buzz of Native artists. That  surprised me because everyone assumes the Southwest or the Northwest  or somewhere else is the hub, but I really think it   s here. It was  intriguing how much was happening here. All these factors and being in  love and everything, so we got married, and he convinced me to moving  here.  Little Thunder Tell us a little bit about your upcoming show at the Great Plains  Museum in June. Do you know   I think it   s called Contemporary  Indigeneity II? I read about that online, maybe.  Adams I don   t think I   m in that.  Little Thunder Okay. (Laughter) Sorry about that. Sometimes there are   .  Adams Was that on my website?  Little Thunder No, it was on theirs, I believe. It was something I googled in connection  with you.  Adams I think the Contemporary Indigeneity, which is the hardest word to spell  ever, is an ongoing juried show, either annually or biannually. I   ve  applied to that and had pieces. Actually, I think one of the pieces we   re  going to look at later is one of the pieces from that. That   s a group  juried show that happens. I think it might be biannual now. With the  Great Plains Museum, I was also their artist in residence one year.  Traveled there because they saw my work in the first Contemporary  Indigeneity and liked it and invited me to apply. That was a wonderful  experience because I worked with the Great Plains Museum. Had a solo  show but then also created a specific commission piece for them to have  22  in their permanent collection. Worked on site on the piece for two  weeks, and did tours and talks with kids and all those good things.  It   s a really interesting museum because it   s interdisciplinarian. They  talk about farming, and they talk about the landscape, and they talk  about art. The museum is meant to be the art venue where a lot of these  ideas get expressed. The institute itself, the Great Plains Institute  (maybe I   m saying that wrong) combines everything from cartography  to geology to ethnology. They combine all these disciplines to study.  What is the Great Plains, and why is that a unique place or unique idea?  The downside was beadwork is not very exciting for people to watch.  For two weeks I was beading, which in beadwork is pretty much me  hunched over with terrible posture, doing tiny work. The other thing  was that I had to time it so that I had this commission piece ready for  the end of the show.  Little Thunder Whoa   Adams Yeah, I had to try and time it so that I had enough to work on in front of  people. I had easily forty-five minutes to spare at the end of two weeks  as I was finishing, before the final. We put it on a pedestal, and it was  done. That was the first piece I ever did with QR codes. That was my  experimentation, was to bring (because they are interdisciplinary in that  institute) to bring this element of science. I had worked on science  pieces before. I did a solo show at Lovetts Gallery with all science  pieces, but to bring this element of map making and history and  ornithology, each panel had a bird species on it and a plant species.  There was a QR code that would give you the latitude and the longitude  and the name of the location where that biosphere would be found. I  really love that I can bring my love of science into the beadwork pieces.  Little Thunder Is that the first time that you used the Japanese beads, the   .  Adams No, I had really liked the delicas before that.  Little Thunder There is a connection between being able to do the QR Codes and   .  Adams Yes, I had liked the delicas before that. Most beadworkers frown on  delicas. They   re considered not the right kind of bead because delicas  are a perfect tube, a cylinder. European beads or the Czech beads are     I   m trying to remember the exact name of it. They   re shaped like a  donut, so they   re round, but they   re round on all the sides. That   s really  great for working on curves and lines. I have an affinity for the  precision that comes with it. I had already been working with delicas in  a lot of small ways because I like that precision, but when I did the  piece that won Best of Show at the Heard was a cradleboard. It was a  23  Salish-style cradleboard with a fully-beaded headboard up above the  baby. I did the florals in all different kinds of beads, but I did the  background entirely in delicas. It was excruciating and problematic, but  the end result was so crisp and so clean that I thought it was worth it.  When it comes to the QR codes, the delicas are what make the QR  codes possible because while they   re a three-dimensional object, they   re  shaped almost like a can, like a can of food. If you were to lay a can on  it   s side and look straight down, it would really be a rectangle. That  way, I can bead this pattern, and then from straight above, it actually  can be flattened into two dimensions of black and white. It can be read  as a binary, as a positive and a negative, as long as I get it right,  (Laughter), as long as all the beads are in the right spot. It happens more  than you would think. I   m better at it, but I do have to take a lot out and  count. The QR codes are my way of embedding text into pieces and  making beadwork literally readable for modern audiences.  Little Thunder Well, let   s talk about your process and techniques a little bit more. Do  you do all your bead shopping online or material shopping     Adams I do the majority now. I used to shop locally, even as a teenager, and as  a kid, there were always local shops. I   m finding more and more that I  like to order online. I know the colors that I like, and I tend to buy them  that way. Every now and then you find a great bead shop and go a little  crazy. I think the biggest bead shopping I ever did is there was this  small shop in Blackfoot, Idaho. On the way back from the Heard one  year, I had heard that the woman who ran it was in her nineties and she  was going to close it. I think I spent a thousand dollars on beads. I  walked out with a package that was smaller than a sandwich (Laughter)  because they were microbeads, tiny amounts, and vintage. I went a little  crazy. Every now and then you find something because of its rarity that  you probably couldn   t find online. Now the internet has leveled all that  out. Every little antique store that finds beads at such and such estate  can sell them on eBay. You can go on eBay and find amazing vintage  and antique finds. It   s really leveled that all out.  Little Thunder Some of the boxes where you were working on the hand-dyed wool,  were you dying your wool?  Adams I wasn   t. I found some wonderful women in Montana that were running  a quilting shop, and they loved it that I wanted to use this   they were  getting the raw, white, woven wool and dying it themselves. I could  work with them and say,    I want it extra streaky. I want it this color.     Most of the women who came into their shop, oh, they wanted little tiny  pieces. I wanted yardage, and I wanted it with streaks and variations  and mistakes and stuff in it, lots and lots of it. I found that even a solid  24  black, hand-dyed has more depth to it than a commercial simply  because of the way our eyes read those variations. It   s like the fabric  literally gets to drop back and provide a real background for it.  As soon as I found them and the small-scale art they were doing, I  pulled away from using commercial wools and was exclusively using  theirs. They closed shop, and I   m devastated. I may have to learn how  to now. I try not to add more skills. I already have enough skills, and I  am also my accountant, and my photo archivist, and a lot of other skills.  When somebody says,    You know how to tan,    I   m like,    Ah, but I  really don   t want to.    I don   t want to dye wool, and I don   t want to knit.  I don   t want to   . I can only have so many time-taking and supply-driven  skills before I have maxed out. I don   t want to be an expert in  wool dying. I just want to find someone who   s really good at it, and I  can pay them to do it. (Laughs)  Little Thunder Maybe they   ll listen to this interview. (Laughs)  Adams Yes.  Little Thunder Your work seems pretty much split between geometric and figurative.  Adams Yes, in the beginning, it was all geometric. Then I started to add in  elements of animal figures, more stemming from ledger-drawing styles.  The horse heads were kind of coming out of ledger drawings, also older  pictorial beadwork. There   s a strong element of pictorial beadwork. I  wanted to do things a little more realistic. Jackie Larson Bread was a  good friend of my mom   s because of her work. She does photo realism.  That   s mostly what she   s known for in her beadwork, and it is amazing.  She also does a lot of pictorial-style beadwork, taking that older  drawing style from ledger drawings and hide counts and converting it  into a real graphically-dominated beadwork style. Seeing some of her  work when I was starting out   . She was friends with my mom, and I  didn   t know she was famous. (Laughter) She would probably still say  she   s not famous, but she is. She was a real encouragement when I was  first getting started. Actually, my thesis show, my junior review was not  well received. Jackie sent me a letter and told me to keep my head up  and keep on keeping on and it would figure itself out.  Little Thunder When you   re working on a piece, are you working on one piece straight  through, or are you working on different pieces simultaneously?  Adams If I have my way, I try to have about three pieces. I try to have one  large, long-term project that   s really intensive that I   m working at in  sections. Then I try to have some other medium-size piece that I can  pick at, and then I try to have something small, jewelry or edging, that I  25  can do that requires a lot less thought, also that I can finish quickly  because the long projects can zap your staying power. When you   ve  worked on a project for three or four months, you start to feel like it   ll  never end. There   s no sense of accomplishment, so sometimes the  smaller projects help clear the palette a little bit and help you stay  motivated. Even though you   re taking time away, it   s helping to  recharge a little bit. On the bigger projects, you can work with one color  for so long that you never want to see that color again. You fill in  background, and you go,    I never want to see light blue ever again.     (Laughter)  Little Thunder What kinds of research do you do for your pieces?  Adams I do a lot of figurative work with birds that are rendered realistic. I do a  lot of reviewing and looking at nature photography. I also do a lot of     the internet has changed research. When I was starting off, the internet  was still this proto, almost-kind-of-there, and I did all my research in  the libraries. I would look up everything from kitchen design books  trying to get ideas for graphics. Obviously I would look up beadwork  books and photos and some of the early online discussion groups that  discussed northern plains tribal art, things like that that were good  sources of photos and museum collections. Really quickly, the internet  outpaced those things. I can literally sit down and research a project in  ten minutes if I want now.  I can also go online, and I can talk to other artists. We talk to each  other. We ask questions, and we share new projects. Now the rate of  inspiration and information has gone up exponentially, and now  sometimes it   s harder to sort some of that out and have time to actually  get away from other influences and step back. I really like modern  design. I spend a lot of time on Pinterest looking at everything from  rugs to dishes. I really like contemporary design of those types. I look  for ideas in a lot of those places. Paint shows where they show color  palettes and stuff, those are great, great sources. I tend to create these  little research files on my computer where I have everything from paint  chips to pictures of birds, to someone   s kimono that   s the most amazing  colors, or a flower, and put that all together, then figure out what I   m  thinking about when I   m looking at all those things.  Why are those interesting to me, and why am I picking them out, and  then try to reduce it down, and then I draw. I never draw in color. I only  draw in black and white because I don   t think there   s hardly any point  to drawing beads. You can   t pick your colors. You can   t mix them, so  you have to work with the colors that you   re given. Sometimes the  texture is more important than the color. If something   s red, there   s red,  but there   s red matte, there   s red luster, and there   s red glossy. When I  26  pick beads out for a project, I actually get them all out. I   ll get, like, a  hundred and fifty colors out, big trays, and lay them all out and put  them next to each other. The other thing is, they do strange things next  to each other. They play off of each other; they bounce off each other.  You might love this green and this red, but they can   t do much besides,  and one color is an outline versus a background. Again, there   s a lot of  trial and error, and you   ll buy a lot of beads.  I do jewelry as prototypes, so if I   m researching a pattern, if I think I   m  going to like this pattern, I might do a really small version of it as a pair  of earrings to jumpstart it and go,    What these two colors look like next  to each other?    Do little versions. I hate to throw it out, so I do earrings.  They might be a little sampler of what I think I   m going to do and try it  out. I   m also working with different backgrounds. A beadworker that   s  filling in the plain completely is a different process than when you   re  dealing with this negative space behind it. Whether it   s a print or a  photo or something I   ve hand drawn, or wool, there   s always this other  factor to cooperate with. That   s a little bit different than just filling it in  completely.  Little Thunder You have kind of made a bit of a shift away from fabric and towards  paper.  Adams Yeah, I have. The shifting to working on paper started with working  with a few prints. I intentionally made a series of dry points. I   m  working at Bobby Martin   s studio. I left these lines, these gaps in the  dry point etchings where I wanted to put in a row of lane-style  beadwork and try it. That was my first endeavor in that, was to use that  process of intentionally leaving gaps where I meant to put beadwork.  Those turned out really, really well. I really liked the effect. The logic  behind it was that I was not able to make as many projects as I wanted,  and certainly not in price points for collectors or friends that I wanted,  because each piece involved so many hours that by the time I finished  it, I was priced out of my own work. I couldn   t afford to have one.  Also, I found that people who were interested in my work were not  interested in the construction. They didn   t really care the way I did  about how a purse was sewn together or the structure behind the box.  They wanted to see the image, the color, the composition, and beyond  that, it really didn   t   . Most of my larger projects are probably half  construction. If I made a complicated purse with beadwork and  construction, and the entire thing is handmade and bound in silk, they  might never even open it. It   s,    To who am I making all this endeavor  for?     27  Trying to back away from that and to make art that had all the same  qualities as the other pieces I was working on, but didn   t require a  month for each project, to be able to work through things a little faster,  to be able to make enough for a show or some gallery inventory.  Sometimes to move on to a new idea. For now, I   ve been working on  paper in a variety of ways, sometimes printmaking and sometimes ink  and pencil work, sometimes now collaborating on photographs, and  sometimes with solid beadwork on paper where the entire thing is on  paper. That   s the matrix that I   m starting on. Working mostly two  dimensional would be like 2.25 dimensional.  Little Thunder Right.  Adams They come off the paper some, but they   re mostly on these wood  panels, and then working with wood panels, too, as the delivery system.  They are pretty fragile, the way I   m installing them right now, but I like  the space.  Little Thunder We   ll see them in a minute. What   s your creative process from the time  you get an idea?  Adams I generally use sketchbooks and idea books to write the idea down  usually in words, and try to brainstorm out from that. I start making  rough sketches and my little computer files with all my inspiration  photos and ideas. Then I start drawing it and thinking about it. I also  tend to think about it at night. Often, early morning wake-up times is  when I do my best idea thinking about it, and running through different  possibilities, and trying to trial-and-error adapt before I actually start.  Then if it   s on the boxes, what I generally do is I take graph paper, and I  measure out the exact dimensions it   s going to be. Then I draw out each  side. I don   t have to tape it together like a mockup.  I   m pretty good three dimensional that I can make it in my head, and I  can turn it. I can make it and spin it, and make it taller or wider, do  whatever, and that is about sitting and thinking about it. Then I do the  graph paper to see if the dimensions I   m thinking about how the  numbers would really work out. From there, I make a graph paper  template for each side, for each panel. I cut it out in wool and Pellon  and in wood, and cut the wool much larger so that I have a lot of edge. I  use quilter   s tape or painter   s tape. I use a real low-adhesive tape to  outline the graph paper size so that I know what the interior size is  going to be. From there, I generally use thread and make halfway  marks, so I make this grid of reference points with that. The downside  of working with a negative space background is that I draw on it.  28  If I were filling in the background, I could just draw it, then fill in all  the colors, but with a negative space background, I have to leave it as-is.  There   s nothing really that   s safe to draw on silk or wool. What I  usually do is I create the outline and then create the grid. Then if I   m  doing figurative work, I draw the figure out entirely and in as much  detail as I can on tracing paper. Then I baste stitch the tracing paper into  the surface. Then I use a needle, and I carve out the tiny little area I   m  going to bead. I fill in the gap. Then I carve out the next tiny little area  I   m going to bead, and I fill that in. I keep doing that reductively until  I   ve filled in all of the space. Then I can rip off the tracing paper against  the background and see the edges.  On all my realistic birds, that   s how I do it on wool is through that  reductive method and figuratively trying to figure out how to make it  look semi-realistic. I know they   re not looking realistic, but it should  have enough motion and stuff to evoke what it looks like realistically. If  it   s not a figurative, then I actually work out the math on graphing  paper, and I just start in the middle. I just start counting because there   s  a lot of math. If it   s geometric beadwork, it   s counting and counting and  counting and figuring out the math of the reduction and the expansion.  The beads are not perfect squares, so you have to figure out your math.  Your lane is going to be an even or an odd number, and that will  differentiate what kind of angles you can make.  Little Thunder Thank goodness for your science background.  Adams Yeah. There   s this idea in art school that that   s where students who  don   t want to go math should go. That   s where they should major.  Maybe there   s other kinds of art where you don   t have to do a lot of  math, but I have to do a lot of math and sort of symbolic thinking like  that. (Laughter) I don   t know if it was the safe haven for math a lot of  other students thought it was going to be.  Little Thunder Well, looking back on your career so far, what has been one of the high  points?  Adams That   s kind of tough. Honestly, I think having the piece in the Museum  of Arts and Design, having the piece in the Changing Hands, was  definitely a high point. It was early, and it was a really big step for me  to step out of my region, my  inaudible  start, to think,    I think I could  really do this. I think this might happen.    Another random point was to  meet someone and to have them tell me that they used photos of my  work in their class at a college class. They were using photos of it to  teach. I was in shock. You don   t think anyone knows about you. You  are constantly banging on the door, trying to get somebody to care who  you are. I think I was pretty wide-eyed about that. The idea that you  29  want to make something that lasts and that matters, and then the idea  creeps in that maybe it does and that maybe it is right now, lasting and  mattering.  That would be, that would be a very high point. A personal high point, I  made a piece probably seven years ago. In the center of it had, three  Salish women digging bitterroot. It was a wall hanging, rather small but  pretty intensely worked. They were standing in front of this mountain in  Missoula that   s now developed. They were wearing a lot traditional  Salish silk head scarves and some of this other stuff. Victor Charlo,  who   s Salish and a playwright, someone I   ve known most of my life if  not all of it, he was there at this art function. It was a fundraiser for the  Montana Artist Residency, and we were both associated with it. His  daughter April was there. He looked at it, and he got a little choked up.  He said it reminded him of his mother.  At that moment, I thought I made something that matters not just to the  audience out there telling me where it   s good or it   s bad, but I made  something that made somebody feel something. It evoked something for  him about his mothers, what they wore, digging bitterroot, and their  tools. I worked really hard to get the tools right and their head scarves  right and everything right. There   s a moment where it works, where  somebody that   s important to you feels something important and that it  might last a little bit. It might be a little part of that record. That was a  personal moment where I thought,    Whether it sells or doesn   t sell, it  matters a lot in this moment.    That   s a highlight for me.  Little Thunder What about one of the low points?  Adams I have two low points that are different but pretty similar. They both  ended up well, so they   re good stories. (Laughs) The first one was in  college my junior review. BFA program as a junior, you have to have a  formal review process before you   re a senior. The idea is not to let  students who aren   t prepared have the distinction of a BFA; they would  have to get a BA instead. I did the junior review. About half of it was  work that was leading towards the parfleche, but they were in ceramics,  actually. I was painting parfleche on porcelain, which I thought was  interesting. Then the other half of my works were the food, the ceramic  food, very pop arty and silly. It   s what I had as a junior, so I presented  it. Then I got anonymous comments from the faculty.  They literally said,    Leave the parfleche to your mother. Stop doing  this.    They were anonymous, and I asked the faculty if they would  please talk about this, if they would let me come in and talk about it. I  had almost nothing but negative comments on the comment section of  my review, but I was passed with flying colors as far as numerically.  30  And to actually say my mother? There was incredibly demeaning and  insulting. It was derogatory is what it was. It was meant to be a slam at  the heritage, at who I was, and that they knew that this was influenced  by my background and by my mother   s participation in Native culture.  It was definitely a slam, and they wouldn   t address it. I decided   I  found a loop hole, and I found that if they pass you in the junior review,  they can   t tell you what it   s going to be on.  You can get reviewed in one style and do a different style. You don   t  have to do one thing, so I decided they were going to have to look at  parfleche for another year. (Laughter) I did my entire senior thesis in  parfleche patterns and designs. The downside was, because I was  working in a nontraditional fiber art, I had to forfeit my studio. I was  only allowed to have a studio space in the ceramics department. They  just could never seem to find any space for me to work on campus in  any other medium. I ended up working out of my home, which was  ostracizing to a degree because I wasn   t working with other students,  like you should be as a senior. I had to work at home. I   s literally  marginalized. Here is the outline, and you are going to have to be  outside of it even though you   re a senior and you   ve worked towards  this up until this time.  That was demoralizing. When I had my solo show two years later, not  one professor came to see it even though it was a mile from campus.  That was demoralizing, but my senior thesis show was scheduled to  exhibit, the very one they didn   t want to see. I had the solo show, so  whether they showed up or not, I had it. It was well received. That lack  of support in the end, it was a little bit of a stumbling block. A lot of  other people encouraged me, and it went well. The other low point was  definitely the aftermath after the Heard, after winning the Best of Show.  Again, the realizations coming out about that and the opportunity to  redefine myself was one that I took and profited from. Even though that  was a low point to hear some of the criticisms or to hear some of the  negative talk, it   s been far better in the long run to be really, really  honest about where I come from and what I want to do, and to have that  openness with all of the curators and other artists I work with.  I think it makes it easier for other people to talk about what diaspora is,  and what creating a new definition of yourself when you do come from  multiple backgrounds, and I think more people stop feeling that they  have to segment themselves out or pick one or the other. It gives you an  opportunity to talk about    What is the new breed,    instead of just being  a breed, and being a whole person. I did feel a little trapped before that,  that I had to be one thing or another and only talk about one part of my  background and leave other things out because they were disadvantages  to my career. Definitely a low point, but on the other hand, I walked  31  away, and was like,    I won.    I won Best of Show. I   m probably not  going to win it again, and I don   t need to. I did it. I   ll take my award  and go home. If that   s how it has to be, that   s how it has to be, but I  don   t have to stop. In the long run, it has turned out to be an  opportunity.  Little Thunder Is there anything we forgot to mention before we take a look at your  work?  Adams I can   t think of it. I   ve covered a lot in a rambling fashion. If there   s any  other questions that you think we   ve missed, but I can   t think of it.  Otherwise, we can look at   .  Little Thunder Yeah, we   re going to look at some pieces of art here.  Adams Okay.  Little Thunder Molly, you want to tell me about this piece?  Adams This is a combination of beadwork and photo etchings. It was a  collection of photo etching trials I actually did in college and didn   t use  at the time and saved. The center one is a portrait of me in my  traditional outfit when I was eighteen. The photo on the left is my great-grandmother  and her outfit, getting ready for powwow. The one on the  right is her family when she was away at boarding school, her siblings,  and her mother and father. I took all these photos and wanted to  highlight them as a triptych and put them together and use the  beadworks almost as saint imagery and draw the outlines around them.  I used the fire color scheme on the two older portraits and then the blue  for the image of myself. This is a little bit of a family piece about our  photos and the beadwork that goes throughout.    my great-grandmother  is wearing a fully-beaded dress top and getting her hair braided. Then in  the center, I   m wearing my dress. Then on the right, my great-grandmother   s  brother has a beaded boy   s suit. It has the floral patterns.  It was usually a vest-pant combo worn over a commercial fabric. He has  32  that old-style suit floral design on his outfit. His mother was a  wonderful beadworker.  Little Thunder All right, so how about your box here?  Adams This piece has two Scissor-tailed flycatchers on the front in realistic  poses, flying. On the back, on the verso, there   s an abstract geometric  rendering of the same birds of my own design. The interior opens up to  an orange interior with geometric designs. I am just in love with the  Scissor-tailed flycatchers after moving here.  Little Thunder Yes   Adams They   re such an emblem of this area, and I had wanted to do a piece  about them. The outside is this bright blue sky with the two different  versions, the geometric and realistic flycatchers. Then the interior is this  really orange which I think of the Oklahoma soil and the red orange that  comes out, then some of the beadwork designs inspired by the some of  the beadwork I   ve seen since I moved here, some of the Kiowa and  Apache styles with the blue and white candy striping moving through it.  It was a contrast of earth and sky, literally the ground and hide, and the  yellow and orange stain that   s put on a lot of moccasins here, some of  the collection of impressions.  Little Thunder That   s wonderful. Okay, we   re looking at some works on paper here.  33  Adams Yeah, these are a combination of ink drawings, color pencils, and thread  work, and beadwork on paper, so a combination of a lot of different  techniques. I was wanting to play around with some more spontaneous,  interdisciplinary stuff, and really feeling an urge to draw again. The  birds, the Scissor-tailed flycatcher is really a fun motif to play with.  They   re so lyrical, the way that they move and their tails. These two  different pieces, one more flat and symmetrical, and one more in  motion, referencing a lot of modern design and pop culture colors and  some things like that, but also working with thread to create texture, so  trying to draw with thread. The one on the right has blue and red  accents in thread embroidery. The one on the left, a lot of what looks  like black lines that are drawn are actually black thread. A combination  of black ink and thread and gold beads on a colored background. Just  trying to play with color and design but really enjoying working on the  Bristol board paper, and mounting these pieces out from the wood  panels so that they float in front of the form they   re mounted on.  Little Thunder That   s a nice presentation. All right, and how about this piece?  34  Adams This piece is beadwork on a photo, and it   s a collaboration with Roy  Graff, a photographer that I met. I   d been wanting to incorporate  photographs of landscape and then work geometric designs over the  surface. Loved his photography and thought this was an opportunity to  work directly with the photographer. He   s supplying the photographs  and having them printed on this beautiful paper. Then I   m working the  geometric designs over the surface and mounting them in the same  manner that I   m doing some of the other paperwork. Working on a  series upcoming, more pieces of landscape photography. He   s able to  produce images with the rich deep colors that I want, and then I can do  the geometric designs over the top.  Little Thunder Very powerful images. Well, thank you so much for your time today.  Adams Thank you.  -------  -------   
