 Little Thunder  Daniel  My name is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is Wednesday,  December 2, 2011. I   m interviewing Mike Daniel for the Oklahoma  Native Artist Project sponsored by the Oklahoma Oral History Research  Program at Oklahoma State University. We   re in Tahlequah at Mike   s  studio. Mike, you were an art teacher in Tahlequah public schools for  thirty-one years, one of the first potters to participate in the  reawakening of Southeastern pottery and designs in the state. Thank you  for taking the time to talk with me. Where were you born, and where did  you grow up?  I was born in Seminole, Oklahoma, and I came to Tahlequah when I was  seven months old. I was raised in Tahlequah at Sequoyah Grade School,  about three blocks from my studio. I went to school at Tahlequah Public  Schools. I attended Northeastern  Oklahoma State University  and  graduated there in 1971 with an arts education degree. Taught Native  American Art Craft and Cultural Studies in Tahlequah Public Schools to  seventh, eighth, and ninth graders and a selected group of high school  students.  What did your folks do for a living?  My father was a parts man at Wilson Washington Ford Motor Company  for thirty one years, and my mother stayed at home and took care of the  house and family. (Laughter)  What are your earliest memories of doing art?  Elementary school. The money was limited in elementary school, doing  typical, tear-the-paper projects, but in the sixth grade on Friday  afternoons they would call a group of us out of our classroom. We   d go  to the cafeteria, and we   d have all kinds of art supplies. We would do  artwork all Friday afternoons. It was a lot of fun. I think that   s really  5  Little Thunder  Daniel  Little Thunder  Daniel  Little Thunder  Daniel  Little Thunder  when the encouragement started. My parents were always very  encouraging in the arts, which was unusual for a male back in those  days. (Laughter) I think we   d read articles about Jerome Tiger at the  Five Civilized Tribes, and that kind of opened things.  At your home?  Yes, it opened things up, the Muskogee Phoenix and all that. I always  pursued the arts and went on and studied at Northeastern. Really wanted  to be a painter, and then I got into ceramics my sophomore year. That   s  where I felt comfortable, and I applied my design work and my painting  background into the designs of my work. I guess that   s when it all  started.  You really hadn   t done any three-dimensional?  Well, in high school we did clay work, hand-built projects. There was a  potter   s wheel available, and I did hand-built projects and did painting  and all that. I think I got one of the outstanding art awards when I was a  senior in high school, which was a surprise to me. (Laughter) I was  always encouraged in the arts in junior high and high school and, like I  said, at home, too.  I built my studio and got things running. Matter of fact, my first firing in  my kiln was in  1976 . We went to the Bicentennial in Washington DC,  and I participated in that area. It was a lot of fun. They called in the Five  Civilized Tribes groups, so that was fun, to participate.  You put some artwork in there?  Had some artwork there, and we got to play stickball on Lincoln Plaza.  (Laughter) Not many people get to do that, so that was fun. But that   s  when it all started. Started going to little shows and then dealt with some  galleries and some markets through the years. Art   s just been a part of  who I am.  My philosophy on being an art educator, you need to do art yourself and  be out trying to market it so the kids will know. I think one of the  problems with art educators, they   re not really out in the real world,  even on the college level, but that   s changing. Some of my colleagues  now are teaching at universities, but they   re out in the art world trying to  market their work, too. I think that part is changing to some extent.  You were adopted, and your adoptive parents were Indian, and they  really encouraged your exposure to Indian art. Did you get to see any  Indian paintings or anything else around town that really made an  6  Daniel  Little Thunder  Daniel  impression on you as a child?  Riley White used to be the art teacher at Sequoyah High School, and  he   d have paintings around town, so I saw his paintings. We would do  little art shows in high school, and the high school teacher, (I didn   t have  a car to drive) he would let me drive his truck to set up art shows. He   d  send high school students to the local library to set up an art show. So  exposure in art in high school. Bill Nichols was one of my art teachers.  He encouraged me, but it was all types of art. Yes, I was encouraged in  the arts. My father and I built the studio I   m currently in. When he  retired, he refinished wood and worked in wood. I got one little corner,  and after a year or two of finding sawdust in my clay, we expanded.  (Laughter) When my father retired, we did a lot of things together like  that. It was a lot of fun. He helped me buy my first potter   s wheel and  my first kiln. My mother   they always encouraged me in the arts.  There   s been a lot of people in college and my adult life that have pulled  me through the art world.  One of my first shows when I got out and hit the art circuit was the  Children   s Medical Center in Tulsa. Big show. I was up on stage with  Woody Crumbo and Solomon McCombs. Of course, another young  artist was there, so they gave me encouragement. Then I made a trade  with Solomon McCombs, and his piece of art he traded was worth more  than my pottery, but he said,    No, I like that.    I learned to listen. It   s not  always the price, but I can   t ever get anybody to trade with me where  mine is less and theirs is more. (Laughter)  Yes, I have been encouraged. My influences in the arts were Cecil Dick,  Joseph Lonewolf, Fred Beaver, Solomon McCombs, and Kelly Haney.  They all encouraged me as a new artist in the    70s. One of my first  galleries was Kelly Haney   s gallery in Shawnee. I   ve been encouraged  in the arts. Of course, if you   re an American Indian artist, a lot of times,  unless you go to a specific school that teaches that, you have to learn  what you learned in your college teachings and apply it to your  American Indian art or your Indian art, whatever they want to call it  today. (Laughter) I just call it Indian art. To me, that   s what it is. I was  always encouraged.  Can you talk a bit about the Southeastern revival of the pottery  tradition? Anna Mitchell was, of course, one of the first ones to explore  that, but there was a group of you.  Yes, I think it was a neat deal. I was in the Cherokee Artists Association,  and we later changed to the Southeastern  Indian  Artists Association to  make it more inclusive of more tribal groups. Anna Mitchell and Bill  Glass and myself, and Nokovti Scott as a shell maker, and Anna as a  7  Little Thunder  Daniel  traditional potter, and Bill and I as contemporary potters, we just started  the movement of helping people understand what Southeastern art is, our  history, where we came from, and what our designs mean.  It   s still a teaching process because there are still a lot of people that  aren   t aware of Southeastern art. Bill and I and Anna had a workshop.  We used Anna   s advice. We did a traditional pottery workshop, and  Anna was supervising everything for our artist group. People came in,  invited people, and did traditional firing and everything. It   s an  educational process. It makes it interesting as far as seeing more and  more, especially the Five Tribes, using these designs. They   re calling  them their designs, but it goes a lot further back than that, but it   s okay.  At least they know what it is and what they   re doing. I   m glad to see  that, that we know our own designs and we   re using them now in all  forms of art, from pottery to beading to painting. It   s encouraging to see  that. The new generation is at least growing up and they know where  they came from. As I   ve always said, art is our history. Before the  written word, we had the art word.  Of course, putting a plug in for potters, if we have an atomic explosion,  the pottery   s still going to be sitting there, and all these paintings will be  burned up. (Laughter) I really feel good about where people are, as far as  education in Southeastern or Mound Builder or Woodland art. It comes  in a lot of different names, or Mississippian art. It   s really encouraging,  especially to see the potters that are doing all the designs, and then  they   re working it into paintings and graphics and even contemporary  sculpture. It   s really good to see that.  With your early pots, for example, the one that McCombs traded you for,  what was your style like at that point?  The designs weren   t as refined. It wasn   t refined, and the coloring  wasn   t as deep as it is now. I   ve only used two types of clays during my,  I guess we   re going on thirty-nine or forty years, in my art career. It was  a little bit lighter, and the designs were more primitive. I   ve talked to  people that have some of my early works, and offered to buy it back  from them. They said,    No, it makes mine worth more.    (Laughter) I  said,    Well, it   s pretty doggy,    but they said,    No, we   ll go ahead and  keep it.     It was enjoyable. There   s a piece right there, Julie, that light piece. That  was one of my first pieces. I was using wax resist and not doing a lot of  etching into the pottery when I first started. Even when they did use  resist, it was like animal fats. They didn   t have the wax resist as they do  today.  8  Little Thunder  Daniel  Little Thunder  Daniel  Little Thunder  Daniel  What was one of the first awards that you got, or an especially  memorable award?  When I first started out and went to competition, I took my work over to  the Five Civilized Tribes. They had a pottery division. I went over there  and was going to enter my work, and the ladies there said,    We love  your work, but we can   t take it because it   s not traditional.    I said,    I  understand. You   re calling traditional, the clay has to be hand-dug and  processed and fired in a traditional way?    They said,    Yes.    I said,     Okay, I understand.     Then, about six o   clock that evening, I got a call from one of the board  members. Her name was Henrietta Johnson. She was from the South,  and she talked slower than I do. (Laughter) She said,    I understand that  you got your work rejected at the Five Civilized Tribes.    I said,    Yes,  ma   am, I sure did, but I understand the rules and the guidelines.    She  said,    Well, we   re going to start a new division: wheel-thrown pottery.  Some of our people need to learn that you   re the new group of artists  that have been to college and you   re educated in different ways.    So the  Five Civilized Tribes started the wheel-thrown division, and it opened  the doors.  And you got into that show.  I got into that show. I didn   t get mad about it. I understood, and it   s  opened the doors for other artists. I wish more shows would have a  contemporary division or a wheel-thrown division, but I will say the art  market that the Cherokee Nation sponsors in the fall has a good  competition. I was able to place in that this year, which was a surprise to  me, second place, competing with traditional pottery and contemporary.  Oh, they were all together?  It was all together, and a lot of those shows do that. If I win an award, I  feel like it   s really something when you   re competing with your  colleagues in their own divisions. Things have opened up. That   s  probably the first memorable show. Through the years, I   ve won various  awards. This stage in my career, if I win something, it   s a bonus. I just  love to do the art now. Of course, that ribbon sells a piece of art  sometimes, so I   m happy about that. (Laughter)  I really appreciate the art world now that it   s a lot more encouraging in  Oklahoma than it used to be when we first started out, and even in the     30s and    40s when they started the movement like the Jacobson House  and all that. They   ve got a long way to go, too, to get on the same level  as New Mexico and Arizona and Colorado and Utah, but hopefully it   ll  9  Little Thunder  Daniel  Little Thunder  Daniel  Little Thunder  Daniel  be that way before I go to the next world. (Laughs)  What were some of the galleries that were important to you in the early  days?  I got to show at Doris Littrell   s gallery for a few years and then, Linda  Greever, the Art Market, which was always encouraging. Then I moved  to Andy Payne   s daughter   s gallery in Oklahoma City. Now I   m  currently dealing at Gilcrease Museum in the gift shop/gallery. They   ve  been encouraging my work in pottery for, probably, ten to fifteen years.  I think the reason that happened was Linda put on a show for us. They  had the national convention of state representatives in Tulsa one year,  and it was during the Tulsa powwow. She got a tent for us, and we set  up really fine art, and we showed our work there.  Some of the state representatives came through and the state  representatives    wives, and they said,    This is magnificent art. How  come we haven   t seen it at Gilcrease and the Cowboy Hall of Fame and  Philbrook?    I said,    That   s a good question. You need to ask them that.     Not long after that, I started getting calls from the different local entities  in the state that wanted to start handling more Oklahoma art. What   s  funny now is the movement is    American made.    I think we can boast as  Native artists that it   s American made by indigenous Americans, so  that   s kind of the movement now. (Laughter)  Those are the people that have encouraged me. Now I do shows and  marketing through the new inventions of computers and websites and all  that sort of thing. I still enjoy going to shows and visiting with the  artists.  Booth shows are a part of your     Yes, there   s the new artists and the middle artists and the old dogs like  myself. We   re still out doing the art and trying to sell it. It   s a lot of fun.  From the very beginning, you   ve done stoneware. Functionality has  been important to you?  Actually, what I call my work is decorative work. It is stoneware, and  you could bake and cook or serve in it, but hopefully they   ll consider it a  piece of art and set it up on their mantle or in their display case, but it is  functional. It   s high-fire, natural gas reduction kiln, fired at 2,300  degrees. I   m able to control the colorization in it by reducing the oxygen  or giving it oxygen. That   s kind of where I am now.  I still use earth tones, and my colors, besides slips and engobes and  10  Little Thunder  Daniel  stains, are black and turquoise and clear. I   m just moving into a stage  where I want to use some purple. That   s kind of been with me a couple  of years. I try to use colors that you see all around you every day, but not  many glazes. I still want the feel of the clay. I put the circles of life on  the inside. I think that   s the distinction of my work, that it is decorated  on the inside. But it is high fire, so if someone wanted to buy it and use  it as a functional piece, they could.  You were so successful from the beginning with your pots. What  prompted you to go into teaching?  I graduated at midterm, and Tahlequah public schools had called me. I  had done my intern teaching with my former art teacher, Ms. Purdy.  They had an opening at midterm for an art educator. Teaching junior  high students is quite a task sometimes, but I always enjoyed that age.  They really work hard if you can get a hold of them and get them going.  I thought,    Well, I   ll teach a little while and stay in the art, go into art  full time.    But I liked it, so I stayed with it. Thirty one years later, I  finished.  I was very fortunate. At that time, the government schools were closing  up. American Indian students were coming into public schools, and they  wanted to hire identifiable Indian educators. I was in that group. When I  retired, I noticed the people that retired with me, probably 30 percent or  40 percent of us were identifiable Indian educators. I hope they replaced  us with the same group. That was the setup.  Then I got federally funded programs, Johnson O   Malley and Title VII,  to encourage Indian students in the arts. My role was to encourage them  to stay in school because at that time, and still, we have a high number  of dropout students that are American Indian students. Part of my job  was not just to teach art but encourage kids to stay in school and do the  best they could. If they came in my class, they had to join the Indian  club. I have a lot of my former students that say,    That   s the only club I  ever enjoyed, and your class was the only class I ever enjoyed.    But they  graduated from high school. What I encouraged them in, I said,    What  we do in here, beading, pottery, baskets, jewelry, leather work, or  whatever, you can learn these basics, and maybe you can use it as added  income.     I still get students that are in their thirties or forties today that say,    I   m  still doing beadings or baskets, and you   re right. I can pay for my  driver   s license or my car insurance or buy baby diapers and baby food  with what we learned.    (Laughter) That   s what was neat about it.  Several of the students went on to pursue an art career some way. Being  an art educator, I also had the philosophy that I had two full-time jobs  11  Little Thunder  Daniel  Little Thunder  Daniel  because I was a full-time artist, too. Of course, when I first started out I  would get repercussions about,    Well, you have another job.    A gallery  owner told me one time,    You   re just as prolific or more prolific than a  lot of the full-time artists,    (Laughter) so that was encouraging. It   s just  double work.  I used to run competitively. I   d come in and take a break for an hour or  so, and then go run five to ten miles, come in, rest for an hour and a half,  then do my art for four or five hours. Go home and rest, and start  teaching again. It was a lot of fun, and at least I was in shape and never  wore down for a long time. (Laughter)  It was the students and the encouragement of the students, especially  American Indian students, to have them pursue their high school degree.  Then if they moved on into college or whatever they did, they got  exposed to all kinds of art. We   d take field trips to Tulsa, Oklahoma  City, to Gilcrease, Philbrook, the State Capitol, which is a gallery itself.  That was in the early days before they did have a gallery. It was really a  lot of fun. The last field trip we took to Oklahoma City, one of our  representatives and the Speaker of the House, Larry Adair and Bob Ed  Culver, he greeted us and took us through the Chambers. We looked at  all the art, and we took a group picture together. Those guys were with  us. It was to encourage kids. They were learning things. A lot of them  had never been out of Cherokee County, so they got to see art. We   d go  by Tinker Air Force Base, and they   d be looking. (Laughter) They   d  never seen big airplanes.  People don   t realize that we still have young people in our community  that haven   t been exposed to a lot of that sort of thing. Art can take in a  lot of volume, a big world for the kids. Whether they pursued it in  American Indian art   when computers came out, I encouraged them that  that was the future of art, like the animation and movies, what they   re  doing with computers now. Some of our new artists in our Southeastern  Artist Association are in that area. Everything   s cool now. (Laughter)  You   ve always kind of been few in number as potters here in Oklahoma.  How did the Indian art landscape change from the    70s to the    80s?  I think in the    70s and   80s, it stayed about the same, and then in the     90s, I think the boom hit. Other artists were being recognized in the art  world. Pottery in this area was conceived as an art form instead of a craft  form.  That was the breakthrough?  The breakthrough. I read in Southwest Art, their summarization,    When  12  Little Thunder  Daniel  does a craft become art?    It   s when you take it up to that second and  third and fourth level. It   s finally done that. A lot of artists, a lot of  potters in Oklahoma, Indian and non-Indian, are functional potters.  That   s fine. As a potter, you put yourself in a niche where you   re trying  to sell three-dimensional work, but it   s still all original work. There   s no  duplication of it. Then you put yourself in a smaller niche as an Indian  artist, and you put yourself in a smaller niche, doing Southeastern  designs.  I   ve put myself in all those niches, but I think it   s been good for me  because I educate myself. I learn something new, or I   m willing to try  something new every two or three years where my work is not stale all  the time. When I hear my fellow colleagues say,    Your work seems to  be evolving,    they   re the biggest critics in a positive way that you can  have. It   s encouraging when you still hear that when you   ve been at it  for so long.  In the 1990s, the Indian Arts and Crafts Act was passed, requiring  artists to have proof of enrollment or a letter certifying their status with  the tribe. Do you remember how that impacted galleries and artists?  Yes, I think it caused division. You know, like Red Earth and the Five  Civilized Tribes, it caused division and hard feelings. Being an adopted  Indian child, I saw both sides of the page. I was lucky that I had my  documentation and am a federally-recognized Indian artist. Some of the  artists aren   t today, and some of the artists that were really doing well at  that time have pulled way back. Like I said, I see both sides of it. What I  would say is if parents adopt Indian children, before they adopt those  Indian children, they make sure, some way, if the parents don   t want to  give their names, have some kind of documentation, that they get their  full recognition from all tribal groups. I would hope that all tribal groups  would think enough of the children to recognize them in that area  because they can   t help their circumstances. They can   t help where they  came from or who their parents were. If they were raised in a positive  family, that   s what counts.  Being American Indian, it   s who we are. If you know your clan, if you  have an Indian name, or you   re a member of a band, that   s something  nobody else has, and somebody else shouldn   t be able to take that away  from you. The division was there. I think it   s not as bad as it was, but  you have art shows that only take federally-recognized tribal artists,  which is fine. Other shows, you have to sign a waiver on it sometimes. I  noticed the last four or five or six or seven years, there have been some  prosecutions that have come out of it. I really don   t know the answer,  what a good answer is. All I can say is I see both sides of the coin.  13  Little Thunder  Daniel  Little Thunder  Daniel  Some people that I know, they   ve traced everything in their heritage, but  with the Five Tribes, their name   s not on the Dawes Roll, and they may  be higher blood quantum than, sometimes, the people that are on the  Dawes Roll. I would say if they really want to test things and really want  to prove who they are, they have DNAs now where you can do that.  It may surprise people who are registered and not registered how things  really turn out sometimes. (Laughter) It affected art and the art market,  but we survived, and the people that aren   t registered are still surviving.  They   re still selling their art. They just had to go a different direction.  We that are recognized, it helps us, too. There   s room enough for  everybody, I think. It just depends on what markets you want to attend  and don   t want to attend.  You were involved with the Chattanooga  Tennessee, Trail of Tears   project. Can you talk about that a little bit? I think you all had to submit  who was involved.  Yes, Bill Glass was in charge of that. He   s a good friend of mine, and I  feel fortunate that he wanted me to participate in it as a ceramicist. I  helped Bill do some of the plaques, or the discs, that are in Chattanooga  now. Of course, Bill was in charge. He had the art all laid out, and all we  did as clay workers is put the parts and reproduce them and make them  the way he wanted.  It   s really a very good project, and it   s where everything started,  especially the Cherokees and Creeks in Chattanooga. It was very  interesting being there for the opening and have people recognize  Southeastern art. That is the epitome of Southeastern art, the discs that  we did and displayed. The stainless steel sculpture and the spider in the  pool,  Little Water Spider  that   s the beginning. That   s where John Ross     Trail of Tears started.  What   s funny, talking to Jon Tiger, the Creeks owned that land first, and  they were fighting over it. (Laughter) You know, we   re always going to  kind of mess with each other, but it was an honor to be involved in that  project, and it   s still an honor.  Pretty emotional to be in that place.  Yes, yes, to be at that place, and the city of Chattanooga to support the  arts, to come up with the funding. I wish Oklahoma   s cities could do that  sort of funding. They have done some projects. They have funded some  projects, but there   s always room for more. If the Five Civilized Tribes  would go in together, pool all their money together and do some kind of  project involving all the Five Civilized Tribes, that would be a great  14  Little Thunder  Daniel  Little Thunder  Daniel  Little Thunder  Daniel  Little Thunder  Daniel  project somewhere, somehow, in Tulsa or Oklahoma City or a little town  like Tahlequah or someplace neutral. That would be an interesting good  project for that to happen.  You   re one of the Master Artists  of the Five Civilized Tribes Museum ?  Not yet?  Not a Master Artist yet. (Laughter) A lot of people say,    Well, you   re a  Master Artist.    I said,    I don   t know about that.    We laugh about it  sometimes. There are good artists that are Master Artists, and I   ve been  at it a long time, so that   s good enough for me. (Laughter)  What has been one of the most exciting awards for you, or honors?  I think one of the most memorable pieces or awards was at Red Earth  when it had a lot of dignity. Allan Houser was one of the judges. I did an  effigy piece. An effigy piece is a piece with a face on it. It had the ears  and the eyes. I   d taken pink mussel shell and put in the earlobes and had  real feathers coming out of the ears. Allan Houser was one of the judges,  and I think I won second or third on it. It   s been so long ago. The  competition was really stiff, so that was an honor. Allan came by my  booth and complimented that piece of work, and I shook his hand and  said,    I feel like it   s an honor for you to be the judge.     We had a mutual friend, which was Cecil Dick. They both went to Santa  Fe together at the institute  Santa Fe Indian School . He told me some  good stories he and Cecil pulled in the    30s and    40s in Santa Fe.  (Laughter) He even wrote a little note, and I gave it to Cecil. That was  probably one of the premiere artists in the world, and he was the judge.  Probably, that   s the most memorable thing I can say about my art, also  getting encouragement from the older artists when I first started out.  Can you talk a bit about your friendship with Cecil Dick? Would you see  him at shows? Did you go visit him?  He only lived four blocks up, so he would come by, and we   d talk. He  was always encouraging.  He was really strong on cultural content.  Strong. When he went to Santa Fe   he told the story. He went to  Chilocco  Indian School , and he   d try to run off every weekend. The  superintendent said,    You   re  like  trying to put a square peg in a round  hole, so we   re going to send you to the institute in Santa Fe.    Cecil  always had a story. Even when he went to the institute, he always kept  his Cherokee Southeastern heritage alive through doing his art.  15  Little Thunder  Daniel  Little Thunder  Daniel  Little Thunder  Daniel  Little Thunder  Which was unusual because the pressure was to do Plains.  He didn   t cave in to doing what everybody was doing then. He might   ve  done a few, but later on he always did his own work and his own style. It  was good to sit and philosophize with Cecil. We came up with the  theory   teaching the culture and everything in class, he said,    I   m a firm  believer that the Southeastern people came up by water from the  Southeast.    What was funny, every morning we had the educational TV,  and we   d watch it for five minutes in school. Then, this great new  discovery: some of the tribal groups came up by water from the  Southeast  I told Cecil that story, and we both laughed about it and said,     We must be geniuses, Cecil.    (Laughter)  You   ve gotten compliments on your business sense, which sometimes for  artists, that   s hard for them to get. What were some of the early lessons  you figured out?  Just try to have everything ready and have it organized and have it  priced and ready to go, even though you may show up almost time for  the opening of the gallery. Doris Littrell made that comment to me, that  she thought I handled business pretty good, but I   m going to have to  probably disagree with her on about half. (Laughter) I always try, I  guess from teaching, to have preparation and be ready to go, even  though I may finish firing it a day or six hours before I   m supposed to be  at a show. Have everything ready to go and be organized. It   s been fun  marketing my work. The thing about the pottery I do, every piece has a  title. I think people appreciate that. The price is on there, the title and the  price. I think it distinguishes it as a piece of art as opposed to a  functional piece. Like I said, my work, hopefully, people will think of as  art or decorative art, brought it up from a craft to, hopefully, an artistic  level. Maybe it   s helped open the doors for other potters in this area, too.  Is the title on the inside or on the bottom?  I write the title on the bottom. It   s carved into the pottery. Then I   ll have  my tag on the inside for marketing with the title and the price on there,  just like you   d see a painting. I think people appreciate that, too. That  way they don   t have to talk to me very much. (Laughter) No, I always  try to be educational in the process about educating them in what the  title means and what the theory was on it. I think it   s helped in  marketing the work.  A lot of potters have had to branch out. It seems like the market got  really tough towards the end of the    90s, early 2000s, but you   ve pretty  much held fast to the aesthetic. The aesthetic function came first.  16  Daniel  Little Thunder  Daniel  I did. Of course, I was fortunate that I did have a teaching job. I held fast  and stayed with it. My mother got ill for about two years, so I kind of  had to do the shows I could and look after her. Now that she   s gone, I  see the economy changing to some extent. What I   m judging that from is  the Five Civilized Tribes, Art Under the Oaks, and the Cherokee Art  Market at the Hard Rock  Casino . As far as the work that I   m doing and  what I   m trying to present, I was still selling okay. I try to market my  work where I have prices for beginning collectors up to the collectors  that want to spend more. I   ve always tried to have a wide price range.  I   ve seen the market change through the years, doing some of the bigger  shows, but I always like to stay as regional as I can. I like that feeling of  being around the artists. If it wasn   t for Santa Fe Market, a lot of people  wouldn   t know about who we are and where we come from, and even  it   s opened up to Southeastern art and artists, even the divisions they  have now. I read their theory a couple of years ago on judging art in the  new divisions. A lot of artists are doing new things, so they   ve had to  open up new divisions in new areas. That includes Southeastern designs  on pottery. That   s really good. It   s really a good deal. You have to  market your work and have it set up and be ready to go at most of your  shows and have things going. I   m not saying that I don   t wait until the  last minute, either. I try to do as good as I can. (Laughter)  You did Santa Fe Indian Market for a couple of years. In your first  experiences, is there anything that stands out?  I was new. Actually, they used to have an outlaw division. That   s the  division where I   d set up. It was during Market, but that was a separate  entity. It was really the response I got. With the designs and my style  and the colors, a lot of people appreciated that it was something new and  fresh, something they hadn   t been seeing before, so that   s where I was.  Then I had some markets at Taos. I used to deal with a gallery there for a  few years, but in the art, we come and go. We deal with galleries for a  few years or deal with markets, and then sometimes you move to another  area in another market.  My experience in Santa Fe was positive. I hadn   t been back in a while,  and I went back a few years ago. It   s gotten so big and expanded so  much. I know it   s hard on the artists (I would think that it is) to try to  market your work in that big atmosphere. On the other side, it   s showing  that they   re opening up to a lot of different areas and a lot of different  venues. Being in that area, that   s the art mecca of the United States, I  would say, for American Indian art at least. I think it   s nothing but good  to help an artist to experience that, to go through that experience. Some  of my colleagues, they   ve been doing it for twenty or twenty-five or  17  Little Thunder  Daniel  Little Thunder  Daniel  thirty years and never missed a year. I admire them for that.  What have been your experiences with Eastern Band Cherokees? Have  you shown out there?  I haven   t shown out there. I haven   t really shown out there. Dr.   Michael  Abram used to be a collector of mine, and he had his own  gallery/museum out there, so my work has been exposed out there. They  have shows there. I really am kind of uneducated on what the quality of  the work is. I know that the Eastern Band were promoting the arts really  strong before they were  promoted  in this area. They   ve always stood  behind their artists and promoted there.  I think probably Joel Queen is one of the premier potters in that area.  He   s done a lot to show people some new avenues of Southeastern  pottery. I mean, he   s taken it three or four levels on up. I have had  exposure. My work   s been seen in a lot of different areas, but once I sell  it to a gallery   or sometimes you don   t know where it goes and who  comes in and buys it. Maybe another gallery will come in and buy it and  move it to another place.  Somebody visited with me and said,    I saw your work in Las Vegas in a  gallery.    I said,    Somebody must have been hard up and sold their  whole collection.    (Laughter) It   s really been funny. Another lady said,     I saw your work in a gallery in Santa Fe,    and I said,    I   ve never dealt  with that gallery.       It was your work. I went in there, and I looked at it,     and she said,    Man, that looks like it   s been cast.    She turned it over,  and it had the cast lines in there. She said,    It had your name on it.    I  said,    Well, the only thing I can say about that, I guess my work was  better than I thought it was because somebody wanted to go ahead and  cast it.    (Laughter)  You mentioned that your style of pottery has changed a bit over the  years. It   s gotten more refined, I guess, in terms of designs. Can you talk  about that a little more, and do you use stamps, or do you draw  freehand?  I   ll set the piece of pottery up, and I   ll look at it, look at the shape and  form and then figure out what design needs to go on there. Ninety six  percent of the time, it   s all done by hand. Just look at the piece and put  the design on there and cut it in, the etching or sgraffito.  I had a lady that was a collector of Cecil   s. She was deer clan, and I   m  deer clan. He   d done a painting for me, and I told her,    Well, what I   ll  do is use his deer on your pottery. That way you   ll get both of us.    So I  did that. Sometimes I   ll draw something out   they have some  18  Little Thunder  Daniel  Little Thunder  Daniel  transparent plastic that you can put on pottery to repeat the design, but I  think most people appreciate, even though the designs are alike, they   re  a little bit different. It   s not the same. The cut on the nose or something  like that is a little bit different. Hopefully I   ve evolved where the design  work is more intricate and more in my own motif.  Matter of fact, I bought a book just a few days back. It   s The Greatest  People of the World, and Picasso was in there. Of course, he studied  American Indian art for his influence in his contemporary. The irony to  that, I   ve been thinking about his style and everything the last two or  three pieces. I did a piece with some Mound Builder speakers on there,  their heads and everything, and got a comment that they  collector   would like to have another piece like that. But simplification in art, you  have to know what the detail was before you simplify it.  Some of the things I   ll hopefully do in the next three or four years will  be a little more contemporary, just mix what I   m doing now, have my  base pieces. The things that are real time-consuming may be a little more  contemporary with a Southeastern influence. It was interesting. I   ve read  about him three or four times, how he was influenced by the early  Native art, so I see it may be moving.  I never used glazes until four or five or six years ago. Since I   ve been  using a turquoise called Early Morning Turquoise, those seem to sell a  lot. I   ve been using a black glaze, and it seems to be selling well. The  glazes that I chose seem to be the colors that are working and the  combinations of colors. I   ve been using some real green engobes and  yellow engobes and sky blue engobes, just a hint of it, in the last few  pieces I   ve done. I did a piece called As Long as the Grass Grows and  the Water Flows. I attached shell to the side of it, and people seemed to  like that style.  Hopefully, the evolution will keep going. It may be very subtle and  simple, but I know there   s been a change there, and if somebody sees it,  they notice the change, too. Matter of fact, one of my former students  bought my first piece using the new style of the colors and the water  flowing. Now I   m at a stage in my career that my successful students are  buying art from me, so it really makes it good  (Laughter)  They not only stayed in school, they   re making money to buy art.  That   s right. (Laughter)  Some of your basic shapes are the platter, the seed pot?  Bowl shapes. Really, I haven   t done seed pots in about two or three  19  Little Thunder  Daniel  Little Thunder  Daniel  years. I haven   t done platters in probably fifteen years. That   s the thing  about a functional potter. They   re doing the same thing all the time. Of  course, they   re selling their mugs at five or six dollars apiece, so you  have to do that. I revisit what I   ve done in the past but maybe in a little  bit different style and a little bit different way. This show at Gilcrease, I  wanted to do something different. I   m going to have what I call a  combination piece where it   s two pieces of pottery put together, one on  top of the other, with a neck on it. You   ll look at the old style  Southeastern pottery, and they used to do that. My philosophy is what   s  new is old and what   s old is new.  You   ve had your house at Tenkiller for a while, but your studio has  always been here. How did that feed into your creative process? What  were the advantages or disadvantages of not living where your studio  was?  Oh, teaching, I   d always be in town. I   d come into town. The reason I  had to do it here is we had natural gas, and natural gas is less expensive  for firing. Out on Lake Tenkiller, we didn   t have natural gas for a long  time. Matter of fact, I was one of the guys that voted to bring natural gas  out to Tenkiller. What I did out there was, when I   d do sculpture and  painting, I would do it out there. I   d do that, just a little, not a whole lot.  What I laugh at is sometimes people think because you   re known for  pottery you don   t do sculpture. You don   t do painting. That   s been  something that   s been on my mind for a couple of years, so I may kick  some out here. Mainly because of the natural gas being in Tahlequah, I  built my studio in town. Being in town every day, I would do it.  On the other side, when I was out on the lake, I could sit there quietly  and sketch it out or think about the ideas that I was going to do when I  came into town. Houser, he was talking about his studio was twenty-five  or thirty miles away. He said,    It gives me time to reflect what I   m going  to do today, and then when I go home at night, I kind of ease back.     When I   d be coming in from Park Hill in the morning and the sun would  be coming up, I   d reflect on what I was going to teach that day and how  I was going to teach it and what I was going to do in the studio. Then  when I   d go home, I   d feel,    I   ve accomplished something today.    It  gives you a lot of time for reflection.  So you do sketch out things, occasionally? Is sketching a big process or  part of it?  I   ll sketch out shapes, forms, and designs. Then other times, I just go for  it. It just depends on what the piece is. Maybe a commission piece, I  might think about the shape, form, and designs. Sometimes I   ll carry that  thought in my mind for two or three months, what I   m going to do, and  20  Little Thunder  Daniel  Little Thunder  Daniel  Little Thunder  Daniel  Little Thunder  then it   ll be there. It   s ready to go.  You don   t keep a notebook, necessarily?  I do. I keep sketchbooks and notebooks, and I   ll write things down. Like  an artist would have a sketchbook, not necessarily even sketches, just  some thoughts or something I want to try. If I lose that thought, I can  refer back to it. Yes, I do.  Your clan symbol is also part of your logo on your pots.  Yes, yes. I put a deer on the bottom of my pottery. I started doing that  several years ago, and then I put a C for    copyrighted,    too. Hopefully,  that will do some good. Of course, I always sign every piece. Every  piece has a signature on it.  How do you do the designs on the inside? Is that a bit of a challenge?  Actually, when I have my colors all laid out, while the wheel is going  around, I just load my brush and put the circles on the inside. It   s simple.  I guess it looks more complicated than it really is to a lot of people.  When somebody   ll come by the booth, they go inside first, and then they  come outside. Or they   ll look outside, and then it   s a surprise when they  look at the inside to see that it   s decorated, too. Not using many glazes  or a solid color of glaze, you might have a black glaze, an amber engobe,  and a white engobe on the inside as well as the outside, so it   s kind of a  surprise.  Of course, the symbolism is the circle of life, and the fire is in the center.  We go full circle in life from infant to childhood to adulthood to elder.  Also, on some of the real pieces, (like, I   ll do a competitive piece) I may  have the wheel go the opposite way than you normally work because if  you go to a ceremonial grounds, they   re going counterclockwise. So the  circle goes counterclockwise, and then it stops.     How do you do that?    You get that question. Of course, your  coordination, you   ve got to catch one or the other. (Laughter) It   s fun. I  had a friend, Freeman Mitchell, he wanted to put some Southeastern  designs as border designs on a couple of his paintings, so I drew some  out and gave them to him. He said,    Man, those are more complicated  than they look. It looks simple, but when you start doing it,    he said,     it   s not as simple.    I said,    I know from my research. I tried to do some  of them.    I have to play with them for a little while to get them to do  right. (Laughter)  Do you listen to music, have the TV on when you   re working?  21  Daniel  Little Thunder  Daniel  Little Thunder  Daniel  Little Thunder  Daniel  I listen to music. Right now, I   ve got about five new discs of Ray  Charles singing with different groups, and I was rocking out to it the  other  day . His brand new one is digitally enhanced. It doesn   t even  sound like it. I   m debating whether I like it or not. The rhythm of the  work, what you   re going to do   I have some discs to relax your mind or  get you in the work mood. A lot of times I   ll play flute music, too. It  kind of relaxes you and gets you in the mood. I listen to music a lot. I  have a little TV, but my cable doesn   t run out here, so it   s just me and  the pottery and the music. I   ll listen to 97.1, the sports channel, too, to  see whether I can coach or not. (Laughter)  Looking back on your artistic career so far, what was a real fork-in-the-road  moment for you?  Building the studio and investing in a potter   s wheel and investing in a  kiln. My father, hand-building the studio. We did it together. A carpenter  friend of both of ours helped us, too, but we built this from the ground  up. He   s still with me. I have a little tool that I use that helps get my disk  off the wheel. That was his awl that he used to start his drills with.  Of course, in ceramics, you see a lot of people that   ll buy the potter   s  wheel and the kiln, and they use it six times, and then they   re done with  it. But we had quite an investment. That, and starting out. Once some of  the gallery people wanted me to show in their galleries, that was a word  of encouragement, like Kelly Haney and Linda, you know, the early  people, and Ms. Littrell for a few years, there. That was encouragement.  Then having locals come and want to buy your stuff.  You did have a gallery in Tahlequah.  I had my own gallery.  Were you one of the first artists to get     I was one of the first groups. It was really neat. Dana Tiger and myself  and Raymond Vann, we all opened up galleries. Each one had a different  venue, and we made our own little brochure how to get to the galleries  and everything. I   d get the comment,    What about the competition?    I  said,    I wish this whole north end was full of galleries just like Taos.     I   ve always believed that Tahlequah could be another Taos, and it   s  turning into that. They   re promoting their art and artists, so I think it   s a  good deal.  Running that little gallery was working on a shoestring, but some of the  out-of-towners would come in, and they said,    This looks like a little  22  Little Thunder  Daniel  Little Thunder  Daniel  Little Thunder  Daniel  gallery I   d see in Taos.    I said,    That   s the effect I wanted.    Of course, I  might have a Ben Harjo painting in the next room for twenty thousand  dollars, but I wanted people to see that we sell our work for more than  250 dollars. The out-of-towners and out-of-country people didn   t blink  an eye. But it   s funny, the locals that would come in. (Laughter) It was  fun. I enjoyed it.  You were still teaching at the time, too?  I was teaching at the time. My partnership didn   t work out, but it was a  lot of fun, and I enjoyed it. The presentation was   I   d been in enough  galleries to know what it needed. I tried to mix local artists with pretty  well-known artists at the time. I had Ben Harjo and Bert Seabourn in  there and other artists. It worked out really well, and that was before  everything happened as far as the art laws and all that. No, it was after  that, but the people that weren   t registered, we had a disclosure in there.  I asked the other artists,    Are you okay with this?    the federally-recognized  artists, and they said,    We   re fine with it.    We all worked  together.  One of your high points might have been that show at the children   s  medical center.  Yes, it was, to help me get started. I got to show when I first started out  with Woody Crumbo and Solomon McCombs. Myself and Burgess Roy,  we were the two new young guys coming through. Of course, Woody  and Solomon were very established, and they encouraged me in the arts.  Then I did a little show in Muskogee at the community building there.  Fred Beaver was set up there, so we talked a little bit. What   s neat is  being able to show with some of those elders. Then Cecil Dick and I did  a couple of shows together. To be able to have shown with those elders  that opened the doors for us, those were the artists from the    30s and     40s that broke ground for the artists of the    60s and    70s.  I always tried to keep up with what was going on in the art world all  around the United States. I   ve kind of fallen behind in that area, but I   d  say I   m really into my art, now. It   s going to take care of itself, and it  always works out. With the art, your bank account would get real thin,  and then all of a sudden you   d be able to sell some art. That was even  with a teaching job. When you started teaching in the    70s, you weren   t  making a lot. I was teaching, working in a clothing store, and trying to  do my art, too. I was going full scale.  What was one of the low points in your career?  You know, I can   t say I really have had a low point, Julie. The Creator  23  Little Thunder  Daniel  Little Thunder  Daniel  Little Thunder  Daniel  has been good to me. What I try to do is take the gifts that the Creator  gave me and use them, teaching young people in the arts and doing my  art. I was raised to think positive, and I   ve always thought positive about  my art. There were times when the market was down and you just had to  survive, but I really haven   t had any low points that I can say.  It   s a matter of survival. If the economy is bad, you have to adjust to it  and move on. There have been years where you weren   t marketing your  work as well as you probably should have, but I   ve had a lot of high  peaks, too, and middle peaks and low peaks as far as art selling. I   ve  been fairly consistent through my career, and the art world has been  good to me. I feel very fortunate to be an artist and be an American  Indian artist.  Is there anything we haven   t covered that you   d like to add, anything we  forgot to talk about?  In closing, I   d just like to say that I know the state of Oklahoma is doing  the best they can do, but I would like for them to get behind the arts  more, find funding, complete their museum because it   s going to be a  great asset to the state of Oklahoma.  The American Indian Cultural Center?  Yes, the American Indian Cultural Center, and to stand behind their art  and artists because we talk about entrepreneurship. If they stop to think,  all artists and Indian artists, we have been entrepreneurs since the    20s,  since the Kiowa Five. We   ve been trying to market our work on our  own, which is okay.  I would like to see, maybe, the Cherokees have their art market in the  fall, Indian Summer, if one of the other tribes, maybe the Creeks could  have a spring show at their casino. That is a good market area, and  people seem to come, but the state of Oklahoma and each tribal group  stand behind their art and artists and at least recognize them because,  like I   ve said, art is the spoken word because there   s no written word.  It   s always been here. It   s carried our culture through centuries. The new  generation of art and artists, just remember where you came from and  who you are and where you   re going.  Great. We   re going to take a look at some of your pots, now. What   s the  title on this piece?  This is called Green Corn Ascension. It represents the ceremonial Green  Corn Dance where it   s a celebration of the fall or spring and the different  moons. I have a full moon, a quarter moon, and the corn, and the people  24  Little Thunder  Daniel  Little Thunder  Daniel  Little Thunder  Daniel  celebrating. It   s an all-inclusive celebration held. The stars and the  moons and the people and the corn and the water design. You can see  the little designs below the corn and the people represent the ground. Of  course, the stars represent the sky. It   s just a celebration of a lot of  different tribal groups who come together for unity and fellowship.  Beautiful. How about this piece?  This has a more flowing design to it. Actually, the flowing designs  represent the water that you would see. Right now, there   s a movement  to protect our Native American Indian waters in Oklahoma. That   s kind  of been my movement in my designs the last couple of years is make  people aware of the water. Of course, the water is sacred to us. We use it  for a lot of different things, especially in healing and prayer. The little  half circles represents the sun coming up or the rocks you   d see in a  stream. The little stripes that fill in between the half circles or  semicircles represent the rain that comes down. This would be a water  design, keeping in mind that without water, most cultures don   t exist.  Would you like to talk about this piece?  This is called the serpent design. All my work always has circles on the  inside. The circles represent the circle of life, that we have to go full  circle from infancy to childhood to adulthood to elders. The very center  of it represents the center of life, that hopefully in our lives, we can stay  centered. It   s very difficult sometimes to stay centered and balanced, but  it should be a goal of ours. As you can see, the circle on the outside of  the center, there, goes counterclockwise. If you go to a ceremonial  dance, you   ll notice that they always dance counterclockwise around the  fire or the drum. That   s what that keeps in mind. All the work that you  see that I try to produce usually has the circles on the inside. The  philosophy is that it   s not just for the artistic standpoint, but it does have  symbolism. The world is round, the moon   s round, the sun   s round, so  everything has a purpose in its roundness.  This is the outside of...  This is called Serpent Signs. The serpent was sometimes a protector of  the ancient people, the Mississippian people. This represents the serpent  where, maybe, it had gone through the surface and left its design or  track. As you can see, the etching represents the earth, the small squares,  and then the two movements on the side are kind of flowing. Then, if  you saw scales, the points that come out would represent the scales. This  is an old design that   s done in my own motif that I really enjoy doing.  It   s pretty representative of Mississippian culture or Southeastern  culture, and it   s done in my own motif and my own style.  25  Little Thunder  Daniel  Little Thunder  Daniel  That   s gorgeous, thank you. Mike, thank you very much for this  interview. We   re going to close with the wheel going for a minute here.  What I   m doing here is just trimming a little bit of the extra clay off.  That way I can control the lightness and shape of the pottery after I   ve  thrown it. This is where I use contemporary tools for my work. I   m  really at the very finishing stage here.  You hear a lot of potters talk about varnishing their work. I do varnish  my work in a form that I hold a piece of wood on the pottery to get it  smooth as I   m going across. That way, it makes it easier to put on my  colorization and designs. This smoothes it out, gets the base smoothed  out. Then I put my signature and my copyright and my deer clan design,  and that finishes it for this stage. In the next stage, I   ll be turning it back  over and loading my brushes and put the color on it. Then, the next stage  is cutting the designs in the work. Then I   ll fire it in the gas reduction,  high-fire kiln.  Wow. Well, I really appreciate your time today.  You   re very welcome. It   s been a pleasure.  -------  -------  
