 Little Thunder. Today is Thursday, May 16, 2016.  I   m interviewing Lester Harragarra for the Oklahoma Native Artists Project  sponsored by the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at Oklahoma  State University. We   re at the Otoe Missouri    we   re in the new office, the  Internet Loan Office. Lester, you   re Otoe-Missouri and Kiowa. You have an  engineering degree. You work with the Otoe-Missouri Development  Authority Board. You also are involved in the construction of tribal  enterprises and businesses. You   re a fine art photographer, as well, and  lately you   ve become more active on the Native art show scene, entering  shows and winning awards for your work. Thank you for taking the time to  talk with me.  Harragarra Yes, thank you for inviting me.  Little Thunder Where were you born and where did you grow up?  Harragarra I was born in Lawton, Oklahoma, in the    50s. Back then a lot of Kiowa and  Comanche tribal members were born in Lawton Hospital. They just recently  had the 100th year anniversary, I think it was two or three weeks ago. I was  hoping to go down there but never attended. I spent a lot of time with my  Kiowa grandparents: Lewis and Reginda Toyebo. They lived west of  Carnegie  Oklahoma  on my grandmother   s allotted land, one of the original  allottees for the Kiowas, 160 acres, a couple of miles west of Carnegie. I  spend a lot of time out there in the country, along with my Kiowa relatives  there. My father, Kenneth Harragarra, is from this area here, Red Rock. He  was born   back then, they weren   t born in a hospital, they were born at  home. Both my mother and father were born at their homes in Red Rock,  west of Red Rock, and then west of Carnegie.  Little Thunder What did your mom and dad do for a living?  5  Harragarra My dad was in the service, a World War II combat veteran. After the war, he  was employed at Tinker Air Force Base. He worked there until he retired.  Sometime during that period, he was a tribal chairman for a few years there  in the    70s, if I remember correctly. My mother is a librarian and we spent  some time at the boarding schools here in Oklahoma. She was the librarian  at Sequoyah  Boarding School , later after that, Chilocco. I remember we  lived on campus then. Chilocco at that time had over 1,200 students on the  campus. It was at its peak at that time, which is a lot of fun to be in junior  high. It was fourth grade we moved there. I think we left when I was in ninth  grade. That was a good period there to be involved with the students from  all over the United States. So I enjoyed that time. But she was a librarian  there and then she retired from Riverside Indian School as a librarian.  Little Thunder So you talked about having a good relationship, being close to your Kiowa  grandparents. How about on the other side of your family? Your dad   s side?  Little Thunder My father   s parents, actually, I was very young, meaning one or two years  old when my grandmother, Mary, passed away, Mary Harragarra. She was  instrumental in the Otoe War Mother   s Society. Actually, I think, if I  remember correctly, it was the first Indian War Mothers    Association. She  was president of that for a number of years. Her three sons were in the  service. One of them my dad. Eugene, and Clifford were the other veterans  that were  his  brothers. My grandfather, Moses Harragarra, was born in  Nebraska. There   s a part of our history there that is relatively unknown, I  guess, to the general public. I think most people think the Indians here in  Oklahoma chose to be here, but not everybody chose to be here. We were  removed from Nebraska along with some of the other tribes in that area. the  Ponca Tribe being one of them. Pawnee, Iowa, and Ponca tribes were  removed from Nebraska and relocated here in north-central Oklahoma.  My grandfather was young at that time, fourteen years old. He was one of  the ones that walked down from Nebraska to where we are now. The Otoes  have, throughout the year, they have different chiefs. It   s by clanship. One  clan would be in charge during the summer and summer is Buffalo Clan.  That   s what my grandfather was and that   s what I am, Buffalo Clan. He was  hereditary chief of the Buffalo Clan. He spoke very little English and I just  remember vaguely some glimpses of him. He was tall. He passed away  when he was ninety-three years old. What people tell me about him is that  they always remember him walking. That was what he did every morning.  He would wake up and walk. He lived west of Red Rock there also, allotted  land. I remember him. He wore braids. He would roll his own cigarettes,  Bull Durham cigarettes. And since he was hard of hearing, he talked real  loud, but he spoke mostly Otoe. Very few people now understand the  language. But vaguely remember my grandfather, Moses Harragarra.  6  Little Thunder In terms of being around the language up there, around your Kiowa  grandparents, you were around it?  Harragarra Yes, I was around them quite a bit and they spoke mostly Kiowa to their  friends. As grandchildren, we didn   t really learn Kiowa, but we could  understand a little bit of what they were talking about. They decided back  then that it would be better for us as children growing up in a different  society to not learn Kiowa, unfortunately. We view that differently, but back  then, that was their train of thought, was that it would help us in school to  more accepted by the dominant society as everybody calls them. I spent a lot  of time with them. With not only them, but also their friends and sisters,  brothers and sisters, that were our relatives also. Definitely a different value  system, first of all, but definitely a different perspective on life. That you  don   t see anymore, unfortunately, but there   s quite a bit of difference that I  can see now from when they grew up. My grandfather, Lewis, was born on  the banks of the Washita, he estimates around 1893. Back then they didn   t  have any records.  He remembers that they would go once a month to Anadarko to collect our  rations. I remember living with him and asking him all kinds of questions  about what Indians did and how fast a horse was, and how fast a buffalo  was. But I do remember several things that he talked about. One of them  was he remembered there wasn   t anything west of Chickasha  Oklahoma .  The rail line went through Chickasha, but there wasn   t nothing. No fences.  Wagon trails was all they were. Everything was open. No telephone poles,  no roads. He talked about that. My grandparents were older when I was born  and came to spend some time with them. They were in their seventies by  then. Probably that generation had a glimpse of what it truly was to be  Kiowa because of their parents. Their parents were the ones that were  captured in Palo Duro Canyon  Canyon, Texas . When you look at what  they could see, as they were a younger person from their parents that was  taught, they were still living on the Plains, still hunting buffalo, then to  where they saw their world changing as they got older, meaning World War  II.  All the technology that was being invented, all the songs that they knew that  were suppressed for years. And then in the    50s they were gradually revived,  the Gourd Dance and Black Leggings. They saw those changes there. My  grandfather, Lewis, composed a lot of the War Mother songs, but not only  that. There were other songs he wrote. He was a composer and I remember  as a young child, he bought a recorder. That was fascinating to me, but he  bought a recorder. He would sing, sing a song, and then he would talk in  Kiowa and what he was describing was what the song was about. My  mother still has those tapes. I think she   s had some of those digitized. I   m  not for sure, I   m pretty sure she had some of them, but I don   t know if I she  7  had all of them. I remember trying to play with the recorder. Those are some  of the memories I have of my grandparents, Kiowa grandparents.  Little Thunder Precious memories there. So what is your earliest memory of seeing Native  art, however, you would define it?  Harragarra Obviously, it   s through my mother being a librarian. After school I   d get off  the bus and go to the library there at Chilocco. It has this large library. So  just being around books all the time. Just looking at   obviously back then  you didn   t pay too much attention to reading     I was more interested in the image itself. I can just think of being in a library  there in fourth, fifth grade, looking at books and looking at images, looking  at artists    renditions. George Catlin was probably one of the influences that I  have as far as art is concerned. And then the realism that he portrayed in his  portraits. I would think probably early influence was just that. Then, as I got  older then you recognized that you could   being kind of technical first of  all, but just being fascinated with a camera, just as a toy first of all. My aunt,  I think, bought my first camera when I was seven or eight years old, just a  little instamatic. Polaroid. Just have a fascination with technology first of all.  But then you look at the capability of being able to record something.  Little Thunder Were you going around just taking   I think back then there was film, and  there was developing and it could get pretty expensive. What was it like with  a camera in your hand? What were you taking pictures of?  Harragarra When I first got a real camera     Little Thunder No, when you     Harragarra Was young?  Little Thunder    were eight. When you got that first camera.  Harragarra Then you would take the film into the drug store and send it in and wait a  week or two for it to come back.  Little Thunder And your family was supportive, it sounds like.  Harragarra Yeah. Back then most of those cameras, you could almost always take a  good picture, but there was always things that I recognize that influenced the  way the camera worked. Lighting, obviously, the more critical aspect of it.  You   d get some pictures and some of them turned out and some of them  didn   t. What I tried to figure out was,    Okay, what made this picture not  turn out?    I would   ve liked this to be a good picture. There was that, the  film. The other camera that became popular when I was younger was a  Polaroid where you could wait two or three minutes and the image would  8  appear on the photo. That was always fascinating. Back then, it was just  black and white. Later, they developed a Polaroid in color, but black and  white images were   the first camera I got was a Polaroid.  Little Thunder Did you get one of the Polaroids, too?  Harragarra Yes, I think my grandmother bought me the Polaroid camera.  Little Thunder And were you taking pictures mainly of people and family members? Or  landscapes? Or just anything?  Harragarra Back then it was just anything. I think the pack only had eight photos in it.  You had to be very conservative about what you took a picture of. I  remember playing with that. It was something that fascinated me was how  that happened. As I got older and got into college is when I got   I call it my  first real camera   a 35 millimeter Canon. You had the same option then.  You could take it to a lab and get it processed. But then, going to school at  UNM  University of New Mexico , they had a photo lab. In the photo lab I  learned how to develop and do my own printing. From there you could  spend hours first of all, doing that process, printing, and developing. And  doing the burning, and dodging, and cropping. Probably what I   ve always  concentrated on and still do is try to improve my images. That   s one of the  aspects of photography that is ongoing. You always want to get a better  image. That process that started back in the early    80s in the darkroom was  trying to take a better picture. Obviously, light and the settings on a camera  influence that.  Little Thunder You didn   t do any photography in high school. Didn   t have access to any  classes?  Harragarra Not really, no. Not really. Never did any classes in high school. I   m just  self-taught.  Little Thunder Right. How did you end up at University of New Mexico?  Harragarra Actually, my mother told me about this engineering program that was  started out there. It was geared to Native Americans in engineering. We  were the first four students. The program out there at UNM, University of  New Mexico, is called NAPCO, Native American College of Engineering.  Went out there in the mid    70s, I believe it was. Then always wanted to buy  a real camera. So at least     Little Thunder I wondered if you   d been torn. If you were thinking about,    Oh, I   d like to  be a photographer. Make my living with photography.    Or did you just also  have this other interest in technical things and how structures work?  9  Harragarra Probably it was that more than anything. Just had a curiosity in  mechanical   how things work and function within a camera. It had settings  that you had to set correctly. It was obviously a mechanical instrument, but  probably the aspect I liked about with it was also creative, a creative tool.  That was the other fascinating part was just trying to figure out not only how  to set the camera, but also how to get a good image, a nice image. That  interest was   as a child like I said, it was just fascinating to take a picture.  Little Thunder Now University of New Mexico, they probably had people who were  studying photography. Did you have any interaction with them?  Harragarra No, there were other students. Architect students, other colleges there that I  worked with at the Bureau of Indian Affairs. They also had an interest in  cameras. Back then in the late    70s, early    80s, that was kind of one of the  popular things people did was have a 35 millimeter. Nikon had their version  and Canon had their version, and they weren   t really that expensive. There  were quite a few people that carried around a 35 millimeter. I remember  seeing old interviews of Johnny Carson and several of the actors that he  would have an interview, they would have their 35 millimeter around their  necks. It was just one of those things that everybody got into, me being one  of them. So there were several of us students that had cameras. I don   t  remember really how many pursued that later on in life, but as I got older I  got more interested in it. Probably what motivated me more than anything  back then was   for example, this Black Leggings photo. As I got older,  recognizing that if you look at that image there, there   s several of them that  have gone on. One of them was a real well-known artist,  Sherman   Chaddlesone. He   s there in the front.  Little Thunder I didn   t see him.  Harragarra As I got older, that probably was the motivation was to capture that event,  primarily. But also knowing some of those World War II veterans that were  in this organization. It was just my way of contributing, really. That, and I  look at it as a way to preserve our culture currently. A hundred years from  now, there are going to be Indians, there   s going to be Kiowas, there   s going  to be Otoe-Missourias, so this is my contribution. A hundred years from  now I   ll have something for them to look at. Now we have the capability of  video, which adds another aspect to our culture.  Little Thunder Had you seen any Native photography at that point? Were you aware of any  other Native photographers that were.... Of course, Horace Poolaw is a  famous one. I   m thinking about Zig Jackson or any of those people.  Harragarra Yes, out West there in the Southwest and Arizona and New Mexico, there  were a few Navajo photographers that I can think of. I don   t remember their  names right now, but I do remember looking at their images and thinking     10  first of all, they take great images. You just kind of look at those and think,     I   d like to take some pictures like this one of these days.    In a way, you   re  influenced by those. Some of those artists that were in acrylics, T. C.  Cannon, he had that 35 millimeter. There were several of them that did  photography. Maybe their specialty was in some other art form, but they did  dabble in photography. I didn   t really look at it back then as a true art form.  I looked at it as a way of just recording something. Later on, I would say  probably in the past maybe five years, maybe it   s longer, I started doing  these art shows. I never really participated in these art shows because I was  just trying to take pictures of events.  Little Thunder Right.  Harragarra And then gravitated towards   because people would always ask,    What do  you do with these images?    And I   d say,    Well, I don   t do anything with  them now, but at some point I plan to.    And I   m still planning to.  Little Thunder Yeah, and I was   I listened to one of your interviews, in which you  mentioned that you had from 8,000 to 10,000 images. (Laughs)  Harragarra Oh, now it   s quite a bit more than at. It   s easily over a hundred to two-hundred  thousand. I don   t know really know how many exactly I have. But  yeah, it   s in that area.  Little Thunder As you say you   ve approached it and still your primary goal is to document,  and in the process you   re documenting individuals for their families and  things. Do you sometimes give them copies of photographs?  Harragarra Yeah, at the Black Leggings, for example, in one day I can probably shoot  3,000 images. If there   s somebody   a personal friend of mine may ask   so  I   ll go through and pull out those images and get them a copy. I hope to do  that for all the Black Leggings, but it   s one of those projects that I still am  working on and would still like to do something like that.  Little Thunder Right.  Harragarra Right now I just kind of do the group shots. There   s several of them, but I do  try to take individual shots of all the dancers that are out here. I was asked to  start doing this in the late    90s, so I   ve been doing this ever since then. I  don   t think I   ve missed any of the dances in the past probably fifteen,  sixteen years. Back then there were still a lot of World War II veterans that  were still active. Now, I don   t think there   s any. I think I took a picture of  the last three World War II veterans about three or four years ago. I hope to  do something with these. Even just a slide presentation is what I wanted to  do. Start out with that.  11  Little Thunder Now you got a one-man show in 2009 at Southern Plains  Indian  Museum.  I didn   t know if the entire subject of the show was the Black Leggings  ceremonial or was it a range of pictures?  Harragarra It was the Black Leggings strictly. In addition to the still images that I had,  the University of Oklahoma had a group of researchers there. One of them is  a young man named Michael Jordan. He had done some video. So in  addition to the still images on the walls, they had the video that played of the  Black Leggings. It was one of the few videos that the Black Leggings allow.  Little Thunder And you spend a lot of time photographing at powwows?  Harragarra Yes, I do trying to photograph as much as I can. Mostly just Indian life as it  is today. Meaning not only just the dancers, but the camps. People cooking  fry bread, people putting on their outfits. Here in Oklahoma, though, it   s a  little more difficult as opposed to the Northern tribes where first of all, they  dance during the day when you have good light. I try not to use flash, but I  do, at times, use flash. But I like to stick with the natural lighting if I can.  Around here, like I said, our dances start at eight and nine, so I lose a lot of  the good light.  Little Thunder I hadn   t thought about that. but yeah, definitely on a different schedule.  Let   s see, you   ve won a couple of awards at the Red Earth Indian Arts  Festival in Photography, didn   t you?  Harragarra Yes, I   ve won     Little Thunder That must   ve been when you started entering.  Harragarra Yes.  Little Thunder What was that like for you?  Harragarra Probably the first time I won, obviously, you get excited about it. I   ll always  look at images and think,    Well, if I tried this or if I was over here two more  feet, or if I had the camera set a little differently, you   d come out with a  better image.     Little Thunder You   re always being critical. (Laughs)  Harragarra I think everybody does that.  Little Thunder All artists do that.  Harragarra Everybody wants to do something, first of all, that they feel represents the  people, but most importantly, that aspect of it is trying to represent. I think  12  at some point some of these images that I have of the Black Leggings were  displayed overseas at a museum in I think it was somewhere in Ireland?  Maybe in Wales? It   s been a while since that request came in, but I did send  some over there. That   s what I look at. I think that the commander of the  Black Leggings, Lindon Palmer, took some over when he was in Normandy.  Gave some to some of those people over there. That   s why I   m kind of  critical about having everything looking as nice as I can.  Little Thunder Right, those issues of representation. Of course, photography comes, for  Native people, comes with a lot of baggage. Working, being a Native  photographer, how do you approach things?  Harragarra Probably the misconception that Natives have is that you make a lot of  money doing this. Unfortunately, that   s a misconception. I tell them, most of  them can get online and look things up through Google or whatever search  engine you may have out there. And I said,    Look at these images and see  what they   re going to cost. You can go to stock photo, and realistically,  those images are from eight to twenty, twenty-five dollars.    So when  somebody sees an image of themselves and they think that I   m making a lot  of money off of it, first of all, I don   t sell them. I don   t do any stock photos.  And the reason why is it   s eight to twenty-five dollars.  The unfortunate part about it is there   s not much money to be made. The  other side of it is the pictures that I do take and a family asks for them, I  typically just do it at cost because it   s something I   m not doing to make  money. It   s hard to do that to make money. If I took the other types of  images, maybe weddings, or sunsets, or things like that... That   s what I do at  these art shows. They   re generic photos, they   re not of individuals. But I  would say probably 60 percent, 80 percent of my images are of people. I do  these other images, first of all, because they just happen to be there and  recognize a nice scene. Those are the ones that I sell. Like a tipi or a buffalo  over here. Those type of images I do sell and enter into these art shows.  Little Thunder That   s the other part of it, the business part. The images that you do sell,  how do you figure out how to price them?  Harragarra Mostly I look at the cost of what it costs to get the image produced, printed,  and mounted. I get online and see what everybody else selling theirs for.  When you look at the cost of what it has and what it costs me to get all this  together. I remember I was boarding a plane and going to California at one  time and was running a little late and they were asking everybody to check  their baggage. I had my camera gear in one bag and I was going to put it in  the overhead and she asked me to check it. I said,    Okay, I   ll be willing to  check it if you   re willing to insure it for me.    She said,    How much do we  have to insure it for?    I said,    Probably  10,000.    When you look at the  investment you have in equipment, the cameras, the lenses, tripods     13  The other investment is nowadays with digital. It   s the computers that you  use and the software. I do this just to document my culture. I don   t look at it  as a way to make a living. I don   t really have that aspect to push me along  or to steer me. I think if I were in that situation, and I think you asked that  question earlier, about doing this as a living that adds another aspect of  pressure to where you have to do this to survive. Fortunately, I   m not in that  situation. I just do this because, first of all, I enjoy this and it   s something  that I look at a contribution to my culture, just like the other people in my  life have done. They always have some talent. Maybe it   s making  moccasins, maybe it   s singing. This is my contribution.  Little Thunder What   s a project that you   re currently working on? A project or a series?  Harragarra The ongoing project is the Black Leggings Project. There   s so many images  I have now. That   s ongoing and there   s several ways    When I first started  this, it was very expensive to get a book produced. One of my good friends  is David Fitzgerald, well known photographer here in Oklahoma. I   ve  known him since the early    90s. Back then he had a good publisher in  Portland, Oregon. He told me the cost of getting a book produced and it was,  to me, it was astronomical. There   s no way I could convince the people I  know or some of the tribes that  I am  involved with to do something like  that.  He   s had quite a bit of success with the Cherokees and Chickasaws, and his  latest tribe was Choctaws. Obviously, they   re well-funded. That   s how that  occurred. When I was aware of the cost, I realized there   s got to be some  other ways of doing this. Fortunately, the technology has progressed to  where you could produce something in Photoshop and Adobe, that software  there, and it   s not near as expensive as what it used to be. That   s one of the  projects that I would like to do, work on, concentrate on, is getting some of  these images of the Black Leggings. It   s one of those things to where I  would need to devote a lot of time to it because first of all, I want the images  to look nice.  Just the color correction, the software now is so sophisticated. You wait  another six months and there   s another version coming out and it has  different capabilities. Just working with the software on some of that. Some  of these older images I have are film. The limitation there is very few labs  nowadays do film. There   s one in Dallas and that   s the closest one. I have to  send the black and white images, film strips, down there and have them  reproduced. I want to do this Black Leggings Project here. I have so many  images. Obviously, there   s going to be several. I wouldn   t call them     maybe a series? I have no idea how I   m going to do this. Now what   s  happening in their organization is the Vietnam era veterans are the ones that  are taking over and are themselves getting older. I   m looking at World War  14  II first. The Korean era, there weren   t that many veterans back then. Then  Vietnam and most recently, the Iraq War. Desert Storm, there   s a few  veterans that were in that conflict. That   s probably the biggest project I want  to work on right now is finishing that up.  Little Thunder You   re doing the Artesian Show, I guess, next weekend.  Harragarra Yes, Memorial Day weekend.  Little Thunder Can you talk a little bit about  it . I guess this is your second year.  Harragarra Yes, I participated last year. It was the first year I was involved in that. One  of my images I submitted   one of them won First.  Little Thunder Oh, that   s wonderful.  Harragarra I enjoy that show down there. The Chickasaw Nation really supports their  artists. They   re trying to develop this art show into something that has a lot  of significance in this area. They have the resources, first of all, but I think  they recognize that a part of all Native cultures is their art.  Little Thunder Have you ever done IFAM or Santa Fe Indian Market?  Harragarra Yes, I   ve done IFAM.  Little Thunder I thought maybe     Harragarra Yeah.  Little Thunder When was the first time you did that?  Harragarra This year will be their third year, so I   ll be out there in August for the third  time. I did their first one, 2014. They don   t have any judging or anything.  It   s just an art show.  Little Thunder Was it a pretty good sale show? In terms of     Harragarra Yes. They start on actually Thursday. It   s Thursday, Friday, and Saturday.  Of course, Indian Market is Saturday and Sunday. I enjoy going out there,  meeting other people and seeing old friends.  Little Thunder Right. I think there has been a shift in terms of    I remember being at art  markets with paintings, and there was like resistance on the part of the  people to pay for photographs at all. But I think that has changed. I think  people are recognizing that. I was wondering, too, what your involvement is.  Do you mat or frame your photographs? Or do you just display them?  15  Harragarra Yes, I do. For a while I used to do my own matting when I first started out. I  was just doing my own matting. The printing is probably the more difficult  part because the color is very critical in a photograph. One printer may have  a good tech that understands the color accuracy is important. They may have  another tech that   s just there for the money. There   s this lab I work with in  Oklahoma City that I   ve been working with for a number of years. He   s very  critical in his work, so I use him exclusively for all my printing. I don   t  really do any printing myself. I tried to at one time, but it   s pretty involved,  and obviously, the printers themselves get more expensive. I don   t do any  printing, but I did do the matting for a while.  Little Thunder Right.  Harragarra The other art show   I think the first art show I participated in was Red  Earth. That might   ve been four or five years ago, I don   t remember when.  That one   s coming up second week in June.  Little Thunder Yes, it   s show season. Do you do any non-Native shows?  Harragarra No, I don   t. I was trying to remember. I tried one, I think.  Little Thunder Was it here in Oklahoma?  Harragarra Yes. I don   t really do those. It   s kind of like I have limited time. I pick the  ones that I would like to participate in and typically they   re local, other than  Santa Fe. Who doesn   t enjoy going out to Santa Fe?  Little Thunder Exactly. (Laughs) You haven   t had any dealings with galleries, I take it?  Harragarra No, I don   t. I   ve been asked, but I just haven   t gone down that road yet.  When I first started, I primarily photographed people, so that was the  limitation there. I didn   t want to display people that, first of all, some of  them have an objection to it, and I didn   t want to violate that. I was very  cognizant of peoples    images being out there, especially if they didn   t want  them. That   s when I started gravitating towards taking other pictures of  animals and tipis and landscapes. That   s when I started doing the art shows  again.  Little Thunder How has your approach to photography changed over the years?  Harragarra At the beginning, it was just trying to master the setting of the camera.  Learning what settings, how it affected the image. Not only that, but back  then it was film. It wasn   t just the camera settings that you could manipulate  and change the image, it was also in the dark room. You could spend hours  in a dark room on one image. Dodging, and burning, and changing the  16  lighting. At the beginning it was just learning the techniques. How to take a  good image, how to manipulate the camera, get the settings and the lighting  correct. I concentrated on mostly trying to learn that aspect of a good image.  Then as I got older and felt more confident in how the camera was set, then  you start looking, I did, anyway. You start looking at the more creative  aspect of an image. That   s probably where I am now. Now I use flash.  That   s another aspect of controlling light. That   s what photography is all  about is controlling light. They have different types of wireless flashes and  controls on the light that you can modify and change an image. I   m working  in that now, but there   s a newer type of lighting technique called light  painting that I   ve been getting into. I don   t have any images currently, but  that   s one of the newer techniques, I guess, that I want to work in.  Little Thunder That sounds interesting.  Harragarra Yeah.  Little Thunder So you   re playing with the light actually when you   re trying to take the  picture?  Harragarra Yes, it   s typically done in the evening or at night, and what you do is you set  the camera to where the exposure is open, the shutter is open, and then you  use a smaller light. Could be a flashlight, could be a larger flashlight. Could  be your cellphone. What you do with the light is you paint what you want  illuminated. The rest of the image remains dark. It   s a pretty dramatic effect,  if you get it right. Around here in Oklahoma it   s hard to do in the evenings  because of all the wind. The camera has to be absolutely still as well as the  subject. If you   re taking a picture of a skull, it   s easier for that to hold still.  But if you have a live subject, it   s hard for them to stay still that long, so you  get a little blurring. That   s the obstacles there. Yeah, that   s the newest  technique I   m working on.  Little Thunder Do any of your children take photographs?  Harragarra No, they don   t. I have a daughter. I have several nieces and a nephew. I   ve  always saved my older camera gear, hoping that one day they would pick it  up. I will say this, it   s time consuming. I think that   s probably the biggest  obstacle people have with it. I think a lot of people have interest in  photography. As they get more knowledge about it, I think one of the things  they realize is that it takes a long time to learn how to take a good image.  The other side of that is these cameras nowadays are so sophisticated, you  can put them in the automatic mode or program mode and you get a fairly  good image. That   s one aspect of it. The other is developing something in  the software into where you   re doing some color correction or putting an  effect on the image itself to change its look. That   s what some of these are  here. That   s another whole different art is Photoshop. Manipulating the  17  actual image. Some people gravitate towards that. A lot of graphic artists,  that   s how they started. I know a little of that, but not that much. I just  strictly want to stick with, first of all, a photo. Start with that.  Little Thunder What would you tell a young Native photographer, someone   s who   s  aspiring to do this maybe full time? Or maybe just as a way of giving back  to the community?  Harragarra First of all, like I said, the technology   s improved enough to where you can  buy a basic camera and it   s going to take a real good image simply because  of the software. The camera itself recognizes the lighting situation and it sets  the camera properly. It   s easier than it used to be. I don   t see too many  photographers out there that are Native. At one time, there used to be, like I  said, in the late    70s and early    80s that was kind of the thing to do was get a  35 millimeter. But I don   t see that many now. What I do see is a lot of  young people involved in video. I think that   s probably the bigger interest is  video. That leaves open still photography. There are a few, and they are very  talented. that I know that I see in Santa Fe. I think there   s plenty of room  there for somebody young to get into still photography using a digital SLR.  Now, with these Eastern tribes, they have a lot of resources. I could see an  opportunity where somebody could work with one of those tribes there:  Chickasaws, Choctaws, Creeks. I think they can probably make a living at it  really and develop, from there, an art.  Little Thunder You sort of covered, I think, some of the technical challenges of doing  digital photography. Have you ever experimented with collage or using  photographs in a different way?  Harragarra Yes, there   s Photoshop out there. It   s easy to do collages in Photoshop. It   s  one of those things where I recognize it can be done, but I haven   t really  spent too much time on doing that. There   s several companies that specialize  just strictly in photography. Adobe is probably the premier software  company out there and they have Photoshop, they have Lightroom, and they  have software that they use for movies and video. There   s other companies  out there that also do photography software. I have several versions of those  that I use. I   m sorry, what was the question again?  Little Thunder If you   d ever experimented with using photographs in a different way, a  collage or something.  Harragarra I do use this software to change the image. Right now there   s a lot of interest  in get that old photographic look where it looks scratchy and areas are  blurred and the color   s a little off. There   s a lot of companies that produce  software to get that kind of effect.  Little Thunder I didn   t realize that.  18  Harragarra There   s so many to choose from. You can spend a lot of time going through  all those options and settings. I dabbled in some of that newer software.  Little Thunder When you have photographs at an art show, what size and what finish do  you prefer when you   re getting them developed? Is there a particular size  that sells well or particular finish or mats?  Harragarra The smaller ones seem to sell because, obviously, they   re not as much to  produce. The cost is relatively affordable for most people. I prefer the larger  images like we have on the wall over here. The latest thing I   ve done is  these are mounted on aluminum panels, a photograph mounted on aluminum  panel. I do have matted and framed images that I do sell. But one of the  comments I hear as people look at the photographs is,    I don   t know if this  frame will go with the frame I have in the living room,    or,    Do you sell just  the image because I would like to change the mat to match another mat?     Lately, I   ve started using this new technique called aluminum   mounted on  aluminum panel. What that does for me as a photographer is it eliminates the  distraction of having a nice frame, a nice mat, that they match the image. I  eliminate that. Primarily I just want to display the image itself.  Little Thunder It   s all about the image. Yeah, it   s a nice look.  Harragarra That   s probably my latest way of displaying. I will try some of these on  some other type of medium. Canvas, maybe. There   s different types of  canvas that they use and different type of paper. I   ll try some on different  surfaces and textures and get a different look.  Little Thunder How important is it for you to title your photos?  Harragarra I think it   s important. I spend a lot of time on them. That   s why, probably,  most of them are untitled. The ones that I do title, yeah, I like to spend a lot  of time on that.  Little Thunder Do you sign them on the photograph?  Harragarra Yes, if I remember. There are times when I don   t remember to sign them.  My intention is to sign all of them.  Little Thunder In a corner or     Harragarra Yeah. Unfortunately, that doesn   t happen.  Little Thunder What   s your creative process for a photograph? Do you come up with an  idea   maybe that you want to shoot a particular landscape at a certain time  of day?  19  Harragarra Yeah, there is process I go through. Probably where I learned this from is  from our friend, David Fitzgerald. He was really an artist, an acrylic artist,  doing paintings. How he got into photography is he wanted to take a picture  of a subject, so he took a picture of it and then he would go back in his  studio and he would paint. Along the way he started appreciating the  photographs. That   s how he got into photography was through that process.  What I learned from him was, first of all, he   s done probably close to twenty  coffee table books in his career. He has a technique down and a process that  he goes through. I   ve learned from him how to stage these, how to plan  them. That   s what he does. He does a drawing of what he has in mind, of  what he wants to try and photograph. Not that it   s always going to turn out  like that, but at least he has an outline of how he wants to work and how he  wants the image to look. I try to adopt that as much as I can. I do go out  there with something in mind as how I want this to look. Not that it   s always  going to turn out like that.  There were some times when you could go there and spend two or three  days and not really come out with anything you want to display. But there  are times when you make a mistake and it turns out better than what you  thought it would be. The camera   s set wrong or a movement happens and it  adds to the picture. For the most part I do try to have an idea in mind and try  to reproduce that and try different variations with it. There   s two aspects of  it nowadays that didn   t exist during film. That   s the aspect that these  cameras are very sophisticated now, so you have a lot of control in the  camera itself. In addition to that, the after-production, running it through the  software, you have another avenue of being creative in that aspect. That   s  where graphic artists come into play is that capability. Yes, I do have an idea  of how I want these to turn out. Most of them aren   t something that I   ve  created. It   s something I   ve seen going to conferences or caught a glimpse  of these millions and millions of photographers, worldwide. I do try to get  online and look at images and see something     Little Thunder It   s part of your research.  Harragarra And try to see something that I would like to reproduce using a Native  theme.  Little Thunder Another creative decision I guess is also whether you do a sepia treatment,  or you do color, or    I think you mentioned most of your black and white  are taken from film.  Harragarra Yes, when I get my film   35 millimeter film   printed, you can opt for the  sepia setting in that. Again, that goes back to if you go to a different lab  they   re going to have a different color. Some, obviously you like and turn  out better than the other. But I haven   t done any film printing in quite a  20  while. Most of mine are digital. They can come pretty close to reproducing  something I did four or five year ago. I can take the image back in a digital  format and show them what you did five years ago. Could you get  something to match that? They can come pretty close. Again, it   s the  software that I use to take the color out of an image and put it all in black  and white or add a little tint to it. This is an example of something that was  black and white and I added red tint to it. It looks like a sepia image.  Little Thunder It does. What was your biggest photographic challenge?  Harragarra Money. (Laughter) The expense of the cameras and the lenses. Primarily,  it   s the lenses. They can get up to  10,000. I don   t own any that cost   10,000. One of these days, yes. It   s the cost of the camera body itself, the  lenses, and then the accessories of flash. The radial controllers to control the  flash. It   s the hardware. I was trying to think of the other obstacles,  creatively. I think every artist runs into a period to where it just ain   t there  today kind of thing. Sometimes I have days like that, too. Nothing   s going to  happen today.  Little Thunder No inspiration today. (Laughs) Looking back on all these years you   ve been  photographing, what was a kind of turning point, do you think? You might  not have recognized it as a turning point in your photography, but it may  have been a point at which you definitely started down this road.  Harragarra That would be more serious about it. I can look back probably in the late     90s maybe. Back then I was still shooting film, but it was probably  recognizing   again I go back to the Black Leggings. Recognizing that those  older gentlemen weren   t there. I remember one time I had this little webpage  and I think I had probably sixteen or seventeen elders in there. Within a  matter of two years, probably three-quarters of them were no longer with us.  That was, probably, like I said, in the late    90s. As you watch these dancers  get older, and then at some point not be able to participate. That and just  getting older, first of all. That would be the turning point thing. Then it  became more trying to document and not looking at this as a way, first of  all, to make money.  Not looking at this as a way to be artistic. It was just more of a way of  documenting because that   s what you see. I worked for the Department of  Transportation for a number of years and had the opportunity to travel the  state. When I had an opportunity, I would stop at these different tribal  offices. Every one of them you can go into and what you   re going to  recognize, just like when you came in here, is these old photographs.  Recognizing that and being exposed to that all the time. Every time you  went to a different tribal office, you   ll see a photograph that   s a hundred  years old. That   s probably what motivated me and inspired me at that time  21  was, at some point a hundred years from now these images that I have,  hopefully, some people will appreciate.  Little Thunder Right. What   s been a high point of your photography so far?  Harragarra I think it   s probably just being able to look back. Looking at the images that  I have of people in the late    80s, early    90s. when I was using film. Although  I didn   t have very many black and white because it was film and obviously  more costly, but probably the significant part about that is just recognizing  who they were. Meaning they were older Kiowas, and not only Kiowas, but  there were other tribes: Cheyenne, Otoes, Poncas. I don   t have very many of  them, but they were some of those people that held a prominent place in  their tribe or in their culture. That would probably be, I think, a turning point  where I recognized   again, I go back to what my contribution is to my  culture.  Little Thunder How about a low point at which you   ve been the most discouraged?  Harragarra Probably, I think every Native photographer at some point has to deal with  this and it   s simply because most Native photographers are aware of the  importance of a cultural event. That   s probably one of the first things I ran  into was    What do you do with these photographs? Do you sell them? Do  you have permission to do this?    One of the things I recognize, and at some  point you have to develop a thick skin to this because you   re always going  to be criticized, but let   s say you could have a group of twenty-five people.  Twenty-four of them have no problem with what you do, but there   s going  to be one that objects. As I got older I realized that that one person,  typically, that objects, that   s just the way they are. They don   t only object to  what you   re doing, they object to what other people are doing. I have  learned how to, I guess, put that into its proper perspective and recognize  that there are twenty people that support what you do. It took a while to kind  of get to that point, to recognize that,    Okay, this is just one person.    Really  when you got to know them a little better, you realized that they were just  somebody difficult to begin with.  Little Thunder Right. Thank you for sharing that. What do you see happening with your  photography when you retire?  Harragarra I hope to concentrate more on this. Finish these projects up, this Black  Leggings.  Little Thunder Maybe do a coffee table   well, it wouldn   t be a coffee table book in that  case. Maybe do one with other photographs?  Harragarra Yes, that and I hope to do a book. We talked about that. I have several  friends that one   s a well-known author. He   s done a lot of research on  22  Kiowa culture. He   s agreed to write the text. Hopefully, we get something  going here before too long.  Little Thunder That would be great. Is there anything we forgot to talk about before we  take a look at your photographs?  Harragarra I can   t think of anything. I   m sure there is, though. (Laughter)  Little Thunder If you think of it in between    We   re just going to pause for a minute.  Harragarra Okay.  Little Thunder You want to tell us about this photograph?  Harragarra This one I took I think it was a couple of years ago. It   s in the Wichita  Wildlife Refuge down there west of Lawton. I   ve been down there several  times. This particular day I got lucky and took all three of these images in  this room during that same visit I was down there. I   d been down here  several times before and see one or two buffalo. You wonder where they all  are. This day they decided to hang out by the road. So I took this one down  there. All these really are in color, but I   ve changed the color of them and  the texture of them by using software. I start out with Lightroom  photo  editing software , do some   and then gravitate and change the image, and  put it in Photoshop and do a little more touching. Some of the images I just  do a straight photo, like this Black Leggings image here. I just want to  recreate what I actually saw during that event. But others, to try and get a  little more artistic with them, that   s what this one represents is that.  Little Thunder Right. And here   s our Black Leggings photograph.  23  Harragarra Yes, I took this   I don   t remember exactly what the year was, maybe within  five years maybe. Maybe a little longer. This is as the Black Leggings are  entering into the dance arena. Several of those members unfortunately have  gone on. World War II, primarily, the ones that have gone on. There   s a  couple of them there, but there   s some Vietnam era. One well-known artist,  Sherman Chaddlesone, there on the right. Bill Ware in the front, Korean  veteran. These images like this I just don   t try to do anything artistic with  them. I just want to make sure I get the color correction, make sure  everything   s in focus. Just try to take an accurate image.  Little Thunder Right, beautiful. Here   s another one done in the Wichita Mountains, I guess.  24  Harragarra Yes, this was taken at the same time I took this other image here. This  happened to catch the clouds bright. A lot of this is just being there at the  right time and right place. You could take an image with no clouds and it  looks a little flat. Then the buffalo, of course, they move around quite a bit.  What was surprising about photographing buffalo is people think they   re  like cows where they just stay in one place and eat. These guys move  constantly. Kind of like a lawnmower, they just keep moving.  Little Thunder I love the way the gold just bounces. You got it in the flowers and in the  clouds.  Harragarra Yeah, that was taken in the spring.  Little Thunder Do the Otoe-Missouris have a herd? Buffalo herd?  Harragarra In the    70s we had a herd. They were very difficult to maintain in a small  confined area. They were from a reservation in South Dakota, I believe,  where they had large areas to roam. When they were given to us, we tried to  maintain them in our property, which wasn   t very big back then. They just  were a little more difficult. They were used to wide open spaces. That was in  the    70s. Currently, we are working on trying to acquire some buffalo,  working with a gentleman that has some. A ranch in Amarillo  Texas      north of Amarillo. We   re working on that and I   ll be visiting with him  today.  Little Thunder Oh, great. Okay. Here   s our last photograph.  Harragarra This image right here, this is in color. But I have changed this and put it in  black and white and reversed the color on it. Meaning the lights were black  and the darks became white. I won with that image last year at the  Chickasaw show in Sulphur. The good thing about buffalo is you don   t have  to sign a model release. I photograph them, it   s a little easier     25  Little Thunder Right, did you title     Harragarra    They   re not offended if...  Little Thunder    this one? (Laughter)  Harragarra    they didn   t have their makeup on right. The title?  Little Thunder Did you give this one a title?  Harragarra I don   t remember it. I can   t remember what I called it   Grass Dancer.  Little Thunder Oh, that   s a nice one, nice one. That   s great.  Harragarra I do spend a lot of time on trying to title them. Some people may not think I  do, but I do spend a lot of time on that. (Laughter)  Little Thunder That   s perfect for that and I like the color, and the shadow. That   s great.  Thank you very much for your time today, Lester.  Harragarra Yes, thank you for the opportunity.  -------  -------   
