 Wilson  Today is May 2, 2011. My name is Latasha Wilson, and I   m with the  Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at the Oklahoma State  University Library. I   m here today at the home of Bill Maddux in  Stillwater, Oklahoma. I will be interviewing Bill as part of the  Spotlighting Oklahoma oral history series. Bill, thank you for having me  here today.  You   re welcome.  Let   s start out by having you tell me where and when you were born.  I was born in Fort Smith, Arkansas, on August 15, 1924.  And is that where your parents were living at the time?  No, they lived in Leflore, Oklahoma. That was about sixty miles away  by train. It was the nearest hospital.  So how did your mother get to the hospital?  She rode the train to the hospital. I was born there and my dad came in  the next day, as I understand. He   d been working about forty miles away  from where we lived. You have to understand, we lived down in the  Kiamichi Mountains in Southeast Oklahoma, and there aren   t many  communities, hospitals, or anything else down available in that country.  So were there many trains each day?  One north and one south.  So she had to wait for the train to come.  5  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  That   s right, yes. If she missed that, she had to wait another twenty-four  hours. (Laughter) The only doctor in town was, literally, the old horse  and buggy doctor. That   s how he got around and made his calls, with his  horse and buggy. At that time, as I understand, he was out of town and  not available. That   s why she caught the train and went to Fort Smith.  And were you the first child?  Yes.  What were your parents    names?  My mother   s name was Etta Ellen Tiffee-Maddux and my father   s name  was Dewey Denver Maddux.  What were their professions at the time you were born?  They were both registered pharmacists. See, at that time, you could only  go to school up to about anywhere from the sixth to the eighth grade,  depending on what school you went to. That was the end of your school  years. In their case, they both went to Little Rock, Arkansas, and went  through pharmacy school and became registered pharmacists.  Do you know where they met?  In Leflore.  They were both from Leflore?  Yes.  Do you know how their families came to that area?  Well, his family came in from Arkansas into that part of Oklahoma. The  Maddux name is an old Welsh name, and nearly all people from Wales  were coal miners.    The old, poor coal miners    is the way they referred to  them. And that part of Oklahoma down there is a coal mining area. So  I   m sure in my own mind, that   s why they settled in that part of the state.  Now, my mother   s family, I have no idea on it. Her mother came from  that area down there, but her father was an orphan, so we can   t trace  him.  So do you know much about the house that your parents were living in at  the time you were born?  Yes, they were living in the back of my grandfather   s drugstore, in a  6  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  back room.  In Leflore?  In Leflore, yes.  Do you have any stories about that particular location when you were a  baby?  Yes, yes, I was very small. I have no idea what age, very small. My crib  in that back room was right beneath a large window that opened out to  the rear of the drugstore. One night, some Indian, or they think it was an  Indian, tried to break into the drugstore through that window, and my  father shot at him with an Army .45. I don   t guess he hit the Indian  because we never heard of any of them going to the doctor about it. It  didn   t hurt anything except my mother   s feelings. She was hopping mad  because all that glass fell down in my crib. (Laughter)  So he was probably just trying to break into the pharmacy and didn   t  realize there was a baby right there?  Yes, he didn   t know there was anybody living back there. You have to  understand, that country down there was seven of ten people were  Choctaw Indians. There weren   t a lot of us white people in that area. In  fact, nearly all my grade school days down there, I   d say at least seven  out of every ten fellow students I had were Indians.  And were some of your family members Indians?  Yes, yes. I had one uncle that lived fifteen miles south in the town of  Talihina, whose great-great grandfather was the first governor of the  Choctaw tribe after they made the long trail from Mississippi into  Oklahoma, when the federal government forced them to move. The chief  of the Choctaws wouldn   t come with them. He stayed in Mississippi on  his plantation with his black slaves. He would not come to Oklahoma  with his tribe. My uncle   s grandfather was called Governor Wade, rather  than Chief Wade. Now, his picture, today, hangs in the Rotunda of the  State Capitol. I have an aunt who was a full-blood Choctaw, and I lived  with them off and on when my parents were off doing other things. I  used to go out with her about twice a year, and we would gather barks,  herbs, roots, all types of things because she made all of her own  medicine. Things like sassafras roots, slippery elm bark, papaws.  And did she administer this medicine to people in the area or just to her  family?  7  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  No, it was just for her family. That   s all it was for. I know they used  to   at one time, I would get up and go in the kitchen early in the  morning, and she would be sitting there drinking a cup of boiling hot  water, just as hot as she could possibly drink it. She would have the old  enamel coffee pot over there on the woodstove making coffee. And I  asked her one morning, I said,    Aunt Lou, why do you sit here and drink  plain water instead of waiting about another five minutes until your  coffee is made in the pot?    She wouldn   t answer me. Of course, you  have to understand, that was the way of the Indians. If they didn   t want  to answer you, they didn   t. I mean, silence. Then a few months later, I  asked her again. This time she gave me an answer. She said,    If you will  get up the very first thing every morning, you drink a cup of water as hot  as you can drink it, you will never need a laxative.    So that was her  laxative. I   ve heard many people since then say,    Yes, that   s true. It  works.    If you want to stay regular, you drink a boiling cup of water  every morning. (Laughter)  How long did your family live in the pharmacy?  A very short time. I   d say probably six months at the longest.  Where did they head then?  We moved to Muskogee, Oklahoma, and we weren   t there but a very  few months until we moved on to Oklahoma City. And eventually, my  dad had three drugstores in Oklahoma City. Of course, when the Great  Depression hit, he lost all three of those, but that   s why we were living  in Oklahoma City.  Was he working as a pharmacist in Leflore when you were born?  No, when I was born, he was working in Poteau, Oklahoma, about  thirty-five miles away, working in a bank. Why? I   ve never understood,  but he did. (Laughter)  Where did you move when you got to Oklahoma City? What house?  Where in the city?  Yes.  Let me think just a minute. 2814 Northwest 19th Street.  Was it a pretty nice house?  Pretty nice house, yes. It was half a block off of May Avenue on 19th  8  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Street, busy area. One of his pharmacies was three blocks west of there,  on Drexel and 19th. The Taft Junior High is at 23rd and May. We lived  there, and I was going to Grover Cleveland Grade School on 23rd, two  blocks east of where Taft Junior High is on May Avenue. I watched  them build Taft Junior High at that time. From there on north, clear up to  32nd Street in Oklahoma City was open farm land. There was nothing out  there but a few farm houses. That   s how small Oklahoma City was.  Did you all have a car at that time?  Oh, yes.  What kind of car was it?  Oh, my goodness gracious, I don   t remember what year it was, but it  was called a Hupmobile. Did you ever hear of a Hupmobile?  I have not. (Laughter)  That was our family car. My mother   s personal car was a Model-B,  which came out after the Model-A. She had a Model-B Ford that was  her personal car. My dad had two motorcycles that he used at his  drugstores for the delivery boys to ride making deliveries. Quite often,  he   d ride one of them instead of a car.  Did a lot of people drive motorcycles then?  Quite a few, yes. We had Harley Davidsons and Indian motorcycles.   They  were the two leading brands.  So your mother and father were both pharmacists.  Yes.  Did they work in all three pharmacies that he owned, or how did that  work out?  Well, he ran the one on Drexel Park, and one of my uncles was also a  pharmacist, and he hired him to run the one down on Main Street, in  Oklahoma City. Then he put in the one at 23rd and Pennsylvania, which  everybody pronounced him crazy when he put it in because it was way  out in the country. I don   t remember who he hired to operate it, but  mother would go work at any of them where she was needed.  What do you remember about the drugstores? Did you go and hang out  as a child, any, in the   ?  9  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  A little bit.  Did they have a soda fountain?  Oh, always, always. You had to have a soda fountain, yes.  Did they make ice cream? Or did they serve ice cream?  Yes. They served ice cream, all fountain drinks, just like they would  today, yes.  What was your favorite treat?  A root beer. A good, ice-cold root beer. (Laughs)  Do you remember what brand of root beer you would drink back then?  No, I don   t. I don   t remember what it was. Of course, it was bought in  large quantities there for the drugstore. I don   t know what brand they  were.  So your house was a pretty good size?  Oh, just a little two bedroom, might call it a bungalow, really. I  remember it wasn   t big enough for my mother. She decided we had to  have a grand piano, so she enclosed the front porch and made it part of  the living room, so she   d have room for her piano. Lo and behold, it still  wasn   t big enough, so she had to settle for a baby grand. (Laughter)  Did she play the piano?  No, she didn   t play the piano. She took me to get lessons for about a  year and I finally flubbed up so many times   I   m almost afraid yet,  today, to say purposely, but anyhow, that   s basically what I did   that  my teacher finally informed her that I would never make a pianist. I  should just go out and play baseball, and that   s what I wanted to do in  the first place. (Laughter)  That worked out pretty well.  Yes. (Laughs)  Did your family have a garden there in the city?  Flower gardens. My mother had flower gardens galore. I used to get out  10  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  there and help her work in the flower garden, especially in her rose  gardens. She had three great big rose gardens. Those were her pets. Then  we had a big goldfish pond back there. Had to keep it cleaned out and  taken care of.  What would your parents do for entertainment?  Played bridge. I   ve spent many a night curled around a card table leg,  sleeping down there on the floor while they and their friends were  playing bridge. I mean all night long, until the sun came up and they  could run home and get dressed and go to work.  Wow. (Laughs)  I   d sleep down on the floor under that card table. (Laughter) I guess that  still holds over today because I don   t go to bed until two or three o   clock  in the morning, and I don   t get up until nine.  And would they eat dinner? Would people come over for dinner and then  play bridge?  Oh, yes, quite often, yes. Mother would have nice big fancy dinners. Of  course, we always had some kind of snacks while they were playing  cards. I was about five years old the first time I ever remember making  chocolate fudge. I made chocolate fudge, I   d say, at least three nights a  week for I don   t know how many years for those people to eat. It must  have been good because they never left me any. I scraped the pan and  licked the spoon.  Living in Oklahoma City, did you buy your groceries at the grocery  store?  Yes. If I   m not mistaken, it was a Piggly Wiggly grocery store. I   ve seen  my folks come out of there many times with a banana crate full of  groceries. Now, a banana crate was a round basket that was larger at the  top than at the bottom and about five feet tall. They   d sit a full stock of  bananas down in there and put a top on it. That was the way they  shipped bananas back in those days. But you could buy an entire banana  crate full of groceries for less than five dollars. I remember back,  probably around 1930, the first day that Kraft put Miracle Whip on the  shelves.  What did people think about that?  I don   t know what they thought. I thought it was wonderful after I tasted  it. I still eat it like ice cream if I want to. (Laughter) It was great.  11  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Would people mostly use it on sandwiches then or did they experiment in  many other ways?  Yes, yes. In fact, I believe that   s what they advertised it as, was a  sandwich spread.  What are some dishes you remember your mom making?  Oh, my gosh, just about anything and everything. She was a wonderful  cook. She would cook steaks, home fried chicken, mashed potatoes,  gravy, all the vegetables. She was really a good cook.  Did you have a favorite dish?  No, not at that time I didn   t. My favorite dish was ice cream. (Laughs)  Did she help you make your first batch of fudge when you were five?  Yes, the first time.  And then you took it from there?  Yes. Now, the other end of that story is I made my last batch a couple of  years ago when I was eighty-five. I   ve had to quit now because I can   t  read the recipe or see the measuring to be sure I   m getting the right thing  in the pan. Wanda has to do that for me, so I decided eighty years was  enough of it.  Have you passed that recipe on to your children or grandchildren?  Yes, it   s in there in the box. Just good old coco fudge, that   s what it is.  When you were living in Oklahoma City, did you have electricity in your  house?  Oh, yes. We did there, but we didn   t have it when we moved back down  to Leflore. There was no electricity in that town.  Did you have indoor plumbing in Oklahoma City?  Yes. We had all the niceties of modern living when we lived there.  What year did you say it was when you moved to Oklahoma City?  Let me think a minute. It must have been about 1928, I   m guessing.  12  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  So had they had electricity for a while in Oklahoma City?  Oh, yes, yes. At that time, the electricity in Oklahoma City was all  produced at Belle Isle Power Plant, which the lake and everything still  exists right there in Oklahoma City, the old Belle Isle Park.  And were there streetcars?  Oh, yes. They had streetcars. I   ve ridden in many a street car.  What was the process? Did you pay the man who was driving once you  got on?  Well, usually, you   d buy little tokens. About the size of a dime, only  they had certain writing on them and then holes punched in them to  where it would be hard to duplicate. But they were tokens and if I  remember right, they cost you a nickel. You dropped them in a little  machine up there by the operator, and that   s the way you paid to ride the  streetcar.  And did they go pretty much all over town?  Yes, sure did. At that time, they even ran what they call an inter-urban,  which is a streetcar. There was one that went from Oklahoma City over  to El Reno, one from Oklahoma City to Norman, and one from  Oklahoma City to Guthrie. Then for a while, there was one that went all  the way from Oklahoma City clear down to Sulfur, Oklahoma, to the  medicinal springs down there on the Chickasaw land. Most people aren   t  aware of that, but there was one.  Do you have any idea when that ceased?  No, I don   t. I don   t know when was the end of that. I didn   t know about  it until I was reading a special little book that my mother gave me years  ago, telling all about developing the Chickasaw Nation at Sulfur.  Did you ever take the streetcar to any of those other towns?  Oh, yes. Yes.  Would it take very long?  No, just ride along real good. The only problem is when there is a  passenger or a freight train coming down the railway, the streetcar has to  pull off on the side and wait until it gets passed, and then they could go  13  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  back out and continue their run. (Laughs)  Did you ever ride on the train to go much further, like outside of  Oklahoma?  Not outside of Oklahoma. I   ve ridden it from Oklahoma City way back  down to Southeast Oklahoma, to visit people down there, yes.  Did your family do much traveling?  Oh, my gosh  I didn   t go to school until the third grade. So I was about  eight or nine years old before I ever started school because every  summer, my folks would go to Colorado Springs. And we   d stay up  there in a big boarding house in Colorado Springs for two or three  months at a time. And then, in the wintertime, we had what you today  would call a condo, we called it an apartment, then, but we got the same  one every year. Just inside the seawall in Long Beach, California. So  that   s where we spent our winters. And we traveled up to Alaska. We  drove down to Mexico City from Oklahoma City. Drove down through  Death Valley once. And back in those days, that was quite an experience  to do that. And all over this part of the country. It   s a lot of traveling. I  think that   s why they allowed me to start school in the third grade  because my mother convinced them that I   d already had a better  education riding around in the car than what they were giving me there  in school. (Laughter)  And were you all able to travel because the pharmacies back home were  being taken care of?  Doing well. Doing well, yes.  So what would you do when you were away? Just enjoy life?  Everything. Like, in California, we   d go to auctions in Chinatown. In  fact, I have some items in there right now that my mother bought in  Chinatown back in the early 1930s. And we   d take trips out to Catalina  Island or were always doing something, just down on the beach going  swimming. Lots of things you could do like that out there. In Colorado,  we   d drive over to the Garden of the Gods, Cave of the Winds, Seven  Falls. Up Pike   s Peak twice, once in a car and the second time we went  up riding what they call the cog rail up the side of the mountain. The  little open cars kind of like you   d see today on a Ferris wheel, pulled by  cog rails up the steep side of the mountain. All kinds of things like that.  That   s where I got my education instead of going to school.  Did you start out in San Francisco before your Alaska trip?  14  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  No, we drove from Long Beach. We did, we drove to San Francisco.  Hadn   t even planned to make the trip to Alaska and then for some  reason, my dad, I remember, came in one evening and said,    We   re  going     I had no idea what they were talking about. He   d gotten tickets  and boarding passes and everything to cruise up the inner passageway,  they call it, up past Alaska, up in there. If I   m not mistaken, I cannot  remember for sure, I think   yes, I still think it was. I think it was a  wooden ship.  Really?  Yes, it was wooden. It wasn   t a regular cruise ship. It was a cargo ship  that the captain made a little extra money carrying passengers up  through there, that   s what the deal was on it. Because there wasn   t     Golly, I don   t think there were probably twelve people on there that  weren   t crew. But it wasn   t a real excursion ship that we   d think of  today.  Well, what did you do once you got to Alaska?  We didn   t do anything. We didn   t go to port except one place where  they unloaded their cargo, and we didn   t get off there. We just cruised  up the outer banks, I guess they call it, and then you   d turn and come  back down on the inner banks, right in next to the shoreline where the  glaciers are calving up in there. You know what I mean when I say  they   re calving? A glacier keeps moving toward the ocean, that big sheet  of ice over the side, like down the side of a cliff, and as it moves,  occasionally, those tremendous chunks of ice, like big icebergs of that  glacier, fall off into the ocean. And oh, it sounds just like thunder, a  terrible loud noise and a big wave from them. You wouldn   t want to be  close by on a small boat, it would swamp you. When they say a glacier  calves, that   s what they   re referring to.  So you got to watch this on your way home?  Yes.  Did you see whales?  Yes.  Were there many other tourists onboard your ship?  About twelve is all there was. Yes, that   s all that was on there. I know  there was another boy on there pretty close to my age, and he and I spent  15  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  a lot of time exploring the ship. I don   t think the captain appreciated us,  but we explored his ship anyhow. (Laughter)  Do you know what kinds of goods the ship was carrying?  Have no idea. No. I have no idea. I didn   t pay any attention. I really  didn   t care. We were just having fun. (Laughter)  Do you remember hearing anything about the upcoming construction of  the Golden Gate Bridge?  No, not at that time, I don   t remember hearing anything about it. I  remember hearing about it all through the years when they were talking  about building it. Did you know that bridge has two painting crews? One  of them paints the upper structure, and one of them paints underneath the  lower structure. And it takes each crew one full year to go from one end  of the bridge to the other. As soon as they get there, they turn around,  and they start back the other way. It takes two crews working every day  painting that bridge. That amazed me when I found that out.  Wow. Well, your family would drive from Oklahoma to California?  Yes.  Did you drive along the Route 66?  Always, old Route 66. I knew it by heart. At that time, one of the main  things I remember about that time was out through New Mexico   well,  Arizona, too   the Pueblo Indians out through there had these square  houses, much like the Spanish style that we see today, with the logs  sticking out of the side up at the roof and the roof built on top of the  logs. You   d see a lot of those villages just off the highway up through  there, those pueblo style villages and homes. There   s none there now. I  don   t know why, under the sun, they couldn   t at least preserve one of  them just for people to see what it looked like. I always thought they  were really interesting.  Did the road seem pretty busy? Were there a lot of cars?  Yes, quite a few, quite a few. One interesting point was that out through  the New Mexico-Arizona part of it, you traveled along for, oh, maybe  five miles and all of a sudden, the highway would dip down, oh, I   d say  eight or ten feet. Then you   d drive along there for a little ways, and then  you   d go back up to the original level of the highway. I never could  understand that. Finally, someone explained it to me. Out in that  country   well, it   s just like Las Vegas today. Las Vegas has horrible  16  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  floods. There they are in a desert, but when it rains the water does not  soak in to the ground. It washes right over the top. They made those low  spots in the highway so the water could get through and pass on down  through there without washing out the highway. Those were low water  bridges, I guess you might call them. (Laughs)  Would you stop and eat along the way?  Oh, yes. Yes.  Mostly burgers or   ?  Oh, no, my mother didn   t believe in that. We had to get out and eat a  meal, supposed to have a good meal. This big boarding house that we  stayed at in Colorado Springs   I have no idea how many people stayed  there, but it was a big two-story booger. It had two dining rooms, and  you were assigned to your dining room. And then out on the veranda,  they called it then, the porch, on three sides, both floors on that building  were   oh, good Lord   hundreds of tables and lawn chairs and things  where people could sit out there and eat and visit or drink coffee or  whatever. One of the main topics of conversation between those people  was a mild argument over which dining room was the best. Always  arguing over who had the best dining room, I never will forget that.  (Laughter)  Do you think the dining rooms served different fare?  No, it was the same food. It came out of the same kitchens. (Laughter)  One of them was always better than the other one. Then, occasionally,  on a couple or three occasions, I remember staying at the Broadmoor  Hotel there south of Denver. What is it? I can   t think of the name of the  city now. It was then, and it still is, a very elaborate place. Of course, my  parents were avid golfers. Always on the golf course if they could  possibly get away. That   s why we would stay over there, so they could  play golf on those beautiful golf courses. Now, we young people, they  would pick us up on a bus and travel around to zoos and different places  on up around Denver and all that area. That   s where we   d spend our  days. You weren   t allowed out on that golf course. No, kids were not  allowed out that door. (Laughs)  So did you make a lot of friends?  Oh, yes. Yes, we had a lot of fun. And then they had an indoor  swimming pool. They had an indoor ice skating rink. All kinds of things  there. I never did learn to ice skate, but I sure did have a lot of fun  watching people out there doing it. Some of them were astounding, how  17  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  good they were at that ice skating.  We talked about you starting school later because you were learning so  much through your travels. Would you say you were learning geography  and history and   ?  Oh, yes. Yes. Yes.  What are some of the biggest lessons you took from your travels?  Well, I was fixing to tell you one of the biggest lessons I got out of all  that was human behavior. It amazes me, still does yet today. When I was  traveling after I retired from the fire department, national sales manager,  I traveled all over this United States. I spent hours and hours in airports,  O   Hare Field, DFW, and all the rest of them. I thoroughly enjoyed it,  sitting there watching the people. They were more fun than the monkeys  in the zoo. Honest to goodness. You wouldn   t think humans would pull  some of the stunts you could see what they did going through an airport.  (Laughter) I   d just sit there and die laughing. I tell everybody, I honestly  do, I think I have seen every mode of dress that you can imagine, both  European and United States, go through O   Hare Airport. Except for one  thing: I never saw a girl go through there in a bikini. (Laughter)  Maybe had one on under her clothes. (Laughs)  May have, probably did, but I never did see a girl in a bikini. (Laughs)  Other than that, I   ve seen every mode of dress you can name.  Is there anything else in particular that you would say you learned from  your time traveling, growing up?  No, no. A lot of historical facts, like in Mexico City and the stops we  made in New Mexico and Arizona, even the Panhandle of Texas,  traveling back and forth, driving all the way down to San Antonio and  through El Paso and then on crossing the border on over into Mexico to  go to Mexico City.  How was the drive through Mexico?  Not too bad. Not too bad. Just the roads weren   t anything to brag about.  Of course, we   re talking about way back in the early 1930s when that all  was, so things weren   t very good. I do remember that the border guard  told us to leave our valuables and all our money there in their locked  safe area, there at the border. And they exchanged enough of our money  that they thought it would be all we would need to make the trip and stay  two or three days in Mexico City, then come back home. He said,    The  18  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  reason for that is because the banditos are operating pretty heavily along  the highway between here and Mexico City. They   ll take everything you  have that they can get loose and walk off with. (Laughs) Rings, watches,  billfold, anything they can get a dime out of, they   ll steal it.    We never  did see any. I was disappointed. I never did get to see one. (Laughter)  And I guess you could trust the border guards and your possessions  were waiting on you when you     Oh, yes. There wasn   t any doubt about that. They put them in little  individual safes they had over there, and you set the combination to  where you wanted it on the safe.  Did your parents speak any Spanish?  No, they didn   t speak any. You didn   t need to down there because there  was plenty of people down there that could speak pigeon English and get  by just fine. About the only thing you needed to know in Spanish was to  ask,    Where   s the bathroom?    (Laughter)  Do you remember sending postcards home to your family from your  travels?  I never did, but my mother did, yes. I never did send any. I was too busy  having fun for that foolishness. (Laughs) I lived quite a young life,  really. It was really different and really exciting, very educational.  Well, since your parents were pharmacists, were there many home  remedies or did you often take medicine if you had an ailment?  Take medicine. Wouldn   t today unless the doctor said I had to. Didn   t  take medicines. That was for people that didn   t know any better.  (Laughter) That   s what my mother used to say     These are in here for  sale for people who don   t know any better.    (Laughter)  What were some of the remedies you remember in your home?  Let   s see now. At that time, we had Ex-Lax. We didn   t have it in our  home, but I remember it on the shelves in the drugstore. We had syrup  of Pepsin, P-E-P-S-I-N. And Pepsi-Cola, today, I guarantee you it has  Pepsin in it, which at that time was a laxative, syrup of Pepsin. That   s  why I don   t like Pepsi-Cola today because I can still taste that Pepsin.  (Laughter) If I   m not mistaken, we had Alka-Seltzer or something very  similar to it. Of course, we always had aspirin. That   s about the only  ones I remember.  19  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  What about if you got a bee sting?  Bee sting? You put baking soda and water and made a paste and put that  on there. When it dried it made a poultice and pulled part of the poison  out of there. A bee stinger   I don   t know whether you are familiar with  them or not   a bee stinger is a needle that right down pretty close to the  point, there is a little sack on each side of that stinger that   s full of the  liquid that makes the swelling in your arm. My Indian uncle used to  reach down and get a hold of those and pull them up out of there, and if  neither one of the sacks were broken, it never even swelled. He said  what people do as soon as a bee stings them, they slap their hand on it  and that hits the stinger and that breaks the bulbs. That   s why they   ve  got a problem. If you   ll just gently reach down and pull that out of there,  you won   t have any problems. (Laughs) Live and learn.  Yes. Well, did you have any dangerous incidents when you were growing  up? Were you really sick or did you have any   ?  No, the only one I had when I was about   let me think   somewhere  around twelve years old, I stepped on a shingle nail in a board right in  the middle of my left foot. Before we went to the hospital, my leg was  the size of a dinner plate. It swelled that much. Got to the hospital, I  remember Mom and Dad were quite worried because the doctor had  already told them they would have to take my leg off at the hip to stop  the gangrene. But they didn   t. They came in there with two pair of  scissors   I don   t know if you want this or not   two pair of scissors,  twice a day, and they   d go up through that nail hole in the bottom of my  foot, clipping up inside my foot. Then they   d drain about half of a teacup  full of puss out of there, twice a day. Then they would wrap my leg, oh,  I   d say eighteen inches at least, in diameter in towels, and then brown  wrapping paper, like the old stores used to wrap things in, dry goods and  so forth. They   d wrap my leg that big around with towels and paper.  (Gestures) And then they would come in there with probably six or eight  tea kettles full of boiling water and start pouring that boiling water on  top of that and saved my leg.  Wow.  I always thought that was amazing.  That sounds amazing.  Of course, back then we didn   t have the sulfas and all the drugs that you  have now. There wasn   t anything you could take for it. There it is, take it  or leave it.  20  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  So how long were you in the hospital?  I don   t remember. It seemed like about six months to me, but going back  and checking what little I can, it must have been a little over three  months in the hospital.  Wow. Well, what are some more specific establishments you remember  in Oklahoma City? Like stores or   ?  Oh, the Criterion Theater down on Main Street and the big organ they  had in there. And my mother and aunt from Talihina would always dress  up fit to kill   I mean to the nth degree. And they would dress me and  my cousin, which was one year younger, and we four would go to the  Criterion Theater. You always had to go at least a half an hour early to  hear Gaylord play the organ.  Which Gaylord was this?  I can   t think of his name. I don   t remember what his first name was. The  First National Bank building, which is still standing there, was already  there, then, but the Skirvin Tower that is practically next door to it now,  we watched them build the Skirvin Tower, at that time. Now, on top of  the First National Bank building, there still is, I think, a tower that stands  up on top of there. And originally, that tower, at night, had either a red, a  green, or a yellow light shining up on the tower, and that was the  weather forecaster for Oklahoma City. If it was going to be bad weather,  it was red, good weather green, and if it was going to change, why, it  would be yellow. (Laughter) That was the weather forecast for  Oklahoma City.  Wow.  Of course, at that time, they had either two or three, I know they had two  big train stations. The stockyards across the river and right down by the  stockyards, there was Cattleman   s Caf  . It   s been there for many years.  Did you go to the state fair?  Oh, yes. Yes, I rode the streetcar to the state fair. At that time, the state  fair was at Tenth and Eastern. I understand there   s a high school or some  type of school there now, but that was at Tenth and Eastern. That   s  where I saw my first and last horse race. The horses ran down, were  going around the first turn, and one of them stumbled and rolled over on  top of the jockey and killed him. I never went back to see another horse  race.  21  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Oh, my gosh   That was enough for me, right there. I never will forget that. That was an  ugly picture.  Oh, I bet.  Rolled over on top of his jockey. And not only that, it broke four legs on  the horse, so they had to kill him, too.  Wow. Did people bet on horse racing then?  I   m sure they did. At that age, I didn   t have any idea, but I   m sure they  did. They   d bet on anything. (Laughs) As my dad used to tell about one  of my uncles, he said,    That guy would bet on anything. If there was  three birds sitting on the fence, he   d bet you which one was going to fly  first.    (Laughter)  What about the shopping cart? Did you have shopping carts?  The shopping cart was invented over there in Shawnee, but I can   t  remember when we got them, whether we had them at that time in  Oklahoma City or not. It doesn   t seem like we did. Not that early.  What about parking meters?  I don   t think they were out then, either, no. I can   t remember now. The  parking meter was developed right up here at OSU. I remember that. In  fact, I   ve seen the first one on display up there in the cabinet. I don   t  know whether they still have it or not, but that was the first parking  meter.  Two great Oklahoma inventions.  Yes, and I know the gentleman who invented the shopping cart was  related to Jake Katz at that Katz Department Store down there  on Main  Street in Stillwater, Oklahoma . I don   t remember what the connection  was, but some relation there. Goldman, wasn   t that their name?  I think so. When did you move from Oklahoma City?  We moved down to Leflore in about   let me think a minute   1934.  And was that because of the crash?  The Depression, yes. Had to move down there to have enough to live on.  22  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Do you remember your parents    attitudes at the time? Did they know it  was coming?  Oh, yes. Yes, they knew it was coming. See, they already owned some  land down there from living there before. In fact, my mother   s father at  one time practically owned that whole area around Leflore, Oklahoma,  many, many acres. Most of it they let go back to the county because  nobody wanted to pay the taxes on it. I would almost bet you could go  down there today and buy land in Leflore County if you   ll just pay the  back taxes. In fact, they   ll even give you a reduction on that because  they know you   re not going to pay that much. (Laughs)  Did your parents talk much about politics?  No. No, the only thing I remember was that my dad used to say he was a  republican, and she was a democrat. He used to say he sure would like to  live long enough to see a republican president. (Laughter) At that time,  in Oklahoma, if you signed up to vote, and you did not register as a  democrat, chances are on your ballot, you weren   t going to have  anything to vote on. The republican ballot might have two names on  there out of the whole twenty. You weren   t even going to have anything  to vote on if you were a republican. That   s why everybody was a  democrat.  Did you all have a radio when you were in Oklahoma City?  Yes, yes, had one there. After we moved down to Leflore, our radio   no  electricity, so we had an old Atwater Kent, was the name of it. Big long  box about three feet long, almost a foot square, had a big speaker horn  that sat up on top of it and in the evenings, once in a while, a lot of the  townspeople would come up there to listen to the radio. And Dad always  made homemade ice cream if he could. Now, in order to hear the radio,  we had to go take the battery out of the car and bring it over there and  connect it to the radio because it ran off of the 6-volt battery out of the  car. No electricity. (Laughs)  What are some programs on the radio?  Oh, the only one I ever remember hearing on there was when they were  going to have a big prize fight. Like with Max Baer and  Max   Schmeling from Germany. I think that was the first one I ever heard on  the radio. We didn   t do that but twice a year. No TV, no radios, nobody  gave a darn. You had plenty to work on. In those days, you didn   t have  time for that. You   d get up in the morning, you had chores to do. You  had to go help Dad milk the cow, feed the chickens, gather the eggs, slop  23  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  the hogs, draw up the water out of the well and put it in the pot and build  a fire in it so Mom could wash clothes that day, draw up enough water to  bring it in the house so she had fresh water in there in the buckets to  work with and cook all day. If you got all that done by breakfast time,  then you could eat breakfast and run down to school. Now, if you didn   t,  you   d run to school without breakfast. So if you didn   t get your chores  done, just forget about eating.  How did your family adjust to that change in lifestyle?  Well, they   d been there for many years before, before we moved to  Oklahoma City. So they just went back to where they were as kids.  What about you?  It was all new to me. (Laughs) All new to me. That was quite a change,  I   ll tell you. When you got out of school in the evening, you   d start it all  over. You had all these chores to do before dark. If you got them done,  you could eat your evening meal. (Laughs)  So did your dad just farm when you moved back to Leflore?  We raised a large garden, and we raised hogs, had a milk cow. A lot of  times, if it was cotton picking time, I   d go pick cotton. And if I was real  lucky, I   d make fifty cents a day picking cotton out in that hot sun all  day long, for fifty cents. Or gather corn, throw it up in a wagon and  team, throw it up into the wagon, chopped cotton, chopped the  cockleburs out of the cotton stalks. Then Dad and I found out we can  make a lot more money cutting and delivering wood back in the  mountains. Where we lived, we went about half of a city block from our  back door, and we were in the Ouachita National Forest in the Kiamichi  Mountains. So we could go back in those mountains all day and with a  two-man crosscut saw and a double-bit axe, we would cut wood, throw  it down the mountain side, down into the valley to where we could load  it into a wagon with a team of mules or horses, and then take it into town  to deliver it. A rick of firewood, we got a dollar. A rick of cook wood  was five dollars. They used the little one-inch by one-inch by twelve-inch-  long piece of wood to put in the cook stove to cook with.  So when you were working in the cotton fields, did your father own those  cotton fields or were those somebody else   s?  No, no, no. We had some land outside of town there that he owned that  the sharecroppers took care of. A man lives on the farm, he   d raise the  corn or whatever he grew on there, and he kept two-thirds, and he gave  the owner of the land one-third. That   s called a sharecropper. So that   s  24  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  where we   d get the corn to feed our hogs and cows and so forth. Of  course, now, you   d sit down there in the barn and shell that corn into a  bucket or sack, and then you would carry it downtown to the gristmill  and have it run through the gristmill once. It would come out in real  coarse grains of corn. That   s what you fed the chickens, the hogs, and  the cow. Those were called chops. You run it back through there two  more times, and you   d come up with cornmeal like you   d use today to  make cornbread. That   s what we did with the corn. That   s about as close  to farming as our family got, that and the big garden.  So how long was it before your parents were working in pharmacies  again?  Oh, I don   t know that my mother ever did. We left Leflore. The first  time we came up here to Stillwater was in 1939, and she enrolled at  Oklahoma A M College. Dad went to work on the northwest corner of  Seventh and Main at Kennecut Drug as a pharmacist. And I went back  down to Leflore and lived with my great-aunt for my junior year of high  school.  Why did you do that?  Because I   d already enrolled down there, and I kind of wanted to stay  down there with my friends. I really didn   t want to come to Stillwater at  that time.  But you ended up coming your senior year?  I came up here the next year,    41-   42. I graduated Stillwater High  School in 1942.  So did you make some friends that last year of high school in Stillwater?  A few. I didn   t have time. I was always busy working. I worked darn  near every night of the week at the D and V Drug at the southwest  corner of Seventh and Main, across the street from where my dad  worked at Kennecut   s.  What did you do there?  I was a soda jerk. Down there in Leflore, since you didn   t have anything  to do, so to speak, we would shoot marbles, spike tops, old wooden tops  with the string on them, had rubber gun fights, shoot hoops with a  basketball, not much, but a little bit. Most of it was spent going fishing  or hunting back in the mountains. That was the lifestyle down there.  That was your recreation.  25  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  So did it take you a little while to adjust in the school, coming from  Oklahoma City to Leflore?  Yes. Yes, it was quite an adjustment, especially since I was going to  school with so many Indians. I never thought of that. (Laughs) Now, all  of my cousins were Indians. This full-blood aunt had three daughters  and my uncle in Talihina had one son, so those were my four cousins.  They were all Indians.  What did your mom study at A M?  History. She always wanted to be a history instructor.  And did she end up graduating?  Yes. Before we came up here, she   d spent two years going to  Southeastern Junior College, I guess you   d call it, in Wilburton, down  by Leflore, Wilburton, Oklahoma. So she came up here to finish. After I  graduated in    42, that summer, I went out and enrolled in college. She  and I had one English literature class together.  How was that?  I didn   t want any more of that. She beat me too bad. (Laughter) I never  will forget that. Mother and I would go into the same class, and she   d  work me good. You think she   d help me with my homework? Heck no,  she wouldn   t help me  (Laughter) We laughed about that.  How many years did you go to A M?  Three.  Three in a row?  Yes,    46,    47   well, part of    49. Yes,    46,    47,    48, right after I got back  out of the Navy.  What year did you go to the Navy?  December after I graduated high school in, what, May? Enrolled in OSU  and went to ROTC until the last of November and then dropped out and  joined the Navy on the twelfth of December,  1942 .  Where all did you serve?  26  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  All over the South Pacific. Went all the way south to Australia, came up  through New Zealand then Caledonia, been to Pearl Harbor three times,  Fiji islands, Guadalcanal. I, too, have been to Guadalcanal. (Laughs)  Marshall Islands, Florida Island. Lord, I can name every island out there.  I spent twenty-seven months out there on the same ship.  Wow. How was that?  How was it?  Yes.  A pain in the neck. (Laughter) If you were lucky, you got off once every  two weeks to go on one of the islands, loaf around for a few hours, and  that was no liberty for nobody.  Were you with pretty much the same guys the whole time, too?  Oh, yes, there on that ship. Probably around, I   m going to guess about  350 to 400 of us. It was a big ship.  What was the name of the ship?  USS Argonne, A-R-G-O-N-N-E, a repair ship.  What does that mean?  We could repair anything. We even had a six chair dental lab on there.  Really?  To take care of your teeth or make your false teeth or whatever you  wanted. I don   t have any idea how many welders. I would guess there  were no less than two dozen welders aboard that ship, always welding  something, someplace. Repaired all the other ships, anything that was  wrong with them, they   d come alongside, tie up alongside. We   d repair  them.  So you visited the different islands where troops were stationed and  repaired?  No.  Who were you repairing things for?  Our own ships. They   d tow them in or run them alongside us and tie up  27  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  while we made the repairs, or they   d tow them in there with tugs. We  even repaired PT  patrol torpedo  boats, which are made entirely out of  plywood. One of our biggest repair jobs was the fact that   running  convoys out through there, they always put destroyers on each side of  the convoy, the cargo ships, the convoy. Every so often, they would  speed up ahead of the convoy and they would crisscross and take  opposite sides. Why, I never for the life of me understood, but they   d  take opposite sides. Then the convoy would pull back up in there, and  they   d run alongside diesel-electric submarines, is what the idea was, or  aircrafts, fend off aircraft attack.  You would be amazed how many times we would have two destroyers  brought in alongside our ship. One of them would have a tremendous  hole in the middle of the side of it. The other one would have half of the  bow completely torn off where they had run into each other. You  wouldn   t believe it, but it happened. All the time, it happened. (Laughs)  We could never understand how under God   s sun, they could manage to  do that. Run into each other. (Laughter) Of course, radar at that time was  very few and far between. An interesting fact about this ship, before  World War II, it sat in the harbor at San Diego, and it was Admiral  Nimitz   s flagship. Painted white, wood decks on it, brass, shined brass,  telephone cables under the water, out of the ship. Boy, it must have been  something. But anyhow, when I went aboard, all the wood decks had  been torn out. I joined it at Noumea,  Caledonia  after we came north out  of Australia and New Zealand.  And did you want to be in the Navy or were you just assigned?  Oh, yes. No, no, I joined the Navy. I thought I   d either have a warm  place to sleep and three square meals of food a day, rather than having to  dig a fox hole and sleep out there in the mud and eat out of a tin can. Or  if they sunk the ship, I wouldn   t have anything. Take your choice. All or  nothing at all. (Laughs)  Have you kept in touch with many people on your ship?  Not a one. I saw one once or twice over at Tulsa that I knew on there,  but other than that, not a one, no. Now, if you   re interested, I have a  complete chronological history of all that in there if you   d be interested  in reading it.  Oh, wow. That   s great.  Let   s see, I gave you one on the life story all the way through Oklahoma  City up until the time we went to Leflore.  28  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Yes.  There   s about five years there that I haven   t written about. Now, I   m  writing one in there right now from 1939 when we came to Stillwater  through about the first of    43, when I joined the Navy. Then I have one  in there for the better than three years in the Navy. So there   s my life  story.  Well, let   s go back to Stillwater a little. Tell me some more things you  remember about Stillwater whenever you moved here.  From    39 to   41? A lot of little things. As an example, the intersection of  Virginia   well, in the first place, at that time the size of Stillwater was  one mile from north to south and one and one-half mile from east to  west. That was how big Stillwater was. You went from Fourteenth to  Miller, was the north city limits. Perkins Road to Walnut were the east  and west city limits, a mile and a half wide. At the intersection of Miller  and Virginia   Miller turns into Virginia before you get to Perkins Road.  At the intersection of Virginia and Perkins Road (Virginia runs on the  south side of Wal-Mart) there   s a big deep hole right there on the  northeast corner of that intersection. Did you ever notice that?  Yes.  All right, that   s only about one-third as big as it used to be. They built  the businesses on north and filled in a lot of it, and then they built the  Wal-Mart parking lot and filled in a whole lot of the east end of it. But  that was a big pond in there named Creech   s. The C-R-E-E-C-H-S were  the people   s name that owned the land. So it was known as Creech   s  pond. At one time, that was the fresh water supply for the city of  Stillwater. Of course, there   s very few people around here that  remember that.  So was it the fresh water supply when you moved here?  No, that was before I moved here. Boomer Dam was already built, and  we had Boomer Lake when I moved here.  Had you been to Stillwater before you moved here?  No, never been here.  What did you think about it? What were your first impressions?  I thought it was great. I still do, still think it   s great.  29  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Did it feel like a university town at that time?  I had no idea what a university town should feel like. (Laughter) Where  I lived out in the mountains, I had no idea. Another oddity, I told you  about my dad working in one drugstore and I worked across the street in  another. At that time, there were five drugstores on the west side of  Main Street from Seventh to one-half block south of Eighth. In one and  a half blocks, there were five drugstores.  Wow, and were they all always busy?  Yes, always did business. There was Kennecut, D and V, Tiger Drug,  Central Drug, and Rexall Drug.  And your father worked as a pharmacist in Stillwater?  Oh, yes. That   s where he worked at Kennecut Drug while Mom went  and enrolled in school.  How long did he work in the Kennecut Drugstore?  Oh, my gosh. He and I went to Braggs, Oklahoma, and opened an old  shut down drugstore over there because of Camp Gruber. They opened  up Camp Gruber. We went over there and opened that drugstore for Van  Horn, who was one of the owners of D and V in   let me think. It had to  be in part of    42 because I went in the Navy in December, yes.  So did your parents move to Braggs, then?  Yes, eventually. Yes, they moved to Braggs from here.  What did you think about the university once you started attending?  Oh, after I started attending?  Yes.  After I came back from the Navy? It was all right. It was fine. I never  was an adept student. I didn   t care for it, really.  Would you attend any sporting events?  Once in a while I would go to a football game, but not very often. My  favorite sport was to go to the wrestling matches, one man against the  other one. You   re either good or you get beat. (Laughter)  30  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  So when you returned to A M, were there a lot of vets that had returned  that were going to school?  Oh, my gosh, yes. Yes, the G.I. Bill was in full swing.  Did you live in Vet Village?  No, I lived down on the corner of Sixth and Knoblock.  Just in a house, or was it a boarding house?  Basement of a home down there. There was two, four, six of us lived  down in that basement. Two to a room and three rooms and a bathroom,  that   s all that was down there.  Do you remember buildings that you had classes in?  Oh, yes. Old Williams, the old library building, I even had one in Old  Central. Gunderson Hall, Engineering building   it was here then. Oh,  they built the Life Science building. Where was that, right west of  engineering, the library?  Yes.  Yes, I had one class in there.  Did you have any places on campus that you would hang out?  No, never did.  What about off campus? Where would you go just to socialize?  To Perry.  Oh. (Laughter)  I had my own car, and I   d take those halihoots I lived with. We   d get out  of town if we wanted to go drink a beer or shoot the bull or whatever.  We   d just get clear out of here, didn   t want anything to do with it.  Did you feel much of a disconnect because you were a little bit older and  had been in the war for a few years?  Well, yes, but everybody that lived down there where I was, was also a  veteran. There was a lot of veterans here, then.  31  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  When did you meet your wife?  Had to be about the latter part of 1948.  How   d you meet her?  Out cruising around, three or four of us in the car. We were always  picking up some of the girls, and we   d take them for a ride and take  them back home or wherever they wanted to go. It didn   t make any  difference, just friends. She was in one of the groups of two or three that  we   d pick up. They   d be walking down the street or something. They  might be walking to or from Crystal Plunge, the swimming pool. Did  you know there was a place called Crystal Plunge?  I   ve heard of it.  It was on the south side of Sixth Street and the big mill elevator there. A  very nice, privately owned swimming pool.  So would that cost a little bit to go swimming there if it was private?  Yes. I believe it cost fifteen cents, if I   m not mistaken. Things were  terribly high.  I   ll be honest, other than expanding a little bit,  Stillwater  wasn   t much  different then  when I returned after the war  than it was in    41,    42.  Things were about the same, a few new buildings.  How many theaters were there in town?  In    42, there was one, two, three   there were four movie theaters. And  then in about    46 or    47, after the war, the Leachman Theater was built  on the northwest corner of Fifth and Main. That was about the same time  that drive-in theaters began to become popular. There were two or three  of them around town.  Did you go to those very often?  After Wanda and I were married, we went occasionally and took our  children. That was several years later.  Where did you buy groceries at that time in Stillwater?  At Safeway, usually. Safeway was located east of Husband and north of  Sixth, a red brick building in there that is now I understand part of the  telephone office. That used to be the Safeway grocery store. Now, you  32  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  asked earlier something about when did I meet my wife, Wanda. It had  to be in late    47 or early    48. Like I told you, there   d be a group of boys  and girls around and somebody would say,    Well, I   m going to see a  movie tomorrow night at such and such place, would you care to go  along?    That was asking for a date, I guess, because that   s about all that  was ever said. If they wanted to go along, fine, but if they didn   t, why, it  didn   t make a bit of difference. (Laughter) That   s the way you offered  back in those days.  How much did it cost to go to the show?  I believe, after the war there, in    46,    47, and    48, along in there, I  believe it was a quarter. Prior to that, in    39 up to    43, it was ten cents.  Wow. That   s a big     Of course, you   ve got to remember, at that time, you could buy that big  of a hamburger for a nickel.  How much was a gallon of gas?  Twelve cents.  And that   s in    41 or after the war?  No, wait, I take it back. In    41, it had gone up to about eighteen cents.  Yes, it was twelve a few years before that down in Leflore.  Did you go out to eat very often in Stillwater in the    40s?  No, I never had time to go do anything when I was in high school. I  spent every night and weekend working at the drugstore. After I came  back from the Navy, we would go out to eat practically every meal, then,  because we had no other way of eating.  What were some places you would go out to eat?  Myatt   s Eatery, next door to the Aggie Theater on Main Street, Smith   s  Caf   on the west side of Main Street, about two doors south of Sixth,  Aggie Barbecue at Sixth and Washington, Bishop   s Drive-In in    42. And  then in    46 and    48, that was Cliff   s Drive-In, at Fourteenth and Main.  And Huntsberry   s at Sixth and Main, which was an old railroad car that  had about eight stools at the counter and room for two little tables over  against the wall with two chairs at each table. That was the place that  sold nice big hamburgers, six for a quarter back in    42. But nobody had  a quarter. (Laughs) At that time, one of the favorite things for the people  33  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  to do would be to walk down Main and Ninth Streets to the train depot.  At that time, Main and Ninth were both paved with bricks. They were  brick streets. And you   d walk all the way down the railroad tracks to the  depot and wait for the trains to come in, see who got off, if it was  anybody you knew. But more important was to see who in town was rich  enough to be able to buy a ticket to leave. (Laughs)  Did you ever ride the train out to Yost Lake?  Not to Yost, no. I   ve been to Yost, went to Yost a lot of times. Drove out  there after the war. But do you know why Yost Lake was built?  Why?  That was a watering station for the train. On the east side of the dam at  Yost Lake, there used to be a big wooden water tower. That   s where the  train would stop and refill their water tanker for the old steam  locomotive. That   s why the railroad built the dam and formed Yost  Lake. That   s why it was there.  So when did people actually start having homes out there?  Long before I came here in    39. I don   t know how long. No, there are  some homes that have been out there for a long, long time. Oh, that was  the thing. Good Lord, if you were rich enough to have a home at Yost  Lake, you were the upper echelon  Now, that   s all there was to it.  (Laughter)  Where was your high school graduation ceremony held?  In the Oklahoma A M Auditorium which was where the Seretean  Center is now. North of old Williams Hall, which has also demolished.  And where was the high school?  The high school was the two-story, red brick building between Duck and  Duncan and attached to the north side of our present library, north of  Twelfth Street.  Do you remember how many people were in your graduating class,  approximately?  Seemed like there were around one hundred fifty, big class, yes.  Compared with what I had down there at Leflore, there were twelve.  (Laughter) Twelve in my junior class. I never did really get to get  acquainted with the fellow students here in Stillwater because as soon as  34  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  I got out of my classes in the afternoon, I got on my bicycle and rode  down to D and V drug and went to work. And you didn   t get out of there  until about one o   clock in the morning. The store closed at twelve, but  you had all the cleaning up to do and everything else, so it was usually  one o   clock when you got out.  Why would they be open until twelve? That seems pretty late.  They just did. I don   t know. Across the street at Katz was where the high  school dances were all held, up on the second floor of Katz Department  Store. D and V drug just got to be a regular high school hangout, so we  were always busy with students in and out of there. Some of us, when  we   d close and get out of our stores and close up at about one o   clock in  the morning, we   d ride our bicycles half a block down the street over on  the east side to the Camera Theater. Freddy, the projectionist over there,  would always leave a door unlocked and the popcorn machine was  sitting down in the lobby. So we   d take a big cardboard box, ride down  there at one o   clock in the morning, go inside and scoop all the leftover  popcorn out of the machine into that cardboard box and take it up to the  courthouse lawn and sit up there and eat popcorn until two o   clock. Sure  was a booger to get up and go to school the next day.  I bet  (Laughter) And were those other high school boys that were  working with you at the drugstore?  One of them was. One of them worked at Central  Drug  and one of  them worked at Tiger Drug right down the street from me. We   d have  one of our friends stop by and tell them whether or not we were going to  go get popcorn, and we   d all meet down there. Sometimes I honestly  think that Freddy would pop up a new batch of corn and leave it there in  that machine for us. I really do. (Laughter)  Would you ever go out to Lake Carl Blackwell?  No, because you couldn   t get past Stillwater Creek Bridge to go to Lake  Carl Blackwell. From Walnut to the Stillwater Creek Bridge was a  gravel road, but on the other side of that bridge it was good old red clay.  When it was wet, it was so dad gum slick. You could hardly walk on it,  much less drive. All that bottom out through by Country Club and Range  Road, on out through there, that was just red clay road bed. Slick as it  could be. Then after it dried, the cars that had gone out through there  would leave ruts so deep, and they   d drive so hard in that red clay that  it   d tear your car up if you tried to drive out through there. So I went out  to Blackwell only one time prior to going in the Navy in    42. People just  couldn   t get out there.  35  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  What kind of car did you have when you got back from the Navy?  I bought a 1946 Dodge, four-door Dodge.  When your mom was going to school at the same time you were and a  little bit before, did she associate with other students?  I doubt it. I don   t know. I never did    Yes, I know she did because she  had two or three longtime friends that were going to school up here  when she did. I don   t remember who they were. She did her practice  teaching up here at Morrison.  Then she became a history teacher in Braggs when your father moved  there?  Yes, and then from there, they went back to Fort Smith, Arkansas. She  taught there in the high school.  Did you have a little sister along the way?  Yes, she was born in 1932.  What was her name?  D-E-W-E-N-A, Dewena. However, that was later. They made a mistake  on her birth certificate, and they spelled it D-E-W-I-N-A. So she had to  go back to court and have her name changed. (Laughs)  And did she live in Stillwater?  Yes, she was with the parents all the time, yes. Then Wanda and I got  married March of 1949.  Was she  Wanda  going to A M?  No, she was working down there on the northeast corner of Sixth and  Main at the, I believe they called it an AAA Office. It was a federal  office like your land management and crop insurance and all that type of  thing.  Where had she grown up?  In Ripley. Graduated Ripley High School 1942.  Were you all married in Stillwater?  36  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  No, no, we drove to Bentonville, Arkansas to get married.  Well, do you have any more stories about Stillwater in the 1940s before  we move onto your career beginning in 1950? Okay, well, thanks for  talking to me about all this.  All right.  And we   ll talk again soon.  Okay.  ------- End of May 2, 2011 interview -------  Today is September 6, 2011. My name is Latasha Wilson, and this is the  second interview with Bill Maddux here in his home in Stillwater for the  Oklahoma Oral History Research Program. Bill served with the  Stillwater Fire Department from October 31, 1950 to October 31, 1971,  exactly twenty-one years, and was fire chief for eight of those years.  Today, we   re going to talk more about this time period and some  changes that occurred during this time. Bill, thank you for having me  back.  Thank you for the interview.  In the last interview we learned that after graduating high school, you  joined the Navy in 1942 and served until 1946. Can we start out today  with talking about what you did when you returned from the Navy?  After I got out of the Navy, I returned to my parents    home in Fort  Smith, Arkansas, for about one year. Then I came back to Stillwater and  enrolled in Oklahoma A M College. Spent one year in the School of  Architecture, then transferred to the School of Forestry for two years, up  until    I got married in 1949, so it had to be about the time I joined the  Stillwater Fire Department in 1950.  And last time we talked about your mother had attended Oklahoma  A M.  Yes.  Was that your inspiration or what made you want to come to school  here?  It was. She was attending Oklahoma A M the same year that I  graduated from Stillwater High School, 1942. After graduation, I went to  37  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  summer school out here. The ROTC got me interested in being in the  service, and then the rest of that year I completed some classes out here  at A M before I joined the Navy.  So when you came back, did you have the G.I. Bill?  Yes, yes. Sure did. Hundreds of us were here under the G.I. Bill.  So it was a lot different when you returned than before you went?  Oh, much different, much different. As an example, out there across the  street, north of where the Colvin Center is now and on west of there, that  was some old Army barracks they moved in. That   s where a lot of the  veterans and their families lived. And then on west of that, there was a  large area down there of twelve-by-twelve Army tents. It was a regular  little town down there of Army tents where these veterans and their  families lived while they were going to school.  Did you have classes in Quonset huts?  Several of them were, yes. The School of Architecture at that time was  all   Gunderson Hall was the School of Architecture.  Do you remember any other buildings in particular that you had classes  in?  Oh, yes, I had a lot of classes in Williams Hall, my English classes, right  behind the campus fire station. Williams Hall was torn down years later.  When I graduated from high school, the graduation exercises were in the  first building north of Williams Hall, which at that time was called the  College Auditorium. It   s been replaced with the Seretean Center. Let me  think   there were several of them I can   t remember. Some of them were  over even on the third floor of Whitehurst Hall. And then the original  engineering building, a lot of math and engineering classes were in that  building.  Did you have classes in Old Central?  I had one English class in Old Central, yes.  Last time we were talking, you mentioned something about the brick at  Old Central? Who designed that?  At Sixth and Jardot, they just tore down the big house that set back off  the street on the northeast corner. That was the old Jardot home place.  That   s where the father of all the Jardot sons had lived, up and down that  38  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddox  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  street. And at one time, over here on the southeast corner of Twelfth and  Western was a low area in there and that was the Jardot brick kiln area.  That   s where they made their bricks. The Old Central building is built  with Jardot bricks.  And were they one of the main brick distributors around?  Yes, they really were. I think he had either four or five sons and every  one of them were brick and rock masons.  Back to campus, you said that you were in forestry for two years.  Yes.  Where did you have your forestry classes?  Most of them were either in Engineering or on the third floor of  Whitehurst.  And around this time, did you meet your wife?  I met her in    47, I guess. We got married in March of    49. That   s about  the time the School of Forestry   well, in fact, that summer, I   d say May  of that same year, we went to a forestry summer camp in South Dakota.  Up there, we had a lot of experience helping the forest rangers and forest  service fight forest fires. And I believe that   s really what got me  interested in the fire service.  So did you come back and decide to pursue a career as a fire fighter or  what was the process there?  Well, I taught those professors everything I knew, so I left to join the  fire department. (Laughter)  Did you just walk into the fire station one day or how did it work out?  I had a neighbor who was a firefighter, and he said they had an opening  and wanted to know why I didn   t come down and join them. And I flat  told him no at that time. But the more I got to thinking about it, the more  interested I became. So I finally went down and talked to Everett  Hudiburg, who at that time was the fire chief. Everett did his best to talk  me out of joining the fire department, continue my college education,  but I was ready to change and do something else. So I decided, with his  permission, I   d like to join the department.  So you officially started on October 31, 1950?  39  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  That   s right, at six p.m. At that time, we ran two twenty-four-hour shifts.  You worked twenty-four hours and you were off twenty-four hours. And  I don   t care   that day, that twenty-four you were off, was great, but the  twenty-four you were on, I don   t care if it was Christmas, your wife was  having a baby or what, you were on duty at the fire station. It might be  that you could talk somebody into taking your place or hire them to  come and stand by for you for a while, but that was your job and you  were expected to be there.  Do you recall how many firefighters there were in Stillwater at the time  you started?  Twelve firefighters and one chief.  And how many stations?  Two. Had a downtown station at Ninth and Lewis and then the campus  station.  Which is at University and Knoblock?  That   s it, yes. That   s number two fire station.  So did you work at both stations and switch out?  Oh, yes. That   s where I went to work originally, was at the campus  station. And I was up there until I made captain. And I don   t remember  the date on that, but anyhow, then they transferred me downtown to the  central station.  What was your training starting out like?  Well, the fire service in Oklahoma has what they call the ten red books.  They   re written and published here at OSU, and they   re used worldwide  for training firefighters. So going through those ten units of training take  about oh, I   d say at least three years to complete those ten units. So  basically, that   s what my training was.  And they still use those?  Still use them today, yes. Only they   ve added   oh Lord, they   ve  probably added six times that many books to it now. Aircraft training,  Naval   all types of training other than just ground firefighting.  Had many of the men that you served with in the fire department studied  40  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  fire protection in college?  Let me think. Yes, yes, there was about   out of the thirteen, I   d say at  least four had, out of our original thirteen.  And did they have a fire protection program at OSU at that time?  Oh, yes. Yes, sure did. Chief Ray Pence started that way back in, I  believe it was the late    30s when he started that. He helped start that  School of Fire Protection.  So were there any people involved in the fire department that were still  students?  Oh, we had about fifteen student firefighters that lived in the two  stations combined. If they were in the station from classes, they were  expected to help us to fight fires. Otherwise, if they heard the sirens,  they usually came running anyhow. Hard to keep them away. (Laughter)  So did they have pretty much the same duties? They just didn   t have to  be there on a twenty-four-hour shift?  No, no, they had their own duties taking care of the living quarters on  the second floor of the two fire stations. They took care of that and once  in a while they   d come down and volunteer to help us with our duties as  firefighters, cleaning the trucks and changing the fire hose and all that  type of thing.  Did they get free room and board there at the fire station?  They got free room. Their board was in a dining hall on the second floor  of the campus fire station. And they had very good food at a very  economical price. But they   re the only ones that ate there. Hired their  own cook, bought their own food, and really had good food service.  Were many of your co-firefighters veterans?  Let me think. Let me think. I can only think of about four that weren   t.  Yes, nearly all of them had been in the service and then come back and  been reinstated on the fire service.  I was wondering how the fire service suffered during the war years.  Well, at the Sheerar Center, you can find out a lot about that. At one  time, Chief Pence even had a brigade of all women, all female  firefighters. There   s a picture of them posed on a ladder down there in  41  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  the Sheerar Center. If you get a chance, you might look at it. It   s quite  interesting. When I retired from the fire service, I went to work with a  national sales manager for an ambulance corporation and traveled all  over this United States. But in Ohio, I ran into two what they call  bedroom cities because the people work in the   we   ll say Cleveland and  Cincinnati, the big city, but they go in   that   d be like people in  Stillwater all go down to Perkins to live, but they worked up here, so  they call that the bedroom city. In the daytime, in two of these little  towns, there were very few men left who would be capable of fighting  fire. They had total volunteer female fire departments. And let me tell  you, there was some of those lady firefighters that would put we men to  shame. They were really good.  I wonder if many of them continued in fire service after the men  returned.  I don   t have any idea. But I   m sure that   s what took place here in  Stillwater. During the war, they had these ladies that Chief Pence trained  to fill in with the few men that were left here on the department. And  evidently, from what I hear, they did one fine job.  Do you remember what your starting salary was?  Yes, my first paycheck was  150 a month. If you were a good little boy,  and you lasted six months and went off probation, you got a ten-dollar-a-month  raise.  Pretty good money.  Oh, yes. Yes. In this day and age, that would fully qualify you for food  stamps. (Laughter)  Well, what were the fire trucks like when you first started?  Usually   one of them we had was a    39,   40 model Dodge truck that had  been converted into a fire truck, usually by the members of the fire  department themselves. Bought a fire pump tank, made a hose bed,  welded the pieces together and made a hose bed, and everything else we  needed on there to operate as a piece of fire apparatus, particularly the  one that we used out in the rural areas. Now, here in town at that time,  we had three new American LaFrances. We had a new eighty-five-foot  aerial truck and two new 1,000 gallon pumpers, one at each station. So  the Stillwater Fire Department had just really become updated as far as  apparatus was concerned. You   d have to look at some of the old pictures  that are on display down there of some of the equipment they had before  that. They had wooden ladders. They had one ladder truck that was  42  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  spring-loaded. You released the latch on there, and the ladder would  spring up into the air, and then you could crank it out to extend it. It was  amazing.  Did everyone contribute in every way or did certain people have certain  duties? Like, did everyone drive the trucks?  No, no, we had certain men assigned as drivers. When I first went to  work, within a week I was driving the rural truck. Any fires outside of  the city limits, I responded to them with a rural fire truck.  How far would you go around Stillwater?  I can remember going as far down as Langston, up almost to Ponca City.  We covered quite a wide area, really, with that one truck. Of course,  usually, we had a mutual aide in effect. Like, if I went up on the  reservation, up here on this side of Ponca City, they would have a rural  truck that would be down there, and we   d work together. Clear down to  Langston and Coyle. Coyle had a truck. Langston didn   t have anything  at that time. I don   t know whether they do now or not. I don   t think they  do. I think Guthrie and Coyle cover Langston, Perkins, way on the south  of Perkins, as far as farmland is concerned. Ripley. Ripley had one little  brush rig, we called it at that time. It really wasn   t any good to use out in  the rural area. It would   ve been an in-town pumper only. Fire equipment  at that time was about as scarce as hen   s teeth. You just didn   t find any.  On the rural trips, how would you access water?  We had big suction hoses on the truck. We would drive down to a pond  and lay this big six-inch pipe or a hose, connect it together, extend it out  into the pond, and put a floating strainer on there, so we didn   t pick up  trash or run over our pump, and then pick up the water out of there and  pump it through the hose up to the fire if we were close enough. If we  weren   t, we   d pump it out of there and put it into our storage tank, then  unhook the big hose in the pond and drive back up to the fire and fight  fire with it. Back and forth. If you were close enough to the city, we   d  run into town to the nearest fire hydrant, fill up our tank, and go back out  and fight fire. I   ve done that many times.  And that was from a cistern, the water in town?  No, that was from regular fire hydrants.  Okay.  Yes, we had regular fire hydrants and water lines in 1950.  43  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  So the process of putting the hose in a pond, how long would that take to  pump enough water?  It probably would take it at least fifteen minutes. And that   s about three  men, working as hard and as fast as they could, putting the different  pieces together. And three minutes with a house burning down is a long,  long time. It seemed like forever. (Laughs) And to the people that owned  the house standing out there watching it, I   m sure it seemed three times  that long.  Well, so the fire trucks have changed over time.  Oh, the ones they have today, I would have never even dreamed of such  apparatuses, what they have today. Of course, today, they   re under a  new set of federal regulations. At that time, we had a big, what they  called the tailboard on the backend of the truck. Two to four men would  stand on that tailboard and hang on to a handrail and ride to the fire.  Under the new federal regulations, you   re not allowed to do that.  Everybody has to ride inside of the cab. That   s why these new ones have  great big five-man cabs on them. They have a driver and a co-pilot, as  we called them. Plus, three people can ride in the seat behind them. Not  only that, at that time, if I wanted to grab a hose and go ahead and fight  fire by myself that was my privilege. Nobody was going to stop me.  Under the new regulations today, you can   t begin to do that. It takes a  minimum of two men. You must always have a backup with you. And in  most cases, you have to have three to operate one fire hose. So the new  federal regulations have really changed the operation and the man power  of the fire service.  Do you know about how many people serve in Stillwater in fire service  these days?  Well, in Stillwater, as I understand, right now there are seventy-two.  When I retired as fire chief, if I   m not mistaken, I had thirty-four.  So from thirteen to thirty-four to seventy-two?  Seventy-two, yes.  Quite an increase. Do you think it will continue to increase?  Oh, it   ll have to. As the city grows, they have to, yes. They gained a  little more help here when they took the ambulance service away and put  it in a separate operation. They   re now running three men on a pumper  instead of two. So that helped a little bit as far as manpower is  44  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  concerned. Of course, that gives you a false picture because they were  running three usually, before, unless the third one was out on an  ambulance call. So that   s why you can   t say they always had three  because there wasn   t always three available.  How have uniforms changed?  Well, at that time, you bought your own uniform down at Katz  Department Store. It was what we called a    set of grays.    It could be a  long sleeve or short sleeve gray shirt and gray slacks or whatever you  want to call them. More like jeans, really. Nowadays, nearly all of them  have a black   I can   t remember the name of the material   anyhow, it   s  a fire-retardant material, and all of them are black.  And what about helmets and masks and stuff?  Helmets really haven   t changed that much. They have a little bit. They  have a dropdown face shield on most of them now, clear Plexiglas face  shield. They still use the breathing apparatus that we used called a Scott  Air-Pak, fresh air breathing apparatus. The fire hose and a lot of the  other equipment have drastically changed. Used to, we used a cotton  jacket fire hose that had to be washed and scrubbed and cleaned every  time you used it. This new fire hose is a   well, it seems kind of like a  rubber coating on there, and you can load it back on the truck wet. It  won   t hurt it. It doesn   t do any damage. It was quite interesting the  specific way that you had to load a fire hose on so that when the  tailboard man grabbed the hose and ran over here and hooked it to the  fire hydrant, you drove off going to the fire laying the hose. If you didn   t  have those couplings turned the right direction, they couldn   t turn in the  bed. Therefore, you   d either pull a coupling in two, or the hose, or you   d  tear something up. So it had to be loaded in there in a certain manner to  feed out the back of the truck while you were driving down the street.  Did that get messed up very often?  Oh, no. No, no, no, no. I never saw it messed up one time. No, it was  very specific the way you had to load this fire hose.  When were you appointed fire chief?  The same day that President Kennedy was shot.  November 22, 1963.   Did you know that that was coming? Were you expecting to be  promoted?  No, I really wasn   t. I hesitate to get into the story about that, but  45  anyhow, on a, I believe it was a  Friday  afternoon, they called a special  City Council Commissioners   or they were then   meeting because the  Stillwater Fire Department was really in a great turmoil. We had had a  gentleman appointed fire chief for about three months that for some  reason he couldn   t get along with any of the firemen. I don   t think you  could find more than two firemen in the entire department that had a  good word to say about him. They all signed a petition and sent it to the  mayor stating that if something wasn   t done within thirty days, they  were all going to resign. That   s how bad it really was. It   s hard to  believe that a group of men would be willing to give up their lifelong  pension because of something like that, but they were. Some of them  had fifteen, sixteen years in. You could retire at twenty. They were  willing to just throw that away because they couldn   t take it anymore.  But anyhow, they called this special meeting, and I was down at the  headquarters fire station. And the mayor and a representative from the  NewsPress came through the side door of the station and called my  name. I went around there and they said,    We need to see you up in City  Hall right now.    Well, off to City Hall we go. There is the entire City  Commission, the city manager, the city attorney, and two representatives  from the NewsPress sitting there waiting for me. They wanted to know if  what that petition said really meant that. I said,    Yes, sir, it sure does. I  can guarantee you those men mean exactly what they wrote on there,  and they all signed it. If something isn   t done, you can kiss them  goodbye. I guarantee you that.    Well, then, of course, the next question,  would I be willing to accept the position of fire chief. Right out of the  blue. (Laughter) I told them I suppose so, but there   d have to be a couple  or three changes made. I don   t remember now exactly what they were,  but some things that the men were really very upset about.  One thing was, the big argument on the fire department was that the man  who had been appointed fire chief was an assistant chief, and we had  another assistant chief up at the other station, the campus station. He was  on the side of the men and, of course, the chief was on the side by  himself. The deal was that I would fire both of them. I told them I  couldn   t do that. Both of them had like eighteen-something years in  before retirement. You   re not about to get me to do that. That   s not fair  because at that time, had you left the Stillwater fire department, there   s  not another department in the state that would hire you on because in  two years, you could retire, and they   d have to pay your full pension out  of their pension fund, just like you   d worked there twenty years. So they  wouldn   t hire you. In other words, you just kissed your pension  goodbye. So I told them I couldn   t do that.  Besides that, each of those men were the best drill instructors that I had.  And I   m serious, they really were. Both of them were very  46  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  knowledgeable and very good fire service trainers. So I said that   s why I  want two reasons there. So finally they agreed that if I could keep those  guys under control, they   d let them stay on the department. And I  guaranteed them that they   d be under control or that they could have my  neck. And I did. (Laughter) Anyhow, that   s how I got appointed fire  chief in Stillwater. I   m almost ashamed to tell it, but it was really a bad  situation.  But then things turned around.  Sure did. We turned around and everybody got to working together  again and came out of it just fine. Just fine.  How did your duties change? What were some of your new  responsibilities as fire chief?  Oh, my gosh. Anything and everything you can think of. Responsible for  the running assignments on the trucks, responsible for the working  conditions of the men, responsible for all the budget, for making up the  new budget each year, and just on and on like that. Of course, my first  big responsibility was I talked the city manager into starting to work on  this bond issue, and we finally agreed   or the City Commission agreed,  that we   d promote a bond issue for  350,000 for the fire service as long  as we would include in that bond issue the extension of the water line  from down there at Twelfth and Western all the way out to Nineteenth  Street, and west on Nineteenth Street to Sangre Road. That had to be  included in the bond issue. Well, we went to work. The firemen drove  their trucks all over this town knocking on doors, talking to people, and  it ended up that that fire bond, that bond issue, passed by a greater  majority than anything has ever passed in the city of Stillwater.  Everybody was in favor of it. So we really did a great job of advertising  and promoting it.  Is that the bond that also supplied the fire station on South Main?  That   s what it was for, was for that new fire station and new apparatus.  How much did the station itself cost? Did it completely cover that and  then allowed for the waterline extension?  Oh, yes. We had  350,000. And I   ll be honest with you, I don   t  remember what that station cost, but we got a new aerial truck and two  new 1,250 gallon-per-minute pumpers, along with the station itself, all  for that money. Then they had enough money left over to put in a new  radio system and several other things that we really needed to do. So we  had plenty of money to do what we needed to do. As far as the pipeline  47  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  is concerned, I don   t have any idea how that went. I   m sure it was all  paid for. But, I have no idea what it would have cost or anything.  So were you involved with the plans for the new station?  I practically made them up. (Laughter) I worked very close with the  architects designing it at the station down there, yes.  Did you see things on the old stations that you knew you needed on this  new one?  Oh, yes. I went around visiting stations all around the state. Tulsa,  Oklahoma City, Ardmore, Enid, oh, my gosh, all over the state to see  what good points they had that I could put into ours down here.  Were you pretty pleased with it in the end?  Oh, very much so. Yes, very much.  How long did it take to build from the time the bond passed?  About a year to complete. One of the big projects down there was filling  in. See, that was a low spot, as you can tell if you look between the  station and Husband Street back there, you can see how much dirt was  moved in there to fill that in. Then half of the north side of that building  is a basement, a nice big large basement under there.  Is that for a shelter?  Basically, that   s what it was for, yes. But it also housed our water  softener unit, and it has a circulating pump in there that keeps hot water  circulating through your water lines over to the south side of the  building to the restrooms and also there on the north side of the building  there are dual sump pumps in the basement. If water gets down in the  basement, this pump will start pumping it out, and if it gets down to the  stopping place and it fills up with some more, then this pump does it.  They   re alternating pumps, so you don   t take a chance on burning out  the sump pumps in there. It had a   let me think a minute. Golly, what  was that thing? It seemed like it was an eighty gallon hot water tank. It  was a big, big booger. (Laughter) We used a lot of hot water washing  down fire hoses and things at that time. Also, at that time, those trucks  were kept clean enough you could eat off the engine of one of them if  you wanted to. I mean, they were clean. Underneath, on top, I don   t care  where.  The new ones or all of them? All the trucks?  48  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  All that we had at that time, yes. I don   t know what they have down  there now. I have spent very little time at the fire department since I  retired from there, very little. I figure they probably didn   t want an old  fire chief nosing around their business very much, so I   ve stayed clear of  it, really.  Was the fire chief   s main office at that station after it was built?  Yes, yes. I built it. Had a nice office in there.  And that was the third station in town?  No. We tore down the old one up on Ninth and Lewis.  So then there were two still.  Yes, the city tore it down. That   s that vacant lot you see right across the  street from the post office. Right there on the corner. That was how big  that fire station was. That old station was built in 1901. The first floor  was the fire department with the horse stalls. The second floor was city  hall. And behind that, they put in the big water tower that was back  there, that is now gone. Right north of the water tower, they built a new  city jail, which is about the size of a one-car garage. (Laughter)  Sounds pretty optimistic. (Laughs)  Yes, well, as I remember the old story is that usually a man got drunk in  one of the bars in the evening, and they threw him in there all night and  let him sober up and turned him loose the next morning. So they really  didn   t need much jail room. (Laughs)  Were there any significant fires that you want to talk about during your  time?  There are only two that I remember of any significance. One of them  was the Vo Tech building over here on the southeast corner of Sixth and  Walnut. In the south building of that group over there, we had a fire in  part of that. That was right after I made fire chief.  Was the hospital there at that time?  The old hospital was at Ninth and Walnut. Yes, that was the old   see,  you   re thinking about the one on the east of it. No, that wasn   t there at  that time. The hospital was where Tiger Drug is now, on the corner of  Ninth and Walnut. That was where the hospital was.  49  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  So did this fire get that far? Did it get very close?  Oh, no, no. It didn   t get a third of the section of the Vo Tech that it was  in. We had it put out pretty quickly. Now, the only other one that I can  think of was the fraternity house on the north side of Fourth Street, about  half a block east of Walnut. Remember that? That was Tower Park right  there on that side of Walnut Street, from Fourth up to what is now  University. At that time it was College, but it   s University now. That  open spot there had a water tower in it, and it was called Tower Park.  Just on the east side of that, on the north side of Fourth Street was this  fraternity and that thing burned three times. We found out later that it  was being set by a couple of young boys playing with matches. I finally  hooked onto them, but that   s another story.  What about the lumber yard?  Donaldson   Manning?  Maybe, you   d mentioned it before when     That   s up there at McElroy and Main.  Did it have a fire when  George Robert, or G.R.  McAlpine came from  Oklahoma City?  Oh, yes. That   s the one he came up here to look at. That was   oh, Lord.  Let me think. That was way back in about    59 or    60, before I even made  captain because I drove the pumper truck out of the number two station  down there to the fire. It burned all the office area and storage building,  but we kept it from burning the lumber yard itself. We kept enough  water sprayed in between the two. It did burn the truck that was sitting  there parked between them, but it didn   t burn the lumber. Scorched the  ends of some of them, and that   s what McAlpine was talking about,  when he came up here. He never even got out of his car. His chauffer  drove him up here, and he drove all around the block, looked at it, and  went back home. He said,    You   re not supposed to be able to put out a  lumber yard fire, but Stillwater just did.    (Laughter)  And he was the fire chief in Oklahoma City?  Yes, yes. He was the one that retired and built bluebird houses. In fact,  they   re called the McAlpine Birdhouse.  But he was pretty impressed with the Stillwater crew.  50  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  He must have been. He must have been.  When did your numbers start increasing? You said when you started,  there were thirteen and when you retired, there were thirty-four. Were  you responsible for increasing that by about twenty?  Yes, yes. Well, someplace along in there, I don   t remember when   I  would say probably around    65 or    66, I was able to convince the city  that our firefighters, instead of working an eighty-four-hour week that  we should be allowed to go on a three platoon system. Work one twenty-four-  hour period and then off for forty-eight hours, which cut you down  to   what   fifty-two hours a week, I think it is. So at that time, we had  to put on a whole new shift of men, which brought us up to somewhere  around twenty-five, twenty-six men all together.  And that   s what it is still, isn   t it? Work twenty-four and off forty-eight?  Yes. Yes, the three platoon system.  I hear that you designed the Stillwater Fire Department insignia patch?  Yes, I still have the original in there, in my drawer. (Laughter)  How did that come about?  I don   t know. I just do things like that. They just decided we needed a  new uniform, dress uniform, and new insignia. Anything to update the  department and keep up the morale of the men, that   s what you had to  do, and that   s what I tried to do all the time I was there. Anything that  would boost their morale and make them feel better about their job.  So when was the insignia patch, the new one, created? While you were a  fire chief?  Yes, yes. That was probably around    64,    65. I hadn   t been there very  long. I also wrote The Rules and Regulations of the Stillwater Fire  Service that was passed and adopted by the city council. The first time  the fire department ever had a set of   had we had them to go by before I  was appointed fire chief, things would have been a lot different. There  were no rules, none whatsoever. Well, now, these new rules and  regulations, that situation would have been taken care of very quickly.  What is the 2 percent law?  To be honest with you, I don   t know. I have not been able to find out.  The first time I ran into it was in an old book I have in there, National  51  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Fireman   s Association. Their meeting that year was in Oklahoma City.  That was in 1903. That was before statehood. At that time, they were  referring to and bragging about getting it written into the state  Constitution. Mind you, this 2 percent law. But so far, I haven   t gotten  through that book far enough that anyplace in there does it explain to me  what the 2 percent law was. So if you find out something, I sure wish  you would enlighten me.  Okay, I will. (Laughs) You were president of the state association while  you were fire chief. What all did this involve?  Well, we had our regular monthly meetings to discuss various bills,  legislation that was being brought up that might affect the fire service,  and whether we should be for it or against it. A lot of times we were  against it, and we would start having meetings with our legislators in the  State Capitol and then try to explain to them why we would be against  something or why we would be for something and think it was a good  piece of legislation. So as a result, I got to know very, very many of the  state representatives and senators at that time. In fact, State  Representative Hesser lived two doors north, over here on the other side  of the street.  That was convenient. (Laughs)  Yes, I kept in pretty close touch with things down there.  Did you feel like people listened pretty well or were concerned about  how the fire department felt about legislation?  Oh, yes. Yes.  I would think so, but     Yes, they sure did, particularly when it came to a bill that had anything  whatsoever to do with our pension laws. Man, I tell you, that was a hot  subject, when you got on firefighters and policeman   s pensions. See, at  that time, in each city, there was no pension for volunteers. There was  no such thing. In fact, if they even got paid five dollars for going to a  fire, they were doing good. But when you start messing with, we   ll say  the pensions of the firefighters here in Stillwater, the entire amount of  money that came in from the insurance companies, and so forth, into the  pension fund was divided, was prorated, to each and every city say in the  state of Oklahoma. You had your own pension fund. The city clerk in  Stillwater had to keep track of the allocations on the Stillwater Fire  Service pension fund. Same way on the police as far as that   s concerned.  But then, I don   t remember when, several years later, it was all  52  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  combined into one state pension. The same way that   Wanda is a retired  school teacher, that   s how schoolteachers are now. In fact, the fund that  her pension comes out of is exactly the same fund mine comes out of.  She   s a schoolteacher, and I   m a firefighter. Police, highway patrol,  sheriff   s deputies, I don   t know who all comes out of that fund, but  there   s a whole group of them. You start messing with that, and you   ve  got a whole bunch of people walking up and down your backbone.  (Laughter)  So did you serve a one-year term as president?  You served five. Yes, you have three years as the third, second, and first  vice-president. One year as president and then one year as past president,  so you serve five years on the board. That   s why I stayed over an extra  year and worked, so I could complete my fifth year on the board, which  was completed in March of that year. Then, I believe it was the year  before, it may have been that same year, Governor Bartlett appointed me  to the State Fire Marshal Commission. So I also served on it.  Can you tell me about the history of the fire chief   s bugle?  Well, evidently, the best that I can find out, the first reference we have to  them is in England. They call it a bugle. Actually, it   s a megaphone. You  talk into it and with all the hubbub and everything of volunteer  firefighters trying to fight a fire or a bucket brigade, if you can imagine,  the only way the fire chief could make himself heard over all that noise  was using this megaphone that they called the fire chief   s bugle.  Anybody could use it, but when the fire chief was on the scene, he was  the only one allowed to use it. Some of them were made out of wood,  any type of metal they could get a hold of, copper, brass. The one that I  have down at the Sheerar Center is actually made of silver. We think it   s  German silver, but we   re not sure.  Where did you find that?  Chief Pence left that in the trophy case at the campus fire station,  number two station, and we think it was awarded to him way back in the  middle    30s by some national fire service group for all the hard work he  had done in starting the School of Fire Protection out here, among other  things. He was the leader in everything in the fire service. He was really  one strong man. He left it up there and before he passed away, he told,  then-assistant chief Everett Hudiburg that on his passing, he became the  owner or the caretaker of that silver bugle. Of course, after Chief Pence  passed away, then Hudiburg was appointed fire chief. I don   t know to  this day why he didn   t pass it on to the other fire chiefs in between us.  I   ve never figured that one out. He came bouncing into my office one  53  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  day with it under his arm and Chief Pence   s big old fire chief   s badge,  sat them up there my desk and he said,    Bill, when I leave, you   re  hereby appointed as owner and caretaker of this bugle and this badge.     He said,    You   re the first chief we   ve had since Pence that I thought  really deserved them.    Now, to me, that was a great honor, but I   ve  never figured out what the deal was there. It   s always been a mystery.  How many chiefs were there between you and Hudiburg?  Ray Davidson  who retired in 1956  and Max Perry  who retired in  1963 .  Anyhow, ever since the new station was built on South Main, we put it  down there on the display shelf, along with the rubber-covered  horseshoes and several other items down there. When we changed chiefs  here recently, I decided it was a good time to put it on display down at  the Sheerar Center, so everybody can see it.  Yes, that   s nice.  And that   s where it is today.  Are they going to hang on to it just until the exhibit is over or beyond?  I don   t know. I informed them in no uncertain terms that it was mine and  when they changed their exhibit, I expected to get it back. (Laughs)  Don   t want to turn loose of that. Now, what I   ll ever do with it, I don   t  know yet for sure what to do with it. I   ve thought of placing it out here  at OSU in the museum they have out there. It needs to be someplace like  that where people can   they don   t even know such a thing exists. Now,  that bugle, you   ll notice all the buttons on the uniforms of firefighters  and all their badges. One bugle is a lieutenant, two bugles is a captain,  three assistant chief, five is the chief. He   s the five bugle guy,  crisscrossed five bugles. But all the main insignia on the fire service are  bugles. Why they call them that, I don   t know. They   re not a bugle.  So have you ever heard one used?  No. Never have. (Laughter) Spoken through it several times just to see  what it sounded like. It   s just a megaphone is all it is.  Is there anything else interesting at the Sheerar Center right now that  we should talk about? Anything else like that?  One of the main subjects displayed down there is the transferring of the  ambulance service, from a private service into the fire department.  54  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  And that happened while you were fire chief?  Yes. Like I told you a while ago, I was at the State Firefighter   s  Convention in Muskogee when that happened. Let me think. Go on back  to    70. That had to be in early    69. Is that what I told you a while ago?  Yes.  That   s what it had to be, early    69. In fact, when the city manager called  me, it had to be in March of    69 because that   s when we always had our  convention.  What convention was that?  Oklahoma State Firefighters Parade and Convention, we were in the  parade that day.  So had this been brewing for a while? Did you know that people were  thinking about it?  Yes, but not necessarily that we were going to have to take it over. What  happened, a very short time before this   I want to say two weeks,  something like that   the individual who had been operating a carryall,  an ambulance   let me backtrack. Up until that time Strode Funeral  Home ran an ambulance service with one of their cars until this  individual said he would take over the ambulance service. Of course, he  thought he could make a living out of what he could charge for the calls.  Evidently, he found out   well, Strode had to get out because they were  booking private enterprise with him. He found out he couldn   t make a  living at it, so one night at the Monday night commission meeting, he  walked in and slammed the car keys and one or two other things on the  table in front of the mayor and said,    Here, it   s all yours. I quit,    and  turned around and walked out the door. He left his carryall parked out in  front of city hall. That   s what we were given. It operated as the  ambulance in the city of Stillwater, an actual carryall. It rides like a  Springfield wagon. (Laughs)  So how long did you go with just that?  Lord, I   d say for at least six months. I don   t remember when we got our  first unit.  Were firefighters trained as EMTs  Emergency Medical Technicians   yet, at that point?  55  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  No, no. We had all of our first aid courses. We had taken all of our ten  unit courses at the university and one of the last one of them was first  aid. But that was all we had in it. Nothing at all like they have today in  the way of EMT training. I fought long and hard with the city, gaining  access to EMT training for those men. Just kind of like I told the mayor  one day. He said,    We can   t afford that, Bill.    I said,    Now, look, if I   m  with the ambulance driver, and we come out to your house, and you just  had a heart attack, and we   re supposed to know what to do to save your  life until we can get you to the hospital to a doctor, and all we know to  do is what you   re doing right now       It was what they called a scoop  and shoot method. We scoop you up off the street and shoot to the  hospital as fast as we can get there. Called scoop and shoot.    And that   s  all we can do for you and you die on the way, I   m going to feel very,  very, very bad about that.        Now, if we can get this training, and we can promote this training, as  time goes on, then we will know what to do to possibly save your life  before we ever even load you into that ambulance. Then we   ll have a  better idea how to care for you while we   re taking you to the doctor at  the hospital. Now, that   s why we need the training. It   s not fair to the  people in the city of Stillwater to run an ambulance under the conditions  that we   re having to run them right now because all we know to do is to  scoop you up on a cot and drive as fast as we can get away with going to  the hospital. That   s all we can do for you. No intervenes, no medicines,  no nothing. No nothing. We   re not allowed to do anything like that.  We   re not trained to do anything like that. So it   s up to you and the  people of Stillwater, how much service do you want and are you willing  to pay for it. It   s that simple.     How long did they have to think about it?  Not very long. Larry Hansen was mayor at that time. He was a promoter.  He was one fine gentleman and an expert promoter. He didn   t spend a  lot of time convincing the city manager and the city commissioners that  some things needed to be changed. So we started getting some outside  training coming in. And I   ve always been real proud of those men down  there. They have continued their training, oh boy  They even have some  down there now that can do anything a doctor can do. There are three of  them. Yes, they   re qualified and registered to do anything for you that a  doctor can do. Well, I say anything   anything short of a surgery. They  can   t do surgery, but they can do anything else.  Did you increase the number of men once the ambulance service came?  Yes, it seemed like we had to increase six men. Yes, we had to increase  the number to six. We put one additional man on each shift, which  56  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  would be three men per station, for six additional men. We ran an  ambulance out of each station.  Did you work with the hospital much in communication?  Yes, quite a bit. Quite a bit, yes. In fact, in the later years, we even had  some of the firemen would spend their off-duty hours, mind you, on  their own time, out there around the emergency room or helping out  around the hospital just to gain some more training and information.  They   re a dedicated bunch, don   t kid yourself, they really are. They   re  dedicated to their work. It   s amazing what they   ll give up in their own  time and money to accomplish what they think needs to be done.  And we don   t have to go into details, but here recently, the ambulance  service has transferred hands and is no longer run by firefighters in  Stillwater.  This is true, but you would be surprised   see, even now, when the  ambulance goes out, if it   s called for, the fire department has to send out  one of their top medical people. They   re still making runs in conjunction  with the ambulance service. People don   t understand that, but they are.  Thankfully.  Hopefully, because some of the reports I hear, they   re really not  extremely satisfied with the service they   re getting right now   not only  in response time, but in the ability of the people to take care of the  patient when they get there. I don   t know. This is all hearsay. I know  four weeks ago, I had my heart attack sitting right here at the house. My  wife was gone to the grocery store. When she came home a few minutes  later, she was going to call 911. I said,    No, you   re going to help me get  right out there in that car, and we   re going to run these seven blocks to  the hospital because we could be there before the ambulance will even  get out here to our house.    So that   s what we did. I didn   t bother to call  an ambulance. I   m kind of hard headed. (Laughter) But we made it.  Are there any other people that you worked with closely while you were  in the Stillwater Fire Department that you   d like to mention?  You mean in the fire service?  Yes.  Oh, my good Lord, girl, hundreds of them. I wouldn   t even know where  to begin.  57  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Who took over as fire chief when you retired?  A gentleman named Frank Smith. He still lives out here south of town,  at this time. Then after his time was up, I think City Manager Gates  brought in some guy from back north or east, someplace back in there by  the name of Miller. I don   t know anything about him at all. Then after he  was gone, we had a Jim Smith, James Smith. I hired him on the  department when I was chief.  When did you retire?  Halloween night, 1971.  Had you been planning to retire for a while? You said you worked an  extra year.  Yes, I   d planned all that year because I was in touch with this ambulance  corporation out of Dallas, Texas, and I went to work for them as a  national sales manager.  Was that pretty immediately after October 31? Did you start in the next  few days?  Yes. Next few weeks. I think I took about a month vacation.  So did that job involve a lot of traveling?  A lot of traveling, yes. I remember one day I caught six airplane flights  in one twenty-four hour period, six of them. I used to go back east where  everything is so close together and the people would say,    Well, where  do you live?       I live in Stillwater, Oklahoma.       Well, where   s your  office?       Office is in south side of Dallas, Texas.       What?  How far  away is that?       Well, it   s approximately three hundred miles.    See, they  can   t understand that. To them, a long ways is from here to out there on  Long Island, where you can see the building out there. That   s a long  ways. Three hundred miles? At that time, Frontier Airline was operating  out of Stillwater. I   d catch a flight out here, go to Oklahoma City, catch  a flight out of Oklahoma City, go to Love Field in Dallas, had a black  chauffer that met me there with a nine passenger Cadillac Limousine,  took me down to my office. I may be thirty minutes. I may be there all  day. I never knew. But a lot of times within an hour, he   d take me back  out to Love Field.  Well, this one day I was talking about, I went from Love Field to  Atlanta, Georgia, called on a distributor in Atlanta. From Atlanta, I went  to Tallahassee, Florida, called on one in Tallahassee. Left Tallahassee  58  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  and went to Long Island and then from Long Island, I went up to Lake  Kiamichi, way up north, in north New York state. That was one day of  travel. A lot of times, I   d leave Long Island, eat a breakfast before I left  the hotel, catch a plane there at LaGuardia or Kennedy, one of the two,  eat another breakfast on the plane on the way to Chicago, catch another  plane in Chicago and eat another breakfast on the way to LA. (Laughter)  Leave Long Island in the morning, be in LA by about noon.  So did you enjoy that job?  Oh, it would have been a wonderful job for a single man. But for  somebody married with a family back home like I did, it would really be  inconvenient.  How long did you work there?  Oh, about a year and a half, with an unlimited expense account. They  didn   t give a darn how much I spent, couldn   t care less. Most of my  stops were spent setting up an ambulance on display in a convention  center, or something along that line. So I   d have to go in there a day or  so ahead and buy all the booze, hire all the pretty girls to serve it, set up  the necessary rooms in the hotel, make sure that the unit was  emblazoned in the convention, all for display, get the people to be in  there to operate that and take notes or whatever they needed to do. There  was times when I   d have three ambulances leaving Dallas. One would  be going to Florida, one to New York, and one out to California. Then I  was hopping along meeting them out there and putting them on display  for conventions.  Do you feel like you got experience to be prepared for that job because  of taking over the ambulance service in Stillwater?  Yes, sure do. Sure do. I learned a lot about ambulances, what the good  equipment was and, of course, at that time, Stillwater was still operating  like the Strode Funeral Homes cars down there now, had one big Pontiac  and I don   t remember whether they ever got a Cadillac or not. But they  were still operating that type of an ambulance. And I   d drive up here in  one of these big box ambulances that we built. They just couldn   t see  that.    No, we won   t ever have an ambulance like that.    Well, that   s all  you have down there today. (Laughs) That was a coming thing, but I  couldn   t convince them of that. Of course, it wasn   t my place to sell  them on it anyhow, so I really didn   t care. (Laughs)  So how many kids did you have?  I had four.  59  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  And they grew up in Stillwater?  Yes. One of them is now in Boulder, Colorado, and one in Arlington,  Texas, one in Houston, and then one passed away a few years ago.  And how many grandkids?  Five, I believe   one, two, three, four   yes, five grandkids.  Well, what keeps you busy these days?  Oh, all kinds of projects around here. I like to build all kinds of things. A  lot of woodwork. I do   or did, all of this has changed in the last four  weeks since my heart attack. They won   t allow me to hardly lift my own  hands. But I   ve built and repaired about anything and everything around  the house here.  And you started a group for retired Stillwater firefighters?  Yes, yes.  What   s that called?  Payne County Retired Firefighters. It   s for anybody in Payne County.  And when did that start?  Oh, my good gosh.  Quite a while ago?  Quite a few years ago, yes.  And is it still going pretty strong?  Oh, yes. Yes, our last meeting was over at Yale, at the Mexican  restaurant over there. I think they said there was   I didn   t get to go  because I was sick there. I think they said around twenty-eight people  there. So it   s quite active. Then I have another group here in town. I   ve  started the visual aid for the people who are visually handicapped here in  Stillwater.  Oh, really? What do you all do in that group?  Anything we can do to help some person who isn   t acquainted with how  60  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  Wilson  Maddux  to take care of things when you   re blind or going blind. Try to convince  them they better get all their ducks in a row and get things lined up for  the day that they   ll no longer be able to see it. Put all your tools exactly  in a certain spot, all your kitchen utensils  in the same spot , mark your  clothing so you   ll be able to identify black socks from blue or white  socks. Just a million and one little things like that that you normally  wouldn   t think about.  How do you identify these people? Do they hear about the group and  come, or do you hear about them and go find them?  No, they just hear about us from word of mouth, more than anything.  That   s neat.  We have access to   the VA  Veterans Administration  keeps   a lot of  us veterans have access to wonderful equipment, such as a computer that  I have in there that talks to me. I can enlarge the print on it to where I  can only get one letter on the entire screen. It goes up to thirty-two font.  Big boogers. Every time I type a letter, if I type an A, it   ll say A. If I  type a Z, it   ll say Z. Then I get through writing it all across there and I  click ahead of it, it   ll read the whole thing to me. That   s the only way I  can correspond today.  Sounds like a fabulous service.  It is. It is. The VA does all kinds of wonderful things like that. I told you  I do a lot of woodwork. I have a TV camera in there that I can focus  down here on the blade of my saw because I can   t see it. And I make a  mark on the wood where I want to saw the board in two, and I can   t see  that. So I focus this camera down there on the blade of my saw and on  my mark. And then the camera is hooked to a TV set up here, and I can  enlarge it on that television. But I saw down here, and I looked 
