 Little Thunder  This is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is Friday, September 20,  2013, and I   m interviewing Eddie Morrison as part of the Oklahoma  Native Artists Project for the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program  at Oklahoma State University. We   re at Eddie   s home just outside  Tahlequah. Eddie, you started out as a painter, but around 1988 you  turned your energy to sculpture. You   ve won awards at various shows in  and out of state, including Santa Fe Indian Market, and your work is  held in numerous private and public collections. Thank you for taking  the time to talk with me.  You   re welcome.  Where were you born, and where did you grow up?  I was born at the Claremore Indian Hospital in Claremore, Oklahoma,  and I was raised in Tahlequah, though. I was raised by my grandmother.  She was a full-blood Cherokee. Jane Batt was her maiden name, and  Jane Batt Brackett is her full name. I think she did a great job with me,  because I was a handful, I   m sure. (Laughter)  So you grew up around the language? Are you fluent in Cherokee?  Well, actually, I grew up in that period. I went to a non-Indian high  school and grade school, and my grandmother came from a time when  they were trying to do it. She tried to encourage me, and she would tell  me things and do things, and actually I got interested. At one time I was  trying to learn from her, then I got to playing, and that was it. I   ve  always kicked myself in the rear that I wasn   t more in tune with what  was going on. I think it was before it was popular to be Native  American, anyway, around here.  Right. How about your mom and dad?  5  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Okay, my mother remarried when I was just a child, and I spent off-and-on  with her up until my grade school years. She married a man, a  wonderful man, named J. T. Hummingbird, and they relocated and went  to South Carolina. When they relocated a lot of the Indians, some of  them went to the West Coast; some went to the East. He went to the East  to Georgia and worked on the atomic energy plant down there. I went  back and forth with them, but I had a lot of trouble because of my dark  skin with the people down there. So that   s how I ended up living with  my grandmother here in Tahlequah.  I see. How many siblings?  I have   I   m one of seven, and there   s just three of us left now,  unfortunately.  And Jesse is a painter.  Jesse  lives in Bisbee, Arizona,  and my half-sister, Nancy, lives in  Tulsa.  Was Nancy also interested in art as a young child?  Well, she makes dolls, or did craft dolls and little sewing things like that.  I have a few samples, if you   d like to see them, that we have. (Laughs)  What is your first memory of seeing Native art?  Actually, when I was living with my grandmother in grade school, her  sister would come to her house periodically. She was just an old  Cherokee woman that lived over in the hills over by Stillwell. She   d  come to visit my grandmother in Tahlequah, and she would draw. I was  just fascinated with her drawings. I mean, they were so realistic, and  she   d just do it with pencil, and I     Things around the house, or     Yeah, animals, panthers, anything, and I was just fascinated by it. I  never really, you know, tried to do the art. Of course, my grandmother  always crocheted and made quilts and things like that, and the other  ladies in the family. I used to watch her and see all those intricate  designs and different things with that little needle, and the crocheting  was real tiny. She   d sit there and do that, and it   d come out with a little  design. The same thing with the quilts. I guess it just influenced me.  I had a best friend that lived across the street kind of from us, and he was  6  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  a Cherokee. His dad, Lyman Vann, was a cornstalk shooter, and he  would make bows and arrows from just raw wood. We   d sit and watch  him for hours, carving a bow out of the wood, and it just fascinated me  that he could make something like that out of wood from nothing. That   s  the way I feel today. To see something come from nothing and go into  something, it   s exciting to me.  What is your first memory of making art?  Well, of course, my grade school years, I never really took any formal  art classes, even through high school.  No art classes were offered, pretty much?  No art classes or anything. Once I got out of high school, I got married  and had children and I started   and I always had in the back of my mind  this interest. Acee Blue Eagle used to be on TV. I   d watch him and stuff  like that. Of course, there was Willard Stone and a lot of these guys that  are around here, Solomon McCombs and Fred Beaver and some of those  guys. I was always fascinated by their work, so I thought,    I   m going to  try that.    I got some canvas, or not really canvas. I got some poster  board and some paint, and I painted a few things, and I did a pen and ink  drawing. I guess it was in the early   70s sometime when Philbrook  Museum was still doing their Native American show.  Okay.  I submitted a drawing to them, and they accepted it. I didn   t even know  what I was doing. They hung it in there at the show, and I was just  tickled to death to be hanging in there with some of those famous artists.  After that, I got an invite to go to Kansas City  Missouri  to do a show  on the Plaza there with Solomon McCombs, (I can   t remember some of  those guys) Fred Beaver. I think Kelly Haney was just starting out. He  was there, and some of the other guys. We went down. My stuff was  just, it wasn   t even framed. It was just sitting out on the table, and all  these other guys had their stuff   . That was my first experience of  actually showing my work. Someone bought one of my little paintings. I  enjoyed it, but I kind of struggled because I   ve never had any formal  painting or training other than self-taught.  How old were you then, Eddie?  I was in my twenties and still had black hair. (Laughter) Matter of fact,  my youngest daughter wasn   t even born then.  But you were married?  7  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Yeah, but I still didn   t really pursue it. I went to school to be a   after I  got out of college, I was a medical technologist and worked in hospitals.  Let   s talk just a little bit about college which was at NSU  Northeastern  State University . Is that right?  Right.  You didn   t take any art classes there, either?  No, no, I majored in biology and chemistry. I had to draw a lot because  of the different things you had to draw for biology, body parts and things  like that. I was still doing my little painting and drawings on the side,  though, kind of just as a hobby.  And trying to catch shows periodically?  Actually, I never did another show. Well, I did a few little smaller area  shows around but nothing professional. I think I did the Trail of Tears  show when it was first started and different things, and people would  buy the little paintings.  What were you selling them for?  Oh, I think I sold one for ten dollars. (Laughs) I never got any major  money, but what I got I was pretty proud of just because someone  thought enough of it to buy it. (Laughter)  Well, then at some point I guess you   re working in medical technology,  and you decide to take up sculpture.  I started, actually, carving. When I was trying to paint and draw, it just  didn   t feel natural. I thought,    Well, I   m going to try carving or  something.    So I got my pocket knife out and whittled out some pieces  in wood, and it just came so natural, just a natural flow. I could think of  it up here, and it   d come out my hands. I could do it, and I was amazed  at how   and it   s kind of exciting, I think. That   s the mystery of creating  this, I guess, because you really don   t know where it comes from. It   s  just a gift you have, the good Lord, the Creator   s blessed you with, and  that   s the first time I just felt really natural doing something.  So I kept on carving, and I saw this ad. Of course, I knew who Allan  Houser was because I   d always read about him and admired him. I read  about this class I could take through the Art Students League of Denver  in Colorado in the early    90s. Actually I don   t even know if it was    89 or  8  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison     90, but whenever it was, I saved my four hundred dollars and went up  there and spent the week. I was the only Native artist in the class, and  Allan took me under his wing. I learned more in that one week about  carving because he said,    You just stick with me and watch me. That   s  the best way to learn.    Then when I started doing mine     You were working in stone, I guess.  It was marble     Marble.     and I   d never done marble before. He came over to where I had a big  piece of marble, and he said    Where   s your drawings?    I said     Drawings?    (Laughs) He said    You get me a drawing, and you come  back tomorrow and show me what it   s going to look like.    I   d never  even sketched it out. I took a drawing back, and he was happy, and then  he gave me some pointers. From then on, we went through the rest of the  class. I   d sit over and watch him. He   d say    Get you a beer out of my  cooler and drink it and watch me.    (Laughter) He was the most   I  mean, for a man of his prominence, I appreciated him more as a man  than as an artist because he was such a nice man.  When I got through, I said something about,    Do you think it   d help me  if I took more class?    He said    I think you should go to the Institute of  American Indian Arts in Santa Fe. I   ll help you get in if you want to go.     So I applied, and I got in the school and got a scholarship or whatever it  is they give. Went there and got my two-year fine arts degree in three-dimensional  arts.  That   s a big transition because you   re having to talk your wife, I guess,  and your kids into a move from Oklahoma to Santa Fe.  Actually, they did not move with me.  Okay.  I was fortunate enough to have a degree in something I could work at  out there. I worked at the St. Vincent   s Hospital there in Santa Fe while I  went to school, which helped send money home and also pay my rent  there and support me. The whole time, I   d come back and forth to do  that. I was living in     Every couple of months, or     Yeah, that   s the way that worked out for me, and enjoyed every minute  9  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  of it. I was fortunate enough to receive the faculty departmental award  for Outstanding Student of Three-Dimensional Arts. I enjoyed all the  classes. That   s the first time I   d been around a lot of the other Native  tribes, and I think that was the biggest education I got right there,  learning other Native tribes    cultural traditions and things like that.  And being exposed to a lot of different motifs. I was wondering     because you   re an older student at this point, right? You   re in your  forties.  They were calling me Grandpa at school. (Laughter)  But it was   you enjoyed it?  Actually, there were about three of us in there about the same age, and  they called us all Grandpa. (Laughter)  So you three hung out?  Yeah.  What do you feel like you really came away with from the Institute?  What are some of the things?  I think it was learning to think beyond what you think you can do. They  really wanted you to stretch your creative imagination to go beyond  something that   s like everybody else is doing. They wanted you to be  your own man and learn that. I got to experience different art forms,  ceramics, painting, and drawing and things like that I   ve never had  before. Of course, the sculpture is what I went there for, the three-dimensional.  And did you work in wood as well as marble or was it     No, I actually was using mostly alabaster when I was out there in school.  I still was trying to do my little shows on the side, too, because that was  the first year I   d ever got accepted to Santa Fe Indian Market, too. I  applied for that and went to Santa Fe Indian Market when I was going to  school out there.  What was that like, doing your first Market?  Well, I had set up there. I had some little trinkets I   d carved, and I had  this piece that I have up here on the table. I had some other simplistic     which my work is kind of simplistic. It   s not real complicated. Allan  Houser came up to see me, and he said,    Hmmm, I find some of that  10  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  pretty interesting.    (Laughs) That   s all he said, and I thought    Well, I  better study some more.    (Laughter) He really liked my relief carving  and everything. He said,    That   s something if you can do that.    That  gave me some encouragement, too. I think he was a consummate  teacher, though, as far as teaching.  Because of that     Yeah, he was another one that always stressed that you should try to find  your own identity and do your own thing.  So what did you do after the Institute?  I came back. We were living in Kansas then, and I started doing my  shows and still working part-time as a medical technologist.  You had taken a medical technology job in Kansas, after?  Yeah, yeah. I had started doing, around that little town we were in, and  was doing the Wichita Indian Market and some of the other shows and  still doing the Santa Fe Indian Market. I don   t know. Someone there in  town   the Chisholm Trail ran right through this little town I lived in.  This lady came and wanted to know if I could (her husband had just  passed away) do a monument for that Chisholm Trail dedicated to her  husband. I had never really done a large-scale thing like that before, and  she commissioned me to do it. I worked on it and worked on it, and went  up and had the stone cut, drew my drawings and everything. She liked  that. Did a big relief into this big slab of limestone, which still sits there  today. They dedicated it and had a big dedication for it. It was something  that I did while I was there, and it   s still there today.  What was the name of the town again?  Caldwell, Kansas, they call it the Border Queen. It   s actually where they  lined up for the Cherokee Land Run across there. I felt kind of conflicted  in a lot of ways. What I did was take this piece, (it was titled Those Who  Came Before) and it depicted Native Americans and early day settlers,  and then some of the old buildings. I put buffalo in one corner. I put  Native Americans on each corner watching them take our land, but that  was kind of    (Laughter)  You were able to get your statement in.  Yeah, it was also dedicated to Jesse Chisholm. He was half Cherokee.  Right.  11  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  The Chisholm family was there, and they gave me a blanket. I was pretty  honored. It was really something. They were proud, and I was proud.  And how did you decide upon limestone for that? Had you been working  with it a little bit already?  Well, actually, there again I have to credit Allan Houser because when I  was at the marble carving class up in Colorado with him, he said    Have  you ever tried any of that Kansas limestone?    I said,    No.    He said,     Well, you should try some. It   s really a pretty yellow stone, and it   s  easy to work with.    Someone gave me one of those little fence posts,  and that thing just worked out well. Someone bought it. Then I started  making others, and people kept purchasing them for their homes, which  I think as an artist, you feel honored that someone thinks enough of your  piece to take it home with them and live with it. It   s the ultimate  compliment, I think.  Absolutely. I always feel for sculptors because their work is so heavy,  and transporting things is always an issue. How did you get your piece,  for example, the Chisholm commission?  Well, actually, she paid for someone to come in with a forklift and lift it  and help me get it. I just made the piece, and they did all the other work  on that. They framed it and everything.  And you were in the same town.  I will say that, yes, being a sculptor, especially a stone sculptor, is dirty,  hard, heavy work, and it will take a toll on you, any type of thing like  that. I don   t know if you remember Bill Prokopiof. He should have been  and was one of the fine sculptors that, I think, it was detrimental to his  health, working. I wear a mask and all the safety equipment. Actually,  when I first started probably twenty years ago, I was lifting one of those  heavy pieces, and I felt something pop in my chest. I popped my  sternum, and it was really something not to do. (Laughs) I learned a  valuable lesson there. Anymore, I make my wife help me. (Laughs)  You weren   t working for a couple of months, I imagine.  Yeah, I had to lay off until it healed up and everything.  You   ve done several shows in DC, right,     Right.  12  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder     with the Indian Arts and Crafts Commission? What was that like,  going out East for the first time?  Well, actually that wasn   t the first time. A lady named Sandy Chapin  met me and started buying my work, and she had a little gallery in Long  Island, New York. She just really liked my work, especially the cedar.  She liked the limestone, too. She invited me to do a gallery show up  there at her gallery. She said,    I   ll fly you up there, and you can ship  some smaller pieces.    She had some bigger ones she had bought and  shipped up there, too. She   s the widow of Harry Chapin who was a  singer. She had wrote that song    Cat   s in the Cradle.     She flew me up there. I remember on the plane on the way up there, I  was thinking,    Here I am, a little Indian boy from Oklahoma on my way  to New York to land at JFK airport.    When I got off the airplane, they  had all these guys lined up in these little hats because she said,    I   ll send  a car to pick you up.    There was a guy standing there, and he had his  little sign that said    Eddie Morrison.    I looked behind him to see if  anybody was   . (Laughter) He had a limousine out there, and they pick  me up. There I was, riding in the limousine with holes in my shoes.  (Laughs) We went over there and stayed at her house. It was quite an  experience. Actually, I went back a couple more times. Mel Cornshucker  and I drove up there, and Ron Mitchell that one time. We drove up there.  Wonderful memories.  Yeah, met the people from the Interior Department there that run the  Indian craft shop. Started buying my work. I   ve gone back and done  several    Meet the artist    shows, and I   m going back again in November  to do another one. I   ve been pretty blessed, really, to have met these  people, and they like my work.  You have several sculptures, like, in businesses and restaurants and  different places. I just wondered if you ever go see them after they   ve  been purchased.  There was a telephone company called KanOkla Telephone Company up  in Kansas that owns one, and it sits in their lobby. I   ve never seen it  again. A couple little museums up there have some of my work they   ve  purchased. I   ve never been back, but I do want to go back someday and  see it. There was a gentleman and his wife there in Caldwell that bought  a piece dedicated to their son who died. Made a piece of him, a large  piece that sits in their     It was like a      13  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison     business window downtown, too, there.     a sculpture of him, their son?  Yeah, it depicted him, kind of a likeness of him.  That was probably a different     Yes, it was. I don   t like doing that because my work   s what I called  impressionistic. It   s not really realistic in its   I go with the  impressionism. I just follow the natural lines in the stone or wood or  whatever. It   s different for me to make someone. It worked out well,  though.  What influences come into play with your animal imagery, for example?  Well, when I was growing up, my grandmother would always make  comments about the animals. A lot of these things I never paid much  attention to until I went to school in Santa Fe. She   d say if you want to  run fast, you   ll eat a deer or rabbit or something. She would always  relate what you ate to what you could do. She   d tell me these stories, but  hers were kind of, they   re not the complete story of the Cherokee myths  and legends and things. I had never heard of that book, that  James   Mooney book that he wrote about a lot of the Cherokee myths and  legends.  When I went to school out there, we had to do a lot of things based on  myths, tribal things. I started researching, and I was like,    Oh, wow   That   s the rest of the story of what she used to try to tell me.    I did a lot,  not a lot, but several pieces that were connected to some of those stories,  too. I don   t do that anymore. Now my work is just kind of, maybe you   d  call it generic, but I don   t try to depict any myths or religion or anything  like that in my works, other than some of the symbols, or anything like  that.  When did you discover, like, the red cedar? When did you start working  with that?  That was early on. I actually started with the black walnut and the harder  woods, but once I started using that red cedar, it was just so beautiful.  It   s not real exotic wood, but it has a character all its own, and I could  use it. If it had a knot or some kind of a defect, you might say a defect, I  started relating it kind of like to people. A person can have a defect in  one area, but they still have another beauty that shines through. That   s  the way I do it still to this day. It didn   t have to be perfect because  humans aren   t perfect. You see a lot of people that might have a  14  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  handicap, and some of them are just real beautiful people, too. I just kept  using it, and I still do it. I can   t deny this is what brought me to the  dance, I guess, in a lot of ways.  So I   m not sure, you know, how involved you were with the galleries, but  in 1990 when they passed the Indian Arts and Crafts Act, I was  wondering if you remembered how that impacted artists and galleries.  Jesse had already established himself as a painter then, my brother Jesse  Hummingbird, and I met Bill Rabbit. I mean, of course, I knew Bill, but  I got to know him. They belonged to this group called the Indian Arts  and Crafts Association, and they talked me into getting into that, too. It  was a bigger organization than it is today. It doesn   t have the strength it  used to, but they were real instrumental in getting some of that law  passed and everything. I wasn   t part of that so I joined it, and you had to  be documented, and they stood up for the laws, trying to enforce it.  Also, there   s an Indian Arts and Crafts Board, too, that   s in Washington  DC. They came and talked to me. I know that it got to be a problem. It   s  still a problem in a lot of things today, especially jewelry and copying  and things like that. It   s easy to do. Some of the not necessarily foreign  countries but even people in this country will copy your work and  market it as being done by you and sell it. That   s not fair.  Right, right. Once you were, you know, getting really active with shows  and active with your sculpture, selling it in public venues, did you and  Jesse ever do any shows in the same place?  Well, actually, I had a booth out at the Indian Market in Santa Fe, and  we shared, tried to share. We got into it like brothers do, and so it didn   t  work out too well. (Laughter) We are the best of friends.  And it   s hard.  Yeah, it is.  I was just thinking about the space, to have a sculptor and a painter.  I think that was the biggest thing that caused the problem, (Laughter) as  Jesse   s quite outspoken. We got over it, moved on, and we   re the best of  friends. We have a lot of fun now just doing things together instead of  trying to show our work together.  Just visiting.  Or if we do anything together, it   d be kind of like an individual artist at a  15  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  show or something.  Have you ever accidentally broken a sculpture transporting it  someplace, to a show or competition?  Yes. That   s something that happens, and you just have to   sometimes  it   s a good piece. I haven   t had a lot of it happen, but the most recent one  that I had happen, I was doing artist-in-residence at the Botanical  Gardens up in Denver. They had an Allan Houser sculpture exhibit there  at the Botanical Gardens. I think it   s been two summers ago, maybe  three. I took my pieces up there, and they had a little booth outside for  me to sit there since he was a mentor of mine, sort of. We would kind of  break it into two sessions. I had gone to rest during the midday because  it got hot, and then we   d come back later in the evening. You could just  leave your things there, and the security guard and the people were  supposed to watch it.  I had some taller pieces, and they had a real bad wind storm. The tent  blew, and a piece of it caught a piece, and it blew it over and broke it  right in two. It was one of my wild onion pieces. That one hurt probably  more than any of them because I really liked that piece. Some guy had  just called and said,    Have you still got that piece? I   d like to buy it.     (Laughs)    Yeah, but it   s broke in two.    (Laughs) You just have to go on  and accept it as, well, it wasn   t meant to be.  Right. Did you take a trailer with your sculptures? Is that how you  handled that?  Actually we have a large SUV that we load them onto. I   ve done it so  many years, I could put it on a little PVC pipe and roll it easily off. Now,  sometimes I have to pay people to help me load them back on. Faye used  to help me quite a bit, but she and I both are no spring chickens  anymore. Things get heavier as you get older. (Laughs)  Are you a member of any artist associations now?  Well, other than SWAIA  Southwestern Association for Indian Arts ,  I   m not at this time that I can think of. The Cherokee Nation, they used  to have one cooperative, you know. Bill Glass and all those guys were in  it, and it didn   t work out. That   s what the new gallery downtown   it   s  kind of an offshoot from that, and the Cherokee Nation took it over and  made a gallery themselves instead of a cooperative membership thing.  Have you done any pieces for the casinos?  They just bought a piece from me for their new Veterans Center, so I   m  16  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  pretty honored that they are going to put it in there.  What was the subject?  It was a Cherokee legend. It was called The Iceman and the Fire. It   s  based on a Cherokee myth of the ancient members that were a nation  that had a fire they could not put out. They called this little guy down  that had these magical braids, and he stood in the middle of the fire and  blew on his braids. All this ice and rain and snow and everything came  and put the fire out that they had been trying to put out for a long time.  That sounds neat. This one was approximately how large?  It   s probably about a 600-pound piece of alabaster, New Mexico  alabaster. It   s gray. It   s real polished and everything.  What   s the best compliment or most memorable feedback you   ve gotten  on one of your sculptures?  Well, the most memorable and what I consider probably the ultimate  compliment was (and it   s happened to me several times) I remember the  first time it happened at the Santa Fe Indian Market many years ago. I  had one of my bigger sculptures there and several others. This lady was  totally blind, and they came up to my booth, and the person with her  said,    Feel this.    She put her hands on it, and she felt all around the face  and went down, and several of the others. Then she said,    Beautiful.     (Laughs) I thought,    Wow, that   s the ultimate compliment.     Right. So you work in several types of materials. That   s amazing to me  because, for example, it seems like such a jump from red cedar to  marble, technique-wise and tool-wise. How do you make those  transitions?  Actually the stone that I use is stone that probably a lot of the other  sculptors wouldn   t use it. It has a lot of the same natural lines that wood  has. I go with the natural lines and just let the nature and   actually it   s,  there again, from my influence from Allan Houser. He stated to me, he  said,    Sometimes you   ve just got to let the material speak for itself.     That   s exactly what I try to do. It   s kind of the way I   ve taken my work,  letting the material speak for itself.  Like I was telling you a while ago with the defects and the different  things in the wood, the same thing with the limestone if it has the little  inclusions of fossils, old nails, or anything that people have put in there  over the years. Sometimes people have carved their names in there back  in the 1800s, and I leave those on there. It makes the piece more  17  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  interesting, especially the limestone, because it has a life of its own. It   s  gone from being formed eons ago to those early day settlers coming and  making a fencepost out of it. Then I come along 150 years later and  make a piece of sculpture out of it, so who knows where it   s going to  next? (Laughs)  Yeah, that   s neat. Does that mean once you have your materials, kind of  letting them lie, and walking around them and seeing what they suggest  to you, or does it mean finding that?  I think it   s a combination of both, really. Sometimes it comes to me just  like that. Other times I can sit and look at a stone and have to really let  my creative mind go. I have to see what I can put into that space, and  what I can get out of it, and keep it to what I want to do with it. I was  saying a while ago, I just go with the natural lines. It   s something   I  can   t explain it. I have done things before, and I   ve gotten through with  them, and I   ve turned around and looked at it, and I   m like,    Gosh, did I  do that?    It kind of gives me a little chill almost.  The same thing with that piece up there when I first started doing it,  even that bigger piece I did for the Chisholm Trail. That   s the  excitement that I feel. I guess I still wouldn   t be doing it if I didn   t get  some sort of   beyond, you know, someone buying the piece. The actual  feel and love of doing it, I think, is something that you can   t market.  You can   t explain it, and it   s something that unless you feel it, you  wouldn   t know what I mean. (Laughs)  In terms of your materials, you showed me a piece of river stone that you  found on the property and worked with. Do you get your own materials  for the most part? Do you order? Do you sometimes go to quarry and  get your stone?  Yes, all of the above, I do. Most of the wood I get and split. That   s easy  to obtain, the cedar wood and black walnut or anything like that. The  stone posts I buy from the farmers up in Kansas, and that   s where I get  that. Now, I do go to the quarry for some of the larger pieces. I just was  commissioned to do a large piece this past year for a lady in Santa Fe. It  was a thousand-pound block of limestone that I had to have quarried up  in Kansas from the Silverdale quarries. I really like, like the piece you  were talking about, the river stone, and things like that, back to the  natural lines and natural forms that nature gave to it a lot of times. You  just go with the flow of whatever is there.  Right. That piece that   s the commission you   re working on, that   s an  upcoming project?  18  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  No, I delivered it when I went to Santa Fe this year.  Oh, you delivered it.  She has about eight or nine of my pieces at her place in Santa Fe that  she   s bought for the last few years, and they   re really contemporary. It   s  something different that I ordinarily don   t do. They   re faceless pieces,  but they   re just the form of the stone, and I think that     That was per her request, kind of?  Right.  I see.  And she has some of the ones that are more realistic, as I get, anyway.  So you have a sculpture garden up there. That sounds neat. Okay,  you   ve mentioned that, I guess, since working with Allan Houser, you  draw out your images, pretty much?  I don   t a lot of times unless it   s a big, big one, unless it   s a big major  complicated piece. Now the little simplistic pieces, and quoting him  again, he said,    It   s always simplistic. It   s not simple.    That   s what you  want to say. (Laughs) I can   t imagine all this is coming back to me now,  thinking about some of the words he said. I guess I paid attention.  (Laughs)  So others you just go to work directly on it?  Yeah, I just go directly into it. I mean, I   ll sit, and like I was saying, I   ll  go look at the piece of wood or stone, and go with the lines that are in it  and what I can fit into it. I think it   s kind of like Michelangelo said,     There   s something in there that wants to come out.    I admire other  artists, and other sculptors especially. I think it   s kind of like a  brotherhood for artists, especially the ones that have survived over the  years.  You look at Merlin  Little Thunder , and Ben Harjo, and Bill Glass. It   s  a hard business to survive in and still be here. I know a lot of artists that  started when I did that were doing good that are no longer doing art. I  feel very blessed that my art has taken me a lot of places, and I   ve got to  see a lot of things, and I   ve got a lot of good feeling out of doing it. I   m  still being blessed today, even almost sixty-seven years old.  Do you ever do any on-site kind of research for bigger pieces if you  19  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  know that they   re going to go a specific place?  I haven   t had that thing, but I had tried to   I submitted a few little  drawings to different things. Like when Northeastern was looking for a  Sequoyah piece, and some of their medical clinics were looking, I  submitted drawings. It   s a little different when you have to go get an  idea of what it   s going to look like on-site and do a drawing and do that.  Some of your   like the wood sculpture is fully three-dimensional, and  then as you were mentioning, like the limestone is sort of bas-relief. It is  this wonderful   you get this emergence. It reminds me of emergence  stories because you just get that feeling of something coming out of the  stone. Is that part of what you   re striving to communicate?  I think so. It   s part of (what do you call it) aesthetics, but you still want  to keep it balanced, too, and make the piece not look like it was still just  what it came from. There again, it   s what I said a while ago. I think that  there   s an excitement, too, to see something go from nothing, just a raw  piece of stone or wood, and you turn it into something entirely different  than what it was, just an object laying there. It gives you a real good  feeling to see that, too. That   s part of the enjoyment and love of being a  sculptor, I guess. (Laughs) Same thing, I guess, if I were a painter and  took a blank canvas and made something come back out of that. You  still see that.  Right. Is the finishing process different, then, for limestone? How is it  different?  There   s three types of finishing for all different materials. The most  tedious is probably the wood, because I use a hand-rub finish. You rub  (it   s a mixture of oils and varnishes) into the wood, and it penetrates the  wood. There   s about seven or eight hand-rubbed coats. You have to let it  dry twenty-four hours between each coat and lightly sand to get it. The  more coats you put on it, the more gloss you get on the wood piece. It  really protects the wood, and it   s some of the best I   ve ever had. It   s  more tedious to use, but it   s better than polyurethane or anything like  that. It makes it look natural.  Now, the alabaster, it takes a little different type of thing. You have to  use what you call an alabaster compound and buff it into the stone. Then  you polish it up, and then you put a protective coat on it if you want to  get a real high shine. Now, the marble takes another type, too. It   s a  different type of finish to get it to do that. A lot of my work I do not  polish that is going to go outside, especially the limestone. That   s  something that won   t take a real high gloss on it, but the wood pieces  and the alabaster and the marble I will polish.  20  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  When you   re working, do you often have several going simultaneously in  different media?  Yes, I do. If I   m working on the limestone, I will probably have four  pieces going at one time. What I   ll do is, it   s easier to get them   first  thing I do is get them to where they   ll stand upright and be balanced. I  can do what I call rough cutting all at one time, and get what I don   t  want on there off. Then when I go into it, the first thing I put on usually  is the face. It   s the focal point for me. I will go in and try to get a good  face on it.  Then I go from there with it, and I work until I feel like I don   t know  where I   m going with it, is the way I could word it, I guess. (Laughs)  Then I   ll go to the other one and work on it. It   s funny how you can go  back and pick up on that. I can do four pieces simultaneously, I guess  you would say. Now, if the wood is different, I can do probably ten or  twelve of those because I can take it up in stages, and I can finish them  all at the same time, which is the best way to do that.  Have you ever incorporated any other materials in your work like  stones?  I did start putting some silver and turquoise on my wood pieces, and it  really complemented each other. Once I did that, people really liked it. I  found it to be   it added another dimension to the piece. I remember in  school we used to have to do different combinations of things, metal,  stone, and wood together. I haven   t done any for myself that way, but  I   ve seen other artists do it. It   s great that they can do that.  What role does story play in your paintings or sculptures? I think you  sort of touched on that.  What?  Story.  Oh, story. In my early years, I really read a lot and researched a lot,  especially the Cherokee stories and history and everything, and at one  time, even some of the older tribes like the Mandans and things like that  because a lot of their animal stories were things I like to depict, too, and  I did some pieces off of that. I think as Native peoples you can   t get  away from that. It   s in your DNA or something, and you have to do it.  People are going to ask you a lot of times about it.  There are, you know, like the Kachina carvers, and people like that that  21  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  depict their spirits. That   s something I don   t do. That   s something they  do, and I have found that it   s best not to step on anybody   s toes or  anything because it gets to be pretty sensitive about doing things like  that. I don   t try to depict any other nation   s history or anything because I  might get it wrong, and they get pretty mad. (Laughs) Believe me,  people will come to your booth, and it   s like,    That   s not real.    I get to  say,    I   m not a realist.    (Laughter)  That   s true. That tribal stuff gets tricky. How important are titles to your  work?  Well, I think it   s important. My larger pieces, I always try to title. A lot  of times when I   m working on them, I always have that title and theme  in mind. It   s something that keeps your inspiration or whatever going  toward that piece with the feeling that you have toward it, and if it  comes out depicting it, you   re happy.  Do you ever write down titles or just carry them around in your head?  Actually, when I start them, once it starts developing, I usually tell Faye  what I   m going to title it, and that   s what it is, but I don   t write it down  or anything. I just know what it   s going to be, and that   s what it stays.  Now, I   ve gone to title some things, and people have taken them home  with them. They come back the next year, and they say,    I call that  Eddie,    or something like that. (Laughter)  They   ve retitled it.  Yeah, they retitled it. (Laughter)  That   s interesting.  It   s a lot different, I guess, than paintings. Easier to do on some of this.  That is a unique experience, isn   t it, that market of having the same  repeat collectors?  Right.  Can you talk a little bit about that?  I have been truly blessed over the twenty-three or twenty-two (I don   t  know how long it   s been now) that I   ve done Santa Fe Indian Market  and different shows. All across the country I have different collectors  that come back year after year, and it really makes you feel good that  they still like your work. Even at Lawrence this past weekend, I had, oh,  22  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  four or five people come and say,    I bought some of your work twelve  years ago, and I still have it, and I just love it.    I don   t even remember  them. They   ll say,    Do you remember me?    and I don   t remember them.  Then they describe the piece, and I remember the piece. (Laughs) I like  to hear that. I wouldn   t want to hear somebody come up and say,    I  bought your piece twelve years ago. I hate it.    (Laughter)  What   s your creative process, like from the time you get your idea?  Actually, mine starts when I   m looking at the stone or piece of wood. I  can have a post laying on the ground up there, and if it has a certain form  or shape, you know, it   s just like that. Then the thought process for one  that   s more bland, I have to sit there and think about it sometimes. Faye  has learned over the years. She   ll say,    You   re just sitting around out  there at the shop.    I said,    I was thinking.    (Laughs) I was trying to just  let my mind go. She   s learned over the years that that   s what I   m doing.  Actually, I could use it for other excuses, too. (Laughter)  What   s your creative routine? Do you like to work early in the morning  or at night?  I   m a morning person. There are so many artists I know that work at  night. I have never been able to work at night. Once it passes three  o   clock in the afternoon, I don   t like to work. I don   t know what the  reason is, but I do my best work in the mornings. Of course, a lot of  times I have to work outside 90 percent of the time. The way my studio  sits in the summer, and even in the winter, but in summertime the sun  gets so hot on that side after two o   clock in the afternoon, it can be 110  degrees up there. No matter what you do, you   re not going to get cool,  and that   s when I usually quit working.  And how about the winter? Are there times when you just can   t work  because it   s too cold?  There are times, but there are many days I go up there with so many  clothes on I can hardly lift my arm and chisel on stone. (Laughter) I have  a wood stove up there, so I   ll go inside periodically and warm up and go  back out there. I   ve been up there when it   s been brutally cold and  snowing and everything when I   m trying to get ready or make a piece  for a deadline or something. It   s for the love of being a sculptor, I guess,  that you do that. (Laughs)  How big a part of your work are commissions?  It   s taken off more in the last five or six years than it ever has been. It   s  at least 30 percent, probably, if I were guessing right now.  23  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  A big chunk.  Yeah, I just love going to do the shows, still, though. I used to say,     Boy, I hope someday if I ever get real well known or make enough  money, I can quit doing the shows,    but, number one, I   ve never gotten  rich at this. I probably established myself as an artist, but I love going to  those shows and seeing our old friends and just doing it. I told Faye last  year, I said,    I don   t know how much longer we can keep doing this.     She said    Well, as long as we   re having fun at it, we   ll keep doing it.     (Laughs)  It is a balance isn   t it?  Right, it is.  Looking back over your career, what was a fork-in-the-road moment  when you could have gone one way or another, and you made a choice?  Well, probably the fork in the road was when I was working in a hospital  in Wichita, Kansas, in the late   80s, and I got fired from the job because  I got into it with this other guy. (Laughs) It was over a loud radio. I hate  to even talk about this. It embarrasses me today to talk about it, but they  fired me and him. I had to go home and tell my family I got fired, and it  was really embarrassing. After that   s when I got another little job, and I  seen that deal with Allan Houser being a guest lecturer at the Art  Students League in Denver. I saved my money and went to that. Once I  did that and went to art school, it was no looking back at anything else.  That was probably a big turning point as far as being a professional  artist, getting fired from a job. (Laughs) It   s embarrassing. I don   t  recommend for anybody. It   s a blight on your record. (Laughter)  What would you say has been one of the high points in your career?  Oh, I think the highest high point is just knowing that my children  respect what I do, and my family, I think. That   s a good feeling. I can  remember in-laws saying,    Why don   t you quit that and get you a job?     (Laughs) Now I do well with it, and I can call it a good job. My kids  really respect what I do, and they brag on me, and I just really find that  refreshing.  What has been one of the low points?  Oh, I think a lot of times you kind of get down because you don   t have  any money and you   re struggling, and you think nobody likes your work  sometimes because you can go to shows and not sell a thing. You get  24  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  kind of low at those periods. I   ve learned over the years, just go on down  the road to the next show and don   t think about it. I can   t say that I   ve  had a real ultra-low thing other than a lot of times going through periods  of what we call the rollercoaster, the downside, and going back up. The  high points outnumber the low points in this for me, personally, more  than I can say.  Even this past weekend at Lawrence, when my little granddaughter was  going up to   Faye was taking her around to Dana Tiger and Johnny  Tiger and some of them because I know them and they know Faye. She  was telling them,    I   m an artist. I   m an artist, too.    I thought that   s pretty  neat because none of my other kids or anybody has ever said they  wanted to do it. (Laughs)  She   s interested.  Yeah, she is. Draws things at home.  What   s an upcoming project that you   re really looking forward to?  Well, I think that my major thing right now is I   m going to go to do  another    Meet the artist    show in Washington, DC, at the Interior  Department at the Indian Craft Shop. They   re going to put a couple of  my stone post sculptures out in their courtyard. They want a couple for  the courtyard there. That   s my next upcoming thing that I   m working on  and looking forward to. I   m thankful for the chance to do that.  Is there anything that we   ve forgotten to talk about or you   d like to add  before we take a look at your work?  No, I   ll probably think of it after you leave. (Laughter)  Okay, well, we   ll pause everything for a minute and get refocused to  look at some of your sculptures.  Okay.  All right, this is an example of one of your limestone sculptures. Do you  want to tell us a little bit about this piece?  Yes, it   s a natural Silverdale limestone.  What kind?  Silverdale is what they call it. That   s where it comes from up in Kansas.  I like it. It has the little tiny fossils, and it   s a stone that   s easy to work  25  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  Little Thunder  Morrison  with. I had made a larger piece, and this was a fragment that came off  the larger piece. It depicts a woman that   s reclining.  I could remember when I was a young child, and we would go to the  river or something. There would be these rocks and things and people  would   especially I can remember after eating, my grandmother or my  mom or somebody, they would go sit on that rock and recline or relax.  That   s what I thought of when I was doing this.  What   s the title?  It doesn   t really   I call it Reclining Woman.  Reclining Woman. Yeah, it   s gorgeous.  I leave the natural in there. Again, it   s letting the material speak for  itself.  Right, it   s beautiful. Now we   re looking at some of your red cedar. Do  you want to talk about these?  Yes, cedar wood is my first love when I first started, and I still love it.  It   s such a natural wood. It   s not real exotic, but it   s a beautiful wood.  You can see the grain. I can take an old piece of wood that   s been dead  many years, and it   s just like it comes back to life. I rub this tung oil into  the grain in the wood, and it penetrates. Recently I started using  turquoise and some silver to add a little complement to them. It works  out well. There again, I just go with the natural lines in the wood, and  wherever it flows, it   s going to be.  I   ve been real successful with what they call cedar wood bears. If you  look at the grain on the back, it   s just like the fur on the   . In Cherokee  stories, the bears were pretty significant. They were part of our tribe. We  went off and became bears, and they told us if we ever needed food or  clothing or anything like that, we could take them for it. The Cherokee  word for bear is yo-na. I do a lot of bears.  All right, how about this piece?  Okay, this is one of my earliest pieces that I tried relief carving in. It   s  an old scrap piece of black walnut wood. Of course, the Trail of Tears is  a very significant event in the history of our Cherokee Nation. I think  that, I don   t know, I was looking for something to do to try a relief, and  the way this came to me is one of those stories you hear sometime. I was  out standing, watching the clouds. This cloud came along, and it was  basically shaped like that piece of wood, and it had that same kind of  26  Little Thunder  Morrison  image in it. I went to the studio, and I started carving it. This is one of  those pieces that when I got through with it, I looked at it, and I said,     Did I do that?    (Laughs)  I did that piece probably twenty-five years ago or more, so it   s a piece  that I keep in my house as my Trail of Tears piece to represent that. I  call that Survivors of the Trail of Tears because we   re the ones that  survived and descendants of those that came on today. Otherwise, we  would not be here, as all tribes have a history like that. We are all  survivors, really, all Native peoples. Fortunately, we   re still here.  Still here. Well, thank you so much for your time today, Eddie.  Well, you are more than welcome.  -------  -------   
