 Little Thunder  Montgomery  This is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is February 8, 2011. I   m  interviewing Gary Montgomery for the Oklahoma Native Artists Project  sponsored by the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at  Oklahoma State University. We   re  in Oklahoma City  at the home of  one of your collectors, Nancy Hughes, one of your strong supporters  over the years. You were born in Seminole, Oklahoma. Did you live in  town or outside of town?  Outside of town.  What was it like growing up in that part of Oklahoma?  I loved every minute of it. Actually, I guess I really can   t remember that  far back. (Laughter) Anyway, we lived out in the country, and we were  kind of farmers, rancher-type people, and I was raised by my  grandparents. My grandparents raised chickens, hogs, cattle, horses.  Anything to get the gander, so to speak. So yeah, I enjoyed it.  I wondered if you had horses because they   re so important in your  pictures.  Yes. As a matter of fact, I was given a horse, a black stallion by the  name of Brunky when I was very small. I love horses.  Did you ever compete? Rodeo stuff?  I never got to do much of anything with the horses, actually, because  when I was very young, my grandparents passed away, and I had to go  to boarding school at a very young age, about eight years old. And from  that point on, the ranch situation ceased to exist because of the death of  my grandparents.  5  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  That must have been such an abrupt     Yes, it was a big change, so to speak. But Native Americans have a way  of adapting. Didn   t make any difference what situation you   re in, you  learned how to adapt and you adjust, or it   s bye-bye. So yeah, I was  young. I was sent to a boarding school because my grandparents passed  away, and my mom was remarried, and she didn   t have the wherewithal  to support another child. And off to boarding school I went.  Was it Eufaula or where   d you go?  I went to Jones Academy down in Hartshorne.  Brothers and sisters?  No. I was the only one. My brothers, they didn   t have to go. Like I said,  they stayed with my mom and step-dad, and they raised them. I was the  only one that had to go to boarding school. But I enjoyed it after the first  couple of weeks. You kind of miss your parents and your grandparents,  and you don   t know what to think, but  after a  period of adjustment,  you start going with the flow and you   re young enough at that age that,  that   s it.  And you were raised speaking your language at home, so at Jones, that  wasn   t a hard transition?  Yes, being raised by your grandparents, that   s what we spoke, was  Seminole. When I started elementary school, I didn   t know how to speak  English, whatsoever. But I went to elementary school at Strother  Elementary for the first couple of years and I learned how to speak  English. So by the time I did go to Jones Academy, I knew how to speak  English fluently.  Were you exposed to any art classes in elementary school?  Not really. But when I was growing up, my mom   s brother was a  commercial artist in Tulsa, and he was always bringing me paper and  pencils and coloring books, all kinds of things like that to get me started.  Actually, I started doing paintings on the walls at a very young age.  (Laughter)  Sounds like an artist.  My mom didn   t appreciate that too much.  Were your grandparents supportive of your drawing? Did they know you  6  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  like to draw?  I can   t really say. I was always out messing with the horses and doing  other things. I didn   t really sit down and draw or paint then. It was only  after they passed away that I began living with my mom  and  my uncle  started coming down     That   s when you discovered art.  That   s when I started getting crayons, much to the chagrin of my mom.  At Jones Academy did they offer art classes?  Yes, as a matter of fact, I won my first award when I was in the fourth  grade. It was a fireman   s fundraising thing. They had a little art contest  at the elementary school  level  and I won what I would  call  the grand  award for my age group.  That   s great.  It was good. That was the first time I ever got to associate with a  winning competition. It was a good feeling. I think I won five bucks and  a trip to the theater. Five bucks, to me that was a lot of money back then.  (Laughter) That was a lot of candy bars.  So did you attend Jones  Academy  through high school?  No, I went from third grade to the eighth grade. And when I went  through the eighth grade, I asked my mother if I could come back and go  to school at Strother, and she said,    Yes.    She said,    We   ll set another  place at the table and put another nail in the wall.    So, that   s when I  started school at Strother. I had already been playing basketball and  football at Jones Academy. I kind of hated leaving football because  Strother didn   t have a football program. But they had basketball and  baseball. I was always kind of an athlete, anyway, whether it was  running through the forest (we grew up in the forest) or running through  the woods chasing chickens. Chasing chickens for my supper, is what it  was.  You got pretty involved with baseball, right?  Yes, I graduated   I wasn   t All-State or anything. When you   re a Class  C high school, all the All-Staters come from big schools. They hardly  ever notice small school athletes. But when I went to Murray  State  College  I  had  played high school, and I was always involved in  summer league baseball, and people always told me that I had the ability  7  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  to play. But you don   t know until you actually get into bigger  competition. When I went to Murray State College, I went out because I  enjoyed playing sports. I didn   t know if I could make the team, but I did.  Actually, the person who really got me started thinking that I could play  baseball at a college was Jean   golly, I forgot his name now. He  coached at OBU  Oklahoma Baptist University  for a long time. He  coached baseball, baseball and basketball for a while. He   s the one that  got me started thinking that I could compete. And when I went to  Murray, I went out for the baseball program down there and I made the  team. I wanted to play at a bigger school, so I transferred after my  freshman year to East Central  University  and I started playing baseball  for   there   s another coach that I forgot. (Laughter) But I went to East  Central and played baseball there.  Did you take art classes while you were at East Central?  Yes, yes. I started taking Art classes when I was at Murray.  So you kept those two things going simultaneously?  Oh, yes. Golly. When I was in high school, I was always in the back  room, drawing and doodling around. Teacher would say,    Hey, Gary,  what   s going on?       Huh?     Did you get recruited to do student posters or anything like that?  I was always getting picked on. If anything came up, something had to  be done,    Gary can do it  Yeah  Let   s go get Gary. Gary can draw.    So  yes, I was always getting picked on.  When you were in college, either at Murray or East Central, were you  exploring Indian subject matter in your art classes?  I was always interested in doing horses and Indian subject manner. But  when you   re at a university, they more or less stress abstractionism. And  I was stuck with it because I was going to school and you have to do it.  But the minute I got out, I was always dabbling in Indian art.  They didn   t stress figure drawing or anything?  Yes, when I was at Murray, I had a teacher there, his name was Larry  Milligan. He stressed figure drawing. I think I learned more from him  than I did through my whole college career, because you got to do what  you wanted to do, instead of turning on a projector, blurring the image  on a wall or on the screen and saying,    Do something with that,    and  then leaving the room, which is what D.J. Lafon did half the time. And  8  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  when you don   t want to do that kind of thing, he calls you into his office  and says,    Hey, what   s the problem here?    Then you quietly tell him,    I  came here to be instructed, not for the instructor to leave the room and  just leave me hanging.    So we didn   t get along too well.  When did you start exhibiting at Indian art shows? When did you make  that decision you were going to try doing that full time?  I didn   t even know that you could make a living as an artist. I didn   t  even know that they had competitions at art shows. When Linda and I  got out of college, I went to work at Texas Instruments in Dallas, Texas,  and I kind of got tired of the faster pace, being a country boy. After  about a year or two, we moved back, and that   s when I met Doris Littrell  and Bob McCabe and Kelly Haney   s dad, Woodrow Haney. They   re the  ones that encouraged me and got me started competing and doing Indian  art for a living. So I jumped into it, both feet, and never looked back.  Occasionally, sometimes, I   ll think back and say,    Wow. I wish I could  have stayed at TI. I could have been getting a paycheck.    But anyway,  it   s been good.  Did you move to Oklahoma City or did you move back to Seminole?  I went back to Seminole. We had a little piece of property in Seminole,  and I moved in  with  my step-dad and the brothers. Linda and I wanted  to move back. Actually, I moved us back without   I didn   t really ask  her. (Laughter) I got in trouble for that.  How did you first meet Doris and Bob? Did you bring  them  some of  your paintings?  No. I think somebody told them about me, because they came down to  the house, to my house. I remember what happened. I used to sell some  small little originals to Barry   s Waffle House in Wewoka, Oklahoma.  The owner of Barry   s Waffle House was Jim Chaddick, and he was very  familiar with Doris Littrell and Bob McCabe. He   s the one that turned  me on to them, and they started buying my work and entering me in  competitions. So that   s how I got started.  Sometimes gallery owners or collectors will have an impact on the kinds  of things that you explore or think about doing because they respond  strongly to certain images or     Like I said, they didn   t have a gallery at the time   Doris and Bob  didn   t   but they traveled a lot. They were always traveling out to the  Heard Museum in Arizona, and they did a lot of correspondence and  worked with a lot of galleries out that way, and in Texas and Colorado.  9  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Back then they used to travel all over the United States doing art shows,  and I can truly say that I won awards from New Jersey to California  without ever actually being there.  I was wondering if they entered your work in competitive shows.  Yes, I   ve never been to New Jersey, but I won an award there. (Laughs)  Who were some of the early artists that were also showing with you  around that time? Did you do any mall shows?  As a matter of fact, I did one mall show, and it wasn   t very successful. It  was in Greenville Mall in Mississippi, and the person who put it on lived  in Memphis. We traveled there and we made the little trip down to  Greenville, Mississippi.  Did Linda go with you?  Yes, we didn   t have any kids, then, and a lot of times, we just picked up  and took off.  Were there some other Indian artists there at the show?  Not then. I was the only Indian artist there. Like I said, if it had been  maybe a group showing or something like that,  there  might have been  a little bit more of a response. But I was the only one there and there  wasn   t very much of an advertisement situation. A lot of mall shows can  be very deflating to your ego. (Laughter)  Yes, we   ve done a few of those. So were you entering shows like the  Philbrook Annual or the Anadarko Indian Fair?  Yes, like I said, Doris got me into a lot of these shows. She got me into  Philbrook, and I think back then, the Gilcrease  Museum  had a few  shows, too. I painted in oils, and the first couple of tries and the  Gilcrease wouldn   t even look at my work because I didn   t do flat work.  I was wondering how your work was received because it was more  realistic.  I did a lot more realistic work. And when I first started out, with a name  like Montgomery, people didn   t think I was a Native American.  Anyway, yeah, it was kind of difficult at times. We got past that.  So they   re making an assumption based on your name.  10  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Yes, a lot of times I would go to an art show, being my first time at this  particular art show, wherever, with a name like Montgomery, and people  would say,    They   ve got another white guy in here?     They were also making assumptions  based on  your style, right?  Because it was kind of Western looking?  Yes, it was Western themes and Western-type art. It was kind of a  process, getting people to know who I was, that I was Native American.  It was a process.  What was your style like early on? How was it different?  I did a lot of plain background work, just images. Kind of illustrative  work. In a sense, I was trying to emulate people like Blackbear Bosin,  what they were doing. I didn   t put anything in the background, it was  just solid.  Just white negative space?  Or I did a lot of work on mat board. I just painted the image and left  the     The background was blank and the foreground was kind of filled in?  With a few rocks in the foreground, and that was it.  When you were going to shows, hanging out with the other Indian  artists, did you get any business tips or any technique  tips ?  No, which is probably my fault. I always tried to project an image of,     This ain   t my first time.    I always tried to project that I already had  something going on even when I didn   t, even when you had to hock  something to get to the show. But I always, I don   t know, you just had to  project that you were halfway successful.  And experienced. Paladine Roy and Donald Van had a  poetic  realism  going with fully developed landscapes. Were you looking at any other  artist   s work and thinking,    Oh, I   d like to try that,    or,    No, I   m not  going to do that   ?  I was more interested in the Western art scene than I was the Native  American process, and I just stayed with that. Did a lot of oil paintings. I  did go through a period where I did a lot of watercolor. And the  watercolor just didn   t give me the, as Bob McCabe used to say,    the do     that I wanted. The softness of the edges and that kind of thing. Oil  11  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  painting   I always came back to oils. I might try something for a while,  but if I didn   t like it, I just   oil paintings were my thing, and I just  always came back to oils.  Had you been working with those quite a bit in college?  Yes, as a matter of fact, when I was at Murray, I started working in oils  back then. I got introduced to oil paints and I started dabbling in it.  When you first start painting in oils, you just kind of have to learn the  process, from darks to lights. Acrylic or water color, you have to go  from light to dark. I made a lot of mistakes, but I finally got the hang of  it. I don   t know if I will ever get the full hang of it, but I   m still learning.  Going back to that idea of being interested in Western art   of course,  the first cowboys were Indian cowboys, really   do you think it was from  growing up in a rural environment? Was it just an interest that you had  in depicting the Western lifestyle?  I don   t know it was anything specific that turned me on to doing  Western art or anything except just being around horses. I just loved  horses.  You can feel that in your work.  I try to get the muscles right. I see a lot of artists who don   t get  musculature right, and if you   re a horseman, people can tell. (Laughter)  What was one of the most unexpected experiences you had at a show or  with a gallery owner?  I think one of the first art shows that I had or didn   t have   Doris  introduced me to a lady from Wichita, Kansas, one time. I   m not going  to say names or anything,  names of  galleries. But I think she was just  getting started in the gallery owner business, too. And there was a  process of both of us learning. She asked me to do a one-man show for  her and she only gave me one month to get ready for it.  And you were painting in oils   Yes  And the show didn   t happen. She was slightly perturbed at me, and  I was, because a month is not enough time. Anyway, we both learned  together.  So you met your wife Linda in college.  Yes, we met at East Central.  12  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  What kind of role has she played in your career?  Golly. Critic. Supporter. Being there to pat me on the back. Being there  to tell me what I was doing wrong. Just being me for me when I need it.  You couldn   t ask for somebody better than that to support you. When I  say support, I   m talking about more ways than one. Yeah, when you  jump into art with both feet, a lot of times it   s beans and rice and biscuits  and gravy, so yeah, and she was the only one working at times     That helps.  She   s been there for me, and vice versa, and we   re still together.  You were an early member, I think, of the American Indian and Cowboy  Artists Association. . .  I wanted to be a member of the Cowboy Artists Association. I don   t  know if I   m right or not, but I always thought that was a little bit of a  prejudicial situation going there at times. Being a    cowboy artists     association is exactly what that meant.  One color of cowboy.  Yes, but I still have aspirations. I have one original that was donated by  Mrs. Nancy Hughes to the  National  Cowboy  and Western  Heritage  Museum. They came and asked if we would be interested in donating,  and she asked me which one I would like to have donated. As a matter  of fact, there   s a hole in the wall right there.  I remember in the    80s there was an American Indian Cowboy Artists  Association that did the San Dimas show. There was a move on the part  of these associations to include Indian artists. But as you say, sometimes  it didn   t feel like they were treating their Indian artists the same.  I was part of that scene, too, for a couple of years. The San Dimas  Native American Art Show. What was it? American Indian and Cowboy  Artists Association. A lot of times I wish I had stuck with it. But I got  frustrated early with some things that happened and went on. And a lot  of times you don   t have the patience to see things through or overlook  some situations. And maybe the people that were involved didn   t know,  and we both make mistakes, so     Right. Do you remember how the Indian art landscape changed from the     80s to the    90s?  13  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  There was a lot of prejudice going on back then. I remember one time  my friends and I went to Crow Fair, Montana, and we took my car and  my car broke down in Casper, Wyoming. They told me it would be  Monday before they could get it fixed, and we hitchhiked from Casper to  Montana, and we spent the weekend there. Hitchhiking up there wasn   t  bad. Getting out of there was. And I remember standing on the side of  the road and some cowboys would come by and try to run you over just  because you were Native American. That was not too long after the  Wounded Knee situation  the 1972 occupation of Wounded Knee by  activists with the American Indian Movement , and there was a lot  animosity there.  And you were going to Crow Fair just for the powwow?  Yes, we were just going to go to the powwow, and turned out to be an  experience.  In terms of just the popularity of Indian art, here in Oklahoma and  regionally, too, the mid-eighties were a good time, when people were  really selling     It was good back then, yeah.  Then it changed. I   m wondering     I think everything was good up to about 1984 where the bottom of the  oil well business dropped out. You   re making good money, and all of a  sudden, boom, the bottom drops out. What do you do? It   s kind of like  starting all over again.  Did you change your painting strategies or your business strategies?  No, I   ve always been kind of a, well, let   s put it this way. I   ve never had  a business strategy. I   m one of those guys that you   ve got to kick his  teeth in to get him to   I   ve never. Maybe I   m just dumb, I don   t know.  Well, you   re focused on the paintings.  I just do things a certain way and hopefully that will get me through.  Bob McCabe told me something one time, a long time ago. He said,     Art   s going to change, and it always has, but things come around, and  only the good artists are going to survive.    I   ve always tried to be a good  artist and do things the right way.  Some of your trademark images are Plains images. How did you first get  interested in Plains culture?  14  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Cowboys and Indians. (Laughter) John Wayne. Anthony Quinn playing  Native Americans. You know, he wasn   t Native American, but what the  heck? You grew up watching Native Americans on TV and you knew  things weren   t great, and you tried to portray it the right way and tried to  tell people that this is the way it was, or how it was and is. I still try to  do that. I haven   t changed at all in that concern.  So you   re just trying to show segments of Plains Indian life that you  wouldn   t see  on television ?  Yes. A lot of people ask me why I don   t paint my Seminole heritage  more or the Eastern Indians more. Because there wasn   t any money in it.  Bottom line. It   s not that I didn   t want to. You had to eat. You had a  family to support, and you did what sold. And that was it.  But you have painted Seminole paintings and Creek paintings. How  much of your work do you think has been devoted to those images?  Golly, I probably wouldn   t even say ten percent. But a lot of my  paintings aren   t really Western or Eastern. A lot of times I like to just  paint a portrait showing a Native American face and show the emotion  rather than the tribe, tribal history or anything. A lot of people used to  say that I paint portraits as well as anyone, but a lot of times, if I  couldn   t paint the Seminole lifestyle  it   s  because now, a lot of people  didn   t know about the Eastern peoples from the Northeastern seaboard  all the way down to the Seminoles in Florida. The only person they  associated with was the Cherokee. I hate to say this, but a lot of people  say,    Hey, my grandmother was a Cherokee princess.    But when you  hear about the Trail of Tears, it wasn   t only the Cherokees that went  through the Trail of Tears. All of the Eastern seaboard people went  through it. We   re talking about Choctaws, Chickasaw, Creeks   they just  traveled further.  So you   re interested in catching that humanity, rather than something  tribally specific? You   re a Master Artist of the Five Tribes Museum.  How did you feel when you received that title? What did that mean to  you?  I was elated. I didn   t actually know what    master artist    meant, but  there   s no way in the world that I could live up to being a master artist.  You can only try. There   s a lot of people before me who were associated  with being Master Artists of the Five Civilized Tribes and I was  included in good company and that was a feather in my hat. I just tried  to live up to it, the standards that they set.  15  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  You went to both France and Japan, I read, with exhibits of your work?  Is that right?  I didn   t go.  You didn   t make that Franco-American trip, either?  No, no. As a matter of fact, people never told me that they were going.  They just took my work.  They just took your work?  They just took my work. That was good. It   s nice to be included.  What   s been one of the most fun places that you   ve gone with your  work? Or most memorable place that you   ve traveled in this country?  I really enjoyed going out to San Dimas, California. You know what I  remember most about that? The size of the strawberries out there. They  had the biggest strawberries. They would put on this banquet for the  artists and the patrons and it was a meal to die for, but the thing I  remember about it was the strawberries. They had the biggest  strawberries, man. It was awesome. I enjoyed it.  In 1990, the Indian Arts and Crafts act was passed, and it required  artists to provide proof of enrollment or be certified by their tribes as  artists with that heritage. Do you remember the impact of that bill on  galleries or individual artists?  Being truthful with you, I never gave it much thought because I was  already doing what I was doing and I was Native American. Other than  having the name Montgomery   I had to prove myself, not prove myself  but prove my heritage. But, other than that, I never gave it a thought.  And I   m sure that people would probably find fault with that, but I never  tried to be, how do you say it, politically correct. I just did what I did  and let people judge me for my art, and that was it.  You were one of the five hundred national artists who entered a design  for that Trail of Painted Ponies. What design did you paint on your  horse?  I tried to paint a paint  horse  with Indian images in the paint. A paint  horse has got spots in it, whether it   s a white horse with brown spots, or  a brown horse with white spots. But within the spots, I tried to  incorporate Native American images throughout the horse. It was fun  doing it. I enjoyed that.  16  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  In terms of tribal support for the arts now, are you seeing more of that?  Do you think we   re getting to a point where tribes are actually getting  behind their artists more and being more supportive?  I really can   t see it. Maybe it   s just me, but I   ve seen more tribes going  through the casino phase than I   ve actually     That   s had an impact if they buy art from the artists, but that   s not  always the case.  I   ve never had a casino approach me and want me to do a specific mural  or anything like that. And I think it would be fun monetary-wise. But  then again, I don   t know if I would like my paintings hanging in a  casino, anyway. I   m a Christian, and I just don   t think that would be  appropriate for me.  In 2010, you won Grand Award at Red Earth for your painting    Eagle  Dog.    We   re going to see that in a minute. But I noticed in addition to  the kind of realism that characterizes your style, there   s this  impressionistic eagle in the background, just real sketchy. Is this a  direction that you   re going to be exploring more?  It was just something that seemed right for that painting. I originally had  something entirely different in mind when I started the painting, and it  just kind of evolved into a mystic scene in the background   the spiritual  aspect of it. And it turned out well.  Yes, it did. You work in both oils and acrylics, and we   ve talked about  that a little bit. Do you do pastels or charcoals at all for any of your  portraits?  Way back when, I dabbled in charcoals, I dabbled in pastels. Like I said,  at one time, I dabbled in a little bit of everything, whatever got the  goose, so to speak.  You mentioned the importance of kind of capturing emotion in your  paintings. Do you have a story in mind that leads you into that emotion?  I really can   t say that it was a particular instance that leads me into doing  what I do. I just enjoy capturing   whether it   s a small child or an  elder   I just like to show emotion in the faces. Native Americans, they  always have a spiritual aspect in whatever they do, everything they do.  And I try to show that emotion in the things that I do.  Eyes are a really important part of that. I understand they   re hard to  17  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  paint.  Like they always say, the eyes are the windows to the soul, so yes. If I  don   t get the nose right, I   ve got to get the eyes right. (Laughter)  Does one come before the other? (Laughter)  No. I don   t try to put any one aspect before the other. I just try to capture  emotions in the facial expressions that I paint.  Have you ever used family members as models?  Many, many times. As a matter of fact, just about everybody has shown  up in one painting or another. So, yes, whether it   s my brothers, aunts,  uncles, yeah. Just about everybody   s been there.  Do you work from photographs as well?  I do, but reference only. They might give me a particular image that I  want to portray, but like I said, it   s reference only. Make sure I get  everything right.  No overhead projector?  No, no, no, no, no. To me that   s a no-no. I   ve seen a lot of people that do  that, but where   s the art involved when you do something like that?  How about props in your studio? Do you collect things like drums or  rattles?  I try to, but I   ve never been financially sound enough to go buy artifacts  and things like that. A lot of times, I just go buy magazines and books  and do a lot of research, what I need.  In terms of accessing a kind of inter-tribal image, feathers and staffs and  blankets or things, you   re choosing things carefully because they have  weight  with  a lot of different tribes?  Every aspect of a Native American   s life is, not only emotion, but their  emotion plays on their spiritual aspect. I try to portray that spiritual  aspect in a lot of my paintings, whether it   s a spear or whether it   s a  pipe, or carrying a buffalo robe with all the images of past exploits on  the buffalo robe or different situations. If I don   t have it, I   ll go and find   what I need  to put into one of my paintings. I   m always looking for  different things I can use.  18  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Research is time-consuming, isn   t it?  Yes. A lot of times when I was younger, as a matter of fact, not so long  ago, I used to spend a heck of a lot of time drinking beer in beer joints.  But you know what my favorite place to be is now? Barnes and Noble.  (Laughter)  How do you think your style has changed over the years?  Hopefully for the better. When you first start out, you do  only  things  that you know how to do, one pick at a time, but as you evolve as an  artist, you go to different aspects and different periods. You   re trying not  to change your style, but without knowing it, you do, because of the  experience you gain. Refining and honing your skills.  What is your creative process, beginning with how you get your ideas?  It all starts with the face, believe it or not. It all starts with the face, and  trying to see what I can do to surround it, whether it   s animal totems,  bears, eagles, wolves. Like I said, the Native American, their spirituality  had all of these animal totems. Whether it be a wolf, bear. A lot of times  they would try to emulate the images of these animals, the cunning of  the wolf. Sometimes a warrior would carry a shield, and he would have a  little totem of a kingfisher or an eagle. It all comes down to the  spirituality, and emulating the spirit of that particular animal or bird. A  lot of times, I include eagles in my paintings because a lot of Native  Americans believed that because the eagle flew so high, he was a  messenger to the Great Spirit. I don   t think a guy could explain verbally  everything that he feels, but hopefully some of my images can capture  what I can   t explain by word of mouth.  Right. A picture   s worth a thousand words. Looking back on your  career, what was one fork in the road that seems especially meaningful  to you now?  When I stopped drinking. I started drinking when I was a senior in  college, and a lot of people think that, to put it  bluntly , I was a drunk. I  don   t know how I survived as an artist all these years, but when I quit  drinking, that was a new revelation in my life. It took a stint in the prison  system, but I think today I   m a better guy for it, and also a better artist.  Was your art something that you could hold on to along with that  spirituality?  Oh, yes. As a matter of fact, they sent you to different camps in the  prison system, and everywhere I went, people knew who I was because  19  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  of   I hate to say, fame   but as an artist. I went to a camp in Antlers,  Oklahoma, and I stayed there for about seven, eight months, and a lady,  the librarian there, knew who I was. She fixed a room up for me  complete with television, big table, and said,    This is for you. All you  have to do is come in here and paint.    Didn   t cost me anything. She  didn   t ask me for anything. She just provided that situation for me, that  scenario for me. I couldn   t have been more grateful to anybody. That  was great.  How wonderful. What has been one of the highlights of your career?  Winning Grand  Award  at Red Earth. (Laughter) I   ve had so many nice  paintings that I   ve thought should have got something at Red Earth, but  you don   t get anything, you know what I mean? And it   s not only    it   just depends on who the judges are, and what they like. There   s a couple  of times when I thought I had a couple of really, really, super nice  pieces, but guess who was the judge? It was a sculptor. And that   s the  way it goes. It   s not that I was completely devoid of winning anything at  Red Earth, it   s just that I wanted the Grand. And God blessed me with  getting there. That was awesome.  That was well deserved. What would you tell a young person who  wanted to pursue a career in Indian art today?  Don   t go  No, I   m just kidding. (Laughter) No, no, no, no. To be  truthful, don   t force it. Do what you feel. Do everything you can to be  the best that you can be. I think that   s probably the basic  message . If  it   s going to come, it   s going to come. If it ain   t, it ain   t, and that   s about  it. Whatever you do, be sincere about it.  You have to love it to stick with it.  Yes, yes, yes, you   ve got to. If you didn   t love it   I don   t know where I  would be. Hard times, bad times, just having art there brings peace of  mind. Doesn   t make a difference whether you sell it or not, just being  able to do it. What can I say? I think I   ve been blessed.  Well, we   re glad you have stuck with it, Gary.  Me too, me too.  We   re going to take a look at a couple of your paintings. I   d like you to  tell us about this painting first. That   s something we didn   t talk about.  Do you title all your paintings?  I do, but I don   t remember the title for this one, I did it so long ago. I do  20  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  remember the image I was trying to portray is the look and emotion of  the faces as they were removed from their homeland to Oklahoma.  And these are Seminole people.  Not knowing what to do. Just totally being kind of lost. I think that kind  of says it all right there.  It does. Even the choice of the short grass  in the picture  as opposed to  swamps and     Alligators.  Yes. (Laughter) A big change in geography.  As a matter of fact, I was getting ready to do a painting of Seminoles in  Florida, and I was going to do a Seminole relaxing with alligator boots  on. You see a lot of magazines with J.B. Hill or whatever boot company,  Nakota Boots with alligator boots.  I think that would be great. I think you need to do that. Would you like to  tell us about this painting?  This painting was the painting that won the Grand Award at Red Earth   Indian Arts Festival , 2010. This image is something that   I had  something completely different in mind, but it just evolved into what  you see. I hate to say this, but when it won the award, it wasn   t finished.  And the thing about it is, I don   t think anybody noticed because  everybody was focused on the face and the upper torso. A lot of times,  you go through a painting and you try to do it quickly and spontaneously  and there are some times when you know it   s missing something, but it  doesn   t really gel until later. This is one of those paintings. The eagle  that you see in the shield didn   t come about until I was laying on a bed  in a motel in North Carolina   Cherokee, North Carolina. I never had  tried to put an image on the shield, but I couldn   t come up with an  image. I tried to paint something else on it, and it didn   t work. I put  turpentine on the rag, dipped the rag in turpentine and tried to wipe it  completely off. And I thought I had. I went back and laid down, and this  image just popped in my head. It was just something that was meant to  be. I think only a Native American probably knows what I   m talking  about or an artist knows what I   m talking about. Things that just happen  accidentally. I think that made the whole painting.  It does. It looks so dimensional. The eagle looks like it   s coming through  the shield. So are you going to finish it?  21  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Well, it   s finished now, but when I entered the competition at Red Earth,  it was not finished. And I   ll be the first one to tell you that. There was  things that I wanted to do to it that I didn   t have time for. And there are  things in it now that, like I said, that happened accidentally after the fact.  But I   m thankful to the judges who saw   I don   t know whether it was  potential. But thank you, anyway. I think when you first see the painting,  people are drawn to the image of the face and the headdress and the  eagles, and I   m just thankful that they didn   t see the bottom part of it  when they chose it to be the Grand Award winner.  That   s a common experience. A lot of artists can attest to things that  weren   t finished but went into the gallery or into the show. How about  this painting, Gary?  This painting was a painting   it could either be a Sioux or a  Cheyenne   but it was a Western Plains tribe, chasing a white buffalo,  and what the white buffalo meant to the Plains Indians. There   s big  medicine. I don   t know exactly how you would describe it, but the white  buffalo held high esteem to the different American  Indian  Plains tribes.  A lot of people asked me why I portrayed him as not actually pursuing  the white buffalo. What I tried to portray was the actual reverence he  had for the white buffalo and the spirituality of that beast. What it would  mean to him, but he also hated to kill it. That   s what I was trying to  portray.  And this one is done also with acrylics, but it   s almost like a  watercolor     Yeah, it is done with acrylic, and it was thinned with water and I guess  you could call it watercolor.  One of my favorite artists is a Cowboy Artist Association member. He   s  now deceased. His name was Frank McCarthy, and he don   t know it,  and never will know it now, but like I said, he was one of my favorite  artists. A lot of the images that I portray has to do with horses, and he  painted the horse as well as anybody. I think he was a master at horse  anatomy, and his work as far as painting a Native American on  horseback. I just loved his work. He was probably one of the most  influential artists that I   ve ever   I never got to meet him, but I   m glad  he was there. Like I said, this is one of the images that I painted, I   m not  going to say to emulate, but that looked like one of the images McCarthy  would paint. I know it doesn   t come close, but     It was inspired by him.  Yes.  22  Little Thunder  Montgomery  Little Thunder  Well, thank you very much, Gary. Thank you for your time.  Thank you. Appreciate it, and appreciate you thinking of me, letting me  do this.  It was an honor.  -------  -------  
