 Little Thunder My name is Julie Pearson Little-Thunder. Today is Tuesday April 14, 2015,  and I   m interviewing Chickasaw bladesmith Daniel Worcester, for the  Oklahoma Native Artist project sponsored by the Oklahoma Oral History  Research Program at Oklahoma State University. Daniel, you describe your  work with knives as neo-traditionalist. Your elegantly designed pieces have  won you numerous competitive awards and museum shows including an  exhibit at the Museum of Arts and Design in New York. Among other  honors, you   re an inductee into the Chickasaw Hall of Fame and a former  Red Earth Honored One. Thank you for taking the time to talk with me.  Worcester Well, I   m glad you came.  Little Thunder Where were you born and where did you grow up?  Worcester I was born in Ardmore about six miles from here. I   d say the first six years  of my life, my dad was a professional rodeo bareback saddle bronc rider.  We traveled around the country and different places. I guess I grew up in  hotels, and motels, and at rodeos, and things like that. Then after he got hurt  rodeoing, he bought a ranch down right around Stewart, Oklahoma. He  bought a ranch down there, I think it was like 1,800 acres. It was a really big  ranch, and really seemed huge to a little kid. It was kind of wild and wooly  down there. (Laughs) We stayed there for a while, for maybe a year and a  half. Then he bought this place here right outside Ardmore and we moved  here. I grew up here and this is what I call home. Spent twelve years in Lone  Grove School, graduated from there. Right out of high school I went to, one  month out of high school, I went to work for Southwestern Bell/AT T. I  spent about thirty-eight years there.  Little Thunder So your mom, what did she do for a living?  5  Worcester She broke horses and she was a jockey. She was very good with horses as  well as a housewife. As far as having any occupation outside the home,  other than breaking horses     Little Thunder She raised horses, too?  Worcester We raised horses, yeah. Back then there were brush tracks all around. Race  tracks. Matter of fact, from here I could walk right over the hill and every  Sunday I   d walk over there or ride my horse, and they   d have a four-gate  race track. It was really fun to just go over there and she   d ride. It was  quarter horses, but they   d go all over the state. Brush tracks is what we  called them. They were really fun and you could learn a lot as a kid.  Little Thunder Was the Chickasaw on your mom   s side or your dad   s side?  Worcester It   s on my father   s side. He grew up   he was born right north of Pontotoc,  south of Ada, so the Chickasaw   s from his side of the family.  Little Thunder Right. How about brothers or sisters?  Worcester Had one half-brother, he passed away here about fifteen years ago. Other  than that, I was the only child.  Little Thunder What were some of the places that your dad rodeoed around that you have  memories of?  Worcester I   ve got vague memories of them because I was so young, but I do  remember going up into New York, Niagara Falls, some of those places like  that. Before him and my mom was married, he   d rodeo all over. It   d be like  four and five of them traveling in a car, and they   d go one rodeo this day,  one rodeo the next day. Of course, when I came along, I   m sure it kind of  slowed them down a little bit, (Laughter) just traveling all along. After we  got this place and he got a job as a ranch foreman, he stayed there until he  retired working on a ranch.  Little Thunder What was your relationship with your grandparents on either side of your  family?  Worcester My grandparents from my mother   s side were raised all here. We spent a lot  of time with them. We   d go down to my dad   s mom maybe two or three  times a year to see her.  Little Thunder Where did she live?  Worcester She lived at the old original allotment place, right north of Pontotoc.  6  Little Thunder How important was your Chickasaw heritage growing up?  Worcester It was real important as far as who you were. I just knew I was Chickasaw  and I never doubted it or anything. When we went to my grandmother   s, she  spoke a lot of Chickasaw. Of course, my dad, he   d do it, and he   d teach me  some of the Chickasaw words, and some of the Chickasaw slang words.  Little Thunder Great, so you were around the language a little bit?  Worcester Yes.  Little Thunder What kind of art were you exposed to in the home?  Worcester In the home there was   I guess in the home as far as art, they   re just  pictures on the wall, that sort of thing as a child. But I took an early interest  in art as far as I was always drawing and coloring, and making things, little  sculptures, and whittling. I liked to whittle a lot. Actually, I   ve got a scar  here on this finger from when I cut myself, I   ve still got a scar, and on this  finger here from where my cousin cut me. He was whittling with a knife and  I wanted that and I reached and that knife slipped and I looked and I said,     That looks pretty bad,    and I ran about a half a mile all the way home and  had it doctored up. (Laughs) That   s amazing how that scar is still there.  Yeah, we used to always do things like that. Back then, all boys pretty much  carried pocket knives and there was a game we all played called Mumblety-peg.  We   d play that, and you can play it at school, and no one ever bothered  anybody with it. It was     Little Thunder It   s throwing   you want to explain?  Worcester Mumblety-peg is a weird little game. You take a folded knife and you bring  the blades out and then you flip it and if it sticks, then you get to hammer the  peg into the ground. If it doesn   t, then the other guy does it, and it goes  around and around. Finally, someone has to pull the peg out of the ground  with their teeth. Everybody just gets a big laugh out of it because when they  come up they   ve got dirt and mud all over their face. (Laughter)  Little Thunder That   s not the winner that gets to do that, right?  Worcester No, no, I think not. (Laughter) As far as art at school, there wasn   t any art at  school, but I loved drawing at school. Everybody   d come to me and they   d  say,    Will you draw this picture? Will you draw that picture?    I loved just  drawing. I did that at the house and everything, but I was always interested  in art.  Little Thunder Do you remember being exposed to any Native art, specifically, or the first  time you might   ve run across some Native art     7  Worcester As a child, no. I don   t remember any.  Little Thunder And in middle school and high school, were you also encouraged? Did you  also take art     Worcester There wasn   t any art at my school, ever. Still, I   d draw everything. Kind of a  story I remember was when we got to the seventh grade, every year at the  state fair the school would have buses and you   d get to go up to the state fair  for the day, which was    (we was in first through sixth, you didn   t get to do  that), but when you got to seventh grade, I guess they thought you was big  enough to do something. Anyway, I got five dollars and I got to go up to the  State Fair, and me and my buddies, we all just were running wild, having a  good time at the fair. I had five dollars, but I knew it had to last all day. I  wanted to do something really neat with it and didn   t just want to go to the  shows. I rode a few rides and I had about two dollars left. I didn   t eat or  drink anything, because I knew I   ve got   I ran across this art booth where  you could make your own pictures. It was a crazy deal. It spun around and  you could put different colors in it and it   d make your own picture and it  was a dollar. The guys said,    Come on, let   s go get to this show here.  They   re fixing to have another show. Let   s go see it.    I said,    No, I   m going  to do this.    I did that. I paid that for it, and to this day I kept that and I   ve  got it in my office. What   s really funny is I   ve got other artwork in there  from really good artists and when the grandkids come in, I   ll say,    Your  Poppy did one of these pictures.    My little granddaughter looked around and  she pointed at the one I did and she said,    Yeah, Poppy. I bet that   s it right  there.    (Laughter) I thought,    Well, a kid can see it.    I thought I   d fool her  for a while, but no.  Little Thunder That is funny. Quickly in terms of school then, even though you were just  drawing and painting on your own when you could, or drawing, did your  teachers recognize your talent?  Worcester Yeah, I had several teachers   they   d say,    Go to the office. We   re not going  to be doing that in here.    (Laughter) But I did have   I remember one  teacher that said,    That   s really good, Danny. You did a good job there,     and it made you feel good.  Little Thunder You mentioned that after high school   why don   t you tell us again what  happened after high school?  Worcester After high school, a month after I graduated, I went to work for  Southwestern Bell. In August I married my wife, Debbie, and I worked.  First thing, within the first six months living, we bought a new little trailer  house. It was great. I told Debbie,    We   ve got to get some artwork in here.  These walls just look bare.    I went and bought a whole bunch of boards and  8  painted all kinds of pictures and we hung them all up. Friends would come  over and they   d look at that and they   d say,    What   s that?    and I   d say,    I  painted that.    They   d say,    What is it?    and I   d say,    I   m not really sure  what it is. What do you think?    They   d just say,    Oh yeah, that   s okay.     (Laughter) But I knew they was thinking,    What is that?    I kept on with art  like that.  Little Thunder Were they sort of semi-abstract, too?  Worcester Yeah, they were. I always liked lines, as far as symmetrical lines this way.  But I did do birds and different things like that, painting. I was always   for  a whole time, I   d always have me some paints and stuff and go and paint.  Something to do with art.  Little Thunder You weren   t doing anything connected with art at your job, right?  Worcester No.  Little Thunder What did you do at Southwestern Bell?  Worcester What I did there was   I think I did about everything: fix cut cables, repair  lines, go into people   s houses, install phones. Probably went into six or  seven houses a day. You got to meet a lot of different people and see how a  lot of different people lived and everything. That was a really good learning  experience to meet different people every day. I did that, but I just kept on  with my     Little Thunder See some different art, too, probably.  Worcester Really did. Honestly, that exposed me to some art, going into people   s  houses. We   d talk about it, you   d always see something there in somebody   s  house. Oh wow, there   s a Navajo rug and they were always   most people  really liked to show and tell what their art was. So it wasn   t like being  confined in an office or a factory job all day. It was just like every day was  a learning experience. You might see a little piece of art, a statue, or  anything, and people really always liked to tell you things and talk about  their art because they was proud of it.  Little Thunder When did you, while you were working, when did you get back into three-dimensional  work, and how did you end up in knives?  Worcester I was just kind of antsy about it. I knew there was something I wanted to do  with art, but I just never could put my finger on it. I seen this ad for a  bladesmithing school in Texarkana, Arkansas, which was an extension of  Texarkana up north at Washington, Arkansas. I told Debbie, I said,    Look  here, this looks kind of intriguing. I wonder what it   s all about.    She said,  9     You need to find out a little more about it.    So I called and I found out.  What it was, it was the bladesmithing school. It   s where you could make  your own blades. I said,    Wow, that seems neat. You make your own blades.  You don   t just grind things off, but you actually go through the whole  process.    Anyway, I found out all about it and I told her. She said,    Well,  you need to go do that.    I said,    I hate to leave here and leave you for       It  was two-week school     Little Thunder A two-week school.  Worcester    hate to leave you with three kids and an old pickup because we had an old  pickup and a newer car, a Monte Carlo, and she took out them Monte Carlo  keys and said,    You go down to that school.     Little Thunder How old were you?  Worcester Oh, it was in 1989.  Little Thunder Okay.  Worcester I can   t remember   I   d have to figure up how old I was, but the way I always  say it I was so much older then. I   m younger than that now. It was a good  experience as far as I went and I learned. It seemed like I just absorbed it. I  just ate it up. I finally had my hands on something that I could actually do. It  was just for the blades. You learned how to make the blades and everything,  so after that was through I came home and I   m thinking,    Now I   ve got to  go see what I can do with it as far as handles and everything like that.    I  gathered up all my equipment and everything. That was a process, buying.  I   d go to auctions and sales and try to find things that were used that you  could put together and I wound up putting together everything. That was  probably about a year and a half, two-year project, just getting everything  together.  Little Thunder If you   ve never made a handle before, and you   ve not had the opportunity to  watch anybody else make a knife handle, that must   ve been kind of a  challenge.  Worcester Well, it was. I bought a little book and it was explaining how to do it. Of  course, you read books and there   s nothing like hands-on experience.  Through trial and error I managed to muddle through it and get it done.  Then there was always these knife books you could get at the store, and read  about all the experts, about how they did it. I   d get those books, and I   d look  at them, and I   d try to do this and try to do that. Finally, I said,    I   m not  getting another book.    I threw every knife book I had away, and I said,    I   m  going to do it on my own.    I did and I   ve never gotten another knife book.  (Laughter)  10  Little Thunder Was it partly because what you were trying was not working?  Worcester It   s partly     Little Thunder Based on your reading?  Worcester With me, it   s that I can   t follow instructions. If I   m there and somebody   s  showing me something, I can pick it up like that. But to read it, it just  doesn   t compute.  Little Thunder So you   re working your job, too, at the same time. Then when you come  home at night     Worcester In the evenings     Little Thunder    or in the evening, you   re tinkering.  Worcester Yeah, weekends.  Little Thunder When did you decide,    Okay, now I know how to do this, I   m going to make  a few of these and I   m going to do something with them.     Worcester I finally finished one knife. That was my whole goal, really, is just to make  one for myself because I always admired custom knives, but I couldn   t  afford one. I thought,    The  500 I spent for my school, I can probably at  some point make a knife that I can say is mine and that will cover the  expenses. I won   t have to buy one.    I actually finally finished my first knife  and I was just really proud of it. It looked terrible, but it was usable and the  blade looked real good, but the handle was really funny looking. Somebody  came by and I guess they   I probably showed it to them. They said,    Wow,  that   s neat. That   s pretty good,    and I thought,    It is?    (Laughs) I thought,     Hmm, I   ll make another one. I   ll try to do a little better.    I just kept  piddling and making one.  Finally, someone told me. They said,    You know, you   re Chickasaw, you  could go up to Red Earth.    I said,    What   s Red Earth?    They said,    It   s this  show and if you   re Indian, you can get in. If you do artwork or what you   re  doing there, you can probably get in and see.     I thought,    That sounds neat. I think I   ll try it.    I made a few calls and  finally found out and I got an application and I sent it in. I think back then  you had to do   I can   t remember if it was slides or photographs, but I   d  always have a 35 millimeter camera, so taking photographs, that was fun  with me. Anyway, I sent it in the first year and they sent back a letter that  11  said,    Sorry, thank you for entering, but better luck next time.    (Laughs) I  thought     Little Thunder You didn   t get accepted.  Worcester Yeah, but it didn   t bother me a bit. I just told myself, I said    I   m going to try  and do a little better.    The next year I sent in and I was accepted, so I was  really happy.    Wow, I   m going to a real art show.     Little Thunder From the beginning I imagine your handles were   had you already  developed this sort of inlay look     Worcester No, that hadn   t came yet. What I had was pretty much what people would  say, the traditional knife, like a bone or a deer antler, or a wooden handle.  That   s pretty much where I was at that time.  Little Thunder All right. What was like when you got into Red Earth the following year?  Worcester Oh gosh, it was fantastic. I was seeing all this great artwork there and  visiting with different artists   not selling anything, but that   s okay. I was  just happy to be there. Then somebody came by and bought something. I  thought,    Wow, that   s pretty neat to sell something. That means they like it,  too.    It was just a real neat experience. Got to meet a good buddy of mine,  Benjamin Harjo, he came by. That   s the first year that I met him. We talked  and he said,    Daniel, you need to see about going out to Indian Market.    I  said,    Where   s that?    He said,    Santa Fe.    I said,    Yeah, that sounds good.     After I got through talking to Ben, we came home, and I was telling Debbie,  I said,    I just can   t believe an artist like Benjamin Harjo would tell me that  my work was good    because he told me he liked that, and he told me I could  go out to Santa Fe to Indian Market. I mean to have Ben tell me that I was     that was really encouragement. I guess I was just encourageable.  (Laughter)  Little Thunder How did you then find this other style of working with the handles?  Worcester That   s pretty neat. I got     Little Thunder It was probably the first time you   d seen Ben   s work, which is a lot of the  times very geometric.  Worcester Exactly, it was. It was very     Little Thunder Colorful.  12  Worcester    it was very colorful. I was real impressed with the way the colors were  and everything. It stuck in my mind, all those colors. Then I wound up  getting an application and I did send it out to Santa Fe. I got in out there.  Little Thunder How many years is this after Red Earth?  Worcester I want to say a year. It was Red Earth and then it was like, maybe, the next  year. I sent in to Santa Fe and they said they accepted me and I told them  what I did, but they wanted me to forge. They wanted me to do a  demonstration. I thought,    That   s really good. I   d like to do that out there.    I  enjoyed   I   d been to several spots around here as far as just showing how I  forge. I was ready to go and they called me and they said,    We   re going to  have to cancel that.    I said,    Why? What happened?    They said,    We   ve got  a drought this year.    The fire marshal won   t let them do any kind of open  flames. They wanted to know       is that what you had?    I said,    Yeah, I   ve  got a coal-fired forge and that would be probably dangerous.    Anyway, they  let me share a booth instead of giving me my own booth, and I did that.  The next year I   d known Les Berryhill (he   s a good friend of mine, and Pat)  and I got together with him. We shared a booth the following year, and  we   ve been sharing ever since. But I was still doing my traditional type  artwork pieces. Les, he gave me some old dominoes he said was his Dad   s.  He said,    You might try using these if you can on any of your handles.    I  thought,    Okay, I   ll try that.    I brought them home and I laid them over on  my shop desk and I never tried them. I   m still doing with the wood and the  bone and things like that. Then one day I just was out of material as far as  my traditional wood and bone. And I seen his dominoes over there and I  tried them and I thought,    That   s neat how those dominoes look and  everything.    I started putting a little bit of inlay in them, but they were white  dominoes. They weren   t any color or anything.  The next year, I kind of mixed them up with the traditional, but they still  looked traditional. At that time, I was leaving the dominoes showing the  dots on it. People were saying,    That   s neat there like that.    Then the next  year, (or it might   ve been the year after) I did that a couple of years. I was  picking up collectors and everything and they were liking what I did.  Especially being as I forged my own blade, I could have all kinds of neat  designs where the blade was.  Then I   d ran onto some billiard balls and some old colored dominoes and I  put that with there. I made one knife that was all different colors. At that  time, they had a miniature category and I made a small one like that, too. I  thought,    These are pretty. I like these. I   m going to make some more of  them, not like that, but using these colors.     Of course, go out to Santa Fe and you   re out there early to enter your work.  13  Went to enter it and I   m just happy as could be with these pieces. The  person that I sat down at the table with to look at them, she looked at them  and she said,    Where   d you get these out of? Cracker Jacks?    When she said  that it just felt like somebody stuck a heart in my knife. I thought,    Uh-oh,  they   re not going to like this, this isn   t good.    (Laughs) She said,    We can   t  take this. What did you make these out of?    I said,    I found some old  dominoes and I found some old billiard balls. I had some old silver that I  used for inlay.    She said,    I   m going to go check with the director.    I could  see them over there talking and going back and forth. All the time I   m  thinking,    Most of my pieces I   ve brought are like this. This isn   t going to  be a good day.    Then she came back and she said,    He said it   d be okay,  being as you found your material. This is just different material that no one   s  ever       (she   d never seen anybody bring in). I said,    I understand.     I was happy they took it. Then went about my business and come Friday  night, the art preview came up. I   d seen on the table I   d won a first place on  my big knife, and a first place on my miniature. Man, I couldn   t believe it. I  thought,    Wow.    Then the collectors   they really did like that type of work.  I was kind of torn between doing things like that because I knew I was going  to alienate some collectors because I   d built up a pretty good following of  collectors that liked the traditional stuff. But there just wasn   t anywhere else  to go with the traditional. It was boring. I was bored with it, so I had to leave  it behind and go to something else. This is the way I wanted to go, but I was  just hoping there   ll be new collectors. I was really surprised, most of my old  collectors, they were in love with it, and I picked up a lot of new collectors.  Every year I   ve been picking up new collectors and it   s been great.  Little Thunder They followed you into the new style?  Worcester Yes, they did. That was really   it was kind of scary because you think  you   re going to make people not want what you   ve got, but yet that   s what  you want to do. In the end, it was really what you want to do. I   m still that  way today. I look for all kinds of new things and different ways to do things.  I think it would be really boring if you didn   t.  Little Thunder That   s a great story. They just didn   t know how to categorize you. What role  does Debbie play in your art business? It   s kind of a two-person deal a lot of  times.  Worcester She provides good moral support and she   s a good critic. She   ll see things  and she   ll say,    Why did you do it like this or like that?    I   ll look at it and  I   ll say,    I don   t know.    (Laughter) She   s good to bounce new ideas off of.  Sometimes she   ll say,    I really do like that.    As far as in the business, she  says,    That   s yours. You   ve done some good so far, you just keep on doing  it.     14  Little Thunder You have a neat kind of website. Did she help with that or     Worcester I don   t have a website.  Little Thunder Oh, you don   t?  Worcester No.  Little Thunder You know what, I bet I was on Chickasaw Nation  website .  Worcester The Chickasaw Nation main     Little Thunder They have a really nice website.  Worcester They do. They do that.  Little Thunder In fact, yeah, I didn   t see a website for you (need to correct that). How did  you figure out how to price your work?  Worcester You just put a price out there, thinking from what other things that you   ve  seen. Time-wise, you can   t really show your time on anything. As far as  what would something like that be worth to someone, that   s about the only  way I could do it. Pricing is kind of a hard thing to do because you never  really know   you put a price out there. You have a price that you   re  comfortable receiving for your time, but then you wonder,    Is anybody  going to pay that?    Then you see how it goes and lets it equal out and you  think,    This is a happy medium. The customer   s happy and I   m happy.  Little Thunder When you went out to Santa Fe, that   s sort of a different pricing.  Worcester Actually it can be, but I   ve never adjusted with winning on my first place.  Little Thunder With the prize winner?  Worcester Yeah. I   ve just priced them and whatever the price was there, whether I won  or didn   t, it   d be that way. I did, in 19   I want to say 1999 (I think it was     99) that I made a pair of spurs and I won the Challenge Award. I was real  happy with that.  I really had no idea in the world what price to put on a pair of spurs, but I  put the price out there and the collector was happy to get it. They   d never  bought a knife from me, but they just came by because they   d seen the  spurs. That was one thing, just like pricing. Who knows?  Little Thunder Right. What did you charge for your spurs?  15  Worcester I think they were around  1,800. I think I made another pair for the next  year and that was it. I just got into spurs. It was one of those things that was  different and I wanted to try. My dad, with his rodeo experience, he knew  some old spur makers. He told me how to make them as far as from one  piece, so they weren   t welded. They were just one piece, each spur. I wanted  to try it and see. He   d told me about it. I tried that, but what I found out with  spurs is I really don   t care to make any more after two or three pairs because  you have to make the other one identical. (Laughs)  Little Thunder Oh, yeah.  Worcester And that   s kind of boring. (Laughter) If I   m going to anything that   s boring,  it doesn   t last long.  Little Thunder What other kinds of things do you make besides knives?  Worcester Usually I   ll start my shop up here in March when it warms up because it   s  warm weather. My shop   s outside. I do the silver inlay and things like that  inside, the tedious things, but outside where I forge my blades and  everything, it   s outside and I like warm weather. I   ll start maybe in March  and finish up in November when it starts getting cool. During the winter  months I   m making jewelry; I like making jewelry. Sometimes I   ll just paint  and do that. This past year, I put together a book that I   d been writing. I  wanted to get it together. Every year I do something to keep me going.  Little Thunder During the winter.  Worcester Then when I   m ready to start back up, it seems like I   m invigorated and  ready to go again because everything that I found that I do, whether it   s  jewelry or whatever, seems like I can relate it to my knives, and different  ideas, and handles, and things like that. Every year   s a new year. Who  knows what it   s going to be?  Little Thunder That   s neat. What other shows then do you do besides Santa Fe and Red  Earth?  Worcester I   ll do the Chickasaw Festival. It was being held in Tishomingo in October,  but now they   ve started a new festival which is going to be at Sulphur, at the  Artesian every May. There   s big hopes for it to really grow, and that   s  always a good springboard in that time of the year to show new work and  kind of see the response you get from different people and hopefully pick up  new collectors.  Little Thunder And the Artesian is like a workshop and co-op kind of gallery as I  understand it.  16  Worcester They do have a gallery across from the Artesian Hotel.  Little Thunder Okay.  Worcester It does have workshops there for practicing artists to display their work and  how they do it.  Little Thunder At last year   s festival, which was the first one, you mentioned that you did a  workshop.  Worcester I did a workshop as far as giving a short speaking of how I do my work. I  didn   t do any actual hands-on demonstration of forging.  Little Thunder I see. Tell us about the Chickasaw Artists Advisory Group.  Worcester That   s a group I was asked, last year, if I   d be interested in helping form that  group, specifically to get a traveling show. I was happy to be a part of it,  myself and four others. We formed the Chickasaw Advisory Group.  We   ve put together a proposal, which has been accepted to travel to one  international show and I believe six other shows across the United States  that will have twelve Chickasaw artists with their different artwork. It  should be really interesting. It will end up in   Sulphur will be the final stop  for it. That as well as advising other different aspects of art shows there in  the Chickasaw Nation. It   s a real opportunity to promote other Chickasaw  artists and highlight their work as well.  Little Thunder That sounds really exciting. What   s the overseas destination?  Worcester We   re not sure yet. It just was finalized this past month. The first thought is  Paris, but we   re not sure if it   s going to be Paris or London, but they   re  going to have to go and check all the venues.  Little Thunder Yes, and hopefully you   ll get to go check out some venues. (Laughs) How  much of your business comes from just sales at booths, and how much is  from commissions?  Worcester Actually, all of them is from sales at booths because I don   t do any  commissions. I used to do a few commissions, but then it just got to be so  boring. I like the interaction with customers, with collectors and friends. I  like for them to be able to see what I   ve got, and handle it because it   s  functional art they can look and see. You   ve always got that unknown when  you do something on commission. Is it really what they thought about in  their head and everything? To me, it   s too stressful. (Laughs)  17  Little Thunder Understand. You were inducted into the Chickasaw Hall of Fame in 2009.  What was that like?  Worcester That   s great. I couldn   t believe it. The Governor called and said I was  inducted into, he said into the Hall of Fame. I was laying on the couch one  night when he called. He told me, he said,    Daniel, just wanted to call and  let you know that you   re being inducted into the Hall of Fame.    He told me  when it was and everything and to be there. I hung up and I said,    Well,  thank you that sounds great.    I told Debbie   she said,    Who were you  talking to?    I said,    I was talking to Governor Anoatubby and he said I was  one of the finalists for the Hall of Fame.     She says,    So what does that mean?    I said,    I guess it means that there   s  probably six or seven people that they voted on and they   re going to pick  one of them to be there. I said,    That sounds good, doesn   t it?    She says,     Yeah.    Then I got to thinking,    I really don   t know what he said.    Then I  thought,    That   s Les calling me and acting like that was the Governor. That  wasn   t the Governor calling me.    The next day somebody else called me to  make arrangements. I said,    You mean I am inducted into the Hall of Fame?  I thought that was just kind of a contest or something.    They said,    No, you  have been inducted.    I thought,    Whoa.    (Laughter) I told Debbie and she  said   it was just a really fun deal.  Little Thunder Were your children able to go, too?  Worcester Yeah, they were all there and my parents were there and some of the  relatives. It was just a fun experience, altogether.  Little Thunder What do your folks think of your success with knives in the art world?  Worcester They are very, very proud of what I   ve done, and they   re amazed. Every  time I   ll have a different knife, I might show it to them, or I   ve won a  different award and I   ll tell them. They   re just   their only son, they   re  proud. (Laughs) I   m happy that they were able to see me do some of my  accomplishments.  Little Thunder Do they have a few? I know your grandkids have one or two.  Worcester They have one, yeah. My grandkids each have one. Actually, one of my  grandsons, since he was born, I make miniatures, so I   ve made him one from  the one ball of the billiard balls up to the eight ball. Every year I give him  one up until he   s sixteen. Then I   ll make him a large one.  Little Thunder That   s a wonderful tradition to start. I understand your son also makes  knives?  18  Worcester Yeah, my youngest son, about eight or nine years ago, he came over one day  and he said he   d like me to show him how to make a knife. So we got out  there on the forge and we spent all day. Everything I did, he   d do, and he  picked it up real quick.  I helped him fix up his shop, and he   s got a shop. He lives about ten miles  from here, and he   s developed his own style. But I was really glad that he  picked it up. He   s real artistic and he collects Indian art. He   s been exposed  to Indian art since he was a baby because of all the shows we went to. He   s  really got an eye for art and I   m proud of him.  Little Thunder Right. How has your work with knives, in a way, impacted your involvement  with your Chickasaw culture?  Worcester I think it   s really been an asset. One thing about the knives, it just opens up a  new area as far as what other artists can do. I think it shows other artists that  you might not have to do things traditionally because whatever you do as an  artist a lot of times   for instance what I do, I might be making my own  traditions as I go. I think it lets other Chickasaws see that you can do a wide  array of different types of art.  Little Thunder And you went full time with your knives when? Around when?  Worcester When I retired from AT T.  Little Thunder Which was around     Worcester Three years ago.  Little Thunder Oh, so it   s been that   you   ve been on the show scene a long time, but only  for three years have you been full time.  Worcester Have I been   yes, yes.  Little Thunder Is that different?  Worcester The difference is I don   t go to work. (Laughter) I come out to my studio and  I might check my garden and then come in and forge a blade. I might take  the dog a walk around the pasture, so it   s really been great. As far as my  production, I   ve not done any more. Now I   m able, I   ve slowed down a lot  more. I might not take chances as far as having to do it in bad weather,  whereas before I would be doing things in bad weather which I don   t do  now.  Little Thunder You   ve also done photography, I guess, all your life?  19  Worcester Since the late    60s when I got my first little Polaroid. In the    70s, mid-    70s,  I got a 35 millimeter Canon. I   ve been a really avid photographer since then.  I enjoy taking photographs.  Little Thunder Have you had any photography shows?  Worcester No, not any shows. In Exhibit C, I do have a three-piece mural hanging  there that I did of a cigar store Indian. It   s been hanging there for about a  year now, but as far as any other shows, I   ve done one local show. I   ve not  really been pursuing anything like that. It   s just something I get to do during  the off months. Kind of a hobby-on-a-hobby or something like that, I don   t  know. I do all my own photography as far as when I do an ad or anything  like that.  Little Thunder Right, and Gallery C is the one in Bricktown with the Chickasaw Nation.  Worcester Yes, it is.  Little Thunder Well, let   s talk about your process and techniques a little more. I mean the  beauty of your knives is apparent, but when people know the process, it  seems even more impressive. I read that you work with found materials  including older steel. I wondered if you   d ever found a newer piece of steel  and worked with it, and how it held up.  Worcester I have tried different types of steel. All types of steel I   ve tried, but I   ve  always went back to the old steel. I like old harrow rakes. I   ve got some out  back. I like the teeth on them. They make really good steel and after a while  you can kind of feel the different texture. Another one I like to use is old  coil springs off of Model As and Model Ts. They had the old coil springs  under there. That   s just really excellent steel.  That   s part of my process is locating old different steel. I really like to try  the old. Plus, it just seems like it provides a little bit of history in a knife.  Like this knife here that I   ve been working on, it   s from an old coil spring. It  was found out in a junkyard, but it   s got new life into it. The steel, I beat  my steel down, and I hammer the edges. You just keep hammering the  edges. What it does is it compresses the molecules to make a better cutting  edge. Even though most people, they don   t buy my knives to use, but yet  they   re very functional. That was one of the things I learned in  bladesmithing school is how to just keep beating the steel to compress the  molecules to where it makes a very, very fine cutting edge.  Little Thunder Yes, because I   ve seen on the video the steel that you brought out of the  forge and it looks huge, of course, compared to your knives. You   re just  actually beating it into that smaller and smaller shape.  20  Worcester Right, that   s really the first step is beating it down. Of course, it   s a long  piece on that particular piece, which means you don   t have to use any tongs  and it   s really easy to hold that piece. That particular piece was from an old  truck spring that I   d split in half. You can make a longer piece with that, but  yeah, it   s a lot of work.  It   s hard work and it   s hot, but I like it hot. When it gets hot here, I   ll put my  thermometer up in it and it may be 135 degrees in front of that forge, but  I   m sweating, and it   s just exhilarating. You just feel really alive, or I do  when I start hammering. You   re just sweating, and you just keep hammering  and hammering. You feel real alive. I don   t know, it   s like you   ve ran three  or four miles and you just feel real good and drink you a whole pot of tea.  (Laughter)  Little Thunder It   s a good workout. You mentioned that, in the video, that you harden the  steel in oil. Are you talking about cooking oil, or motor oil or     Worcester I use motor oil, yeah. I use motor oil and harden it in there. It provides   you  could use all kinds of mediums. You could use cooking oil, you could use  water, just all sorts of things as far as the type of steel I use, but the oil  provides a quench to where it   s not real sudden.  You can, if you do it too sudden, you can actually cause the blade to just  crack. Once you do harden it, I   ve got to be careful by the time I get it back  to the oven because I have dropped them before and they   ll just shatter. So  you   ve spent a lot of work there and you want to sit down there and just cry  over your spilt milk. (Laughter)  Little Thunder So they go into the oven afterwards for the final hardening?  Worcester After I forge it out, I   ll grind it out and get it all to the shape that I want.  Have my filework   I do all my hand filework to make the designs. Then I   ll  put it back in the fire to harden the blade. Then I   ll take the blade when it   s  real hard, as hard as it can be (it could just shatter). I   ll bring it and put it in  the oven and let it go back down nearly to the temperature where it   s usable  and it won   t break. Then you   ve got your usable blade. Then it   s ready to  put whatever you want to put on it: the handle, the bolster, everything. It   s  ready there. You   ve got a lot of hot, hard work up to that point. Then you  get to do the fun stuff.  Little Thunder It   s like a kiln, I guess, the oven that you   re talking about?  Worcester Yeah, it   s just a small little oven that you just set it at what temperature you  want and it brings it right to that temperature, and you   ve got a usable blade.  21  Little Thunder My thought was always, how do you make sure that the blade doesn   t break  from the handle?  Worcester As far as the blade and the handle not breaking?  Little Thunder Yes.  Worcester Every piece that I made is called the full tang to where the steel and the  blade are all one piece.  Little Thunder All one piece.  Worcester It   s all one piece so that it   s not going to break.  Little Thunder Right, and you use coins as I understand sometimes?  Worcester I do. I use a lot of old coins     Little Thunder The handle and the blade.  Worcester    as far as separating the handle from the blade. You   ve got like   that   s an  old Indian Head nickel. Just different things like that.  Little Thunder That   s neat. Have you experimented much   you have the wonderful inlay  look and lots of beautiful colors that you put together, but have you  experimented much with texture with the same kinds of color and inlay? Or  not? Any kind of texturing?  Worcester I haven   t done anything that would   you   re talking about giving it a  different feel?  Little Thunder Yes.  Worcester On the outside?  Little Thunder On the outside.  Worcester With leather, if you use leather, I think I   ve done one with leather and it  makes it a different texture on the outside like you   re talking about, but  actually doing anything like that would be a more traditional type where  they did use leather and things. Most of mine when you   re through, it   s  smooth to where it looks like it   s all one deal. I haven   t done any in a long  time, but the small miniature Indian corn, I   ve done knives with those.  Little Thunder Oh, for the handle.  22  Worcester For the handle, and it looks like a photograph, but it   s actually different  colors. The corn makes different colors and it makes a pretty neat, but still  the texture   s all smooth.  Little Thunder I wonder if you were looking for an influence, and how you ended up with  the knife handles that you like. Would it have come from jewelry? Would it  have come from beadwork? Would it have come from other places?  Worcester Yes, it would. I   ve asked myself that. It would come from jewelry. It would  come from   I collect old baskets, Indian baskets, and it would come from  that. I collect old rugs, Navajo rugs, and all those kind of influenced me on  my handles, but yeah, you   re right.  Little Thunder How much time do you spend actually just looking for materials?  Worcester That   s just kind of an everyday thing, anymore. Wherever I go, usually on  weekends, I like to make a garage sale, estate sale, and if I find something,  I   ll get it. Just driving down the road, if I see something out in the pasture  that might work, I   ll get it, but I look for old steel.  As far as the silver, I like to use   I   ve bought a lot of old silver spoons and  different types of teapots, and things like that. Anytime I see anything  sterling, I   ll buy it. That   s pretty much what I   I   ve got a whole bunch of  coin silver, also, 1802 to 1830-type spoons that I use. That all works into an  old piece. You   ve got something that   s new, but yet it   s old. You   ve got old  material all in it. Even the billiard balls, like    40s and    50s pool halls and  things they came out of.  Little Thunder Right. Like you mentioned, it   s got the history and the story. Have you ever  bought   I was thinking of all the agricultural equipment that you do see  resting out in the field, have you ever got things from your neighbors close  by?  Worcester Actually my dad, he supplies me a lot of those. I helped him with his antique  auction for twenty-five years. Every year he   that   s what my Dad does  since he retired. He buys up antiques. So I learned a lot about different  antiques. Since he   s done that, he   s acquired a lot of old pawn jewelry, and  Indian rugs, and baskets. That   s kind of where it   s interconnected there, but  he   s always come up with different farm equipment and when he gets  something new he   ll holler at me and I   ll go look at it.    Yeah, I   ll buy that  from you.     Little Thunder (Laughs) That   s a good relationship there.  Worcester As far as materials, there   s never really   I   ve never had a shortage of  materials. When I started I was using stuff like that simply because it was  23  kind of high to go buy all that stuff, but I could find stuff for next to nothing.  I think that   s how it worked out, but I liked doing it that way so I   ve never  changed. (Laughs)  Little Thunder Right, right. What kind of impact do you want your knives to have on the  viewer when they see them?  Worcester Every person has a different interpretation of what you do. When they see it,  most of them say,    I can   t believe that these are knives. I   ve never seen  knives like this.    That makes me feel good. I like to know that I   m doing  something that maybe no one else has done. That surprise. I see a lot of  surprise. I see a lot of admiration of it, and appreciation for turning old stuff  into new stuff. It   s good to get the feedback. That   s one of the things that  you like, being one-on-one with a collector.  Little Thunder Also, I   m struck by the shape sometimes of your handles, I don   t know what  you call it   we   ll be looking at one that has kind of a split almost like a fin.  I   m wondering what inspired that.  Worcester I like to do just animal shapes. A lot of my pieces I   ll kind of incorporate  into the shape of maybe a fish, or a bird, or a snake, or a woodpecker, things  like that.  Little Thunder So you   re consciously channeling those     Worcester Yes, yes. Living out here in the country like I do, it   s great. I like to think  I   m close to the land. Just every day you see things out as you walk in the  pasture. I walk out in the pasture every day and I just see different things.  For instance, I   ve lived here since    63 on the same property, but every year I  see something different as far as a new species of plant, or even some kind  of insect, or a bird or something. It just never quits changing. That   s like my  work. It   s going to keep evolving. I   m never going to get to a spot to where  try to keep it the same because I don   t really want to keep it the same.  A lot of times when I   ll start forging a blade, I   ll just purposefully do  something to it to make a mistake. Then I have to work around that mistake  to make it to something different. But if I don   t make a mistake, sometimes  I   m afraid it   s going to turn out like the last one, and I don   t want it to turn  out like the last one. So I   ll put a notch here, or I   ll cut it off short here or  something, or make a funny angle on it. Sometimes I think,    Wow, I   ve  really messed this up. How am I going to fix this?    But it always lets your  mind find new avenues to make something into a finished product.  Little Thunder That is neat. Do you take photographs of every single knife that you do? Do  you keep a photographic record? You don   t?  24  Worcester I don   t. It   s just too much trouble. (Laughs) It would   ve been nice, I guess. I  couldn   t tell you how many knives I   ve made, but when I see one that I   ve  made, I can definitely say,    I   ve made that    because I   ve done that before.  Somebody   ll bring a knife back and say,    I wonder who made that,    at a  show and I   d say    (Laughter)  Little Thunder What is your creative process from the time that you get an idea?  Worcester It   s just pretty much if I get an idea about a piece, I   ll just start forging on it  and forge the blade out to that shape. If I   ve got particular colors in mind, a  lot of times I   ll see it before I ever start.  Little Thunder You see it in your head. You   re not writing anything down?  Worcester No, I don   t write anything down. I   ll see it in my head and I   ll go that  process. Then a lot of times I   m just building, forging a blade and seeing  what happens. It comes along and I say,    Hmm, this color would be neat.     Then I   ll go to sleep on it and I   ll say,    Oh, I   m glad I didn   t finish it  yesterday because this color will be a lot better.    (Laughter)  I   ve found that to leave one sitting overnight or a couple of days when I   m  really not sure, is a pretty good idea because then I   ll have a better idea of  where I   m really sure what I want to do with it. When I   m not really sure  about something it   s kind of,    I don   t know if I should do that or not.     Then when I do finish a piece, I may not see exactly what I did with it, but  I   ll let it sit a couple of days and I   ll look at it and I   ll say,    I see something  there I didn   t know I put there. I didn   t know why I did that, but that looks  neat. I like that.    A lot of times I make something and I   m really not sure  was I conscious in what I was doing? (Laughs)  Little Thunder That reminded me of a question, and now I   m trying to think about it. Do  you work simultaneously on several or is it one at a time?  Worcester One at a time.  Little Thunder Do you just follow one all the way through?  Worcester Yeah, I like doing one at a time and just taking my time with it and seeing  how I can bring it along. I have done two or three at a time in the beginning  when I was starting. I   ve found that I don   t really like doing that at all  because you just can   t   I have to devote all my time to one piece and when  it   s done, move on to another one.  Little Thunder Looking back on your career so far, what do you think has been a turning  point for you when you could   ve gone one way and you went another?  25  Worcester I think, really, a turning point was when I discovered different materials and  different colors with my blades and shapes even because I wasn   t really sure  if I should go into that area or not. I think that was a good turning point.  Little Thunder What   s been one of the high points in your career?  Worcester Well, high points was definitely being inducted into the Hall of Fame.  Being chosen Honorable One at Red Earth was fantastic and winning the  Challenge Award on the piece in Santa Fe was really a nice award. Then  I   ve had a lot of other first places out there, which I   m always happy   even  a third or an honorable mention I   m happy to get   but it   s nice when others  recognize what you do.  Little Thunder What   s been one of the low points of your career?  Worcester Oh, low points   I guess a low point was probably when they didn   t know if  they was going to let me in that show or not. (Laughter) As far as a low  point, I   ve never really had any low points because it   s   life   s too exciting  and every day   s an adventure. I might have a low point a couple of hours or  a day maybe, but then   it   s kind of like getting bucked off of a horse. You  just get back on and it   s a new adventure, a new ride. Go for it. (Laughter)  Little Thunder Is there anything we   ve forgotten or anything you   d like to add before we  look at one of your knives?  Worcester Oh, no. I think I   ve talked enough.  Little Thunder Okay, we   ll take a look at your knives.  Worcester Okay.  Little Thunder Okay, you want to tell us about this knife, Daniel?  26  Worcester This is Stars and Stripes. I completed this last month. The handle was  fashioned from old dominoes and old billiard balls. Hand-done firework  decorates the top of the spine and goes all the way around the blade. The  blade was forged from an old, found steel pickup coil spring. It has an old  Indian Head nickel separating the blade and the handle. The red is from old  dominoes and the blue is the billiard balls. It has white composite paper  separating each piece.  Little Thunder Beautiful. I noticed you have titles for your knives.  Worcester Yes, I do like to title each piece. It makes it more unique.  Little Thunder Okay. Here we   re looking at another one.  Worcester This is entitled Chameleon. I titled it that because the back is completely  different than this. The back is red and orange. This knife   s handle was  fashioned from a combination of old billiard balls and old-found dominoes.  The blade was forged by hand from an old-found coil spring taken off an  abandoned old Model T. Functional firework motif decorates the spine of  the blade with a nickel, Indian Head nickel, separating the blade from the  handle.  Little Thunder That   s beautiful, too. We   re looking at the other side here, as you said.  27  Worcester Yes, yes, this is the reverse side of the Chameleon.  Little Thunder Oh, those are gorgeous colors. This one   s really different looking   the  handle. You called it Four Red Moons?  Worcester This is Four Red Moons and I named it for four red moons. The knife was  forged by hand, by hammer and on the forge from an old Model T   s coil.  The handle was fashioned from bone with red dye. An old Indian Head  nickel separates the blade from the handle.  The other side is pretty much the same, but it   s separated into four pieces as  far as the four different pieces of bone. I entitled it Four Red Moons simply  because last year and this year the tetra blood moons were happening. I  thought,    Oh that   s neat, four blood moons. I   m going to call this Four Red  Moons.     28  Little Thunder That is beautiful. How about this one?  Worcester This is Purple Sky. Its knife blade was forged by hand from an old-found  pickup   s coil spring. The handle was fashioned from old billiard balls.  Firework decorates the spine of the blade and travels completely around the  handle. An old Indian Head nickel separates the blade from the handle also.  To get all those purple colors, I might add, is very difficult from billiard  balls because the outside of the billiard balls aren   t always what they look  like on the inside. It depends on the environment they were in     Little Thunder Oh, wow.  Worcester    as far as cigarette smoke, how much light was coming in, but to get the  dark purple is very, very rare I found out. Then the Purple Sky   the name on  that was simply because I was listening to a Hank Williams song and    a  falling star lights up a purple sky.    I thought,    Wow, that   s neat. I like the  way that sounds.    So I named him Purple Sky.  Little Thunder That   s a great title. Well, thank you so much for your   maybe let   s look that  that last one that has the     Worcester Oh okay, the one out?  Little Thunder Yeah, the one that   s out. That you talked about.  29  Worcester Okay, this is the one I just finished actually. It   s forged from old coil steel of  a truck spring. It   s got an orange billiard ball, black dominoes, and red  dominoes. It   s a double-edged piece. The design on it was just kind of  whimsical, just to put different shapes in it. The other side is pretty much the  same with white, with laminated paper as far as filling in-between.  Little Thunder It does have a nice, whimsical feeling. All right, well thank you for your time  today.  Worcester Okay, I   ve got two more. You want to see?  Little Thunder Sure. (Laughter) Oh yeah, those are so nice. Different.  Worcester This is my Woodpecker. Yeah, that   s Woodpecker. As far as the design, old  billiard ball, plus dominoes. It   s very functional as far as where your fingers  fit.  Little Thunder Right, that is gorgeous. I see where the ridges are. Wonderful.  30  Worcester That was kind of a whimsical piece. This piece here is Arizona Ironwood. I  like to use wood as far as being a very, very pretty-type wood, which is  Arizona ironwood. Sometimes I like to put it with a different type of blade.  This blade has firework going all the way around the blade and the handle.  It   s just a different-type-shaped piece, very functional. I   ve had people that  like maybe this type of blade as far as cheese knives.  Little Thunder I was going to say you can use that in the kitchen, it looks like. Easy to  manipulate.  Worcester Yes, yes very much could.  Little Thunder Okay, I really appreciate your time today.  Worcester You   re very welcome. I   m glad you came.  -------  -------   
