 Simpson  Hicks  Today is April 6, 2012. My name is Lynn Simpson, and I   m on the  faculty of the Oklahoma State University Library. I   m in Boley,  Oklahoma, to interview Henrietta Hicks as part of the Oklahoma Oral  History Research Program   s Spotlighting Oklahoma Oral History  Project. Our topic today is Boley, Oklahoma. Thank you for meeting  with me.  Thank you for having me.  Would you tell me when and where you were born?  I was born in Chilesville, Oklahoma, about five miles just north of  Boley. Do you want to know the year?  You do not have to tell me the year unless you really want to.  Oh, I can tell you. I was born around Valentine   s in 1935.  Thank you. Could you tell us a little about your youth and where you  grew up?  I grew up in Boley. I was born there in Chilesville because my  grandfather owned a general store, and my parents lived there at the  general store.  At  two years old, I came into Boley, often in and out of  Boley all of the time. At six years old, I moved and stayed with my aunt.  Could you describe your family, your extended family, your siblings?  Yes, I   d be happy to do that. Let me first tell you about my mother   s  family. My mother   s family consisted of five children. I like to tell this  story because back then, I believe, they were the only family that had  5  Simpson  Hicks  Simpson  that many children that were all educated, as people say, college-trained.  Now, my mother was the third child, but as I said, there were five. All  five of them finished high school, and four of them graduated from  college and went on to have a degree above a baccalaureate, master   s  degrees, except my mother.  My mother finished high school, but she said she didn   t want to go to  college. She wanted to get married because she didn   t know how long  she would be living. She wanted to get married, and she lived until she  was ninety-four. At any rate, she got married, and shortly thereafter, a  year or so after that, I was born. Consequently, she didn   t go to college,  but Boley has known my family as the first family of education because  all of them were born  between  1909  and  1917. Back in those years,  children were not educated, but my grandparents saw to it that their  children were educated. They sent them. Sent one to school, and the  other one would reach back and get the other, and so forth. So that   s  them. I have one sister. My sister lives in Boley.  Would you share a little about your own educational background,  starting with elementary school?  I went to elementary school for the first year out at a little place called  Clayton Chapel, a very rural school back in the days of segregation. I did  not stay there but a year because I had to walk to school and I was my  mother   s only child. I   m ten years older than my sibling. My mother  could not stand that, so she said,    We can   t have you walking by  yourself.    So I came, as I said, to live with my aunt Maggie  Ashley  at  six years old. My aunt Maggie was the principal of the school in another  area at Prairie Bell, off of Highway 48. I went to school with her and  was taught by the teachers in that school system. I believe she had three  teachers, and she was the principal.  I stayed with her all of my life until about my sophomore year in high  school, and then I stayed with my aunt and uncle, L. G. Ashley and  Velma Ashley. I graduated from a little school. People don   t believe that  that   s why I know so many people, because I   ve been all over the  country with my aunts because they were principals and schoolteachers.  They taught in these various areas, so that   s why I know them. I  graduated eighth grade from a little school called Anderson Chapel. Dr.   Ernest  Holloway also went to school at that same little school. His  siblings went to school there, too. I came into Boley, into Boley High  School. I graduated from Boley High School in 1953, the salutatorian of  the class.  Since you did attend Boley, would you tell us some about your teachers?  6  Hicks  Oh, yes, I loved my teachers. Some of them I liked. Some of them I  tolerated, and I   m sure they tolerated me because I was quite a talker,  loquacious, you know, and I was always talking or into something. I  really remember Ella Britton. Ella Britton was the English teacher, and I  think she was one of the best in the country. She taught German, too.  She took me all over the country. Back in that day, youngsters would go  from school to school, county to county, in oratorical contests, in plays,  musical presentations, and etcetera. She taught me, and I traveled with  her all over this country. I even won a trip to Prairie View  College  as  an oratorical speaker and to sing. That   s when I learned the value that  somebody can do it better than you.  I was always one of the ones that wanted to succeed. I was always the  one who was going to make it, going to make my speech be the best,  make my song be the best until they sent me to Prairie View to sing and  to speak. When I went there, there was a young woman. I can   t  remember her name, but she could really sing. She sang before I did. I  told her,    Listen, there is no need of me trying to beat  you . I know  when I have been bested.    She was very good. So she heard me speak,  and we became friends at the time, and for the love of me, I cannot  remember her name. Anyway, I won the oratorical deal, and she won the  singing.  Let me bring you back to my education and my teachers in Boley. Ella  Britton presented me in several plays in Boley. At the time, I did not  know I was going to be the star of the show. That wasn   t my aim, to be  the star of the show. My aim was to be the best that I could be. Out of  that came being the star of the show. Therefore, she took me around  Seminole County, Okmulgee County. We went to various schools. We  performed in various churches here in Boley and the surrounding area.  The people around here began to call me by one of the names that I had  in a play.  Another teacher that I had was Mrs. Paul. Mrs. Paul was a great teacher.  She was a very kind lady. Of course, my aunt was superintendent of  schools. Velma Ashley, that sister would keep you in step, and I stayed  with her. She would keep the kids in step. She was an excellent  superintendent. Some of the people probably didn   t cater to  her  so  much and didn   t like  her  so much because she was very strict. She was  strict on education. She believed that you were supposed to do your very  best and you were supposed to be educated. Of course, you realize, I  guess, sooner or later that everybody didn   t fit the mold of going to  college, that some of us would probably work better in career schools,  but at that time, career schools were not available, that I remember. At  any rate, she was the superintendent.  7  Simpson  Hicks  Simpson  Hicks  Simpson  Hicks  Those are the ones that I really, really remember and really, really  enjoyed. Of course, there was the chemistry teacher,  Mr. Shackleford .  Dr. Holloway, came into the school when I was there. As a matter of  fact, he was my class sponsor. He was my high school class sponsor my  senior year. He did not teach me chemistry. I had had chemistry and  biology before he came. I talk pretty fast. I   m sure I   ve missed some  points.  Oh, no, that   s fine. Would you tell us about your college career?  Yes, I went to college. It was never an idea, I thought, that I wasn   t  going. I just went to college. I thought that was just part of what you do.  Some kids had to worry about going to school, if they were going to go.  I never had to do that. I just knew that I was going, so I went to college.  I went in 1953. I finished in 1957. I have a degree in English, a minor in  history, and a minor in French. I hope nobody ever asks me to spell  France because I   ve been so long without it, I can   t even speak French. I  can   t spell France. (Laughter)  Where did you attend school? Where did you go to college?  Langston University. The year that I graduated, my folk, Velma Ashley  and L. G. Ashley, took me to about sixteen different colleges. At that  time, you didn   t have to write a whole lot of entry letters to get into  school, and you didn   t have the SAT tests. Didn   t have that kind of test  to get into school. They took me around to several schools, all out-of-state,  to see if I wanted to go, including Howard, but I came back to  Langston because I remembered Langston. I had been there for senior  day. I had been there for FHA or whatever they called it back then, the   Future  Homemakers of America. I had been there on various trips. I  had been there for basketball games. I had been there to football games.  My uncle L. G. Ashley is a graduate of there. I had been to many Alpha  functions there. I had been to many AKA functions there. So I was really  in tune with Langston. I just could not wrap my mind around the other  schools, so that   s where I chose to go, and that   s where I went.  Did you happen to have Melvin Tolson?  I sure did. I was in one of Melvin Tolson   s plays. As a matter of fact, he  had two in the four years I was in college. Mr. Tolson was a great  teacher. I remember so many things about Mr. Tolson, but I guess the  funny thing I remember, if everybody would be at the football game  saying,    Get    em, boys  Get    em, boys     he would say,    Go get them,  boys  Go get them, boys     (Laughter) I was in one of his plays, and I  was his hit. He is the person that told me that I was a natural, kind of a  natural actor. I don   t know what that meant, but coming from Mr.  8  Simpson  Hicks  Simpson  Hicks  Tolson, I thought it was pretty good.  Nice, nice. Who have been your role models, and what about them did  you admire?  I liked Ella Britton. She was an English teacher, mostly. She was tough.  She was hard, but I liked her. Of course, my mother, Quetta Ashley  Holloway, my aunt Maggie Ashley Taylor, my aunt Velma Dolphin  Ashley have really been role models in my life. They were the people  that   oh, boy. They   re all gone. They were the people that put morals in  us. They were the people that believed that you wore a hat and gloves on  Sunday, and that, I shall not forget.  How did your family come to live in Boley?  Oh, goodness. My grandparents were from Louisiana. They came in  1906, I believe. They came to Boley because it had been said that it was  a place for freedom, a place of being able to be themselves, a place  where they could vote, a place where there was not Jim Crow, and so  they came. My grandfather, Samuel Ashley, really was a genius. He had  a high IQ, but they never knew it until later years. He was a farmer. He  married my grandmother, Mary Figures. Mary Figures was one of those  very strong-hearted, robust women. She was a schoolteacher back in the  nineteen hundreds. They came to Boley for the freedom, for the love of  being free, because they were from Louisiana.  After they got here, they stayed in Boley for a while, but they moved  just north of Boley to an area called Rosenwald. That   s where their  children all went to school, at Rosenwald Elementary School, and then  from there into high school in Boley. My grandmother, I told you, was  from Louisiana, and my grandmother went to college way back when  black folk weren   t going to college. (Laughs) My great-grandmother,  who was not all black   let   s just say it that way. At that time in  Louisiana, they allowed families to buy a team of mules to farm crops.  My great-grandmother bought the team of mules. All of the people  around in the area bought a team of mules. This little area they were in  was Gahagan, Louisiana.  They bought these teams of mules, and the people began to farm crops.  Everybody around lost their team of mules and their crops. My  grandmother Mary Ashley was in school. My great-grandmother, her  name was Edith Bryant. Edith Bryant called her daughter Mary and told  her she had to come home out of school because my great-grandmother  couldn   t read and write. My grandmother Mary came out of school and  came home to take care of the farm. That   s what she did. She saved the  land. She saved the farm and all of the acreage. All her children were  9  Simpson  Hicks  Simpson  Hicks  benefactors of that land. Even in Oklahoma, it was still there. As a  matter of fact, back in that day, oil wells were drilled on the place. She  saved that land. My grandmother died in 1937 so everything went to her  husband and her children.  Did you raise your own family in Boley?  No, I did not. When I finished college, I came back to Boley, and my  uncle was superintendent at that time. L. G. Ashley was superintendent  of schools at that time. They needed an English teacher just to teach for  a few days or a few weeks before school was out because the English  teacher was out, so I came back, and I worked, I think maybe three or  four weeks, and school was out. I said,    This is not for me.     I wanted to go back to California because they had taken me to  California the year I graduated. My aunt and uncle had taken me to  California the year I graduated. I saw the bright lights. I saw sidewalks. I  saw streets. I thought,    This is the place for me.    I wanted to go back.  They did not want me to go back. They were planning on sending me to  OSU for a master   s. I   m giving you all of this. I haven   t told people all  this in years. I did not want to go, but I didn   t know how to tell them I  didn   t want to go. I said,    I want to go to California,    so that   s what I  did. I left. I went to California in Los Angeles. I stayed there until 1972.  I was married in Los Angeles. My son was born there, and he was five  years old when we left to come back to Oklahoma, Boley, Oklahoma.  What was your profession, and how did you choose it?  Well, it   s a long story. When I went to California in 1953, there were not  that many opportunities for young black women that had finished  college. I didn   t do a lot of typing. I could type, but I was not that great  at it, but those were the kinds of jobs you could get, as a typist. What  happened, my aunt that I lived with was a nurse. She wanted me to go to  nursing school. My good friend (we were high school classmates) lived  in California, too. She had gone. She was in nursing school. All of them  were trying to encourage me to go to nursing school. Well, I didn   t  really want that.  To tell you the truth, I always wanted to be a physician. That   s what I  wanted to be when I went to college at Langston. I knew that was a long  haul because it took a lot of money, all of which my parents didn   t have,  but my aunts and uncles would have sent me. They just didn   t encourage  me to be a doctor. They just did not encourage that, I think because there  were not that many black, female doctors. I don   t know. They just didn   t  encourage it.  10  Simpson  Hicks  Finchum  Hicks  Simpson  So I went to California, (I   m backing up a little bit) and I went into  diagnostic radiology. Consequently, I  studied  two and a half years to  become a radiological technologist  at University of Southern California  School of Radiology, then called General Hospital . After the two years  to become certified and registered, (I   m a registered radiological  technologist) I  studied  nuclear medicine. At that time, there was not a  registration for nuclear medicine technology. I never really used my  nuclear medicine knowledge after I left Los Angeles. I did work as a  registered radiological technologist for almost twenty years.  What is your earliest memory of Boley?  Oh, gosh. I have been in Boley all my life, so my earliest memory of that  would be always having the family dinners and my uncle throwing me  up in the top of the house. I   m the oldest Ashley grandchild, and he  would throw me up and catch me. Can you believe that? I   ve always had  long legs and tall, taller than most of the kids around me. That   s an early  memory of my childhood, I guess, and the family dinners, all the time.  What would be served at the family dinners?  Oh, my goodness  My Aunt Velma was a gourmet cook. She could  make rolls that would melt in your mouth. We would have homemade  rolls. She loved to make beef roast. Often times, we would have beef  roast. She liked to make a crown roast, pork crown roast. They were  awfully expensive, but she liked to make those. We would have turkey.  We would have stuffing, and we called it cornbread stuffing. As a matter  of fact, we didn   t call it stuffing. We called it dressing, cornbread  dressing.  My mother was a very good cook. My mother would always make the   vegetable  dish. That would be a combination of cabbage and collards,  mixed. That became her trademark here in Boley. Everybody used to  come by wanting Mother   s recipe to fix these collards and cabbage. If  anybody died,  families  would always want Mother to make these  cabbage and collards. Mother was a very good cook, but that was what  we would have. We would also have peas, have black-eyed peas. We  didn   t eat a lot of macaroni and cheese. We didn   t have a lot of that. We  didn   t have a lot of brown beans, but we had green beans. We had green  beans because my mother always raised a big garden. My Aunt Velma  raised a big garden. All of those items could come out of the garden. Of  course, we always had lots of pies and lots of cakes, and at  Christmastime, we had eggnog.  Would you describe the house you lived in?  11  Hicks  Finchum  Hicks  Simpson  Hicks  The house I lived in is still on the corner up here in Boley. It was a  house my aunt built. She and I lived there from the time I was six years  old. It had a living room, a dining room, two bedrooms, kitchen, and a  little breakfast room. The strange part about that is we only had gas, and  the gas was to the   we had a propane tank, and it sat on top of the  ground. Was it propane that sat on top? I believe propane sat on top of  the ground, and we got that in late years. We had a little stove that  heated up the living room. It was just a little small stove that you put  wood in, but that didn   t last very long. We got a furnace, and we had  propane gas. We did not have a bathroom, but, of course, later years, she  had a bathroom built. I had a very nice home. She had a very nice home,  and just she and I lived there.  When I lived with my aunt and uncle, Velma and L. G. Ashley, we lived  in a three-story house. That house, we had everything in there. As a  matter of fact, let me back up a little bit. When I lived with my aunt  Maggie, we didn   t have a television. There was no television, but we had  radios in every room. I remember the little man (I believe he might   ve  been from Langston) that used to come on and holler,    Phillip Morris      You all are too young for that, but that was on the television. I remember  the Perry Como Show being on the radio. Then, when I lived with my  aunt and uncle, Velma and L. G. Ashley, we finally had a television.  There were not that many televisions around. People didn   t have  televisions. They just didn   t have them, but they had one, so we looked  at a few things on television. Mostly, I was in the band, and I had to  learn how to play the horn, or I had to learn how to do book reports. My  life was filled with just doing things around the house, educational  things. We read all kinds of books. We went to the library. We traveled a  lot. We didn   t know about the television that much, so you didn   t miss  it. The music we had, we had music, but I could only listen to Nat King  Cole.  And why was that?  Well, that was update music. You didn   t listen to that other stuff. I knew  that they had other things in school, and I thought,    If I ever get big  enough where I can go downtown to the juke joints.    You could hear the  blues, and you could hear all of those songs that the kids were telling  you about the next day, who was singing. Oh, goodness  I thought,    If I  could just get downtown to one of those juke joints     But my aunts and  my parents said,    No, you   re not ready for that.    I was sort of sheltered.  What was your neighborhood like, and who were your neighbors?  Oh, our neighborhood was   everybody was your neighbor. You knew  everybody. They were all lovely people. They were just like we were.  12  Simpson  Hicks  Simpson  Hicks  Some of them farmers. Some of them cooks. Our close neighbor when I  lived with my aunt was Dr. and Mrs. Sanders. They lived near us. Then  all around us were other people that were like us, and you know  everybody. They were just Boley people. Mr. Lee was the mayor of the  town. He lived right down the street from us. Then across the road there  was a lady, with a bunch of kids, that didn   t have any education, but her  kids were always clean, and they were fed, and they were in school.  What can you tell us about the cooperative extension agents?  Cooperative extension agent. I can tell you that Mrs. McCain was the  person that we knew as the cooperative extension  person . She was the  home demonstration agent. Mrs. McCain had me speaking, and she  would come out to my house to train me to speak for oratorical contests.  We had large fairs. We had presentation of canned goods and etcetera  that goes on with the home demonstration agent. I remember when we  had our 4-H Club rallies. That sort of came under the home  demonstration agent. There was an office here. Mr. Coleman was very  active as the gentleman part of that home extension service.  We had a very large, very large organization where the youngsters had  an opportunity to participate by their sewing, their cooking, or their  judging skills. As a matter of fact, I won the judging skill one time, and  they took pictures of me. The strangest thing about it is the man that  took the picture did not   at that time, you didn   t have color. I have that  picture to this day. He was going to put some color on me, and my face  is pink. That   s the only thing you can see. That   s the only part of me  that   s pink is my face because he was trying to  do color . I shall never  forget him. They took me because I won the judging contest for the  county. I guess it was the county at that time. It   s been so long ago.  Could you tell us about any other organizations like culture clubs,  Ladies Industrial Club?  We had a Ladies Industrial Club that my aunt Velma belonged to. We  had another club that was the Self Culture Club that my aunt Maggie  belonged to, and I belonged to that club, too. We had the Jolly  Homemakers. There were several clubs that were intertwined with the  home extension service. Then the Ladies Industrial Club and the Self  Culture Club were a part of the bigger club out of Oklahoma City that  right now escapes my memory. They were a part of that. Many of the  ladies belonged to those clubs.  Of course, when you talk about clubs, I realize that the Eastern Star is  not a club, but we had the Eastern Star here. We had the Masons, and we  had sororities and fraternities of every kind. We have Alpha Kappa  13  Simpson  Hicks  Alpha sorority. We have Delta Sigma Theta, members of Zeta Phi Beta.  We have a member of Sigma Gamma Rho. As far as fraternities go, we  have members of Alpha Phi Alpha, Kappa Alpha Si, Omega Phi Si.  Those are the fraternities that I remember being in Boley. Plus, there  were other clubs. There were clubs, veterans clubs. Some of the young  men that had gone to the army and had come back belonged to a club for  veterans. Those veterans that did not finish high school were able to  come back and go to high school in Boley and finish.  How would you describe Boley today, as compared to when you were  growing up?  When I was growing up, Boley was a lively town with lots of people.  What I need to say now is that Boley was the center of the communities  around it. There was a community called Sand Creek, a community  called IXL, a community called Chilesville, and a community called  Rusk. All of those schools of those communities  were  segregated  schools. When the young people finished the eighth grade, they all came  into Boley  High . That   s why we say,    We   re all from Boley.    There  were lots of youngsters. As a matter of fact, we had about seven school  buses that went out in the rural areas and picked up the youngsters to  come to high school in Boley, so it was a grand place when I was a  child.  On Saturday nights, you could not find a parking place on the streets  because there were the places they called the juke joints. The juke joints  are very important to the history of America because had it not been for  juke joints there would not have been some music that was born. The  juke joints were the places where the music was played of all genres,  mostly blues. Then there was the area where the youngsters went at The  First and Last Chance to dance. That was all they did. They played the  jukebox, and they danced. There was nothing there, maybe sandwiches  and pop. That   s where the youngsters went.  The grocery store stayed open until very late because people would buy  their groceries late on Saturday night. There were places where you  could buy   the restaurants, we called them caf  s,  where  you could go  and eat on Saturday night. If you wanted to go and look for your hat for  Sunday, the millinery shop was open. Everything was booming on  Saturday nights. On Sundays, it was pretty quiet because we all went to  church.  Compared to now, we don   t have that many people here. We don   t have  the booming population that we once had. We don   t have the stores that  we once had simply because the people have gone on. The people that  have gone on left some of their children here to run the stores, but the  14  Simpson  Hicks  Simpson  Hicks  Simpson  Hicks  Simpson  Hicks  children get grown and they move because there just isn   t enough money  in the town to keep some businesses alive. But hopefully we   ll stay on  our feet.  Who makes up the Boley community now, compared to when you lived  here before?  The Boley community is still made up of its people. Most of the people  here are second-, third-, and fourth-generation. Some have moved on,  but they come back. Some stay. As I said, they   re second-, third-, fourth-  , and fifth-generation. Some sixth-generation live here and make up the  town of Boley now.  What is the importance of some of the organizations in the town, and  how do they contribute to the community?  Oh, they   re pretty important because we lean on them sometimes to help  us in various projects. We have a little club here called Secret Pals. We  have the Chamber of Commerce. We   ve always had the Chamber of  Commerce. The Secret Pals give a scholarship to our youngsters when  they finish high school. The Chamber of Commerce gives a scholarship  to our youngsters who finish high school. We have the sororities and the  fraternities. They give scholarships to our youngsters when they finish  high school. We had a school foundation at one time, and we pulled  from all of those organizations and all of those people to help with the  foundation to keep the school open.  Who were your town   s leaders, and how did this group of people  determine the kind of town Boley would be?  You   re speaking of the leaders when I was a child?  Yes.  M. W. Lee Sr. was the mayor when I was a child. How he was chosen  was by a vote. From the time I can remember, Mr. Lee was the mayor.  He passed on, and then Sam Wilcots became mayor. That part I know  about. He was chosen by a vote of the people. At one time, we had  wards, and the council people had to live in those wards. The mayor was  chosen from that group of people that made up the council. The four or  five people that made up the council chose the mayor. That is still the  process now, however we don   t have the wards. Our council people are  at-large.  The ones that ran for mayor, I just remember Mr. Lee as being a banker.  Sam Wilcots was not born here, but he was reared here. He worked for  15  Simpson  Hicks  Simpson  Hicks  Tinker Air Force Base. The present mayor is Mary Joan Holloway  Matthews. She is a psychometrist by profession. She is a retired  psychometrist. She is the mayor, and she has been the mayor for a few  years. She was chosen by the council members. The council members  are, as I said, elected at-large. We have a meeting to   we don   t want to  call it a meeting. Right now, for the use of a better word, and perhaps I  can think of one later, what it   s called is election. We have elections.  That occurs by all the members and citizens of Boley to come in and  vote. It   s as simple as that.  Has the general age of the leadership in Boley changed over the years?  I don   t know if it has changed so much because they were young when  they started and as they stay in office so long, they get old. (Laughs) But  the leadership really has not changed that much. It has changed a bit. I  think the education of some of the members of the council has changed a  bit. I   m not saying that   s good or bad, I   m just saying that that might  have been a bit of a change only simply because that   s what they  brought to the table. Not that they were elected for that reason, but that  was just a part of what they brought to the table.  Could you identify some people who have connections to Boley but  moved away to make their mark in the world, and some who have  stayed?  I think first of Franklin Hill. Franklin Hill was Dr. Franklin Hill.  Franklin went to Langston. He was a graduate of Langston. His wife was  Emma. Her name was Emma Daniels. They married, and they both have  PhDs. They were chemistry professors. They went on to be renowned  professors at Southern University in Louisiana. I think of them. I think  of Dr. Hobart Sanders, who was a medical doctor who went to Meharry   Medical College . He came back here, lived in Boley. He had a practice  in Boley. His father had a practice before him, but he had a very large  practice in Tulsa. His wife was Yvonne Lee. Yvonne Lee was one of the  few women that I know that have a degree in electrical engineering. She  lived here for a while. She is not here now. She lives in Dallas.  Naturally, she has gotten a little older. She   s closer to her children.  I think of L. G. Ashley Jr. L. G. Ashley Jr. is a renowned cardiologist.  He lives Prairie  View , Kansas, but he has practices in Kansas City. Of  course, everybody knows the favorite son, Dr. Holloway, who went on  to be president of Langston University. Maurice Lee, he has passed on,  but he had a degree in electrical engineering. James Shaw, who has  become an author, has written a book. There was a young man named  Tomlin, Rudolph Tomlin. Rudolph Tomlin is an author. Johnnie Mae  Phillips Stevenson is an author. She has written a book called The  16  Lynching of Laura. We have a young woman that became a renowned  gospel singer. Her name is Walter Mae Andrews. She lives in Colorado.  Clemon D. Ashley became a very well-known, very well-respected,  renowned person in home extension work. As a matter of fact, he was  one of the few black people that headed up Creek County. I cannot  remember his exact title now but that he is a well-known person of  Creek County. As a matter of fact, they have a building in Bristow  named for him. I could just go on and on as I try to think of some of the  others who have really made their marks. We have Salonya Bennett,  who is an author. We have many, many young people that are  schoolteachers, many of the people, because back in the day when I was  a child, either you were a schoolteacher or a preacher. That   s why so  many young people are schoolteachers, but we do have some very good  ministers.  I think of R. C. Laskey, a young man who says every time  he sees  me,     Can you believe I   m a preacher?    He   s a presiding elder in Oklahoma  City. Then there are the Walker brothers that are just outstanding  ministers. One is a   I can   t remember which one it is, but  they  had  nicknames for them. I can   t remember which one it is, but he was just  elected over all of the CME  Christian Methodist Episcopal  hierarchy.  Let me put it that way. He has one brother who is a minister. I believe  he   s in Indianapolis. Very good speaker. Those Walker brothers, I think  there are three or four of them that are all ministers. We had one we  called Buttons. That   s the only one I could remember his name.  Then there are two young boys   and all of these kids are from the  country and they came into Boley. All of us are country kids. We were  just country kids. We were not ghetto kids. We were country kids. Then  there are the Bowler brothers. There was a big family of Bowlers. The  Bowler brothers are physicians in Tulsa. They have very large practices  in Tulsa. They are in operation as of today. All of these young people  are still going, with the exception of Franklin. Franklin passed away  from a heart attack. As we know, Dr. Holloway has gone on, and so has  Dr. Sanders.  Now, let me see. I could just go on and on, talking and bragging about  the folk from Boley. There were not a lot of lawyers that came out of  Boley, but we do have one or two lawyers. Way back in the years  before, as I was a child, we had physicians. We   ve always had male  physicians. I think of a fellow that was a little bit ahead of my mother in  class. I believe his name was Wiley Martin. Dr. Wiley Martin. He was a  physician in Detroit. As I speak of Detroit, I think of the man who wrote   High Noon at  the Boley Corral  Leon E. Smith . He wrote the book on  the attempted robbery by Pretty Boy Floyd. He lived outside of Boley,  17  Simpson  Hicks  Finchum  Hicks  here. There was another person that came to mind right away. Oh,  Zenobia Powell  Perry . Zenobia Powell is from Boley. She graduated  with my aunt from here in 1925. She became a very, very renowned  musician. As a matter of fact, I don   t know if her daughter is still living  or not. She was a classical musician, I believe, because a lady wrote a  dissertation on the life of Zenobia Powell.  I think she went to Wilberforce University in Ohio.  Wilberforce, yes, she went to Wilberforce. Thomas Dolphin Ashley was  one of the few people I know from here that went into the army right out  of college, Thomas Dolphin Ashley. He became a lieutenant colonel in  the army. He went in as a second lieutenant when black people were not  able to do that. He made first lieutenant right away. It was often said by  one man here that went to the army the same time he did   we called  him Big Mick. His name was Mixon. They all went in, and the two of  them were from Boley. They called Thomas Dolphin Ashley    Red.    He  always said,    The army put Red over all of us because he was the only  one that had any sense.    That meant he was the educated one. He made a  career of the army.  As I said, he left the army as lieutenant colonel. I believe it was  lieutenant colonel. Then he went on to teach at New York. He taught in  a junior college in New York. He retired from the army. He worked for a  while with the Food Administration, Federal Food Administration  Agent. I believe that   s what it   s called. Then after that, he retired. He  passed away a few years ago. Other people from Boley   I don   t want to  miss some of them. I can   t name all the teachers. I just can   t name all of  those teachers because there are so many counselors, teachers. Boley  believed in having your children educated, so they taught school. That   s  just what they did. A few nurses, we do have a few nurses.  Any pro athletes?  He was not a pro athlete, but Jerry Alexander made his mark at Drury  University. Jerry Alexander and  Nate  Quinn, a young man named  Quinn, (his last name was Quinn) they made their mark in Drury  College. They were very good basketball players. As a matter of fact,  Jerry died a few years ago. He was a young man. Drury College came  here to funeralize him. He put them on the map, really. He did not play  pro ball. He became a coach, and Quinn became a coach. His father was  a coach. His mother was a schoolteacher. Quinn was a coach here at  Boley. During his time as coach, our basketball team won  championships.  We were the best in the state. When they first won, I was living in  18  Simpson  Hicks  Simpson  California. When they won, of course, everybody was into basketball  and into the team. Mother called me at three thirty that morning in  California to tell me they had won the championship. I thought,    Oh,  boy     But that was really a big thing. They won the championship more  than once, state championship, until the school began to not have enough  kids to really make up a good basketball team. Am I going too long?  Oh, no, that   s fine. That   s fine. I was going to ask about what people did  for a living, and what are the career paths now for the people who live  here in Boley?  What the people did for a living back in the years when I was coming  along, they were farmers. The majority of the people were farmers.  Farming became almost obsolete when the government came in and said  you could only plant so much cotton. You could only plant so many  acres, and if you plant over those acres, they would plow them up. The  people could not live because cotton was king, and you take cotton to  the gin, and you sell a bale of cotton. Then the boll weevil came along.  The boll weevil came along and was looking for a home, and that ate up  the cotton, too.  Many of the people left the farm and went to work in the packinghouse.  Packinghouses, I guess that   s the proper term. They worked for the  packinghouse, and then they went to work for Tinker. Then many of  them went to construction work. My dad was just a very ordinary man.  So were my  Holloway  uncles. They were just ordinary farmers. When  farming became obsolete, my dad went into construction. He worked  construction work, whereas my uncle  Ned Holloway  went to the  packinghouse and worked in the packinghouse. That means in the cold  houses with the meat and all of that. The construction, you know what  that is. But that   s how they made a living.  There were some people that were schoolteachers. We had mail carriers.  That was a good position. We had our own postmaster. That was a good  position, but you can only have one postmaster and only two mail  carriers. At any rate, that was what they did. We had grocery stores. We  had grocery store owners. We had service stations, service station  owners. Most of the ladies back in my day stayed at home. Now, then  the time came when the schools would have aides to work in the  schools. Many of the ladies went to work as the aides in the school.  Some of them, most of the people that took care of the cafeteria, had  four or five people working in the cafeteria. The school had bus drivers.  The school had custodians. That   s how the people made their living.  What was the focal point of the town? Was it high school sports?  19  Hicks  Simpson  Hicks  High school sports, yes, basketball. Basketball was the thing when I was  a child. The football sort of went out when I came along, but basketball  was it. We had good basketball teams. It was a good thing for the young  people. It taught them citizenship. It taught them how to be gentlemen. It  taught them sportsmanship. You would never hear of a Boley kid acting  up on a basketball floor because their first coach that I remember was L.  G. Ashley. He was the basketball coach for a while, along with being the  agriculture teacher. Then he became the superintendent.  Prior to him, I do remember a superintendent years ago when my mother  was in school. That was Letchin Hill. Everybody loved Mr. Hill. He was  the superintendent back in that day. He died in    41 or    42 as a young  man. At any rate, basketball was the king. That was what you did. We  had a big band for the school, so the band was always performing in all  of the parades around here. That just kept us alive. It kept us going. It  was just a fun time when I was a child.  Of course, now we don   t have our school, but we still have our children  participating in the schools in Okemah, and we attend all of those   activities , all of those basketball games. Now they not only have the  advantage of a basketball game, they can play football, they can play  basketball, and they can participate in track. We did have a track team  here. As a matter of fact, we had one young man from Boley that went  on to school in later years out to Langston and made a name for himself  as a track star. His name is Willie Williams. He was a policeman for the  city of Oklahoma City.  Would you mentally walk us through the town as it was in the area  around your home, describing specific landmarks?  When I think of Boley, and anybody thinks of Boley, you think of the  water tower. The water tower has been there since 1911. When I was a  child, it had water in it. That   s how we got our water. However, we  don   t have that now. We have water wells. That water tower is a beacon  for Boley. When you come down the highway, everybody who has ever  been to Boley looks for that water tower. That, we would like to have  restored. We would like to have that redone, but it costs much more than  we can afford to put in it right now. The water tower was a beacon.  The other part was the north end of town. When you came into the north  end of town, there was a very stately home. It was owned by L. L.  Dolphin. He was the postmaster. On the parkway of his home, there  were the trees called catawba, and in the springtime, all of those trees  would be really green, had great big leaves and these big long beans  hanging from them. It was picturesque. Anybody who came in saw that.  That   s why they fell in love with Boley because when you look down  20  the street, and as you move down the street, you saw this beautiful home  and these catawba trees. That   s what  I  think of.  Then, of course, we   d move on over to the high school. The high school  was a big thing. It was well-kept, and it was very nice. We enjoyed the  high school. On the corner of that was the Ashley home. We knew the  Ashley home. We knew that Mrs. Ashley would be out there barking at  the kids to be sure that they were doing right, or she was going to be  working in her garden, or she was going to be in her kitchen window  cooking, so we always had to look. All the kids had to look for her. I  was in the house with her, but they would be looking for her.  There were other landmarks around town. Letchin Hill built a home  there, right on Main Street, but he did not live long enough to really live  in that house. He died. His wife lived there for a little while, but other  people took that home and lived there. Of course, on Main Street, there  were places that you remember, and you remember W. C. Owens. They  called it the ice cream parlor. You would go in the ice cream parlor and  sit around and eat ice cream. That   s all you could eat in there was ice  cream and drink pop.  Of course, we had our places where they played dominoes. Dominoes  were the thing to play in Boley. Oh, if you couldn   t play dominoes, you  almost couldn   t live here. My dad was king of the domino players, he  thought. (Laughter) So they played dominoes at various places. Then  there was a place in the years called Kees and Babbs. Mr. Kees had dry  goods. In the back of the store, he made the best hamburgers and the  best malts in town. Every Saturday night, you would go there to get you  a malt or a hamburger. (Laughs)  Then, of course, Boley would not be Boley if we did not mention  Trulove   s Hamburger Stand. Everybody in the country has heard of  Trulove   s Hamburger Shop. Charlie Trulove and his wife made nothing  but hamburgers and hotdogs. You   d go in and buy a hamburger or a  hotdog, a bottle of orange or grape pop, and they had these huge pans of  pies. That   s the first time I had ever seen a lemon pie with a crust on it.  It was just about the best thing you   d ever tasted. They had raisin pies,  and you would get a little wedge of that for a dime. It was enough to fill  you up. The hamburgers were fifteen cents. They did not have lettuce  nor tomatoes on them, but they were just about the best you   ve ever  tasted. I don   t know what he did to them, but they had pickles, onions,  mustard and mayonnaise. And they were just so, so good for fifteen  cents.  That   s a landmark. When you say Boley, people will think of Trulove   s  Hamburger. Now, I remember it before it became Trulove   s. It was  21  Simpson  Hicks  Simpson  Hicks  called Baker Robertson. Baker Robertson had it, and that   s what he was  called. They called him Baker Robertson because he made the  hamburgers. I think he taught the art to the Trulove family. They bought  the place.  Would you tell us a little about the Sears and Roebuck house?  Yes, that house belonged, as I remember   one of the mayors of the  town, who was Mr. Young, I don   t remember him, but I do remember  Roscoe Young and his wife, who was a Moon. Her last name was Moon.  They built this house, and Sears Roebuck brought the house in, piece by  piece. The house is still standing. Roscoe Young   s granddaughter and  grandson and their daughter still live in the town. I think that the  grandson may live in the house now. It   s a very nice home. The lady   s  name was Louise Moon Young, married Roscoe Young. They had one  daughter. Her name is Ethelene Young. She runs the service station.  She   s the operator of the service station up the street, here. That home is  hers and her children   s. That house was brought in, as I said, by Sears  Roebuck. They put it together piece by piece. It   s a real nice home. I  think it has a basement. It   s big.  Would you share some memories of the Masonic Temple building?  Oh, the Masonic Temple. Oh, my goodness, that was just a grand time  for Boley. When all of the Masons and the Eastern Stars would come to  Boley, we would have people coming out of our ears. As children, we  were glad to see all these people coming. They would come to what we  called The Temple, the Masonic Temple. The Masonic Temple, I  believe, had three stories. In the lower floor of the Masonic Temple,  there was a funeral home that was owned by the Partridges. They owned  that funeral home, and they were in the bottom part, there. That was the  funeral home of Boley. That was owned by the Partridges and the  Cowens worked there. Upstairs were all of the areas for the Masonic  Temple.  Also in that Masonic Temple was our telephone office. We had a  telephone office there. We called it telephone office, but that was the  place where all of the calls went into. That was the strangest thing. Mr.  Hunter was the operator of our telephone operations. Mr. Hunter   s wife,  who was Annie Peters Hunter, was the first black home demonstration  agent, I think, in the United States. They lived here in Boley. Mr. Hunter  operated the central office, as we called it. The strange thing about the  central office, not everybody had a phone. Some of the people had  phones, but you didn   t have a phone number. You had a ring that would  be a long and a short or two shorts or three shorts. If the phone rang at  our house, it may ring four or five different times. I know that if it rang a  22  Simpson  Hicks  long ring and then a short, that   s for me to answer the phone. Otherwise,  I didn   t answer the phone. A long ring and a short. That   s the strangest  thing  I don   t know how we did that. I don   t know how it worked, but it  worked. Everybody knew their ring, so you answered the phone with  that. That was in the Masonic Temple.  The Masonic Temple stood as a landmark in Boley for years. It has been  said that it was the tallest building. Not that it means that much, I guess,  but the tallest building between Tulsa and Oklahoma City was the  Masonic Temple. It drew people from all over the country to come here  to the pilgrimage to the Masonic Lodge. When all of these people came  into Boley, like they now go to Tulsa and to Oklahoma City, they stayed  in the homes of the people that live here. Three or four people may stay  in one home, or two people may stay in one home, or some would drive  back and forth. This would be a two- or three-day thing for the Masons  and for the Eastern Stars.  That Masonic Temple was destroyed by an arsonist, and I believe that  was in or around 1965. I believe that   s the date. That temple has not  been built here since that time. We do have the Masons, we do have the  Eastern Stars, and they have made pilgrimages back to Boley because of  the history of that temple. All of them came into Boley. Thousands of  them, it seemed. We opened up our school gymnasium for that. When L.  G. Ashley died, who was one of the renowned Masons, I believe I saw  more Masons there than I have seen in years because they all came back  for his funeral. Since then, I have not seen a lot of Masons. Of course,  we still have a temple in Boley. They have remodeled a building, and  they call it their temple.  Would you share memories of county fairs and local sporting events?  Oh, the county fairs were a big thing. We used to have the county fairs  right up the street, here. When I was a little kid, they had the county  fairs, and I could take thirty cents and ride everything, the Ferris wheel  as they called it. They used to have something called hobby horses, and  you   d ride those things. That was for little kids. I didn   t want to ride that.  I was a little kid. I should have. Then they   d have cotton candy. I didn   t  eat cotton candy. I didn   t like that. Then, of course, you   d have the  things that you could always pitch a penny in, and pitch it to get a bear,  or you pitch a dime to get whatever it is, and you   d pitch this to get that.  It was all, you know, you didn   t get anything because you never could  hit anything. It was a big thing, had a big fair.  Then the fairs moved out to a larger spot. We had all kinds of rides and  all kinds of people coming in. At the fair, we had the 4-H Club people,  and that   s when you had the judging contests of all the food that had  23  Simpson  Hicks  been prepared, the jars that had been canned, the items that had been  made by hand. Everything had to be made by hand. Everything in the jar  had to be perfect, exactly right. If you had okra in there, it had to be all  the same way. If you canned tomatoes, the tomatoes had to be the same  way. You   d put your name on the jar, and you   d hope you win a prize  and all of that. It was just a grand time. The fairs were just something to  behold. People would come from all around to the fair in Boley. Of  course, with the fair, what I   m describing, the carnival, that   s what I   m  describing, also, is the carnival. We had a carnival. We didn   t have  animals. Some carnivals have animals to show, but they didn   t have  animals.  Did your family ever participate in those competitions?  Oh, yes, yes. See, my aunt was a schoolteacher, so she had students. I  remember sitting up making these, they call them, tea towels. The hem  had to be just so right. The embroidery had to be just so right. If it were  wrong, my aunt would make you take it out and redo it again. I  remember doing tie-dye where you tie-dyed a skirt. I remember making  rugs out of   as a matter of fact, I went to college with this rug. You  made rugs out of, they called them, croker sacks. You may not know  what a croker sack is, but that   s a tow sack. You know what a tow sack  is? No, you don   t. It   s a sack that you see on the highway now where  people have sacks of potatoes, those big sacks they have, sacks of  potatoes? You can take one string and pull it and make a fringe, make a  fringe, and you make a lot of fringes, and you sew that fringe to the back  of another one, and you make a rug out of it. Then once you make a rug,  you can dye it. You can dye it any color you want. I went to college with  those big rugs on my floor, and I was the only kid who had a big rug on  a concrete floor. Everybody would go,    Oh  Look at this rug.    They  didn   t know it was a croker sack rug that didn   t cost but probably fifteen  cents.  You tie-dyed skirts. We had black and red skirts. My mother was a great  seamstress, so she would make skirts and then we would tie-dye them.  Tie-dye, people still do that now. My mother didn   t do a lot of canning  for the extension work, but she canned at home. Then there was a   family friend  here that I called Mamalene. Her name was Evelena  Stone. She was a great worker in the extension. She could tat. Most  people don   t know what tatting is, but she could tat, one of the few  people in the town that could tat. I have some pillowcases now that she  tatted. Embroidery, she could embroider. She could embroider those,  and she also did crochet. She   d knit. She would knit, knit caps, and all  these things would go in the fair. As a matter of fact, she made a jacket  for me, and they call it the    jacket of many colors.    What happened, she  and my mother were great  friends and  seamstresses and they made  24  Finchum  Hicks  Finchum  Hicks  quilts.  Some communities had a quilting session where the ladies would sit  around the fire in the wintertime and just quilt. They would make quilts.  Then they would piece quilts. I have quilts that have been pieced for   years . I have an 150-year-old quilt. From this I   m trying to get to is  that the pieces from the dresses my mother made for me, and a few of  them for my sister because she   s ten years younger, some of the pieces  they put into quilts, they were scraps. They were just scraps. They were  what people now call remnants. They called them scraps, then.  They took those scraps, and this lady, Evelena Stone, made me a jacket.  She made one for me; she made one for my sister. We still have them. I  wear mine. Every time I wear that jacket, every time, it has not failed,  every other person that sees me,    Oh, what a pretty jacket.    My sister  says,    It   s a mess. It doesn   t look like anything.    But everybody likes the  jacket. I have been offered money for that jacket. It   s nothing but an old  pieced-up jacket. It was something they did and could have gone in the  fair, but it didn   t. It was never a part of the fair. Oh, my goodness, yes   We just had a great time with the fair and the carnivals and all that.  Did the circus ever come?  Yes. The circus was the carnival. That   s what that was. They did come.  They had the rides. They did not have the animals. We didn   t have the  animals around, but they had various rides. They had various stands they  have at the carnivals or circuses that you see now but on a smaller scale.  You were talking about canning and things. Do you have any stories  about pressure cookers?  Yes, as a matter of fact, my mother had pressure cookers. She was one  of the few women in town who owned a pressure cooker. There might  have been someone way out in the country, but Mother had a couple.  She never did loan her pressure cookers, but she would go with people  and let them use it. The pressure cooker thing started back with Annie  Peters Hunter. I think that   s a little known fact, but she started  preserving food by pressure by having a galvanized tub. They probably  call them stainless steel, now.  It was just a tub and heated water, pretty hot, boiling water. Put those  vegetables into those jars and put them in the sun and put them in this  real hot water. As much as I know about it, this is as much as I know  because that was long before my time. I bring this up because it has been  said that this is how canning started in the home demonstration agencies,  was through Annie Peters Hunter. I do have a little picture of her, I  25  Simpson  Hicks  believe, with this tub and this water in it and the vegetables in it.  Of course, with the pressure cooker, that   s what you do. You have a  pressure cooker that you put water in it. Those vegetables are placed in  their jars, placed in that water, and they   re cooked under so much  pressure. Once they cook under so much pressure, they are preserved,  and they will work for years. As a matter of fact, that   s probably why I  never ate dried beans because my mother always had canned peas. We  had canned green beans. Like you buy them out of the store in the can,  we had them in the jars. She canned greens.  She didn   t can a lot of tomatoes because tomatoes were pretty  perishable. She did do a few tomatoes because she liked soup. We did  corn all in a jar, under pressure in a pressure cooker. So we had  vegetables all year long. For people that would go to the store, those that  could afford to go to the store, they would maybe buy a can of peas. My  mother had a jar of peas. The baby peas you eat now, the early peas, we  had them in a jar because my mother had a garden. We shelled the peas,  and she put them in the pressure cooker under pressure and saved them.  Also, the strange thing, my mother was a country woman, and we had  lots of hogs. When they butchered the hogs, sausage was not something  that you could keep long, sausage, just plain sausage patties, but my  mother found a way to do that. She would fry her patty sausage, fry the  sausage, fry it done, place it in a jar under pressure. We had what she  called fresh sausage to eat all year long. I never shall forget her doing  that because, at that time country people ate a lot of salt pork. Well, I  didn   t eat that. Never tasted it. Mother didn   t cook it for me because I  didn   t like it. So that   s why she started that business of doing those  sausage because I would eat the sausage.  My dad ate that, they called it, salt pork. He would eat that fried salt  pork in the morning. Every other farmer around here did the same thing.  That was back in the day. That   s how people were fat and fit and stayed  alive. (Laughs) They did not have a cholesterol problem, did not have a  heart problem, did not have high blood pressure. My dad had none of  that. Seventy-eight years old when he died, and he died from  emphysema, smoking too much, not from eating the wrong thing. He  could run. He was a baseball player. At his age, he never had arthritis.  Never had anything but just emphysema, and that was his own doing.  Smoked for sixty years. You didn   t ask for that, but that was put in.  All the good fresh vegetables and canning and all that     My mother had a garden from the time I can remember until she got  where she couldn   t. At ninety-four years old, she decided,    I just won   t  26  Finchum  Hicks  Finchum  Hicks  Simpson  Hicks  have a garden this year.     Where did she store all of this?  Oh, she   d give it away. She always took pride in saying,    I never sold a  thing from my garden.    We would say,    Do you have to say that?    She  would let people come in and get whatever vegetables they wanted.  Many times, she would give some of the things to the people who really  needed them the most, some of the canned items. She would give them  away. She was kind of that way.  Did she have a cellar?  We had a cellar when I was a child. My mother and dad had it. I didn   t  live with my mother and dad. I went out to see them on the weekends.  They did have a cellar. When you speak of a cellar, you made me think:  turnips. You know what a turnip is? It has a green top. It has a purple  and white bottom. Well, the green tops are no good after a while, (in the  wintertime, you can   t do anything with them) but the bottoms, they  would take those bottoms, cut the top off, put them in a bed of hay and  put sweet potatoes in a bed of hay, Irish potatoes in a bed of hay, onions  in a bed of hay, put them in the cellar. It was cool in there. You had  turnips all year long. You had sweet potatoes all year long until they ran  out.  Would you talk a little about the role of the church and the various  churches in town?  Oh, yes. We   re known for our churches. We have so many churches  here. The first church I belonged to was out in the country. My mother  belonged to that church all her life. She was a member of that church for  right at ninety years, the New Hope Baptist Church. Churches were very  important. Our faith is important to the people of the communities, all  the communities. Every community has a church. Every community that  I mentioned to you, we call them our little bedroom communities. Now  we call those communities the greater Boley area.  All of those communities had churches, three and four churches. Boley,  itself, had a bunch of churches. We had every denomination. We had  Baptist, Methodist, African Methodist Episcopal, Christian Methodist  Episcopal, that   s the CME, the other one was the AME. We have non-denominational.  We have what we called the Holiness Church. That   s  what they called it back then, the Holiness Church. We had a Catholic  Church. We had the Christian Church. One of the oldest churches in the  town was the Christian Church. That building just fell down in the last  few years because there were no more members there, and it just fell  27  Simpson  Hicks  down.  What community traditions are celebrated today?  We celebrate Juneteenth. We do celebrate that. That   s usually around  June 19. We maybe do it on the twentieth. We celebrate in September.  That is when Boley was really  opened . We celebrate in September. We  don   t do that every year, but we try to. During the bicentennial  celebration, we really did a lot of that. We do have the Boley rodeo.  That   s what Boley is really known for now, is the Boley rodeo. We do  have that, and that   s a set time. That   s the Memorial weekend. It   s the  weekend before Memorial Day. That   s what I   m trying to say. It   s the  weekend before Memorial Day. That is a big, big time for Boley. We  have more people, the old folks used to say, than we can shake a stick at.  That brings a lot of folk and a lot of attention and a lot of cowboys, a lot  of cowgirls. People from all over the country come to the Boley rodeo.  We have tour buses that come in all of the time.  We also do tours in Boley all of the time. We start doing tours in March,  and we generally go until about August until it gets really hot. We have  families that come back for reunions, family celebrations and reunions.  We have a lot of those. I do head up the Boley Economic Development  and Redevelopment Authority. From that authority, we are the ones who  take care of all of the tours. I will do food if they want it for various  celebrations and all the tours. I do food if that is what they want.  We do have now, it is not a celebration, but we do recognize the fact that  Pretty Boy Floyd   s gang did attempt to rob the bank that is still standing.  Out of that, we have had two years of bikers to come through, about 675  of them to come through to visit Boley. It   s very organized. They come,  and they go in the bank, and we do provide some food for them. We  provide water  for  all for them. That   s a little bit of revenue that comes  in to the businesspeople here in the town. They really, really enjoy that.  It   s a big, big celebration because I tell the story of the attempted  robbery in all its color. I even have a gun in the bank, and I use the gun  and tell them all about that, show them the bullet hole.  I have pictures of the people that were involved in the bank robbery. I  have a picture of David Turner, D. J. Turner. His name was David  Johnson Turner, who was really the most progressive person in Boley  back in the years. He really put Boley on the map. He was a smart man.  He did a lot for Boley and started the bank. He started the bank simply  out of the fact that he had a drugstore and all the people trusted him. He  had a safe in the drugstore, and they would bring their money for him to  put it in his safe. After he had so much money, he said,    Well, we might  as well have a bank,    so they started a bank.  28  Simpson  Hicks  Simpson  Hicks  That bank is still there. That was the one that  he attempted to rob  and  he was killed. That was just a very negative part of our history and a sad  part of our history. It is not one that we tell out of any fact of being  proud about it. It is the fact that we tell that out of the tenacity of the  people that stood for what was right and thwarted that bank robbery and  demolished that part of the Pretty Boy Floyd gang. It was the strength of  the black people to save their town and to save their bank. They didn   t  do it out of malice. They did it out of necessity.  Of course, Pretty Boy Floyd, they had tried to stop Pretty Boy Floyd and  his gang. He had robbed every bank in Oklahoma that he could rob,  some of them two times, but he met his Boley-loo when he came to  Boley. He did not come, but his people did. We celebrate, we do that out  of the fact that our people were strong people and to teach our young  people that you have to stand for something or you   ll fall for  anything .  So, consequently, we do that with them. These motorbike riders come  from all over the country. They come from all over the country with the  finest machines you   ve ever seen. That is quite a time.  Our churches do various celebrations. We do a lot of work in our  churches and various churches. What we now have is a calendar for the  churches, so when one church is having a big day at their church,  another church will not have a big day on that same day. We fixed it so  the members from one church can help the next church, can participate  in whatever activities they   re having. They have big family days. They  have homecoming days. They remember the birth of their churches, and  that   s always a grand occasion. That   s a part of the history of Boley.  That   s a part of what we do now to keep ourselves going and to keep  ourselves well and alive.  How long have these celebrations been happening, and how have they  changed over the years?  They have been happening ever since I can remember, and any reason  for change over the years is the decrease in population.  Why do you think these traditions are so important to your community?  Because of its people. We are who we are because of our people. The  traditions are something that you   we were having family reunions  before it became popular, here in Boley. We did family reunions. We did  church reunions before people even realized,    Oh, let   s do a family  reunion.    We were doing that. It   s just our people. It   s the strength of  our people. It   s the life of our people. That   s just who we are, our  people.  29  Simpson  Hicks  Describe the interactions with towns like Paden and Okemah.  In the years when I was a child, Okemah was twelve miles to the east of  us. It was a town that was all white, except my one little classmate that  lived there. Her name was Effie Pittman. She lived in the town because  her mother was a maid, and they lived in a little one-room house no  bigger than this table. Her mother was a maid to one of the lawyers  there. That was the only black person that we knew, that I knew, that  lived in the town. That came in late years.  Let me back up a bit. Before her time, there was a young man that was  black that was reared by the Berry family. There is a questionable  history as how he got there, but they reared this black kid, Booker Berry,  as their child. He was their child, blacker than an ace of spades, but he  was their child. They took care of him. He had the best cars. He had the  best clothes, but he came to Boley occasionally. He came to Boley often.  At any rate, that   s the one black person. I said that to let you know that  at one time they were saying that Okemah was the Jim Crow center of  Okfuskee County.  I do know that in Okemah, you could not go to the theater   that   s the  show. The theater was the show. It wasn   t a theater; it was a show. You  could not go to the show unless you went in the back door, in the back  alley, up the back, and you sat up in a balcony. You didn   t sit down with  the white folk. They didn   t allow that. I know that. I also know that if  you wanted to eat there, you could not go in the front door of the eating  establishments to eat. You had to go down the alley, in the backdoor,  and ask Ms. Osborne to give you hamburger in the back where the black  folks sat. They did not sit with white folks.  They had a place there called the Ice Cream Parlor. Now, I remember  this. Let me tell you about my favorite people down in Okemah. There  was a huge place, had ice cream in it. The best ice cream, besides what  my mother could make because my mother could make ice cream that  would just make you   mmm  Anyway, you could go down there and  get this store-bought   see, you all don   t know about a store-bought  dress and a store-bought ice cream. You could go in there and get ice  cream, but when you got that cone of ice cream you could not take a lick  off of it in the store. You   d have to go outside. The white people would  be sitting in there around the tables eating their ice cream, but the black  people had to walk outside. That building is still down there.  The schoolteachers were the people that everybody thought had a little  money, so they could go to the grocery stores and buy groceries. I  remember a store called Here   Tis in Okemah. I don   t want to say the  30  Simpson  name because I may have it wrong, but I know the store was Here   Tis.  That   s where the black people would go on Saturdays. Of course, my  mother and daddy didn   t go there because my grandfather owned a  business, so my grandfather took care of us. (Laughs) We didn   t go  there. If you went to Okemah, you could see all these black folk outside  that store. That was the one store that would cater to black folk for their  groceries and all.  They were not that liberal in Okemah, just to put it mildly. Paden was  just a dot on the map. Of course, Paden didn   t offer us that much, but we  didn   t want that much. Now, let me put it this way. If Okemah did not  want us, it was okay because we didn   t want Okemah. So that was okay.  If Okemah didn   t want us to come down there and didn   t let us come  down there, we felt the same. It was reciprocated. We didn   t care one  way or the other, but over the years, times have changed. People have  gone on, and Okemah is just a lovely place now. In the first place, they  learned quickly that the color of a dollar is green no matter whose hands  it comes from. We do have a little green, and we do go there.  Now, there have been some people   old soldiers die hard. There have  been many people from Boley that will not go to Okemah to this day.  Some have passed on. They would not go to Okemah because Okemah  put a bitter taste in their mouth. They can still taste those sour grapes.  They would not go to Okemah. I do. I go to Okemah. I have friends in  Okemah. As a matter of fact, they call me all the time. They called me  yesterday morning before I could get out of bed good. They are cordial  to me, not only to me but to the other people. We go there. We buy. We  sit. We eat. We talk. They visit our homes. We visit their homes. Black  people live in the town. It   s just a community of people.  Of course, you   re still going to have some old scourges there, and you  may have one or two old scourges here, but they   re in the background  now. They   re too old to move, so they   re sitting still. The young people,  if you   re not taught all that old junk, you don   t remember it. You don   t  have to practice it. Those people that were the teachers, probably, are the  people that held those ideas back then of hatred for black folk. We never  could figure out why. Never could figure out why. Those people did not  like black folk. We never did anything to them. Never. We didn   t kill  anybody down there. If they let us buy anything they had, we bought it.  Some of the black people from here worked in their homes. Especially in  later years, they worked in their homes, and they were the best  housekeepers they ever had. That   s just a general   that   s just the culture  of America. They just look down on you because you   re black. But now  Okemah is a lovely place and I enjoy it.  Talk a little about the role of the boys    home and the correctional facility  31  Hicks  that came later.  Well, yes, at first, that was a tuberculosis center. It was a tuberculosis  center way back in the years, long before my time. That came about   I  was trying to think of that. It   s that ladies    organization. I   m going to  have to plug that name in because I just can   t remember that ladies     organization. The ladies    organization is what changed it because what  happened was they saw that the young black boys were being put in  prison with the older men in McAlester. They thought that was wrong.  Of course, they were incorrigible boys, but they were being put there  with those grown men, and they were being taught, I   m sure, various  habits that were not healthy. Those ladies saw to it that they needed to  move those boys out of there and put them in a home where they could  be boys. That   s how it started.  The first superintendent was John Lilley, and it was called the State  Training School  for Negro Boys , is what it was called back in the  years. It evolved from the State Training School to a home for negro  boys. When it became a home for negro boys, the culture changed a bit  because they were required to go to school. Of course, they worked on  the farm because they had a big farm. They were required to go to  school. They finished high school, and some of them went on to college.  As a matter of fact, when this occurred, changed to be the State School  for Negro Boys, Wayne Chandler was the superintendent at that time.  Velma Ashley was the superintendent of Boley schools. There was a  collaboration between the two schools. Velma Ashley and Wayne  Chandler collaborated where their boys from the state school could  attend. They did not attend all classes at Boley, but they would be a part  of the system. When they graduated, they marched with us if there was  some to graduate, and they went on to college. As a matter of fact, two  or three of them went on to Langston  in the fifties . It became a good  school. It became a changed school.  One of the people that I remember as being superintendents of that  school was Major McCormick. Major McCormick became Major  McCormick. He was Herbert McCormick. He became Major  McCormick because he killed  George  Birdwell, who was trying to rob  the bank. At that time, the governor of Oklahoma gave him five hundred  dollars and named him Major. The town called him Major McCormick  after that. He became the superintendent of the State Training School.  After that time, I think Wayne Chandler came in because that had to be  in the fifties when Wayne Chandler was there. That   s when those  students went to school. Of course, now they have school on the campus.  They have teachers on the campus. It has changed since that time under  32  Simpson  Hicks  Simpson  Hicks  Simpson  Hicks  Simpson  Hicks  Governor Nigh because it was under the Department of Human Services.  It changed under Governor Nigh and went under the prison system, so  that facility is being used as a state minimum security prison.  What was your religion growing up, and what church did you attend?  I am a Baptist. I was a member of the New Hope Baptist Church. I  joined that church when I was twelve years old. Most churches had  baptismal pools. I was twelve years old, and I told you already when I  was born, so you know I   m old. You know that they didn   t have a  baptismal pool when I was a child, so they took me out to a tank. They  baptized everybody in this pond. I was twelve years old and was  baptized in that pond. Of course, they told me all about the pond after I  was baptized. I stayed in that church for a long time, and then I went to  California. When I went to California, I joined another Baptist church.  Then when I came back from California, I joined Antioch Baptist  Church, of which I am presently a member.  What traditions have you made an effort to preserve from your family?  Always the family gatherings. We don   t wait for a family reunion. At  Easter time, we always had family dinner. All the family came around,  the ones that lived here. That was my family that lived in Bristow, my  family that lived here, the family that lived in Slick, and the family that  lived in Oklahoma City. We always came to one house. We observe  Easter. We do Thanksgiving and Christmas. All of the other times, my  uncle had a big lake up in Creek County, and we would go there for the  Fourth of July. Then one time later on in the year, we would have  another picnic up there. He had a lake, a boat, and picnic settings there  with an outside refrigerator and all of that. As a matter of fact, the  Alphas used to go there for their big picnic. I don   t fish. I don   t care  about fishing, but the people who liked to fish would fish. Those that  wanted to ride in the boat could ride in the boat, and I didn   t want to do  none of that, either.  What stories have come down to you about your parents and  grandparents, and were there any themes?  Stories about my   oh, Lord  There are many stories, so many funny  things that happened. (Laughs) Gosh, there were so many I can   t even  name them. Ask that question again. What was it? I   m sorry.  Stories that have come to you about your parents or grandparents and  the themes that you think they were trying to convey in those stories.  It was always the part that my grandmother, who was Mary Figures  33  Ashley, was a very robust, renowned woman. She believed in everybody  walking the chalk line. She believed in everybody going to school. That  was just what she did. Out of that, my family, (when you say family, I   m  talking about my mother and her sisters and brothers) they lived in the  country. They went to school in the grade school in the country, but they  had to come into the town of Boley to go to high school, so they had to  be, what they called at that time, boarded out. They would stay with  various people in their homes and go to school. My mother was always  the cook. That has always been the story. They would always tell those  stories about how they came to stay at Mrs. Jones    house, and how they  cooked, and how Mrs. Jones liked them because they were so  well-bred ,  manageable and all this kind of stuff. They were always telling  these kinds of stories.  My great-grandmother, I remember so distinctly. As I told you, my  great-grandmother knew her father by the name of  Ole Masa . Her  mother   s name was Sue. She was a great big black woman. We said,     What was your father   s name?    She said,    They told me to call him Ole  Masa.    That was her father. She told us stories about Ole Masa, and we  had some pictures. She never learned to read or write, but she never  worked like the other people. She stayed in the house because she was  Ole Masa   s daughter.  I was going to teach my great-grandmother how to count. I said,     Grandma Edie, now, you have to learn how to count. You just can   t be  in this family if you can   t read, write, and count.    (Laughter) She said,    I  can count.    I said,    Well, count from one to a hundred.    I remember this  so   everybody in the family knows that this happened. (Laughs) I said,     Count from one to a hundred.    She counted from one to fifty, and she  stopped and she went back and counted from one to fifty again. She said,     I   ve counted to a hundred. Isn   t fifty and fifty a hundred?    I thought,     You old rascal, you  She thinks she   s slick.    That   s as far as she could  count, was one to fifty, but she knew how to add. Fifty and fifty was a  hundred.  I also tried to teach her how to read. She said that she could read good  enough. She knew how to spell two words. I won   t tell you what those  two words were, but she knew how to spell those two words. (Laughter)  My grandma was a very religious woman, little lady who looked like she  looked. She wore a money belt around her waist all the time. She kept  money around her waist all the time. She wore petticoats. That   s what  we remember about Grandma Edie. Grandma Edie wore all these  petticoats. That   s my mother   s side of the family.  My grandfather   s side of the family, my grandfather was the only  Ashley on his side of the family. His family came from Louisiana. You  34  Simpson  Hicks  Simpson  Hicks  asked this; you asked about my family. We don   t talk about it, but his  mother was a white woman. She married a black man. We don   t know  whether she married him or not, but she had one child by this black man,  which was my grandfather. They separated, and then she married  another man who was part white. They had all these children that were  my mother   s first cousins.  My  great-  grandfather, who we found out later   we didn   t know this  until a few years ago, five, six, eight years ago. We went to a family  reunion. I have a picture of him. We found out that he was part Indian  and part black, and he married Amanda from deep down in Louisiana  who was white and maybe a little Indian. We don   t know. We don   t  know. But that   s the part of the family   that   s why they   re messed up,  (Laughs) everybody looking like we look. It came down that way. You  asked me about my family, so that   s what I   m telling you. Those are the  things that I remember.  When I was a child, I was an only child, and I was reared an only child.  Everywhere I went I was by myself. My mother taught me my family  history. She taught me who my people were so I would know. We went  to Louisiana all the time. We   d go to Louisiana when folk couldn   t drive  to Paden. We would go to Louisiana to see them. As a matter of fact,  some of them live in Bristow, and they lived as white people. They  didn   t know that they were black, in Bristow. When I went to California,  one of my first cousins that came to take me out was not white, but he  lived in the white community, and they thought he was white. He took  me around all places, showing me. He said,    Everybody thinks I   m  white, so leave it that way,    and I did. I did. Of course, you can look at  me and tell what I am, but I   m still his cousin. He came to take me, and I  met some of his friends, girlfriends, other friends. That   s what I  remember in the family of being taught who we are.  But he didn   t tell that you were his cousin, just you were his friend from  Oklahoma?  No, he finally told one that I was his cousin, but, you see, I could   ve  been a cousin from another husband, or mother from another brother or  something. (Laughter) But back then, they didn   t know it. His name was  Billy, Billy Batts. I shall not forget him.  What kind of entertainment was there in Boley?  Well, we had a theater at one time, well, a movie show, a movie house.  We enjoyed that. Other than that, you had all of the activities of all of  the baseball in the summertime, springtime. You had baseball.  Entertainment was what people called picnics. The various communities  35  Finchum  Hicks  would have what they called picnics. They had them in  Chilesville ,  they had them in  Barrel House . At these picnics, people would go out,  sit around, talk, and they would have items for sale. They would sell ice  cream. They would sell hamburgers. The men would play ball. That was  a picnic. That was a big outing for the people.  I know when I first came back from California, I went to a park. We  didn   t call them parks. At that time they called them something else, but  that   s what they were. They were parks. That   s where they had the  picnics. That   s where they had the meeting of the community. I just  don   t remember people not liking people. I just don   t remember that. I   m  sure there must have been if I think about it hard enough, maybe, but  everybody were friends. Everybody knew everybody. Everybody liked  everybody.  Even if you didn   t go to the same church, you knew those people. When  you went to the picnics, you were over on their side of the turf. You  knew there was going to be a picnic there. You played ball against them.  If they won, fine; if they didn   t win, fine. Then the people would do  what they called a hoorah. You don   t know what that is. (Laughs) They  would tease, tease, you know, have bragging rights. We call it bragging  rights now. They called it hoorah then. They would laugh and talk, and it  was just a fun time, as I remember.  What brought you back to Boley in the seventies?  I came back to Boley because   I knew my husband here in Oklahoma,  but we were not married. We were not boyfriend and girlfriend. I have to  tell you all this to get to that. You may not want to hear all that.  Anyway, as I was about twelve or thirteen years old, this fellow sort of  took a shine to me, I guess, but I was so busy doing other little things,  playing and running, I did not know this. He bought me a Christmas gift,  and I took it home to my mother and told Mother,    Mother, that boy  brought this for me.    I said,    I   m going to give this thing back to him      It was perfume in a little thing with a bunch of little green stuff in it, so  it probably was cheap.  I said,    I   m going to give this thing back to that Hicks boy. He gave me  this. Mother said,    Don   t you dare do that.    She said,    He may like you.  Whether he likes you or not       She was always teaching me the right  thing to do. She bought these handkerchiefs and told me to wrap them  up told me to give them to him for a gift. I gave him the handkerchiefs,     Here.    That   s probably what I did. I don   t remember what I did, but  I   m sure I did. (Laughs) That was the end of that. I never saw him never  again. I went on to California and lived in California, then he came to  California.  36  A cousin called me one day and said,    Girl, have you seen that Gene  Hicks?    I said,    Oh, girl, I remember him.    She said,    Girl, he is some  handsome fellow.    I said,    Child, he   s too slow for me.    She said,    Why  don   t you call?    I said,    No, Honey, I   m not. He was slow when he was  at home, quiet, slow, too slow and quiet for me.    She said,    He works  for May Company.    I said,    Well, yes, maybe so, give him my number.     He called me, and he just came over. He was. He was one handsome  character at that time. (Laughter) He was really a handsome man. I  didn   t care about him being so handsome. It was just a fellow from back  home that I had known. That was a part-time job at May Company. He  really was an engineer for Capitol Records. Of course, that didn   t mean  anything to me. I had my own set of  friends .  Later on, he would call me and come by. He didn   t call me often, but he  would call me, and then we dated. We started dating. We dated about a  year, and then we were married. We were married in 1965. I was going  with a young doctor when I met him. I decided that this young doctor  was going to have me somewhere sitting down with a bunch of kids and  not going to ever let me outside the door because I was going to be his  wife. I thought to myself,    I can   t have that. That is not me.    So I said,     I   ve got to do different from this.     He asked me to marry him. I didn   t say yes. He didn   t ask me but one  time. He didn   t ask me anymore. I thought,    Well, what is he going to  do about this marrying thing?    I   m talking about my husband, Gene.  Finally, I said,    What about this marrying? You haven   t said       He said,     I asked you once, and you didn   t give me an answer.    I said,    No, but  we better go on and get married,    because he was having a house built.  He had a house built for us. He told me to go out and look at the house  and see what I wanted to put into the house, so I did. I thought,    Shoot, I  better go on with this deal     (Laughter) So we got married. He is from  here. His parents are from here. My parents are from here. We stayed in  California, married, for eight years. We were married in    65. Our child  was born in 1968. He had asthma, really had a bad case of asthma. We  thought it might be good for his asthma if we moved back here.  In the meantime, his father (my husband   s father) was ill. There were  only two boys his mother had, he and his brother, and they both lived in  California. They thought it was too much for her to have to deal with the  farm. They had about 240 or 300 acres. It was just too much for her to  have to deal with, and cattle. He said,    What about moving back?    I  said,    I   d like that because my parents are from there and my friends are  there. We could do that.    That   s how we moved back. We moved back  to take care of a farm and the fact that our baby that was born in    68 had  asthma, had a severe case of asthma. When we got back here, my mother  37  Simpson  Hicks  Simpson  gave him a dose of castor oil, and the asthma left. He does have a bit of a  wheeze, but he would get really sick in California, and we   d have to take  him to the doctor, emergency, to get treatment. We have never had to  treat him, really, for asthma since he has been here. He was allergic to  eggs, but now that   s all gone. So that was a good move.  That was in 1972, but I thought I would go crazy after I got here because  he stayed in California and worked until we got a house built. Whew   The mud, no lights, no sidewalks, I thought,    Lord, why did I let this  man bring me back to this God-forsaken place?    Oh  I was just  distraught, believe me, but my mother and daddy were here. My sister  was not here. My aunts and my uncles, my cousins, so I said,    Well,  Lord, I   ve got to make the best of this.    I sat in one room and looked out  the window and cried until my husband said,    You might as well stop  crying. This is our home now, and we   re going to be here.     I mean, I put a spine in my back and straightened up. I learned to step  through the mud. I learned to ride around without streetlights. I learned  to walk without streets. I learned to buy enough groceries that I would  not have to go to the grocery store every day. I learned that I could go to  the grocery store and buy an abundance of groceries and put them in one  or two of the three freezers that we had, or I could buy them and put  them in our refrigerators. I have three refrigerators. I could put them in  that and be just fine. My husband was just as happy as if he had good  sense. (Laughter) That   s why we   re here.  After I came here, they mixed me into the town. I became president of  the Chamber of Commerce, they put me in the town and made me do all  kinds of stuff. Maurice Lee was alive at that time. Sam Wilcots was  alive at that time. That   s why I became so involved in the town, because  I did have a little know-how so they utilized my know-how. Now I have  just become a part of the town, trying to do all I can to make the town  the best I can make it. You didn   t ask for all that, but you had no  business asking.  That was so good  Oh, my goodness.  We did sell our house. My husband had built this house for us, had it  built, as the old folks say, from the ground up, a very nice home. We  sold that house. I wanted to keep it, but he did not want any part of any  rental property. He did not want to rent it. He said,    No, we   re too far  away. We don   t want to rent the property,    so we sold that. We do own  some property. We do own some land out in Palmdale, California. We  did keep that.  What role did music play in Boley?  38  Hicks  Music? Oh, gosh. We loved music. We had a lady here, Dimple Brooks.  Her last husband was Brooks, but her first husband was Holmes. She  was a Walker, Dimple Walker Holmes Brooks. Her father, Mr. Walker,  was one of the first people to work on the railroad when the railroad was  here. Dimple Brooks was a songbird of this part of the country. She  could have been a Marian Anderson if she had been pushed to it. She  had one brother. He could sing. We don   t know where the singing came  from. It might have come from her mother.  Her mother was a little bit different. There is something in this book  about them, I think. She could sing. She was a pianist. She played the  piano. She took music, and she played the piano. She didn   t play it by  ear. She played it by music. She could sing. She was our choir director at  our church for years. She directed every musical of every church around  here. That was the first part of my musical education.  Now, my aunt Velma that I stayed with has the baby grand piano. The  baby grand piano is still in the house. She could play by music only. It  was by music, but Mrs. Brooks could run the chords and all of that. Aunt  Velma played piano. We had a teacher here, Mrs. F. B. Jones, who  taught every kid in Boley that the family could afford to pay fifty cents a  music lesson how to play the piano. Mrs. F. B. Jones. Mrs. F. B. Jones  had a son, and her son (I can   t remember his name right now, but I do  have it) played with Duke Ellington   s band. I can   t remember the state  right now, where they were, but he played with Duke Ellington   s band.  He left here. She was the musician of this town.  She had recitals. I forgot to tell you we had recitals. You know, you play  the piano. You dress the part. She had high teas. We had high teas. I  forgot about all that. She had high teas, and they were out on the lawn,  and you had to have on your long dress and had to have on this and had  to have on the other. You played in the recitals. Of course, my part was  always playing the piano, a forehand number with her. She always  wanted me to do the orations, so I had to do some kind of fancy  something with talking with music behind me. That was always pretty  big. You would never think that I did all these orations and all this  talking and all of this stuff that I had to do as a child in Boley, and as an  adult, too. That was the music part of it.  Then we had the band. Mr. Lawson had a band. We had a very large  band. One of the young people from that band, Maurice Jackson, I tell  him all the time (we call him Mecie, he   s a graduate of Langston)    It   s a  sad day that you did not become the Wynton Marsalis of our  generation,    because he was that good or better, and he had a brother  that was that good or better. They just did not push themselves into  39  doing that. Maurice Jackson did graduate from Langston. His brother did  not. His sister became a cosmetologist. That   s a little far off. At any rate,  that   s the music. That   s part of the music.  All of the churches had music. All of the churches had pianos. Some of  them were tinhorn players. They couldn   t play, but they played by ear. It  was enough to keep the people going. I remember back in the day when  my mother used to talk about it. Before the pianos, you had the old    Do,  re, mi, fa, so, la, ti, do.    They pitched the    Do, re,    and you   d know  when to come in on that note, and that   s how they sang. They sung all  over the country doing that. Mother said they had a man named Mr.  Camper, that Mr. Camper could do that better than anybody in the  country. That   s how the music was because they didn   t have pianos.  Then later, people got juice harps. Do you know what a juice harp is?  It   s a little harp that   s this round that has a little thing on the side. You  put it in your mouth, and you play it like that. Then they had the harps.  People played harps. Then came the guitar. Then there was one man  who could play the violin that would make you jump for joy. He could  play in the churches. He could play in the juke joints. He was a violinist.  He played the violin. See, when you think of a violin, you think of  classical music, but he played the violin for the Holiness Church. He  played the violin for the reach-backs, as they used to call them, when  they would have those dances on the floor and all the older people would  be dancing. They   d square dance, and he would play for that. That was  music.  Of course, as the years have gone on, we have become accustomed to  musical instruments in all genres of music. As a matter of fact, they had  the juke boxes to come in, and the juke boxes, you could put all kinds of  records on them. Then we became acquainted with all the well-known,  renowned musicians. We knew all about Sam Cooke, and we knew these  other folk. Ella Fitzgerald was one of my favorite people. Ella  Fitzgerald, I shall not forget that, the fact that I had been reared and all  that. I knew how to eat with a spoon. I knew how to eat with a fork. I  knew that when you eat soup, you take the spoon away from it. I knew  all these graces. My husband worked for Capitol Records, and one of his  people to record was Ella Fitzgerald. Oh, I wanted to see Ella so bad. I  wanted to go see Ella so bad and Nat King Cole, so he took me out. He  took me out to see Ella Fitzgerald. She was just fabulous, and, of course,  I knew my graces and all that because I had been taught at home. My  husband is kind of a country man, but I had been taught at home.  I never shall forget  He was a recording engineer, and she gave him a  twenty-dollar tip. I said,    She gave you a twenty-dollar tip?    He said,     Yes.    My husband is kind of a quiet spoken, easy going man. He said,  40     Yes.    I said,    We can eat off of twenty dollars for a whole week     He  said,    She told me to take you out to dinner.    I said,    I   ll tell you what  let   s do. Let   s go get two hamburgers, and we can eat off the rest of the  money for our groceries.    That   s what we did. Even though we were  both working and had money, that   s what we did.  That   s just back to the music in me, and I sing. I used to sing for a lot of  things. I would sing for some churches. The old voice has gotten  old ,  like everything else. When you don   t use it, you kind of lose it, so my  soprano is just about gone. I sang in all of the cantatas because I was  always the one with the  high  soprano voice. You wouldn   t believe it  listening to me talk. When I went to California, my church was invited  to a church, and Mr. Bingham was there, one of my favorite people. I  hated him, but he was one of my favorite people. He taught math  at  Boley High School . He taught algebra. I went to this church, and I was  singing in the choir. Mr. Bingham was in the audience. I never would  have thought that I would   ve ever seen Mr. Bingham again because he  left here as a math teacher  years ago .  Years passed, and he came back here to the nursing home. He told me,     I remembered you  dancing at a church in California .    He said,    I  know that has to be Henrietta Holloway singing because I don   t know  anybody with a voice that high, can scream that loud.    Had to be me  singing in that choir. When I would be practicing in the  high school   auditorium and he would be having his algebra class, he said,    Close the  door because that Holloway is down there singing loud  Listen to the  lungs on that girl     That   s how I remember Mr. Bingham. At that time, I  did sing. I sing a little bit in the church but not very much anymore  because I don   t have it. It   s just about gone now. Just like you know how  your musical voice leaves you if you don   t use it all the time. Plus, the  fact gospel came along. I could not sing   I didn   t have the gospel kind  of voice. I   ve had to kind of change my voice to meet the gospel genre.  As a matter of fact, let me go back a little bit and tell you about Boley as  a school when Boley was a school and that we had to compete in the  intercollegiate activities. I was at Langston University with all of the  other schools. You competed. Do you know what the intercollegiate      each school  brought the best and brightest kids from  their  school, and  they were tested. You had some that took the English test. Some took the  math, biology, etc. You compile those scores, and whoever won would  win what they called the Man Moon Trophy. It was a big trophy. Boley  competed with all of the schools including Douglass, including Tulsa,  including all those big schools.  I competed in English, (you could do two) and I sang. I sang    Poor  Butterfly.    I shall never forget that. I won, singing    Poor Butterfly.    I  41  Simpson  Hicks  did pretty good in English, but I didn   t win first. My friend  Shirley Sue  King  that went in math won. The bottom line is our little school, Boley,  competed with all these big schools, and we won the main trophy. We  were the highest-scoring kids in the country for black schools  at that  time. Other students who participated were the Daniels, Frank Hill,  Maryetta Haddox, Veltta Vaughn. So many I cannot remember them  all . That   s always been a history. We still have that trophy. That   s  always been a history of the schools of Boley. Aunt Velma saw to it.  Are there any other family heirlooms or keepsakes that you possess?  Oh, yes, I have a lot of them. My grandfather, Samuel Ashley, as I told  you about, was a genius. People didn   t realize Papa was a genius  because Papa liked to drink whiskey and he would get high on Saturday  nights. They thought he was just a whiskey-head, but Papa had a mind of  a genius. At twelve years old, his mother and dad were separated, as I  mentioned a while ago, and his grandfather lived in Louisiana but  apparently had accumulated some wealth. He had a cotton gin, his own  cotton gin. Of course, my grandfather didn   t look like it. He looked like  an ordinary black man. How his grandparents looked, probably, I   m  sure, helped them to secure some of their wealth.  My grandfather ran the gin. My great-great-grandfather had a gin, but  my grandfather, Samuel Ashley, whom we all loved (we called him  Papa) ran this gin. He was the operator of this gin at twelve years old. I  have the books that he kept on that gin. I have the scale that he weighed  some of the cotton on that gin. He stayed there and ran that business for  his grandfather because his grandfather took care of him. His uncles  (they were his grandfather   s sons) came in and ruined the old man, as  they called him, because they would take the money. Papa would tell  him that they were taking the money, they were doing this, but they  ruined him.  How that group of them came to Oklahoma was these uncles that had  ruined the old man and the gin   Papa got married after that and came to  Oklahoma. These uncles were going over across the track, and they were  dating girls across the track. These girls were white girls. The white  fellows knew that they were not in their schools. They didn   t know who  they were. They couldn   t figure out who they were, so they trailed them  home one night and found out where they went. When they went to the  black homes, they knew these boys had to be black, but they thought  they were white. They were run out of town. They were run out of  Louisiana.  My aunt that used to tell the story died at 106  years of age . She used to  tell the story. She said,    They had to take to the  river         Take to the  42  Simpson  Hicks  Finchum  Hicks  Simpson  Hicks  Simpson  Hicks   river     means they went down the side of the river and across the river,  and  the dogs  lost the tracks of them. That   s how they got into Bristow.  That   s how those relatives went up to Bristow rather than to come to  Boley. That   s part of the saga of that side of my  family  and those are  facts. Everything that I   ve told you are facts. I have not told you all of  the facts, but that   s a skim of the facts. (Laughter)  What world events had the most impact on you, growing up?  World events. Well, by the time I was seventeen years old, I had  traveled to thirty-nine states. My family had taken me to thirty-nine  states. World events. Everything was an event back when you   re a  country kid, I guess.  How was World War II? Do you remember much about that?  I just remember my uncle going to the army, and I remember him being  a big shot in the army. That   s the one that obtained lieutenant colonel. I  do remember that. When he came home, it was a big thing. He didn   t  wear a little narrow cap like everybody else. He had a cap on with a  thing to it.  A brim?  Yes, a brim to it. That was a big thing, and the people in Boley were all  excited. He had a nickname of Red. His name was Thomas Dolphin  Ashley. He had a nickname of Red, and that was an exciting part in the  times of the history. He told more stories. He was a comedian, too. He  told more stories about the army. He brought us rations to let us know  how people had put the rations in little boxes. You had a little can or  something, or a little can of that. He brought one of those back so we  could see it as children. He brought us other kinds of things back from  the army to let us know. The one thing I wanted to know, did he have to  be in a  foxhole . He said he knew about the  foxhole , but he was more  or less in the office, so he knew a little bit about both of them. He lived  in Germany for quite a while. He and his wife and children both lived in  Germany for a while. What did you ask me about, world events?  Right.  World events, world events. Oh, I do know   this wasn   t a world event,  but I knew in part of my travels I certainly enjoyed seeing Jackie  Robinson play with the Dodgers, and it was an exhibition game. I went  to Yankee Stadium. I went to Dodger Stadium, and we saw some games.  I also saw Joe Louis box. They took me to see that. Gosh, I can   t  remember what year it was, but I know I was a little kid. I also  43  Finchum  Hicks  Finchum  Hicks  Simpson  Hicks  remember going to the Barnum and Bailey Circus. That was a big thing.  I probably was the only kid there besides white kids. That was a big  thing  My daddy took me to that. I was sitting up watching the circus,  and we were watching the high   what do they call those things?  The tightrope?  The tightropes. You   re under a trapeze. There   s one black fellow now  who is a master of the   what do they call them? Tent masters?  The ringmaster.  Ringmaster. That   s it, the ringmaster. The ringmaster was a big thing.  Oh, I was so excited about that  It came to Oklahoma City. I don   t  remember it being there but once, but I   m sure it must   ve come often.  But we went. My dad went, and they had given me the money. At that  time, you had a handkerchief, and you could tie your money in one end  of it. You don   t know about that, but you tie your money in one end of  that. I was sitting up there having such a good time, and I dropped my  money. My dad was six six. He was enjoying the thing, too, but I  jumped down from the seats we were on under there, trying to find my  money. He missed me. He didn   t know where I was. I said,    Here I am   I dropped my money.    I was down under that seat getting my money,  and then I jumped back on the seat so I could see the high rope acts and  all of that.  They had not taken the kids to the zoo then, but they used to take  children to the Capitol. They took them to the zoo. Those are the only  two places that I really remember taking kids as a group: to the zoo and  to the Capitol. We had not been to the zoo at the time, but there were  gorillas there. There were other animals there. I saw all of these animals  in the raw. I had came back and told all the other kids about it and so  forth. I don   t know any other kid, not even a kid in town, that went to the  Barnum and Bailey Circus but me. I shall never forget that. Let   s see,  world events. Well, I guess that   s enough. (Laughter) That is not a world  event. That was just something that happened.  That   s fine. What do you see as the impact of segregation or integration  on the town of Boley?  The segregated schools were good when they worked. Segregation or  integration really has not been a direct effect on Boley as I see it. An  indirect effect on Boley, because Boley was always an all-black town,  but the indirect effect of segregation on Boley is that it had to move our  people out for employment. Consequently, we suffered from that, but as  far as the segregated schools, the segregated schools were a yes and a  44  Simpson  Hicks  Simpson  Hicks  no. The fact that the segregated schools caused the teachers that were  teaching in those schools to move, to get masters, to get terminal degrees   was a plus .  We were always good people. We were always pretty well-bred. We  were pretty cultured. It caused us to know who you are, to be who you  are, and do the best you can. It taught us that we had to be a little bit  better, and that   s what we tried to do. Those teachers that were caught up  because of integration, without jobs, they went on to get better jobs  because they got higher degrees. People say that segregation was  terrible. I can   t say it was terrible. I can   t say that it was good. There  were causes, and there were effects, some not so good as others and  some were good.  What was taught about Boley   s history, or Oklahoma black history in  general, in Boley schools?  I had black history. I was taught black history in Boley schools, but in  school, there was not a lot taught about Boley history. I learned the  history of Boley from my family. That   s how I know the history of  Boley. I know it firsthand from them, and they lived it. The history of  Boley really was not taught that much. We knew that Boley was an all-black  town. We knew when it was started. We knew about D. J. Turner,  a little bit about D. J. Turner. I was taught at home about D. J. Turner. I  was taught about the bank robbery. My mother was in high school when  the bank was robbed. They have tapes of her now, telling about the day  the bank was robbed, because she was in high school. She remembered  that. She told it to me and to my sister. The black history, we were  taught just about black people in general. That was just part of the  curriculum for the school.  What is it about Boley that keeps people coming back and keeps the  connection alive?  Oh, it   s the people in Boley. Once you   re here, you just  stay . If you  were born and reared here, or if you came to live here as a child, there is  just some connection to being in Boley where,    Gosh, I am somebody.  I   m special. The people here like me. They know me. They knew my  mama. They knew my grandma. They knew my grandpa.    It is just a  family thing. Our people are what keep us going. The people keep any  place going, I know, but it   s an exception when you come to talking  about Boley.  We believe we   re the biggest and the best black town in Oklahoma. We  realize that we are the crown jewel of Oklahoma, so that gives us a sense  of pride. We were not boastful and selfish and uppity. We were just who  45  Simpson  Hicks  Simpson  Hicks  we were because we were taught that in order to be a worthwhile citizen,  you have to succeed in something. You have to have some success. In  order to have some success, you   ve got to have some learning. You   ve  got to have some education as the old folks said. You have to go to  school. You have to learn. I think we pride ourselves on that.  Now, everybody here didn   t finish college. Everybody here didn   t even  finish grade school. But they are still our people, and some of them are  our relatives. Everybody in Boley, we   re not all kin to each other,  though, but some of them are our relatives. That   s just the family of  Boley. That   s just the culture of Boley. When people come here, they  just think of    I   m going home,    I guess the way you do anyplace. Maybe  it   s just the fact that we know we   re all blacks in an all-black town, but  we don   t think about it being all black. We don   t think about the fact that  we   re all black folk. We just think of the fact that we   re people. We are  just people, and we are equal to any other people anywhere else.  What is the most important thing people should know about Boley?  The most important thing. There are so many important things you need  to know about Boley, you don   t have time for me to name them   (Laughter) You need to know that we have pride. We   re a progressive  people. We are a talented people. I can   t say cultured because I don   t  think that   s proper. I don   t think it   s proper grammar to say we are  cultured people, but we do have a certain amount of culture. I can put it  that way. We are a loving people. We have southern hospitality. We like  folk; we don   t care who they are. We make no difference in them. If  somebody white comes here, the only way that we   re going to know  they   re white is if they might stand off a little bit, but they immediately  become our friends. As a matter of fact, they become our kinfolks. We  have some we call aunt and uncle. We like everybody.  As a matter of fact, Boley Schools was the first school to integrate. They  integrated under L. G. Ashley. We had white teachers. We had white  students. They loved here. They loved here. Of course, we now have  white people living in the town. Mary Harshbarger lives here. She   s  been here for years. My closest neighbor, at one time, to the east of me,  was a white couple. She died, and he moved behind us, but he   s still here  in the town. We just don   t have a line. We don   t have any demarcation.  We don   t have a Mason-Dixon line. We don   t have any of that. That   s  not us. We are just people, and we like everybody.  How would you like to be remembered?  Oh, gosh. People will remember me because I   m going to speak up and  talk. That   s why they   re going to remember me. And they   re going to  46  Simpson  Hicks  Simpson  remember me because I   m fair. I   m just. They will remember me as  being that. I   m very fair, and I   m very just. They will remember me  because she will speak up for no matter who it is, for the right. I will  speak up for the right. As I tell them, I will stand for the wrong, but I  will not stand up for the wrong. If you are wrong I will stand there, but I  will not stand up. I will speak up for whatever. I will face anybody for  whatever. I will ask for anything I think this town can use, from  anybody. They will remember me as being loquacious. People will  remember me as that. They will remember me as being (what can I say?)  a person who doesn   t mind being a leader. And I don   t care if you talk  about me. (Laughs)  Did you have anything else you   d like to part with?  No, I probably should have said a lot more in there than I did, but if this  is going  to be public  be sure and let me hear it because I probably will  add some and take out some of that poor grammar that I used and put in  the right stuff.  Thank you very much. (Laughs)  -------  -------  
