 Finchum  Today is April 1, 2010. My name is Tanya Finchum. I   m with the  Oklahoma State University Library, and we   re doing an oral history  project featuring Extension home economists in Oklahoma. We   re in El  Reno with June Cash, who began her career in 1959 in Grady County  and retired from Garfield County. Thank you for having me today. Let   s  start by having you tell a little bit about your childhood, where you were  born, and then we   ll work our way forward.  Well, I was born in Tryon, Oklahoma, which is south of Stillwater, and  my parents were farmers there, along with my grandparents. We all lived  in kind of a close area with grandparents and great-grandparents. We  lived there until World War II when my dad decided, because of health  reasons of my mother, to return back to Hobart where he had been born,  in Kiowa County. Then I really grew up in the Hobart area, Kiowa  County, close to the farm that my grandfather had gotten in the land  lottery of 1901, which was held in El Reno, Oklahoma in August of  1901. I own the farm now and lease it out, but I had a wonderful time  going to school and graduating in Hobart, Oklahoma.  Did you do some farm activities?  Oh, yes, I did. You know, my mom had me out, busy, working. I would  kill the chickens and take those chickens and chop their heads off with  an axe, plunge them in boiling water and then singe them, then take  them in and wash them and cut them up and remove the end tails, and  then flour them down and fry the chicken for lunch that day.  From start to finish.  From start to finish.  You were about how old when you were doing that?  5  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  I was about twelve when I was doing that, yes.  In those days, did your mother and grandmother have much to do with  home demonstration clubs?  My mother did. My mother was a member of the Unity Home  Demonstration Club in Kiowa County, and the fourth Friday of every  month they met. They met in an old school house called the Frisco  School House in which my uncle had gone to school in, but it was a  rural school, so now the Unity Club met there. On Friday morning  before club, we   d go over and clean it up because it was so dirty. That   s  where the club met, and we   d clean it up and chase the mice around.  We   d go back home, and then we would go for the meeting at one  o   clock. I enjoyed that, going with my mom to the home demonstration  club, the Unity Club. She would take the refreshments out and we   d get  those taken care of. We   d attend the meeting, somewhat, then the kids,  the rest of us, would go out and run up and down the road and have a big  time playing outside. They had community events, and I remember they  had Halloween parties and different things, and we would dress up and  play all kinds of activities there at the community center.  They had a float in 1951. It was the year that Kiowa County had turned  fifty years, so they had a big celebration called Short Grass Saga. My  mother   s home demonstration club, the Unity Club, put a float together  and we rode on the back of it, all the kids did, and we demonstrated  washing on a scrub board with lye soap. We had our dresses all fixed up  and our sunbonnets. We hung the clothes on the line and acted as though  we were those pioneers of 1901; that was the Unity Home  Demonstration Club. I   d go with Mom to her meetings, and I remember  they had meetings on making pie and how to dress, the colors to put  together, and I remember saying,    I will not wear black shoes with a  brown dress.    So, I learned a lot from Eva Stokes, the home  demonstration agent, and she was the only one that I knew that had a  profession other than a schoolteacher, so we really held her in high  esteem.  My dad did a lot of work with the Extension office. He was always  going up there for education and seminars. As I said, it was a part of our  life. My brother was in 4-H and I was in 4-H. My brother showed cattle  and I made dresses. It was a basic part of our life, a real important part  of our life, and has continued to be all of my life.  It was a family thing too, it sounds like.  It was a family thing.  6  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  So, once you graduated from high school, then what?  We attended the Baptist church, so I thought,    Well, I think I   d like to be  a missionary.    And so I decided I wanted to go to Oklahoma Baptist  University. When I went   again, the only fields I really knew about  were nursing and home economics. I thought about nursing for awhile  and decided I couldn   t handle some of the emergency situations they  face with blood. Here I   d killed chickens, but I didn   t think I could face  that, so I majored in home economics at OBU, but I never did decide. I  said,    I   m called to the mission field,    but then I went and checked out  work and found out that Cooperative Extension Service, home  demonstration work was really more what I wanted to be in. I decided  that probably my mission work would be in Extension in Oklahoma, and  that was where I stayed my entire career.  You graduated from there in   ?  1959.  So you went to work right after?  Yes. That summer, I decided to go to OSU and just thought I would  maybe pursue another degree, because I thought maybe I needed to think  about that because I had some boyfriend that I was engaged to and I  needed to find a teaching job. I found elementary. I went the first  summer in 1959 to Oklahoma State University and took hours there  toward an elementary degree. Well, this love life   we broke it off. He  was going into medical school, and we broke it off, so here I was. I  thought about it for awhile and then one day that fall, I said,    Well, I  think I better go find a job.     My dad had been ill, so I   d gone back home to the farm to help out there  and do some work with him because he had been sick. So I did some  farm work that fall of 1959. And then about November, he was well and  Mother was fine, so I said,    I   m going to go look for a job.    I started out  that day and the church offered me the youth director   s job in our  church, the First Baptist of Hobart. Then, I had called, and there was a  job teaching home economics in Burns Flat in Washita County, so I  went by that and they said, yes, they would look at me. Then I went on  to OSU, just walked in, and they said,    Oh, yes, we have an opening for  a 4-H agent at-large in Grady County.    By the time I got home that day,  I had been offered that job as well as the teaching job over in Washita  County, and the youth director   s job. Well, I thought,    I   ll take  Extension.    So, that day, I said,    Yes, I   ll go to work for Extension,    and  so December of 1959, I went to Grady County, Chickasha, as the 4-H  agent at-large. A whole new world had opened up for me, and I was so  7  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  excited about this new world and the opportunities that were out there.  Talk a little bit about your first week.  Oh, well yes, it was an at-large job, so I found out you traveled, and they  told me I had to buy a car. Well, I had gone to school at OBU where  women didn   t even have cars, so this was real exciting. I got to buy a car  right off the job and get my own apartment and, oh my, that was so  exciting. I went down to the bank. My dad always told me to be  independent, so he didn   t go with me to the bank to borrow the money. I  went to the bank myself and borrowed my money and made the plans  and all this. Earlier my dad had said, when I was sixteen,    You can get  your driver   s license if you can change the tire.    So, the day I was  sixteen, I changed the tire on the car and he said,    You can get your  driver   s license.    My dad always encouraged me to be real independent.  I borrowed the money for my first car and went to work for Extension  and had my apartment, and life was just really exciting.  Where was your office?  It was at the courthouse then, in the basement of Grady County  Courthouse. Lots of people came through and we had a great interesting  time, going out to visit all the 4-H clubs. Every little school had a 4-H  club, so we went out to all those schools all over Grady County. We had  one at the Catholic school and we would go there. Then, as it went  along, they said,    Well, now we   re going to put you in a regular job.  This at-large is a training session.    They said,    How would you like to  go to Canadian County?    That   s El Reno. I said,    Well, that sounds fine  to me.    So, in May of 1960, I came to work in El Reno, in Canadian  County, as the assistant home demonstration agent, and that was a real  exciting time because I began to work with Margaret Fitch.  I went to 4-H clubs as well as to the home demonstration clubs, and  there were some, oh, thirty clubs, in El Reno at that time, and I would  visit those and the 4-H clubs, which were scattered all over. We had  about six rural independent schools at that time, and they all had their 4-  H clubs. And oh my, they all worked to be the very best, each one of  them. The Big Four Club was out at Maple school, and they wanted to  be the very best, and the Darlington Club, they wanted to be the very  best. So, there was all this competition going on between these rural  schools. They had perfect meetings that they conducted with perfection  in parliamentary procedure, and some of them had their uniforms they  wore that day. We would go into the club, and they would give their  demonstration and their speech and just to be perfect, because then they  were working to go to county competition, to county 4-H speech and  demonstration contests and the 4-H dress revue. Then we would have  8  Finchum  Cash  those events, as well, for the kids. So, it was a real good time.  Then I   d go to the home demonstration club. I remember going to a  home demonstration club that met down by Mustang, on the river. This  home was a beautiful home right on the river. And now that   s all  housing developments, it   s changed so entirely, because it was all a rural  area with farmland and woods, and now it   s all metropolitan. Huge. At  that time, the Mustang school system had about 250 students. Now there  are 8,000 in the Mustang school system. So, that area of the county, of  Mustang and Yukon and Piedmont, has become so urban and so densely  populated where it was once rural.  I remember going to a group that was all Czech members, members  from Czechoslovakia, the women were. They enjoyed speaking in the  old Czech language which I didn   t understand but they had a lot of fun  with that. I   d go in and listen to them and they had wonderful food,  meals that were prepared with lots of noodles and potatoes, and dishes  that were definitely part of their ethnic cultural background. As the time  went on, there were names like Stejskal and Shedeck, a lot of different  names that were so interesting. So the ladies, they went on and they  developed a culture still that exists in the Yukon area where they have  the Czech Festival. It all began with that little nucleus of people that  wanted to continue their heritage, and they have. Made wonderful  kolaches, which they now sell a tremendous amount of kolaches, yeast  bread with a center filled with poppy seed or with cottage cheese in the  middle of those yeast bread items that they made.  If they had that many demonstration clubs, thirty or forty at that time,  how many are still in existence today? Do you have any idea?  Well, things have changed. I still belong   after I retired from Extension,  I joined an extension group called, it became extension agents, HCE,  Family Community Educators. Now I   ve belonged to one for ten years,  after I retired. There are, I don   t know, five or six clubs in Canadian  County, six, maybe seven. One time, in my career here in Canadian  County, I had I think thirty-eight or thirty-nine groups of approximately  fifteen to eighteen members each, so at one time I had over 600  members. These were people that belonged to these extension groups  that met monthly, and they would come to the county meeting each  month, the lesson leader would, to get the material that I had written and  researched and prepared for them. Then they would take it back to their  group, which still is what exists even now. But at that time, we had  twelve lessons a year, and so I did the research on all those lessons and  put them together and did our leaders    lesson every month on a different  subject. Those subjects included some of the same subjects my mother  had studied in the Unity Club, but I was still teaching lessons on  9  clothing and money management, canning and freezing, making jellies  and jams, taking stains out of your clothing, public affairs (that was  another one that we even had way back), how to be involved in the  community and the public. We continued that.  I remember one lady many years ago, her name was Jessie Ratcliff. I  was a young extension agent, and she had been a member at that time for  sixty-one years. We took a picture of her because she had been a  member so long, which was probably thirty years ago now. One of the  very first members. She was such an interesting lady, because she   d  grown up north of Yukon on a farm, and she told about how the prairie  grass was as high as your head north of Yukon there, which is all now  urban. Jessie related how her dad had to go to town. They lived out in a  house, she and her mother, and her dad had to go to town, and it was  several miles, so he was going to be gone a couple of days to go down to  Yukon.  The grass was high, and a prairie fire started. Her mama saw the prairie  fire coming, and she knew she had to do something because the grass  was so high and thick. So, she got an old blind mule and took it out and  plowed a fire guard all around the house with this old blind mule,  because Jessie was a little girl, five years old, and she and her mom were  there by themselves. Her mom worked to plow that fire guard all around  their probably log house, and she saved Jessie that day by doing that.  That was always such an interesting story, I thought. Then, years later, I  got to have my picture taken with Jessie because she had a sixty-one  year membership in a home demonstration club.  There were always interesting stories happening. The lessons that I  taught, it was always a new challenge to do the research on those  lessons. Then, when I was a 4-H agent, I could go back to that time  when we were busy working with the 4-H clubs and having dress revues,  and all the little girls would make their head scarves. That was their first  item, and they   d all line up and make their fringed head scarf. I have  some pictures of those kiddos when we took their picture and we ran  them in the paper and gave them lots of publicity. Because giving  recognition to those children was so important in making them feel good  about themselves and letting them see that living by the motto    to make  the best better    was really such an excellent motto. So, they worked on  those headscarves, and then they had their handkerchiefs they   d made.  They had their pin cushions they made. Then they progressed on to  making an apron, and of course they were always working for the blue  ribbons and making it to perfection. And then they moved on to the  simple dress without a zipper, and then the dress with a zipper, then they  moved to the next station which would be dresses with sleeves or with  certain types of seam finishes. And then to the wool. They would tailor  10  their wool garments and bring those in, and then their formal wear. They  were up to the time they made the formal dresses. These young women,  children, at that time, teenagers, I meet them across the county now, and  they   re outstanding citizens here in Canadian County. Or sometimes I  read about them in the newspaper where they   ve been off somewhere  else and done some exciting things.  So, the lessons that they learned I think in 4-H, and the women that  learned in home demonstration   there was a lady named Henny  Renderhagan. Henny Renderhagan, here in Canadian County, was  probably one of the first of our women, way before I came to the county,  I only knew her for a short time. She was German and a very short, tiny  lady. She told me about how she learned independence, coming to  Oklahoma from Germany, she had to learn the language and how to be a  farm wife, but she also wanted to learn money management. So, she  would take her eggs and her cream and prepare them and bring them to  town, and then she would sell those. She learned to be her business, and  she kept the records of those. She brought them in one day, she was  quite elderly at that time, to the extension office, and I was just  fascinated with them, because she kept good track of them and  maintained the records there and had learned the money management of  it. She gave them to me. Well, I was so thrilled, and I felt that I needed  to leave them there at the extension office, which I did. I think some of  them I did take to the historical library here in El Reno, but some of  those records, I don   t know whether they remained at the office or not.  Henny Renderhagan was a very exceptional lady, and I still see some of  her great-granddaughters here in town. They probably have no idea that  they had such a fabulous grandmother.  Henny was like my grandmother. My grandmother did this too. She  raised the chickens and took the eggs and the cream to town, and that   s  how the women were able to then buy fabric that they made for their  dresses, or possibly a new hat, which was a real treat. Women did that. I  remember my grandmother growing her garden, and she always then  would take the cream and eggs to town. I had a great-grandmother that  did this, as well. My grandmother would take the eggs and cream to  town and make a little profit there that they could use, money of their  own. So, women learned independence through that. They were working  women, in the field, but they still needed some of their own money,  some that was their very own.  My grandmother never sold any products of her handwork, but she did a  tremendous amount of handwork, and I have some of those. She worked  perfection. My grandmother did not belong to a home demonstration  club, but her very best friend did. Her name was Maude Eaton, and  Maude Eaton belonged to one at Perkins, Oklahoma. Maude received  11  Finchum  Cash  every blue ribbon for her canning and freezing. Well, my grandmother  really didn   t   lived in Lincoln County. It was right on the edge. It was  quite a ways to Chandler, so she didn   t belong to a home demonstration  club, but she learned everything from Maude Eaton that belonged. Then,  my grandmother worked to perfection to do a better job than Maude did,  who had gotten all the blue ribbons at the county fair. (Laughter)  That continued on throughout my life of my mother and my  grandmother participating. Even some of the items I have behind me my  grandmother made from a wool coat that was mine in high school. My  grandmother said,    Well, use it up. Got to do something with it.    So, she  took the wool fabric and cut it in squares and then crocheted it together,  and I still have the throw which I just use for looking. I don   t use it for  wear. My grandmother did a lot of handwork that way, and continued  that way.  My mother used her talent in writing poems, so she wrote poetry about  the work of the farm wife and some very interesting stories about the  floods that they had and the droughts that they had. My mother  continued to be a member, later on, of a home extension group  throughout her lifetime, as well. So, the education continued on. And it  still does. I have two daughters. Neither one of them do, but they are  both graduates of Oklahoma State University. One in child development  and she teaches at Career Tech in Chickasha, Canadian Valley. My other  daughter is a music teacher in Muskogee. They were both in 4-H and my  daughter in Muskogee, Shalyn Cash Gallaway, was one of the  outstanding 4-H members in Canadian County. My other daughter, Mary  Beth, participated as well in many activities. So, it   s been a family event.  Along the line, I   m assuming you participated in county fairs?  Oh, my goodness. Yes, the county fairs. In my working career, we had it  in the old field house. It had concrete floors and no air conditioning. Oh,  my. The first of September, it was 105 or 106 degrees and we would set  it up. And here in El Reno, the prisoners out at El Reno prison, it   s a  federal prison, they would get permission to come in and make the  display areas and cover them with paper because they   re at the field  house. So, they would do that and I remember being a young woman and  standing out there and they would stand and whistle   very irritating.  But, anyway, I   d think,    Well, is this a good thing or not?    But they  would get it set up and they would leave, and then we   d have the county  fair. At that time, we didn   t wear jeans or pants or shorts. We wore  dresses and high heels the entire time to make that professional look.  And it was hot, dreadfully hot in there, and our volunteers came in. The  women were so good, and they would work so hard, setting up the  displays and bringing in the entries.  12  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  We had hundreds and hundreds of entries, filling up the whole field  house with extension booths, because each extension booth, some thirty-five  of them, would all have their own five-foot, six-foot display area,  decorated and put their exhibits in, which they were required to have so  many canned items, pickles, jam and jelly, a wool tailored garment, a  cotton shirt, and about six clothing items. They would display those and  then use a theme, and then those were judged. But each item was judged  separately, so they were all working for the blue ribbon, making the  blue-ribbon coat or the blue-ribbon wool suit.  Then we would have a four-day fair in the heat and stand around in our  heels and dresses and have a family night in which we recognized the  outstanding farm family of the year and the outstanding homemaker and  the outstanding rookie homemaker, the one under thirty years of age.  They would get recognition there and have a program, and music would  come in. It was a big event at the county fair. And outside there were  exhibits. So all of the civic clubs in the community would have a  carnival outside, and they all would have games or activities, and they  were making money for their civic group as well as keeping the money  right within the county or the El Reno area so that no one was taking the  money away. So, here we were having our fair, and the women would  have a kitchen, the homemakers would, where they would sell the pies  and have sloppy joes. They sold the sloppy joes. That was a big item.  Mrs. Hoffman would make the sloppy joes. She managed the kitchen.  She, along with Mrs. Evans and other ladies, would manage the kitchen  and sell those cream pies, beautiful cream pies or beautiful fruit pies.  Then they had the pie contest, which was separate. Those pies were sold  individually, so they would have thirty, forty, fifty pies that were judged  on pie day, which was a big event. They made their crust and made  beautiful cream fillings and custard and all that. The fair was attended by  everybody in the community, and the livestock judging was going on  outside, and it was a big event. And a rodeo, they had a rodeo, as well.  So, it was all a fun time.  During what years was this occurring?  Well, the fairs went on during the    50s and continued up until   we still  have a fair, for that matter. During the    80s I think they began to slow  down somewhat, and there was not as much participation. Then other  activities came in during the fair. They brought in a carnival from  outside, so the city groups did not participate like they had in the past.  Do they still teach the girls to sew?  Sewing has become a back burner. They   re not doing so much of that  now, but what I have been reading is that there   s a new interest in it out  13  in the general public. There   s an interest in people wanting to do some  of the clothing. In my years of teaching, I taught every type of clothing  construction you can imagine. We went through the years of basic  clothing construction, pattern alteration, in which we altered the  patterns. We   d teach one class on pattern alteration so everybody could  alter the pattern to fit themselves. Then I went into teaching the stretch  and sew years. The stretch and sew was teaching the new fabric that  would stretch, and polyester and the stretch fabrics. So we made girdles  and brassieres and panties and slips and nightgowns out of this stretch  and sew fabric, with lace on it. The girdles. And then we went into the  bathing suits. We made bathing suits and that was a big time. We did all  that era in making the bathing suits. Then we went into making men   s  suits. I taught making men   s trousers, and I made my husband trousers  with burgundy stripes. It sounds horrible now  But that stretch and sew  era was in there, burgundy striped pants, trousers. I taught classes in  that. And then tailoring men   s suits in the stretch and sew fabric. I made  my father a suit, and I made my husband a jacket. Then, I was teaching  this class. In order to do that, you had to sit home at night and practice  this, or weekends, to get your skills honed up so you could do this. So,  every weekend and every night I was home sewing and working on this  and working really hard. So we went through that era.  Then we went into making wool and tailoring wool, and I tailored  women   s jackets, and tailored many women   s wool jackets. Hand  tailored them, with all the hand stitching and all the handwork and  rolling the collar and making it to perfection. I taught those classes. I  taught those here in El Reno as well as when I was in Oklahoma County.  That one was a big one in Oklahoma County. People were lined up.  Then I taught ultra suede, clothing with ultra suede. Ultra suede  tailoring, which, the fabric was like  30 a yard. The suits, when you  purchased them, they were  500 suits. So, it was sewing for the  500  look. So, for  60 or  65, you could purchase the fabric and then make it.  So, I taught those, and I made a burgundy tailored suit for myself, and  then used it as a demonstration, and a turquoise one and a tan one and an  orchid shade, lavender shade, and all the time teaching these classes.  Women, they   d come in and I would have to measure them. So, here  they were lined up with just their little housecoats on, and I was  measuring their busts and their waists and their hips. Everyone didn   t  think anything about it. Then we would get that fabric working, and we  would have that class and they would come each week to tailor their suit  and bring their sewing machine to the extension office. I had a few  machines, but they brought their machine, and we would line up and  spend the day tailoring and working, and they   d bring their lunch. We   d  enjoy that.  14  Then we taught pants, making ladies    pants with elastic in the waist.  Everybody wanted it to be perfect. I remember one workshop we did, we  decided, this was in Oklahoma County and there were three home  economists, and we were going to do it together. We would have one  class in the morning, the women would bring their fabric and we would  measure them, they would cut it out and stitch it up. We   d have one  class in the morning, one class in the afternoon, and one class in the  evening. I   m telling you, I have never measured so many hips in all my  life. That was exhausting, but we completed it and had those workshops  in which the women   s pants would be hanging just right because we  didn   t want any sagging areas in those pants. Then they had the elastic in  the waist. That was a time of sewing women   s pants.  There were other times that we tailored women   s suits with the stretch  and sew fabric, and I remember one time going down to Mustang with  my ironing board and my sewing machines in the back of the pickup,  because my car was out of commission. So, here I was, hauling all this  equipment to a lady   s house. We were having it in her house. Then we  moved on to one of the churches because we could work better and the  churches were kind enough to let us use their space and work with their  tables and cut the fabric out and measure and all that. Sometimes we   d  go up to Piedmont, to a church at Piedmont, and I   d teach classes there  because it was going to the people. First, as it was called home  demonstration, you worked in the home, and then we moved on as the  years went through, meeting in groups, and the people would come to  the extension office for the lesson. But still, there were years during the     70s that we still went to that location in the community and had our  classes.  Then we went on to teach canning. I remember taking my pressure  cooker and my hot water bath and all my pans, the green beans, the  bottles, the jars and the lids, and teaching how to can green beans down  at Mustang. Also, we   d go over to Calumet and go to the church there  and have a demonstration on making jelly. And then I remember going  up to Piedmont and doing freezing, freezing vegetables and freezing  fruit and then also canning, again, making jelly with it. I was always  hauling this equipment around (Laughs) and carrying things in high  heels. You know, Ginger Rogers didn   t have anything on us. We did all  this carrying with our high heels on and moving around and going to the  people with this material that we were teaching.  Then in Oklahoma County, we decided we would have master food  preservers. They had already initiated a program in Oklahoma County of  master gardeners. Those were people that learned gardening and when  they learned it, they gave back hours on the telephone by volunteering  and teaching others. So we decided that we would have that type of  15  Finchum  Cash  program by teaching how to freeze and how to can and make pickles and  jams and jellies and use the pressure cooker. We would have master  food preservers. We advertised the program, and people signed up and  this was like an eight-week program. They came in each week to the  office and we would teach an all-day session and they would participate,  hands-on activities, with making pickles, with making jam and jelly, or  freezing or drying, dehydrating. It also included dehydrating.  I became the person teaching dehydrating, dehydrating the food and had  my dehydrator. We dried vegetables and bananas and made jerky. I  decided, well, I needed one that was handmade. This was one that was  built. We purchased it, a dehydrator. I thought,    Well, I really need one.  Here are the instructions for building your own, but I don   t want to build  my own.    So, I got my husband   s brother to build me a dehydrator with  some wood and some screens and a little motor. I gave the  demonstration of dehydrating. This was one you could build by these  instructions, so we did that, too. I carried those dehydrators all over  Oklahoma County because people all out in Jones or whatever area,  different parts of Oklahoma City wanted them. I did a lot of dehydrating.  We did an exhibit one year in what was called Shepherd Mall. It   s not a  mall anymore; it   s businesses. But at that time, it was a mall. We set up  (it was our district, several counties in the central part of the state) and  we went in and we had different subject matters that we displayed and  exhibited all one Friday night and a Saturday, and did our exhibits there.  I know I did dehydrating, and I was showing how to dehydrate and had  my dehydrator and talked about that, and also did a family history  exhibit because that was an important part. The different home  economists were doing different things. Someone was doing breads, but  I also did a family history and had taken pictures of my family and some  genealogy, and borrowed some genealogy from a friend of mine and sat  all that display up of doing your family history and your genealogy. We  did that. We had tables set up with black table cloths on it with all these  exhibits throughout the mall. That was an interesting weekend. That was  extension. We worked nights and weekends and sometimes Sundays,  because we were trying to meet the needs of the people when they were  available. We could educate the people about what their needs were. So,  I went on in that area for awhile, teaching that subject matter. I said one  time,    Give me two hours and I   ll teach any subject you want.     (Laughter) I can do the research pretty fast.  When you talk about research, what steps did you do? That was before  computers.  That was before computers. Well, we had lots of fact sheets in the  extension office. Publications were available. We had them from USDA,  16  as well. So, those specialists at the different universities, because we  would share materials from other universities,  they  would bring their  research material in, so we had lots of files. We were always getting  USDA materials. Then we were always reading magazines, and we had  filing cabinets. I had four filing cabinets, and I always was putting  material in all these filing cabinets and keeping the material available  that I thought,    Well, now, someone   s going to want that material.     Then I had these files around me, sitting close by me, because I had to  be ready to answer those food preservation questions right on the spot. I  always had the canning manuals right close by and the food preservation  manuals and the jelly making manuals right there.  People, they didn   t mind calling you at home, so I had them all stacked  around my telephone, as well, because they would call at seven o   clock  in the morning wanting to know how to can green beans, how long to  pressure them. They would even call my house at night, and I wouldn   t  be there and they   d ask my husband,    Well, how long do you pressure  green beans?    And he would say,    Well, just a minute, I   ll look it up.  It   s right here.    So, he would get that canning manual down.  Well, this is a funny story. I was going to teach making sauerkraut, and I  had my cabbage, working with the salt and the big jug like it   s supposed  to work, at home, because I had to do this at home. It took about three  weeks to make this sauerkraut. Well, my dad was sick and I was running  to the hospital. My husband was at home, coming in and out from work,  and he kept smelling this weird stuff going on. It was in that jar. It was  this cabbage with salt all over it. He decided that was probably  sauerkraut, and why was I neglecting it, because, as I said, I was going  back and forth to the hospital all the time. So, he got the canning manual  out and canned my demonstration before it was ready, because it needed  to go another week. And my demonstration I   d been working on for  three weeks was ruined because he   d canned it. (Laughs)  We had lots of experiences of having the materials around home and  him trying to figure out why they were here. So, he became a real good  partner in the processes, doing these things. And, as I said, I was away  from home a lot. So my husband chose to have a job that he could be at  home, and he was a locomotive engineer. He could determine that he  could go to work at midnight and come home about seven o   clock in the  morning so that he could be with the children, because we had two small  children. I had so much night work to do. So, he took this job in town. It  was called a switch engine, and he would go to work at midnight and  switch trains around down at the railroad station, because this was a  town that was railroad hub. He worked that job and would come home  about eight o   clock in the morning as I was leaving and cook breakfast  for the children and get them off to school. He was there in the daytime  17  Finchum  Cash  in the summer. He would be asleep, and they learned they had to be  quiet while he was sleeping, because he wanted to be there so he could  oversee their activities.  That   s how we managed throughout our children   s growing-up years.  They did quite well. They both went on to graduate at Oklahoma State  University, and we   re real proud of them now. They   re wonderful  women and wonderful homemakers, as well. My daughter, who is the  musician, during the years she stayed at home as a full time homemaker,  got her sewing machine out and began to sew and do those activities.  People in the neighborhood were asking her to make their draperies,  which she did. That goes back to when I also taught drapery making. So  she, I guess, was watching me, and then, when she was a full time  homemaker at home, she made draperies for some of the people in her  community in her town of Muskogee. So, it has become a family affair  throughout the years.  My daughter teaches child development at Career Tech at Chickasha.  She works with the children and is a wonderful person in the child  development area. I used to take these girls with me to the Women   s  Conference at Stillwater. Way back in the    40s my mother would go to  Stillwater to the Homemakers    Conference, or whatever it was called,  for a week at Stillwater at OSU. Then when my children came along, I  took them with me, as well as taking ten or twenty women along, too.  We would go up to OSU, and it would be a week of Women   s  Conference and my daughters went along and enjoyed that time, as well.  They got acquainted with the campus and had their picture taken with  Pistol Pete. There   s a story about Pistol Pete. Do you want to hear that  one?  Sure.  Well, Pistol Pete was from Perkins, Oklahoma, where my grandparents  lived. My grandparents had a country and western band, one of the very  earliest ones, during the 1940s, during World War II. My grandmother  played the fiddle, and my aunt and my mother and my uncle sang. Pistol  Pete   s name was Frank Eaton. He lived at Perkins, and he played the  fiddle with them. He was a friend of theirs, way back. I remember Pistol  Pete when I was a child performing. They would perform on Saturday  on a stage there at Perkins, and Pistol Pete, Frank Eaton, would play  with them. I remember getting up and getting to recite a poem or sing a  song along with them, too. Pistol Pete had a red bandana and long  leather boots, and his hat, just like he looks, that   s the way he looked. I  thought he lived at the cotton gin all those years because his house was  next to the cotton gin. Until recently, only recently, I found out that he  didn   t live at the cotton gin. He had a house next to it, and they   re now  18  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  preserving that house there in Perkins. That goes back to the  memorabilia that centers around OSU, Pistol Pete, Frank Eaton.  Was he related to the Maude Eaton that you had mentioned earlier?  No, he was not. Interestingly enough, he was not related to Maude  Eaton, but they all were there in the same community together, there at  Perkins, Oklahoma.  What was the name of the band?  It was the Mote Family Band, M-O-T-E, Mote, my mother   s maiden  name. My grandmother was actually   I didn   t realize at the time, but  she was a musical genius. She could play any instrument that she had.  She had a violin, a guitar, a banjo, an accordion, a piano, and some  drums, percussion. She played all these, and she taught herself to read  music, but she played mostly by ear. They were right along with the time  of Bob Wills. Because of some family illness, they didn   t proceed on,  although they had a man named Glenn Eiler, a promoter who wanted to  take them big time. I have pictures of them when they had their cowboy  hats and their outfits and their white boots. They wore white boots.  Glenn Eiler made a record with them, and he wanted to take them on  along with other Oklahoma entertainers, but my mother became ill and  was not able to proceed with that activity. So, they discontinued the  Mote Family Band. I realize now that they were really good. (Laughs)  At the time, I thought everybody   s family could do that, but not so.  Back to extension work, as I said, I continued to be a member of a  group, and this past fall I made an apron for the county fair. Entered it  and received a blue ribbon on my apron, and it was OSU. I made it with  an OSU theme, OSU fabric, and my daughter now wears it down at  Career Tech when she   s filling in, doing the work down at Career Tech  with her child development program down there.  The other thing that must have changed is where you acquired the fabric  through the years, right?  (Laughs) Yes, oh yes. You know, fabric was available   we had fabric  stores, and wonderful ones. I remember in my early years of teaching  wool tailoring, we would go to Oklahoma City. Oh, there was this  wonderful fabric store and the name escapes me right now, but it was  downtown in Oklahoma City. We would go in and I tailored a wool  coat; it was gorgeous. It looked like Corn O   Brien. The fabric was  yellow and with touches of green and orange in it. I purchased this fabric  there at this wonderful fabric store in Oklahoma City, and it cost forty  dollars. My husband just thought that was a terrible amount. We were  19  first married. He called it Corn O   Brien because it looked like Corn  O   Brien, this wool coat. Then as the years went on, we had the fabric  stores that came in, the stretch and sew fabric stores, and we did those.  Fabric stores have totally changed. We have a Hancock   s now. Our own  big display store here does not have fabric in it, even. The Wal-Mart  store does not carry fabric, here in El Reno.  So, fabric stores are really hard to come by in securing fabric. I think  there   s going to be a resurgent because people are looking for turning  green. They want to have the green feel now. That was another area in  my career. In Garfield County, in Enid, we went through the recycling  area, and I had women that were volunteers that were called a family  community leadership team. I had different ones. This went on for about  five or six years. I had volunteers, and we talked about recycling and  keeping the environment green. One of my team members, these were  women that were volunteers, went all over the state. One year, we  figured we reached 9,000 people with exhibits, with programs, with  radio programs, with TV programs that we did there at the local TV in  Enid.  One of my volunteers was Sue Schmidt, and Sue was into red worms. So  with our recycling exhibit, she had the red worms and she would carry  her red worms. We would go throughout the area with her box of red  worms, which you would feed these red worms newspapers and  vegetable products, no fat or no protein. They would build their own  wonderful soil, and this was great for compost. So, you could keep these  red worms in your kitchen. You fed them the vegetables, no protein, no  fat, and newspapers, and they would just multiply. We would carry the  red worms, and Sue would bring them and show them and keep them in  her kitchen, because they didn   t smell. They were composting.  We went through this and carried our exhibits and we talked to  everybody about how to take care of hazardous waste. That was another  one of our factors. You see, by feeding your vegetables to the worms,  you could have good soil to put into your garden or houseplants, and that  was good for the environment. Then we talked about hazardous waste,  about how to dispose of hazardous waste: paint products, nail polish, oil  from your car, or batteries. We went throughout the area, all over  northwest Oklahoma, all over parts of Oklahoma, talking about this and  carrying our exhibits. So, I   d load the car up with our big exhibit and all  of our products. We carried them with us so we could talk to the people  about this, and off we   d go.  One day we went to Oklahoma City, and we were in such a rush that     there was a new product that OSU had produced that was a meal on a  cake. It as a cake, a product that was dehydrated, and you could eat it,  20  Finchum  and you could purchase it. So, we carried all of our items to Oklahoma  City and did an exhibit, had carried it in my car, and we bought these  cakes to eat so we could just drink our water and eat our cake and save  time and get back to Enid so that we could do something else. That   s  what my volunteers did   these women were so wonderful and so  dedicated to our purpose of saving the earth. They would give of their  time and their energy and go without food (laughs), anything for our  purpose. That was some twenty-five years ago. Of course, that   s come  back again and, as I say, when we see our country being more interested  in the environment, of taking care of our environment, then maybe we   re  going back to doing some of the basics of clothing construction and  better nutrition. Even now, people are talking all the time about saving  our kids, so they   re developing better eating habits. That   s something we  always did through extension.  Then we went through a time in our state and throughout the nation  which we were allowing our children to consume too many calories  through soft drinks and fast food. We now have a weight problem with  them. So, we   re going back to some of the basic ideas of better nutrition  and making better decisions through the foods we select and where we  spend our time, as well. I remember, too, after I retired, in extension  we   re always talking about using our time, time management. That was  a program we often did, but being effective in our community. And so,  when I retired from Garfield County, I thought,    What am I going to do  with my time? Well, I believe I   ll run for the school board.    So, I ran for  Enid School Board, and no one opposed me so I was on the Enid School  Board for four years. I felt like going back and serving the community  again with some of the community leadership skills that I had learned  and had taught in the community. Well, why not give back? And I did.  But I made one poor decision during that time. That was when we said,     We can make money in the schools if we put soft drink machines in the  school, and those soft drink companies will give us some revenue back  for our schools. Oh, my, what a wonderful idea. We can have some extra  money coming in.    And so we did. I remember voting on that as a  school board member, to put a soft drink machine in the school. Then  these companies would share their money with us. Well, that was a bad  decision, because now we know these young people have become   it  has produced some weight problems with them, and they didn   t learn  some skills on making better decisions for their food. So, now the  schools are taking those machines out and working to put machines in  that have more nutritious snacks in them with fruit or juice drinks. So, I  guess I was taken up with the idea of making money, too, but that was a  bad decision.  When you worked in Garfield County, did you live in     21  Cash  Finchum  Cash  We lived in Enid. We had lived in El Reno, and I had worked here in El  Reno, in Canadian County, and I had worked in Oklahoma County, but I  continued to live here in El Reno. When the railroad went out in 1980,  the whole town of El Reno changed. I   m saying, the Rock Island  deceased and it was sold, and all this many families that lived here, some  hundreds of them, had to move. They moved to different areas to work  for different railroads. Enid had a job for my husband there because he  could work in Enid, so I applied for the extension job in Enid and was  selected. Then we moved to Enid, and I was in Extension and my  husband continued to work for the Union Pacific Railroad in Enid. We  lived there, then we came back to El Reno after we both retired.  But during that time in Enid, that   s when I had my family community  leadership team and there were some 600 or 700 women belonging to  extension groups there. The women there, I don   t know, had thirty or  forty-five groups up in Enid. That was a real rural town so they were   I  remember telephone calls. We received telephone calls all the time  before computers. Everybody had a question, they called the extension  office. I took care of so many questions, so many questions. Well, I  looked in the phone book one day. For emergency questions, the sheriff  and I were listed together. Extension home agent and the county sheriff  numbers were together in the phone book, so if you had an emergency,  you called the sheriff or the extension office; that   s why we received so  many calls  (Laughs)  Could you tell us the years you were in each place and what year you  retired?  Alright. As I said, I began work in 1959 in Grady County, and then in  1960, I was a 4-H agent in Canadian County until 1963, when I was  going to have a baby and they said,    We   ll offer you maternity leave.    I  was one of the first ones to be offered maternity leave with extension,  but still thinking,    Oh, I need to stay home with that baby,    I did not  take the maternity leave. Another agent did take that, was the first one,  in another county. I stayed home five years with my children, two little  girls, until I went back to work in 1968 as the 4-H agent in Canadian  County, and continued that job until 1971 when I became the extension  home economist here in Canadian County when Margaret Fitch went on  to another position in another state. So, in 1971, I became an extension  home economist and continued here in Canadian County until August of  1980 when they said,    We need someone in Oklahoma County that can  multitask,    I think probably is what they thought. I went to work in  Oklahoma County and was there four years, because that was a person  that really had to multitask in that county, and stayed there.  But my husband, again, the railroad had changed our lifestyle so  22  Finchum  Cash  completely, and he was working in Enid, and we were meeting. He was  going to work, at two o   clock in the afternoon in Enid and coming home  at five o   clock in the morning. We were living here in El Reno and I was  getting up at six o   clock and going to work in Oklahoma City in  Oklahoma County and coming home at five o   clock. We never saw each  other. So, when there was a job available in 1986   but I really came  back to Canadian County in    84 to    86 here in El Reno, because we  thought that might work a little better if I lived here. But then he was  still working in Enid and when a job was available in Garfield County, I  applied and I took the job in Garfield County and we moved to Enid  where we lived until I retired and my husband retired. It was a  wonderful time there from 1986 until    92, when I retired from extension  service.  The way that they worked, did you have to move counties in order to get  a promotion?  Well, in a way. For some counties, it was. Oklahoma County was  considered a step up in the county, and I was real excited to take that job  and loved it. But, again, the railroad was interfering with our life so  completely and he was working weekends, as well, that it was just too  hectic a life to try. So, we really enjoyed it when we finally got to  Garfield County, and he had a job that he went to work in the morning  and came home at night. That was wonderful because  for  years he  worked at night. That was really nice to have a job that he came home at  five o   clock in the evening. I still had a lot of work nights.  In Enid, also, there was a time when, in 1986 and    87, there was this  farm crisis that happened. That was when a lot of the farm loans were  called in and the farmers were losing all of their operation because their  loans would be called in. So, I developed a support group for those  families. One family I worked with was going bankrupt, down at  11  million, and they needed a support group. I was trained by Extension  how to listen to the families and go to their location. They would group  together and we would sit and I would listen to them and sometimes we  would pray. They would talk about their situation. I received telephone  calls because many of them would not seek any professional service  outside the extension office. They were real proud farmers and farm  women. They would call us. So, I formed a group and we went way out  in the western part of the county to a family, and we met in their home  and they had other farm families that came in and we   d meet in the  evening. My husband went with me most of the time, and they would  just talk. It was some of the most exhausting work that I have ever done,  listening to their pain and listening to them. Because sometimes we were  warned that some of them might commit suicide, they were so  distraught. I was trying to do everything I could to listen to them,  23  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  because they wouldn   t go to a professional counselor. It was very  exhausting.  They worked through it. This one family was able to reorganize and save  their operation and came out successful. I remember, though, that it was  such hard work, and I remember one night, my husband had not gone  with me, coming home about eleven o   clock, and I was so tired that I  had to hold one foot on the accelerator and one foot up so that I would  not go to sleep. I was so totally exhausted. We did some additional  videotaping of the families because they would come together. They  worked through it. They made it. And one day, I had in my office a  fellow from up in the panhandle area calling up. He was going to  commit suicide, and I talked with him, just listened to his pain, and said,     You know, this will pass. I   m just listening to you.    I never heard from  the man again or didn   t hear any bad story, so I believe that he worked  through the situation and did not commit suicide. But that was a real  hard time for farm families in the    80s, because the oil market had  collapsed, as well. There were many people hurting deeply at that time.  That was an interesting time I remember. Very interesting and very  exhausting.  What kind of training did they give you to prepare for that?  Well, it was just letting us know that our job was to listen and that we  couldn   t make any decisions for the people. We just had to listen and to  make comments like    think about this.    There are opportunities, maybe  you need to   we were taught how to help them file for food stamps if  they needed that. One day a lady, I thought,    Eh, no one will ever come  in.    A lady did, one day, in her cute little suit. She   d been out looking  for a job. Her husband was a farmer. Their loans had been called in, and  she needed food stamps. So, I was able to help that lady look for food  stamps. That   s when we had food stamps; now it   s a different program.  But, I was able to help her, because farm families were hurting deeply  during that time.  Did you do referrals?  Yes. Referrals.  Let   s back up before I forget to ask. You said you were one of the first  ones to be offered maternity leave?  Yes.  Before that, what was the     24  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  You just didn   t work.  You didn   t work?  No, and back when I first started working, most everybody was single,  anyway. Or maybe they had a husband. Some of them were allowed to  have a husband. I remember that when I received an engagement ring, I  was told by my supervisor that I really needed to go to the district office  and let them know I was engaged because you really had to have  permission for that. I remember also during that time, the women were  paid less than men, and I knew that when I went to work for Extension  as a 4-H agent, I was told the man would be paid more because he was a  man and we   d be doing the same work, but women would be paid less.  Then when you got engaged, you had to have permission to get engaged.  As I said, I did work through that, and then when I was pregnant, they  said,    Well, there   s a new thing called    maternity leave    and       A whole  new thing. But I thought,    Oh, I think I   ll stay home.    So, I did for five  years, and then I thought,    I need to go back to work. I want to go back  to Extension.    One day, the extension ag agent called me up and said,     Hey, would you like to go back to work?    and that   s the very day that I  had been out thinking,    I   m going to go find a job.    And that   s the day  he called me. I said,    Oh, that   s just what I   ve been wanting to do.     (Laughter) I always thought that was a God thing.  When did you get engaged? Let   s get it for the time frame here.  It was in 1960. I just had gone to work, and my husband   I went to  church and I said,    Who are the single men in town?    because I had  previously been engaged and that hadn   t worked out. They said,    Oh,  there are two. (Laughs) One we think is taken and the other   s name is  Tom Cash.    And I said,    Well, what does he do?    And he said,    He  works for the railroad.       Well, then, I   m not interested.    Then I went to  church and saw this really cute fellow. He was so cute and so handsome  and so charming that I said,    I think I will be interested in him.    That  was in September; we were married December 31 of 1960.  The same year.  The same year. And we have been married fifty years this December.  So, it worked. (Laughs) And he   s been a jewel.  Then your children came along when?  1963 and 1966. That   s when I was staying home at the time. But I  belonged to an extension group during that time called the Meridian  Group that met regularly.  25  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  You were out roughly six years. Did you have to do anything in  particular to come up to speed?  Well, actually, I had taken some classes at OSU during that time because  I just wanted to. So, I was ready to go back to work; didn   t even realize  it when the job came available. I really thought I   d probably go to  teaching. I thought there would be more of an opportunity there. I was  offered a job at Union City to teach down at Union City.  Home economics?  Yes, at that time. The teacher had been out a year or something. Oh, and  then there was an elementary job I was offered somewhere in there, as  well. But then the 4-H agent  position  became available and I thought,     That   s what I want to do.    (Laughs) So, in two weeks, I was back to  work after the job became available.  When you were working with the adult programs, did you have adult  camps?  At 4-H, we had camp. We took the kids to camp in 4-H. With the  women, we took them to OSU to Homemaker Days up there and, as I  said, I would take ten or fifteen women up, and we would stay at the  Student Union. They would take their workshop and their classes and  have their special luncheons and that type of thing. And my daughters  would go with me during that time.  Do you remember which dorm you stayed in?  One of the old dorms. (Laughs)  Willard, maybe?  Willard, probably. Probably Willard.  By Theta Pond?  Yes, yes, Willard, that was it. Yes. There was not air conditioning, I  don   t think. No air conditioning. (Laughs)  Well, let   s talk a little bit about your professional associations.  Okay. I was always interested in professional organizations and  belonged to the Home Demonstration Agent Association, and then it  changed names and became the Extension Home Economists  Association. I was fortunate to serve as president of our association, of  26  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  the Oklahoma Association of Extension Home Economists, and went on  and served in national committees, as well. Ran for a national office  (somehow missed that national office) but I served on committees in the  national level, as well as   that was extension. Then, I   ve been president  of the Oklahoma Association of Family Consumer Science, as well, and  it still has that name. We   ve changed names so many times, sometimes I  forget what name we are. I still serve in the Oklahoma Association of  Family Consumer Science. I still serve as a committee member there,  having been in several offices in the past.  Do you stay in touch with many of your former colleagues?  Yes, yes. We have a group called FEW, Faithful Extension Workers, and  we   re meeting week after next. So, it   s a joint meeting with the current  home educators, extension educators, as well as some of us who were  called extension home economists or home demonstration agents or  whatever name. We   ve changed names several times.  Is there one you prefer?  I think    educators    is really the best title, because throughout the time,  it   s been education. I think education is the best.  But what with it?  Oh, Family Consumers Science Education. Yes, because Ellen Richards,  who was the founder of home economics, really focused on the science,  and I recently heard an interview done about her life in which she was a  graduate at MIT and she said,    Science in the home   that woman that   s  in the home needs to understand the science that   s going on. Why foods  are prepared. Why we eat certain foods for what nutrients and how to  prepare them in the best way.    So, it was science that she focused on for  the career and in her personal life, in Ellen Richards    personal life, she  talked about the clothing, taking care of those needs and the financial  management of the household. That   s what we   ve continued. So family,  the science part of it, is the big factor. In working with the intricate  fabrics that we have, I think I learned more math (laughs) in pattern  alteration than I learned anywhere because I was always figuring in  fractions of how to cut seams four or six ways, or different fractions, so  that we altered a pattern to fit somebody all over their entire body. It  took fractions to figure that out. (Laughs)  Well, with fabric being forty and sixty dollars, you didn   t want to make a  mistake.  You didn   t want to waste it. (Laughs) No.  27  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Do you use any of those skills today?  Well, that   s interesting, because I haven   t done much clothing  construction for several years now. But I mentor a little girl. She   s a high  school girl; she graduates this year. Her name is Stormy. Stormy Beck.  And the school had a side-by-side program here at our public school, in  which they would place a student and a volunteer together because of  their interests. Stormy and I, the school put us together. It was a side-by-side  program. I was interested in clothing and foods, and she was, too.  That was six years ago. And Stormy  has been  my little friend, my side-by-  side friend, since she was in the sixth grade. Stormy needs a prom  dress in two weeks. Just yesterday, she shared with me she decided to go  to the prom, and that she needed a dress. I found myself saying,    How  would you like to have a couture dress?    And she said,    What is a  couture dress?    And I said,    Well, it   s specially designed for you, in the  fabric and the design that you want.    She said well, she would like that.  And I said,    Well, I will do that.    So, in the next two weeks, I   m making  a couture prom dress for Stormy, and I   m going to have to get really  busy to get that finished in the next two weeks since we haven   t even  selected the fabric yet. So, I guess because I happen to have the skills,  and she wanted a dress.  We   ve done many interesting things throughout the last few years. I had  an apple tree in the back yard. My granddaughter was here, and we  picked the apples and then we made the pie crust and put the apples in it  and baked it and ate the pie. So Stormy, along with my granddaughter,  Claire, had a wonderful afternoon doing that. Stormy has been a super  gal, coming in and keeping my grandchildren at different times. I have  Claire and Cash, a seventeen-year-old grandson, and a fifteen-year-old  grandson that is autistic. He is a whole different world in himself,  because he liked the idea of having Stormy babysit him. (Laughs) She   s  just two or three years older than he is, but he functions on his own  level. He   s quite bright on the computer and has been reading since he  was two, but if I ask him to do a certain task, he could not manage that  task. He has limitations. And then we have two more grandchildren. A  ten-year-old and a seven-year-old that live in Muskogee, and their  mom   s the music teacher, so these children are musical children and are  busy with music and drama.  They get that from their great-grandparents. Do you still can and do that  kind of thing?  No, no, I have a garden, but I put it in the freezer. If needed, I still have  that pressure cooker around the place here. I recently told someone,     Well, if our economy really falls down, I   ll put my backyard into a  garden, and I have that pressure cooker and I   ll can green beans. And  28  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  teach everyone else how to do it.     Do you still have your notebooks that tell you how to do all these things?  Yes, I do. (Laughs) Not at fingertip, but I could find them.  What was your most common question, perhaps?  Canning. Food preservation, and stain removal, that was a big one. Lots  of questions. I wish that I had realized that, and I could   ve come up with  that stain-remover fabric gizmo that we use to take stains out, because  people were always calling on how to get stains out of their fabric and  how to remove candle wax. I would tell them to use peroxide and  different products to get blood out. But they were always calling. Now, I  thought, well, with a little chemistry we could   ve come up with Spray     N Wash to begin with. (Laughs)  Do you have a favorite cookbook?  Our homemakers several years ago put together the green cookbook, and  that was in 1985 or so,    84. It has been a cookbook that has continued,  statewide, and it   s still in publication. It   s still being sold. The  homemakers have sold thousands of these.  Do you use it?  Oh, I most certainly do, and I   ve given it as presents throughout the  years, wedding presents. And it   s considered   it has everything in it you  need to know.  When you go to the grocery store, do you go up and down the meat aisle  and be very judicious on what you pick out?  Oh, yes. As you mention that, it reminds me of our 4-H club kids  because Canadian County was, in those years, outstanding in meats  judging. Margaret Fitch, who I worked with, always produced the  outstanding girls    meats judging team. They judged the meat, and went  on to national competition. I had the opportunity of taking the girls to  Kansas City to the American Royal one year. They were four wonderful  ladies that still live in this community that I often see. One of them has a  business, her name is Connie, it was Connie Federson and now it   s  Connie Bone. She has a business that she has established here called  Bone Appetit, because her last name is Bone, B-O-N-E. She has a  wonderful business in which she prepares homemade food, and I   m sure  some of that was some of the skills that she learned back with her 4-H  meats judging team. She   s become quite a successful entrepreneur here  29  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  in town.  Did any of your other 4-Hers go on to follow in your footsteps,  becoming home demonstration agents?  Yes, yes. Marilyn Brosheck was a senior. She was one of our students as  I came into work. She has also retired from Extension. She   s a little bit  younger than I am. (Laughs) She   s already retired. And there have been  others that have gone into similar positions. Another one was Amanda  Von Tungeln, who was also active in the program, and she has been  outstanding working in the community with the Red Cross as a  volunteer. She   s been a real outstanding person in the community. And  the Lawson family. They have some children that were outstanding. The  Perezik family, and the   oh, my goodness. I could just go on and on  with names of families. Sheila Alexander, who went to work for the  Wheat Commission and now lives in Kansas City.  You spend so much time with a lot of them that you would expect that  network to be there.  Yes. And Wilann Heinrich, she is a woman here in the community. In  fact, last night, at our First Kids program at church, I had her four-year-old  granddaughter named Scout, and we got to play together. Wilann  was a busy girl in 4-H and still lives in the community, too. So, the  connections keep on keeping on.  It sounds like you almost have to be the    jack of all trades, master of  none.     Yes, that   s it.  Your favorite seems to be sewing. Would that be a safe assumption?  Well, you know, I think so. But public policy, when I would work in  public policy, I became so enamored with that that also, after serving on  the school board and after retiring, then when we returned to El Reno, I  ran for city council and served on the El Reno City Council for three  years. That was a real interesting time because no life is as interesting as  that life was, I don   t think. (Laughs) The people   it   s just hairy-scary  most of the time at city council. They call you at all times and have all  kinds of weird thoughts and ideas. I don   t know how anybody, a  community, survives sometimes. But that was real interesting. And then  I continued on with community activities, encouraging people to be  involved in their community.  About five years ago, I was asked to submit my resume to the governor  30  Finchum  Cash  to serve on the Oklahoma Board of Nursing, which I did. Then was  appointed as the public member to the Oklahoma Board of Nursing by  the governor, and I am completing my final year now as the public  member there. That has been most challenging because of the 70,000  nurses, RNs and LPNs in Oklahoma, one percent of them have  problems, and those problems have to come before a regulatory board.  That   s every other month. So, every other month, I spend two to two and  a half days in a board meeting, making decisions along with seven other  nurses that are RNs and LPNs on regulations for nurses that have not  obeyed the laws or have done things that were not good for the public.  And the purpose of this Oklahoma Board of Nursing is to protect the  public. So, the board has investigators that investigate complaints, and  then those complaints are worked through, and some of them are  brought to the board for discipline actions. Sometimes before a board  meeting, I   ve spent as much as twenty hours reading and preparing the  cases, knowing what to look up and what to study about those cases.  They also regulate. The board regulates nursing schools, and nursing  schools when they   re NCLEX, their exam does not meet a good rating, a  passing rating, or it   s a low score. The nursing board has to give  suggestions and help them implement plans that will help that school be  successful. That takes on a whole different aspect, as well. So, there   s  time spent there helping those schools, or when they changed  curriculum, accepting them. We have some wonderful other board  members that understand that curriculum, that are PhDs on the board  that helped make those decisions about the curriculum for those some  forty or fifty nursing schools that are out there now, that are giving LPN  or RN degrees. Some of our career techs have LPN programs. So, it took  a lot of study, anyway, for me. (Laughs) And it   s been a very rewarding  experience.  But giving to your community, helping your community in any way  possible, and Extension has been so wonderful because they gave us in-service  training and are always looking to the needs of a community,  what that community needed. So, during my career years, they gave us  in-service training. Now I don   t have the opportunity to have in-service  training, but I try to share whatever I can, wherever I can.  Your skill set is still in place and going strong.  Yes. (Laughter) It   s been really interesting, and that nursing board has  been very interesting. I see decisions that are made, poor decisions that  are made, by people that are very intelligent people, but for some reason  they are making some poor decisions about what   s happening in their  life. Sometimes with drugs and issues of drugs, and the change in our  society that   s transpired, that we have more drugs available, legal and  31  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  illegal, and sometimes people that are very intelligent make some poor  decisions.  If you were still doing Extension, you might be having classes on those  types of things.  Oh, yes. I could certainly see   in fact, in the years that I worked, we  would have workshops and lessons on dealing with drug interaction.  That was a big one, what foods to eat, what not to eat and what to do on  those. So, it works together. And because of this now, the specialists at  OSU provide such excellent training to the county personnel, they have  the information. They   re not digging out so much basic stuff as we did  many years ago. They have more research-based information and that   s  the whole purpose, research-based information.  Was there a time you did child abuse?  Yes, oh yes, that   s another thing I do. I serve as president of Canadian  County Court-Appointed Special Advocates. We have that program here  in our county where children that are taken away from the home, that are  in foster care, need an advocate for them. So, I have been an advocate.  Now I serve as the board president for that. That child needs someone,  needs a voice, and so we have interaction there with children that have  been neglected and abused, and Canadian County is fortunate. We have  a CART (Child Abuse Response Team) house, I don   t know that every  county has one, not very many do, in which we have up to date  information on researching a child that has been sexually abused,  making it the most comfortable position for that child to go through that  program. So, Canadian County is fortunate there, to have that excellent  material.  It doesn   t sound like you   ve retired.  (Laughs) Probably not.  People, people, people.  Yes, it is that way.  Make the world go around.  Yes. One of the nice things about being retired is I don   t have too many  reports to do. That   s really nice.  Back then, you had to do narratives, I understand.  32  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Oh, we did narratives. We filled out pages of reports. Oh, my goodness.  Where you spent your time, how many hours you spent here and how  many hours here; it was always grids and I could never follow the  gridline to get the end, to make it all add up right. These grids all ran  together and my line at the bottom wouldn   t have enough hours or  would have too many hours. And then they   d say,    Your adding isn   t  correct.    I said,    Well, hide the lines and make it work.    (Laughs)  I wonder what happened to all of those?  Oh, I don   t know. I don   t know. But there were times that, I remember  taking Sunday evening to do the monthly report because it was always  something that you had to file through. Living with a calendar. I lived,  and I still live, with a day planner. I have kept all my day planners since  1968 of where I   ve been and what I   ve done, because everything was on  the day planner.  Habits are hard to die, huh?  My first one was about this big. Now I have a big one that I carry. And I  suppose if I were really up-to-date I   d get one of those Blackberries or  whatever things that they have.  The other thing I meant to ask, how did you market and promote what  you were doing and what you would want to be doing? Radio or what?  Oh, yes, yes. Newsletters and radio and table tents. I taught weight  control. Oh, my goodness. I went through weight watch   what did we  call it?  Weight Off?  Weight Off. That   s it. Weight Off. Oh, my goodness. I bet every year,  every class, we lost a person. We lost that much weight. (Laughs)  Oh  I see what you mean. (Laughter)  Well, as I was just thinking about calendars and that, I remember the  Weight Off classes that I taught, and would advertise these classes  through newsletters and the newspaper and table tents. I would go  around to all the restaurants in the county and put a little table tent up on  the table of the restaurants and it would advertise the workshops I was  teaching, which would be Weight Off or clothing construction or  whatever, and put those out. But then, in the Weight Off classes, oh,  numerous classes. In fact, there were so many that my goal always, in  each class, there would be ten or fifteen people, that we would lose one  33  Finchum  Cash  person in the class. That meant we would lose a total of at least a  hundred pounds. So, that was one person that we   d done away with in  that class because we   d lost that weight. We had a good time in those  classes, and I had men in those classes, too. That was interesting because  they had different   I had scales and we   d all weigh in and keep it a  secret from everybody how much they weighed. That was the purpose,  but then they   d share how much they lost that week when they came  back and talked about it.  One year, along with that, we decided we needed some exercising to go  with it. So, we decided we would do belly dancing. (Laughs) We had a  gal that had been to a belly dancing class, so she came in and we all did  our belly dancing and she even had a rhinestone that she put in her  navel. She lost it out in my co-worker   s office and he couldn   t figure out  where this rhinestone had come from (laughs) and he found it in the  floor, but she had changed clothes in there. So, we had a lot of fun going  on, too, during the time, and those Weight Off classes, they were really  fun.  In Oklahoma County, I also had a column that ran in the Daily  Oklahoman in which I wrote out all the classes that we were having.  That was before computers, so every Thursday I would have it all typed  out, the classes. Then I would drive down to the Daily Oklahoman, when  they were downtown in their downtown building, and I would hand-deliver  that to the office of all the workshops because they would then  print it in the Daily Oklahoman. I remember one time getting a speeding  ticket because I was going too fast through downtown Oklahoma City,  but that   s how it got there. Then they moved, and computers came about.  Everything changed. So many things have changed. Extension was  before computers and your extension agent, they had to know all the  current information and have it available. So we were, before computers,  delivering our message to the people. (Laughs)  And if you didn   t know the answer, you had to     Oh, it was,    I   ll get back with you.    Oh, yes. And we had radio. I did a  radio program for a long time. We had our own little radio station out  here and then in Garfield County, I would do a tape and take a tape  down and they would run that tape at certain times in the radio station.  One fellow, I remember living in Enid and taking my tape to the radio  station, and when I moved back from Enid to El Reno, this man moved  here. He had lived in Enid, and he moved back to El Reno. He said,    I  used to listen to you on the radio in Enid.    So, I thought,    Well,  somebody listened, then.    (Laughter) It was different information on  different subjects.  34  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  And then we had the circuit in Enid. It was before cable. It was our own  cable program. They had their own TV unit there. I went down and  would do the lesson, and they would run it on their own local cable  station. Whatever lesson I   d been doing, sit there and talk for thirty  minutes on something or demonstrate something. That was along the  times when we were doing a lot of the environmental programs, too.  There have been so many different types of programs. It   s kind of  interesting to think about. During the early times, we did furniture  refinishing, and I still have the bulletin because they said there   d never  been one printed in such an excellent manner as that one, and there  would never be another one. So, we refinished furniture. Now, all the  antique people say,    Don   t refinish your furniture. It destroys the value.     But there we were, refinishing all the furniture that we could and  teaching them how to refinish furniture. We destroyed all the value of  that antique furniture in the process.  But at the time, it was to save them from having to go out and buy new.  Yes, to buy new, that they would enjoy their furniture that way.  The other thing I wanted to touch back on, you had said when you first  started there was a major difference in salaries between men and  women.  Oh, yes. Yes. They did this because men, they had to be the bread  winners. Women were just working for the fun of it. That was more or  less     Even if you were single.  Even if you were single. You know, you just hadn   t been lucky enough  to catch a guy yet. As affirmative action came about, women were  treated more equally, and minorities were, as well. And thank goodness,  because women still have a glass ceiling that they   re trying to get over  all the time. So, we   re still working on that project.  Within Extension, is it still pretty tough?  It   s more equalized now, I think, probably.  County directors, usually male or female?  Yes, they   re still usually male, though. (Laughs) So, you know. Still  working on it, yes.  But we   re further along than we were.  35  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Yes, further along.  And you mentioned segregation and integration. Was that an issue in the  counties you worked in?  Oh, yes. I thought everybody needs an opportunity. We had a housing  development area here that was mostly minorities, and I loaded up my  equipment and they were so kind, they were able to get us a cooking  range that we could demonstrate there on in that housing development  area. We did our basic food preparation I think is what we did. I  remember carrying lots of pots and pans. We were always carrying  equipment. In fact, my car always had all kinds of equipment in it and  just left it there because why unload it? And bulletins. I remember one  extension agent, she always carried a box of bulletins piled in there. I  usually had mine just stacked up in there. We were always carrying  everything with us, carrying the microwave, and they were heavy. I  remember in Oklahoma County, folks wanted a microwave  demonstration. Well, they didn   t have one, and my dear sweet husband  picked up my heavy one from home and hauled it over there to the  eastern part of Oklahoma County so that I could do a microwave  demonstration to folks that didn   t have one but wanted to learn about it.  In Oklahoma County, there was a lot of working with some of the  American Indian families as well as African-American families, not  Hispanics. We really hadn   t opened that door at that time, so I don   t  know whether the door   s been opened yet or not. But it was always  interesting. In Oklahoma County, I remember the wide variety of  clientele that we worked with. This was in Oklahoma County, and I  loaded up my sewing machines, went to Fourth and Lincoln. Down by  the Capitol, there was an old YMCA there, and it was all minority  population. I was going to teach clothing construction to a group of  African-American women. I unloaded my machines, and the prison, the  El Reno prison, had been kind enough to provide fabric to the folks  there. I hadn   t even brought it; they   d gotten it. Oh, my goodness. This  fabric was orange and green stripes, and purple and blue plaid. The  women wanted to learn some basic clothing construction. We sat down  and worked on that fabric. Oh, it was wild. But they wanted to learn  some clothing instructions, which we did, and how to read a pattern and  do those things.  I really enjoyed working with the women, because they shared some of  their life history. One lady in particular shared that she had grown up in  the rural area of Oklahoma County or Lincoln County, her mother had  died, there were four children, and her father was trying to support the  children, but he had to go and steal food to support them, these four  African-American children. Then he was put in prison for doing that.  36  The children, then, would go to church, and they would find   they lived  in an old house, just an old abandoned house. But they would go to  church, and find a family that would take them home. So, they   d live  with that family for a while. Then they   d find another family. They were  just rotating all the time. This one lovely, lovely lady said that that   s  how she grew up and when she was seventeen she had gotten married  and continued to live. Her husband had a gun, and he had it in the top of  the closet, and she wasn   t aware that it was in the top of the closet. She  reached up to get it and when she got it, it went off, and it blew into her  face and it destroyed part of her face and her arm and left her arm  paralyzed and her leg paralyzed and her eye blind.  She was a member of my class at that time, learning some basic clothing  construction, but how she got in my class was we had a program in  Extension, there were women that went into the homes of low economic  families to teach them food preparation. It was called the Aids Program,  which was a good term at that time (it became another title later on). But  these were women, they   d come into her home, some of the women that  were trained at the Extension Center, to go into homes and teach foods  and nutrition. Lavita Hammond was the director of the extension  program that taught that program. She had learned about Extension, this  little lady that was in my clothing class that was paralyzed on her right  side, and she shared with me her life and the situations in her life that  she had had to face. But she said since learning how to preserve food,  how to take care of her food, she was not going to go hungry another  winter and that when she heard about my class, she wanted to be a part  of that class and learn some things about clothing construction and using  a sewing machine. I remember that sweet dear lady and what a pleasure  that class was, and what a pleasure she was.  But that one particular day, I went from working with this lady back to  the office, where I worked with a lady named Mary Jones whose  husband owned Mark Twain Life Insurance Company. He was Dr.  Jones. He had his doctoral degree and Mary was a member of my  extension homemaker group. She was the president of our homemaker  council there in Oklahoma County. I worked quite closely with Mary in  developing programs and working with the women. Here she was, this  wealthy, educated woman whose husband owned a life insurance  company who had in his early years been the youngest professor at  OSU. So, that particular day went from one community of people to a  far  different  community of people. What an extreme pleasure that was  to have the opportunity to work with these two groups of women and  interact with them, and how exciting that was. Mary was a wonderful  president. As she served as president of the county, Mary Jones, she  recently passed away. I read her obituary in the paper just this winter.  All of our officers in the council   we had a president, a vice president,  37  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  secretary.  About ten of the women, ten or twelve of them, and we had a retreat one  particular time, and she took our officers, women, to her husband   s  cabin somewhere on some lake. I   ve forgotten where. But we spent the  night there and shared and got acquainted with everyone, shared our life  experiences. We had some game that we played. And then we had taken  our food and we ate and the next morning we got up and did some  activities. We were program-planning for the activities there for our  women in Oklahoma County. But it was such a wonderful retreat that we  had in her husband   s cabin on the lake that he had taken his business  people to. So we had our own business meeting there and activities.  Mary Jones was a delightful, wonderful president and did many  interesting things. The experiences were so many and varied of the  people that we had the opportunity to meet and work with. Oh, gosh, I  just get excited thinking about it.  Well, you did definitely what they said, you extended what you knew out  into the     Out into the community.  And further.  Yes, all the way out. (Laughs) With those green and orange stripes, oh,  that was horrible, that had been given to them. The El Reno prison had it  for some reason. I don   t know. It was a whole bolt of fabric. (Laughs)  Is there anything you want to say before we sign off?  Oh, I don   t know. I   m enjoying it now I think more than I did then.  (Laughs) I was meeting too many deadlines.  I had read in the newspaper you had mentioned that there was a  difference between homemade and handmade?  Oh, yes. Yes. Well, one of the things,    homemade    sounds really tacky,  kind of, but if you say,    It   s handmade,    why, it sounds much more  glamorous and has a better critique to it. So, we wanted to say things  were handmade, not homemade. As well as when I told my little girl I  was going to make her a couture dress, not a handmade dress, so she  thinks it   s going to be really fancy. (Laughs) It   s how you sell the  product. It   s marketing.  Maybe    handmade in the home.     38  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Finchum  Cash  Handmade in the home. (Laughs)  Well, it   s been a pleasure hearing your stories today. I appreciate you  inviting me into your home.  Thank you so much. I really appreciate the opportunity. It   s been a  fabulous time.  Walking down memory lane.  Yes. (Laughs) Thank you.  -------  -------  
