 Finchum  Today is April 8, 2010. My name is Tanya Finchum, and I   m with  Oklahoma State University. We   re doing an oral history project  featuring home demonstration agents, extension home economists.  Today we   re in Stillwater, Oklahoma, talking with Arlene Sellers. She  started as a home demonstration agent and 4-H person in 1966, and in  2000 retired as southwest district program specialist in family consumer  science. Thank you for coming today.  Thank you.  Let   s start by having you tell us a little bit about where you were born  and your childhood, and then we   ll work our way forward.  Okay. I was born in Kay County, actually, Ponca City, even though we  lived on a farm. My parents were farmers, and the farm was twelve  miles east of Newkirk. That was kind of out in the middle of nowhere,  actually, but I think it was a good thing. We had great growing-up years,  and I lived there until I left to go to college.  How many brothers and sisters  did you have ?  I have one sister who was four years older, so we were never in the same  school at the same time, which was probably a good idea. She also was a  home economist; she   s with Career Tech.  What did your parents do for their living?  My dad was a farmer/rancher, and my mother was a full-time  homemaker, except she did work a bit when we were in college to help  support us there.  Did she participate in home demonstration clubs?  5  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Actually, no. Not that she didn   t appreciate that, but there was not one in  our community. I don   t know if it was the distance from town or what it  was, but there wasn   t one there, so she didn   t. But she stayed very  active. The little school I went to was a two-room with two teachers. My  husband always laughs about this. There were four grades in one room,  and four in the other. We had a wonderful elementary teacher that  provided all kinds of learning activities for the students, and one of those  was 4-H club. So, we participated a lot in 4-H club, and Mother was a 4-  H leader. So, the family did things together. It was a very close-knit  community, and all the parents were supportive of the school, so they  worked with everybody   s children, not just their own. So, it was a great  community family atmosphere, always.  Where did you go to high school?  I went to high school at Newkirk, which was about twelve miles. Went  four years, graduated, from there.  You did 4-H during those four years?  I did. I continued with 4-H and was active in county activities as well as  the local club. It was a fairly small 4-H club, but we stayed active and  participated in everything.  In the county fair and state fair?  Yes, and speech and demonstration, 4-H dress revue, meats judging,  flower/vegetable show. So many of those things don   t even exist  anymore, but yes, we did it all.  Did you have a favorite part?  I always enjoyed the clothing a lot. Mother didn   t sew really well, but I  had some aunts that did, and they got me really interested in that, and  this elementary teacher helped with that, too. So, that was what I did a  lot, but then I became active in the citizenship, leadership. We had a  pretty wide range of activities. I went on to Chicago to the National 4-H  Congress, and that was quite fun. To tell a little bit more, I was on the  state 4-H meats team, and we went to Kansas City and judged there. It  was all fun, and I learned a lot.  Then that led you to college, to major in home economics?  Amazingly enough, when I was in the fourth grade, I decided what I  wanted to be, and I never changed. At that 4-H club, at that time, the 4-H  agents, as we called them, would visit once a month. They would come  6  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  to our meeting and we would give demonstrations. The first time they  came, I thought they were probably just the coolest people in the world,  and that   s what I wanted to do. So, I figured up that would be 1966 when  I graduated from college. Well, I probably wouldn   t live that long, but  maybe I would, and if I did, that   s what I wanted to do, and I never  wavered from that.  Did you attend OSU?  Absolutely, OSU. My parents, neither one had graduated from college,  but they never said,    You must go to college,    or    Where do you want to  go?    or    How are we going to work this out?    I just knew that you went  to elementary school, you went to high school, and you went to college.  I had been to 4-H Roundup on campus for years, and my sister had gone  before that. I really didn   t know there were any other schools around,  and I loved it. So, yes, I did go to OSU.  And graduated in    66?  In    66 with a major in home economics education.  And then your first job right off the bat was     My first job   the extension department called me after I graduated from  college and said,    Would you like to come to work for us?    Well,  absolutely, I did want to. So, I went down to the state 4-H office and  they said,    Would you like to go to Kiowa County?    And my response  was,    Sure. Where is it?    because I really didn   t know. And it was in the  very, of course, southwest part of Oklahoma. I worked there six years  and was granted a sabbatical so I could get my master   s. Came back to  OSU for a year; got my master   s in clothing textiles and merchandising.  And then after that?  And then after that, if, at that time, (and it   s probably still true) you   re  granted a sabbatical, then you must work for the university for two  years, and I knew at that time they could place me anywhere they  wanted, whatever was open. So, I was placed in Chickasha, Grady  County, which was outstanding. I loved it and worked there two years  and would   ve continued except a better offer came along. I got married,  and, at that time, policies were a lot different than they are now. We had  to live in the county where you worked, so that wasn   t going to work.  They really didn   t want you to be married and both work for the same  organization. I couldn   t have worked in that county. So, I resigned my  position and moved to Anadarko, which was thirteen miles away,  thirteen or a little more, and because of that, then I taught public school  7  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  for eleven years. At that time, my husband was offered an area position  in Duncan, so we moved to Duncan. The district position came open,  and I applied for that, and was fortunate enough to be hired in that  position and worked in that eleven years until I retired. It   s been  wonderful.  It seems to have just fallen into place, almost.  Absolutely. It was a great organization.  In each one of those locations, where was your office? Was it in the  courthouse?  Well, most of them are in the courthouse, but when I went to work in  Hobart, it was in the basement of the post office, the federal building.  Then, in Chickasha, it was in the courthouse. Then, of course, Duncan,  we had our separate district office.  Talk us through a typical day in each one of those positions.  I don   t think there   s a typical day, (laughter) and you probably hear this  a lot, but every day is different. And I think that   s one of the things  that   s very appealing about the extension system. One day you may be  working with youth, one day with adults. One day you may be working  in parenting, one day you may be working in budgeting, you may be  working in nutrition. In Hobart, when I went there, at that time, the job  was more general in nature. We didn   t specialize as much. We were  meeting the needs of everybody which really did spread yourself thin.  But some other things we did   for example, I taught a tailoring class  where we made coats and suits, and at the same time, I was teaching  food handlers at the nursing home on food safety. So, it was just very,  very different. And then in the summer, go to 4-H camp with the kids,  that sort of thing.  Any adult camps?  No.  Some counties had them at some point.  Probably did. I think they would   ve been a lot more difficult. I learned  early on it was much easier to work with children. When you told them  something, they pretty much believed they should do it. Adults know  better. (Laughter)  And how would you prepare for these different lessons?  8  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Well, that   s another real advantage to the OSU, or cooperative extension  system: you have the university as your backup. So, we always had In  Service, of course we came with our degree, but then we kept up to date  through In Service or maybe seminars even outside the system that  might help us in that. But that was usually the way. I did also go ahead  and get a second master   s degree, because I lived in Anadarko which  was close enough to Weatherford. They had Monday night classes, and  my husband was going and some of the other teachers. I got a second  degree in secondary school counseling, and that worked really well for  being able to understand people and that sort of thing.  That   s a good parallel.  Yes. It was good.  Did you have any challenges?  There   s always challenges. With every job, I think you change one  challenge for another. To reflect on the first job, about the first question  I had   well, to back up a bit, I only worked in the 4-H program for six  months there, and then the lady that was in the adult program retired, so  I had both jobs. But the adult program was quite organized and quite  active, so there was no down time to learn that. One of the very first  jobs, or first calls, that I had was,    How do you make cactus jelly?     Now, I grew up on the farm in a rural area, of course, but we didn   t have  prickly pear  cactus . So, I had no idea how to make cactus jelly. But the  good thing was I had the university behind me, and with one call I could  find out, so that was fine.  Then another challenge right away, that very same month, I guess, I had  planned to have a program for the adult women, and the Oklahoma State  Health Department was coming to do the program. I had county leaders  from everywhere across the county coming in. This was my first big  thing with adult women, so it was very important that I show that I know  what I   m doing in order to win their support. Well, the night before the  program, Oklahoma City had a very large snow storm, and the Health  Department could not come. We were just as free and clear as could be,  where I lived. Well, there   s no way you could call everybody and say,     Don   t come,    so I had to prepare another program and be ready that  morning. So, that was definitely a challenge. It worked great. I gained  the support of the people. They were always so supportive. There were  always challenges like that. You think you   re ready and something  happens.  Roll with the punches.  9  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  That   s right. You   ve got to be flexible.  Would you get these types of calls after five o   clock in the afternoon?  Many times, people will call my home and say,    I didn   t want to bother  you at the office, so I just wanted to ask    whatever the question was.  Extension people always get a lot of that, yes. Which was fine, but the  other interesting thing that goes along kind of with that, when I went to  Hobart in 1966, the apartment that I had was less than standard,  probably, what we   d call standard today. No washer and dryer, so I had  to go to the laundromat. I got lots and lots of questions at the laundromat  because Hobart was a small town. Me going there fresh out of college as  a single woman, pretty quickly everybody knew who I was. So, I got lots  of questions there, and it might be surprising, but even in the grocery  store people would survey what I had in my basket to see if I was eating  healthy, if I was doing what I said. That sort of thing was interesting.  Let me back up a minute, then. When did you get married, what year?  Nineteen seventy-five.  Okay, so things were still     Yes, women at that time   it   s probably surprising to even realize this  now. It doesn   t seem like it ever could   ve happened, but when we got  married, my credit card company took my credit card and issued it in my  husband   s name. That   s how far we   ve come since    75, but before that, I  can remember as a young 4-H member that our extension personnel, the  women could not be married. It was okay for the men but not the  women. And then that changed, of course, before I got in.  Was it difficult to get promoted, then?  Well, not really because you were promoted within women, so we were  only competing against women at that time.  Well, at the top level, like the county director, could that be either?  Probably could   ve been, but it just seldom was. I don   t recall a woman  as a county director then, but there may have been some, yes. Of course,  now it   s very common.  Well, when you were traveling around, I   m assuming you had to have a  car to do all the traveling around.  Yes. Oh, yes.  10  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Any car trouble stories?  Not really. My dad bought me a car when I was a senior in college  because we knew I had to have one. Everybody else was getting little  sports cars and cute little cars, but I knew pretty much what I wanted to  do. So, I got a four-door Impala, because I had kids in the car so much.  And, also, much of our office was in the car because we traveled and did  our teaching outside of the office. I had a 16 mm projector where we  showed films, filmstrips, and that was so heavy and bulky to carry up  and down stairs. It was just easier to leave it in the car. So, a lot of our  stuff was in the car.  Did you co-teach some of these with the male counterpart?  Yes. I always worked with wonderful cooperative men. We were always  a team, and we did do things together, and that made it fun when our  whole office was working together. We had great relationships. We did  some things together like in horticulture. If the ag agent was landscaping  a yard or something, I might sit in and think about in terms of color for  the landscape, the flowers, ornamental shrubs. So, we did some things  together like that.  I understand you belonged to associations along the way.  Yes. The extension group, professional group, we had our own  organization, and then I was also a member of the American Home  Economics Association, or what   s now the American Association of  Family Consumer Sciences. I always felt like that professional  organization gave me insights that I didn   t always get from extension. I  think sometimes we can get too focused, so I wanted to keep a broader  perspective. I did join that, and we   d go to the national meetings  wherever they were. They were great support; both organizations were  great support.  When you were first starting, did you have someone to mentor you?  We had a district person that was always available for counsel if you  needed someone, but also at that time when I started to work, we worked  for maybe six weeks under the shadow of a neighboring county home  economist, and that worked great. And because of that, we developed  close relationships with our coworkers in other counties. They were all  mentors then, yes.  And you went to judge some of their counties?  We did that. We did a lot of judging, which a lot of those things were at  11  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  night, so our job was never eight to five. It was whenever you needed to  do something. They were at night. We did judge county fairs, speech  contests, Share the Fun, demonstrations, dress revue. All those things.  Many of those were at night. However, also, at that time you could,  because we had school 4-H clubs, you could have some of those during  the day, because as a school event, you could get out of class for that.  So, that worked well.  If you did those things at night, could you come in late the next  morning?  Not so much. (Laughter) Not really. It seems like it would work that  way, and it probably would for co-workers, administration. I don   t know  about that, but for county clientele, if they call at eight o   clock and  you   re not there, it doesn   t really matter if you   d been out until  midnight. Your hours are still eight o   clock until whatever time. No, we  were usually there at eight o   clock.  That was before cell phones, so they couldn   t just call you wherever.  Exactly, right. In fact, it   s come a long way with cell phones, because  even in my district job, I had to buy my own cell phone and pay my own  cell phone bill. The university didn   t support that as far as something  that would   ve been important. I   m sure now they probably do, but they  didn   t then.  Have you had any of your 4-H students follow in your footsteps?  I have some 4-H members that are now extension staff, and I don   t know  if it had anything to do with me. Probably not, but they are in the  system, and it   s really neat to see them, even though I   ve threatened  them if they ever told that I knew them when they were in grade school,  that I would deny it. (Laughter) But, yes, I have a couple.  Over those forty-some years, did you help do cookbooks?  The cookbooks were done really by the volunteer associations. You  know, the adult women were organized into family community  education groups. That   s what they   re called now. They were home  demonstration clubs, but family community education groups now, and a  lot of them did cookbooks for fundraisers and projects. Their fundraisers  were used for projects in their community. You had to have money from  somewhere, and they did cookbooks, which they always sold really well.  Do you have a collection?  12  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  I have a collection of cookbooks from everywhere, yes I do. That makes  me think about the family community education groups. Some of the  things they did as groups were so important in the community. I can  remember early on in Kiowa County, I worked with a lady and we  helped secure a landfill, which was way before landfills were deemed  important. But we found a little bit of land that a person would donate,  and we got the county involved too, with graders, and we established a  landfill. So, that was one of the things that the groups worked on. They  also did road signs in rural areas so that   you know, it   s very hard to  find a home in a rural area. It   s    north of the mountain    or    south of the  mountain    or whatever, so road signs became important. We did mostly  things like that, just to help out in the community. They mapped  cemeteries.  What would your role be in some of that?  Advisement. Just advise, yes. Early on, it was probably less advisement  than it is now, but now, there   s so much need and so much to do as time  has gone on that there   s not time to actually do the physical part, but in  an advisory role. And they are very capable, yes.  Did you have to do monthly reports or annual reports, or both?  Oh, yes. We did monthly and annual. The monthly report, we did a  statistical and also a narrative, so we had to write, which was a good  thing. I think we could express ourselves more. Numbers   you know,  you can do a lot with numbers, and they don   t really tell much, but a  narrative can pretty much tell what you   re doing. I don   t know what they  did before me, but that   s pretty much what happened when I was there.  Who keeps copies of those, or do they exist anywhere?  Probably in a black hole. (Laughter) I don   t know really who did keep  copies. Now, in the district office, when I was there, yes, I did keep  copies of certain documents to have on record, because we would have  an annual performance appraisal for all county staff. So, as we did that, I  would review the documents that I had gotten throughout the year, and  that would be included in their performance appraisal.  Since we   re talking a little bit about writing, did you also do newspaper  articles?  Newspaper was a very good source of communication; we did that. We  did an educational article on food safety or whatever, and our  newspapers were always cooperative. But we also did radio and  television. We had a weekly radio program and then television, which  13  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  was quite interesting. When I started to work, the TV stations had a farm  program, and of course being with the cooperative extension service, we  were always included at different times. One time, I recall I helped write  and coordinate this program. It was called The Cotton Tale, T-A-L-E,  because I came from the area in southwest Oklahoma that grew a lot of  cotton. So, we did talk about cotton production and then how cotton was  used in fashion and home accessories. I can   t remember others. We had  a lot of radio and television.  Would those be available somewhere?  I don   t know. That   s an interesting question. We could pursue that. I  really don   t know; it would be interesting to see. I don   t have copies, but  that would be interesting to have them.  Do they still have cotton in that area?  Yes, cotton has grown extensively in southwest  Oklahoma . But it was  like channel nine or channel four that did the programs, and probably  five, I   m not sure.  Maybe they   re archived somewhere.  You know, they might have them. That would   ve been in the late sixties  or very early seventies.  It   d be worth checking into.  It would be, yes.  If someone asked you to pick a highlight or two, what might they be?  Oh, that   s a big question. I think probably a highlight in extension work  is just the people, the relationship you have with the people, and  hopefully along the line, you   ve helped them. That   s your goal. We  always tried to make sure we were doing what was deemed important at  the time but also what clientele wanted in terms of our expertise, and to  do that (and this is deviating from your question) we had advisory  councils. So, maybe twice a year we would have people from all over  the county come in and we would discuss,    Okay, for the next year,  what do we think is important? What educational opportunities would  you like to see?    And we always got excellent ideas, so we could then  deliver those in their communities. That was a good tool to use, and  those, to go back to the question, were highlights, and the fact we met  some of the most outstanding people, and hopefully, then, we did help  the community.  14  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  It sounds like you planned maybe at least six months ahead of time, or  even a year?  We planned, actually, five years. We did (I can   t even remember the  name of it) a long-range strategic plan, and then every year we updated  it. And then, actually, as I worked in the district office, when staff would  come in, then we would identify what they had done through the year,  and did it match their objectives. So, even though there   s a lot of  flexibility in the extension program, you   re also focused and accountable  to the people as well as staff.  Do they still call you after all this time?  No, not really. Now, I do get questions once in a while, not really phone  calls. I think that happens an awful lot, but because I transitioned from  the county and worked in the district for eleven years and didn   t work in  subject matter so much, (I was more in administration) I kind of  separated myself from the questions.  How many counties are in your district?  Twenty.  Oh, gosh.  So, there was a lot of travel. We went to the counties for support for,  well, to see if things were going on as reports indicated. So, we did make  a lot of trips to the county, plus coming to campus. So, we were on the  road a lot. I came to campus for the extension faculty meetings and also  for In Service.  You weren   t reimbursed for that?  Our travel was reimbursed, however, this probably is a little-known fact  to people outside the system. The rules were when you spent the night,  yes, extension service would pay your hotel at the state rate. The state  rate doesn   t really give you a very secure feeling in a hotel, so you  usually had to spend more than that which, of course, you paid for. And  then also you paid the tax because OSU wouldn   t pay the tax. So, we  also paid the tax. So, it   s sort of like teaching, in a way. You put a lot of  your own money in, and I wouldn   t complain about that. It was still  okay.  It comes back around, too, doesn   t it?  Yes, yes, it does. One thing that I didn   t mention that goes back well  15  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  before my time, when I went to work, there was a lady that lived in that  county that had worked during the Depression, and I asked her right  away,    What sorts of things did you do?    She said   this is when they  were home demonstration, literally. She would go to homes, show them  how to make mattresses, and also she said,    I would go in, and they  would have like half a beef stretched out on the kitchen table, and they  expected me to show them how to cut it up.     Oh, gosh. So you didn   t have to do that.  Thank goodness. Thank goodness. That would   ve been difficult.  Did you do canning and preserving and that type of thing?  Not so much. There was still some of that done, and still is I   m sure, but  not as much out of necessity now. I came in about the time women were  beginning to start to work outside the home, and farms were as modern  as the city. So, even though, yes, there was a lot of canning jellies and  fruits, that sort of thing, I didn   t actually do a lot of that.  Or sewing, even though you did that for yourself?  Well, I did. I did teach some sewing classes, like the tailoring. At that  time, it was still less expensive to buy fabric and make your clothes, and  now probably not so much.  So, you taught high school?  Yes, for eleven years.  Home economics?  Yes, and I had probably a third boys. It was very, very good. The classes  were very rich in budgeting, parenting, nutrition, and yes, we did some  sewing. The boys   you know, what are you going to have a boy make in  class? We did sweat suits, and the interesting thing about boys, first they  had to take the sewing machine apart and see if they could get it back  together. Not usually. (Laughter) So, that would   ve been my job. That  was challenging at times, but it was good.  So, you could put one back together?  Had to. (Laughter) No choice. There was nobody else.  That was before they were computerized, too, I guess.  16  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Yes. Yes, absolutely. That has changed a lot of things. Even though I did  have class   we used the computer a lot in the classroom from early on.  In class, they would have to keep down what they ate every day, and we  would figure up calories, fat intake, protein, all the nutrients, so they  could see that the hamburger and fries were not always the best choice.  And then we did budgeting where they could figure out if they wanted  that pickup, smoking wasn   t going to be the best bet. It was too  expensive. So, we did a lot of that.  Did time management come in there anywhere?  Oh, yes, yes. We talked about simple things, even, that you would think,     Everybody knows that.    Not so much. Like just making the bed, you  know. Make it all one side first, then do the other side. Just little things  that high school kids can catch onto.  And did some of this work carry over to your home? Organization and  all that stuff?  It does. You know, once you get that in your brain, it doesn   t leave, so  yes, we   re very efficient.  That was important during the seventies and eighties when conservation  of energy and all that was an issue.  Yes, yes, absolutely. It is amazing how subject matter has evolved.  When I was, say, in 4-H, one of the things we did was civil defense  preparedness, and we prepared food and safety kits in case of an atomic  attack. So, we did a lot of things like that that, today, students wouldn   t  be concerned about. Wouldn   t think about, probably.  What would be some of the things they do today? Just a few things.  Well, I   ve been out for ten years, but I   m guessing it   s still basic  nutrition, childcare, budgeting. Those, I guess, are the mainstay for the  family, and even with the computer, you still need the basic skills.  And the computer helps when you need research for your prickly pear  recipe.  Absolutely. That would   ve been very nice at that time, yes.  Did you keep any files handy for questions that you   d get asked  frequently?  Yes. A lot of files and recipes. Even though, maybe that   s not where I  17  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  came from, wanting to give out recipes, that   s where some clientele was  coming from. So, we did, for canning (and some other types of food  preparation, but mostly canning) we would give out recipes.  Other than your film projector, what are some of the other things you  would carry in your trunk?  Oh, probably records for local women   s groups. I say women   s groups;  men joined those, too. Even though not nearly as many, but there were  some men. And when I would go to an adult women   s group, I would  usually prepare something educational so that I would have some input  and not just be there for no good reason. Even though it was a good way  to keep contact with Oklahoma State for the women, I would prepare  some lesson on those basic subjects, nutrition or budgeting or parenting.  So, we had things that would go with that. Usually there would be  visuals of some type.  And you went to them more often than they came to you?  Well, not always. I tried to go perhaps three times a year to each group,  but I had seventeen groups in the first county where I was. So, to get to  those three times was a challenge. Some of them met on the same day,  and the biggest challenge there was finding their home, because they all  lived, of course, (many of them, not all) way out where there wasn   t  always road signs. So, I would call before I would go and ask for  directions, well before the GPS, and they would say,    Just turn right at  that little store and go north around the mountain, and we   ll be there a  little ways down the road.    (Laughter) That would be a challenge, but  we could always find it.  If you had seventeen clubs, how many members would each club have,  roughly?  It varied, but from ten to twenty, maybe twenty-five, the largest.  If they met in one home, they would be pretty packed.  Yes, yes, but they didn   t all meet in homes. Some of them met in  community centers. Especially because of consolidation, a lot of rural  schools were left vacant, and many times they would develop those into  community centers. So, they could have meetings there, and we did that.  Of those seventeen, do you have any idea how many might still be in  existence?  Not really, but I would guess it would be down to eight or nine.  18  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Probably about half, I would guess. We can understand that, with people  working. A lot of clubs, in fact, even when I was working in the county  program, some of the clubs did start meeting at night so they could work  and still go.  Did you have to work weekends some?  Oh, yes. Yes. There would be weekends, but that was fine.  County fairs, I guess, would be on weekends, too.  On weekends, but there was a lot of things on weekends, especially in  the 4-H program.  Before we were getting started, you were saying your mother was  ninety-seven when she passed.  Yes, yes.  Did she help you with any of this, or at least act as a sounding board?  Yes, she did. She did. In fact, when I first started to work, if I would get  a call that I just thought,    I should know this, but I   m not sure,    guess  who I called. Mom. She was always very good at nutrition. That worked  out well. I could depend on her for a good answer.  And to pick up the slack at home for home-cooked meals or something if  you had to work late?  Well, I never lived close to my parents after I graduated from college. I  went to the opposite end of the state and wasn   t back home that much  because I worked all the time. Anyway, the telephone was there, and I  did go home, of course, some.  You said there were issues with getting married in the seventies. Were  there issues with having children?  No, not after they allowed you to be married, then that was fine.  When you first started, did you have a dress code, or what not to wear?  I think not written, but at that time, dress was still taught a lot in college.  So, for me, I knew what it was like to be a professional, so it was  always   I liked clothes, anyway. I think all home economists at that  time dressed very professional. Never in my beginning days would we  have worn pants to work. Now, that wasn   t true after I worked awhile,  19  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  but early on it was dresses, spike heels every day.  Hose?  Oh, absolutely.  Even in the summer?  Even in the summer. It didn   t matter. You still dressed very  professionally. And men at that time would wear the tie. Probably not so  much now. And I don   t know, I don   t have that much contact with  county staff now, but I see teachers that are not dressing the same as we  did. It   s probably true all across.  Well, let   s back up a little bit and talk about OSU when you were there.  Was there a practice house still in existence at that time?  There was. I think I was right at the end of that. And as it turned out     well, it was called the home management house. It was really a practical  application of, supposedly, what we learned in class. I felt kind of lucky  because   I must   ve been in a very large class, so the home management  house was full. They had overflow in the apartments. There were four of  us that lived in one apartment, and we had a student supervisor who  lived below us. That was my experience with the home management  house. She came once; I don   t remember how often. Maybe she ate  every evening meal there; I   m not sure. And as I think about it, that  would   ve been a good job. (Laughter) And then, the home management  house person, the one in charge, would come two or three times, and we  would entertain her. Soon after that, I think they quit doing that.  Had to make sure you had the proper color of food on the plate?  Oh, yes, very balanced and, of course, all the correct etiquette, yes. Well,  and speaking of etiquette, that   s something we taught a lot to youth, as  well as adults. But to youth especially, what utensils to use, how to set  the table correctly. So, yes, we did a lot of that. I don   t know, now.  Did you have a favorite professor?  I hate to admit it   s been so long ago.  Did you have a favorite class, then?  I liked all the sewing classes, because when I was young, very young, I  started sewing and making my own clothes. So, when I got to college, I  loved that. It was easy. So, yes, that was probably my favorite, even  20  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  though I liked them all. All the professors I had, probably, with one or  two exceptions, I would give an A-plus. Very, very good.  Which dorm did you live in?  Well, it is not even a dorm now. I lived in Willard Hall, which was  perfect because it was so close to campus. You could be dressed and out  the door and in your class in ten minutes, so I loved that. I went to  summer school, but stayed in the air-conditioned dorms, so that was  much better. But all four years, I lived in Willard Hall.  Same floor, same room each year?  No, I lived with one roommate two years, and then I was able to get a  corner room which was bigger and had a different roommate. So, that  worked out well. Closet space was a little bigger. That was good because  the closets are very, very small.  Especially if you like clothes, huh? (Laughter)  Especially if you like clothes.   Did you  spend much time in the library?  Lots of time in the library. Then, I think, the library was an anchor. I  mean, many times your date and you would go to the library; I don   t  know if they do that now, but we did that a lot. But we used the  resources in the library. It was before the internet, so we looked  everything up in the book. It worked great. I still love books.  As you were learning how to be a home economist, did you have to  develop lesson plans and things like that as part of a class?  Part of the curriculum, yes, because we also did student teaching. So,  developing curriculum in a class worked excellent because you could  always use it in student teaching. I think it was about six weeks that we  went out in teams for student teaching. That worked out. It was always  nice to have a fellow classmate with you, so that worked out well.  I   m assuming there weren   t too many males in these classes.  I don   t know of any. At that time, I don   t know of any.  I think there may be a few in the merchandising part of it, at least now.  Now, and also in family science. In fact, I think OSU has a football  21  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Finchum  player that was in family science. So, there are some, and I would  suspect that that will increase. Well, the hotel and restaurant, maybe as  much or more male, and I think the new dean is male. So, that   ll make  things different, as well.  When you retired, was it because of years of service, or you were just  ready for a change, or a little bit of both?  I always wanted to have a career, work to the best of my ability, and  retire and have an afterlife, and so that   s what I   ve done. There was no  reason really that I had to retire, but my husband and I, we   ve always  traveled, and we wanted to do more of that. So, we retired at fifty-five,  and have been able to travel and see the world.  Have fun, huh?  Yes. We   ve been to all seven continents, almost a hundred countries. So,  it   s been good.  Have you been to all seventy-seven counties in the state?  Yes, yes. I   ve been to all seventy-seven counties. Of course, when you  work for extension, you almost get there without trying.  Your district   s almost a third.  Yes. But then, you go out of district to maybe judge an event or do an In  Service for someone.  If you had to do it over again, would you take a similar path?  I would. I made that decision early on, and I still feel like it was a good  decision. However, I didn   t explore other careers because I felt like I  knew what I wanted to do. I think now we do a better job in school of  explaining the career opportunities, but I   ve no reason to regret or  change anything.  Is there anything that you would like to add before we close out?  I don   t think so, but just to say thanks for the opportunity, and I think it   s  a great project to be involved in to keep some of the history. It   s  amazing how fast we lose it. So, thanks very much.  You   re welcome. I usually ask one last question. How would you want to  be remembered?  22  Sellers  Finchum  Sellers  Just as someone who worked hard to be fair and honest and a good  teacher.  Well, thank you very much for your time. It   s been a pleasure.  Thank you.  -------  -------  
