 Myers, and I   m with the Oklahoma State University  Library. Today is April 13, 2012, and I   m in Sapulpa, Oklahoma  meeting at the home of Paul Bavousette. I   ll be interviewing Paul today  as part of the Spotlighting Oklahoma oral history series for the  Oklahoma Oral History Research Program. Thank you for meeting with  me here today, Paul.  Glad to, Joe.  Would you tell me a little bit about your family and what your childhood  was like? Did you grow up here in Oklahoma?  I was born in Oklahoma City in 1930. I went to high school and  graduated from high school and then went to the University of  Oklahoma in 1948. I was there two years, and not having any spending  money, I joined the Marine Reserves. In 1950, North Korea invaded  South Korea, and my Twentieth Infantry Battalion was activated and  sent to Camp Pendleton. We left Oklahoma City on August 2nd, 1950.  Okay. So, what year was it that you joined that unit?  I joined the reserves on June 25, 1948.  Nineteen forty-eight, okay. Where was your boot camp conducted at?  I did not have boot camp because when I was activated, any member of  the Twentieth Infantry Battalion that had two years of reserve training,  plus two years of summer camp were not required to attend boot camp.  So, they considered those two years of summer reserve and regular  reserve as sufficient training to be activated at that time.  Kind of like OJT, on-the-job training.  5  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  That   s right. That   s right.  So, when your unit was activated to prepare to head to Korea, where did  you ship to from Oklahoma City?  From Oklahoma City, we went to Camp Pendleton at Oceanside,  California. We were there two weeks doing several forced marches and  snapping in on the rifle range. Then we went to San Diego and debarked  from San Diego directly to Kobe, Japan. I don   t remember the date that  we left the United States.  When heading from San Diego to Kobe, how long of a trip was that?  Fourteen days.  Fourteen days. What was it like on the ships, heading over?  It was an APA  attack transport , which is just a personnel carrier. Very  crowded. The type of ship that the metal bunks were stacked five high.  You lined up for chow in various groups. You really didn   t want to  claim a bottom bunk when you got your rack because onboard ship, a lot  of the guys got sick. And if they were in a higher bunk and they leaned  over and lost their meals, if you were on the bottom bunk that was just a  problem. (Laughter) But it was very crowded and monotonous.  Was there any training while you were on the ship or any kind of  anything to do to get prepared?  Not a whole lot, just some calisthenics, some rifle inspections, details,  we cleaned the head. It was just going from day-to-day to get over there.  From what I   ve read and other soldiers I   ve talked to, there was some  target practicing off the ships for those who needed it.  To my recollection, we did not have any of that. Incidentally, the name  of the ship that I went over, the APA, was a USS Noble.  USS Noble.  N-O-B-L-E.  So you arrived in Kobe, Japan. Can you tell me a little bit about that,  about your time in Japan?  Basically, we   d just pull liberty for about three days and just went from  6  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  place to place. There was some bad weather, which caused a little bit of  delay, but it was primarily to load the ships for the Inchon invasion. I  think, best that I can remember, we were there about three days.  Okay, three days in Kobe. Tell me about your military job. When you  joined the marines, what was your military occupational specialty is  what they call it these days, your MOS?  My initial MOS was 333 and my final MOS was 306, which was mortar  unit leader. In initially joining the reserves and training on the mortar, I  was basically considered an ammo humper. Landing in Korea, I initially  was an ammo humper also, but that changed.  And that was for the eighty-one millimeter mortar?  Eighty-one millimeter mortar, yes.  Who were the men that you served with while you were there?  Well, I really don   t understand that question. I can say that at the time I  joined the reserves on June 25 of    48, I was going to high school with  three buddies that lived close to me, and we would triple date and double  date and were in the Scouts together and so forth. I was influential in  convincing those guys that they ought to join the reserves at the same  time I did. So, we had consecutive serial numbers. Fortunately, when we  got to Pendleton and we got dispersed into different units, these three  fellows had also mortar training, and we were able to stick together in  the same company and platoon. Actually, when I came back, there was  one guy that came back with me. The other one had come back earlier. It  was just a group of guys from different reserves and regulars all over the  United States.  They had an idea for that back in the   I think it was the    80 s and    90s     called those cohort platoons. They would be guys that came from the  same, if not the same state, same city. They were just kind of gathered  together.  To my knowledge, we didn   t have that in    50.  The two gentlemen that were with you there, do you recall their names?  Oh, exactly. I   m still in touch with them.  Okay, who were they?  One was Dow McCarty, M-C-C-A-R-T-Y, who lives in Oklahoma City.  7  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  The other is John McKemie, M-C-K-E-M-I-E. He is presently living in  Sun City West, Arizona.  And both of those fellows were in the mortar platoons with you.  They were in eighty-one mortar platoons. One fellow eventually got  transferred to anti-tank, but the other did stay with me in eighty-one  mortars.  Who was it that stayed with you there in eighty-one mortars?  John McKemie, and we both made sergeant on the same day. That was  in    51.  I see. So you were in Kobe for about three days, roughly. Where did you  ship from there? Where was your next destination?  Inchon.  That was the     Landing.     Inchon Landing, kind of the left hook that MacArthur planned?  That   s right. That happened on September 15th of    50.  Can you talk about that for a little bit?  Sure. I remember coming down the netting on the side of the ship,  getting into the LSVPs, and then going out and circling until they got the  signal. And then like John Wayne, they headed into the beach, got up  close, and dropped the ramp. We didn   t run off firing our rifles like John  Wayne did. It was raining a little bit and we got off and went in.  (Laughs)  Was that a morning landing or an evening landing?  Best that I can remember, I would say that it was somewhere in the  neighborhood of five thirty, six o   clock.  AM?  PM. There were three landing beaches. We landed on Blue Beach.  Blue Beach, okay. How long were you in Inchon?  8  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  We were on the beach just overnight. The next morning, then, we started  in towards Seoul, going through Yongdung-po and best that I can  remember, I could look it up, it probably took three or four days to get  into Seoul.  Once you were in Seoul, what was that like? As far as you were trying to  push the North Koreans out of Seoul at that point in time.  Exactly. Exactly.  What was that like? Was that house-to-house fighting, or   ?  From my particular standpoint, no, because I was not in a line company.  Being in eighty-one mortars, we were behind the line company,  supporting the line companies with indirect fire wherever they needed.  So, from where you were located, how far back from the line companies  would you normally set up?  Oh, it would depend. Anywhere from two or three blocks to maybe a  quarter of a mile. I remember setting up in the vicinity of the railroad  station in downtown Seoul in supporting   well, our eighty-one mortars  backed up three rifle companies: Able, Baker, and Charlie. So, it  depended on whether Able, Baker, or Charlie needed some support. But  we had enough guns that we could back any one of those companies or  all three of those companies up at any time they needed supporting fire.  That was usually received by SCR-300 radios.  And that was from the fire direction center, calling in?  From the forward observers, to the fire direction center. I lost a good  friend at that particular place that was from Oklahoma. Do you want to  know about that?  Sure.  One of the line companies, the battery went out on his SCR-300   portable radio transceiver , and I was designated to take a battery to  him. Going through the railroad station, I ran into a fellow Twentieth  Infantry Battalion reserve member of mine. His name was Owen  Crokett, O-W-E-N, C-R-O-K-E-T-T. We hadn   t seen each other since  we had been there and we were conversing. A sniper caught him in the  face. I think the only reason that he got hit, he didn   t have his helmet on  and he had red hair and I didn   t. So, I figure they could draw a better  bead on him than they did, but he lost his life there at the Seoul railroad  9  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  station.  Probably nothing that could have been done for him at that time.  I didn   t go back and tell his mother exactly what happened because it  was too gruesome, but I did tell her that I was with him when he got  killed, but he was   no.  So, how long were you and your unit in Seoul?  I   ve got the information there on the length of time. After Seoul was  secured, we went back to Inchon and boarded ships again to come back  around to Wonsan on the east side.  This would have been the right hook, coming around.  Yes.  Coming around to Wonsan     Funny thing happened there.  Okay, let   s talk about that.  We were aboard some LSTs  landing ship tanks  that had been sold to  the Japanese after World War II. Going north towards Wonsan, we  found out that Wonsan Harbor had been mined. They were getting  minesweepers in there to clean out the mines so we couldn   t land at  Wonsan until those were cleaned out. The LSTs in the convoy would go  north twelve hours and south twelve hours, north twelve hours and south  twelve hours. We ran out of food and we finally wound up with Spam,  raw, baked, boiled, fried. You name it. That   s the way we ate it. But we  didn   t go hungry, until the mines were cleaned out. I   ve got the dates  there, then, as to when we actually did go into Wonsan.  So lots of Spam dinners.  Lots of Spam dinners.  And lunches and breakfasts and everything else.  Yes.  How many days were they clearing for mines, do you think?  You can look on there and see when we left Inchon and then when we  10  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  land in Wonsan. What are those two dates there?  Left Inchon for Wonsan on ten/six (October 6th). Landed at Wonsan on  ten/twenty-six (October 26th).  Okay, so you can see     Twenty days to clear that harbor.  Twenty days, that   s right. Now, that information is all backed up in this  volume three of the US Marine Corps History in Korea. That   s where I  got those dates.  Okay, so once you land in Wonsan, what is the plan of action at that  time once the Wonsan landing took place.  Of course, we were just following orders     Sure.  We were there maybe a day at the most, and we were ordered to go  south to Kojo to protect a supply dump that was there, from the North  Koreans. We were there   I   d have to look at my dates again. We were  there for a few days. We did lose some men. There were some   we  were right on the bay and did have some men   not in my company   but  some men that were there that were bayoneted in their sleeping bags.  But we were there for a few days. I   ve got some pictures of that, really.  From there, we went back to Wonsan and were sent to Maejon-ni, which  was up in the mountains. We started up there by truck and got  ambushed. This was at night. We had to turn around and come back. In  the dark, in the narrow road, one of the trucks cut too close to the edge  and the truck rolled over and threw a lot of the guys out. I don   t believe  anyone was killed, but there were a lot of broken bones and so forth. We  stayed that night and then the next day, we went back up again and  actually got through to Maejon-ni. We were up there, I don   t know, three  or four days. While we were up there, we were airdropped our winter  sleeping bags so we had those. We also got our winter parkas up there.  Then we came back to Wonsan and rested and ordered and then started  north up toward the Manchurian border, per MacArthur   s orders. We  finally did go as far as Chinhung-ni, where we bivouacked for a few  days.  Okay. That was leaving from Hungnam to Chinhung-ni?  No. Not Hungnam. Hungnam is where we came back after the campaign  11  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  and departed onboard navy ships. We went into Wonsan and then went  north and came back to Hungnam.  So, talk about the heading up, specifically, to the reservoir. MacArthur   s  plan was to just push back the North Koreans at that point? Is that  correct?  Yes, but not primarily the North Koreans. It was the Chinese at the time.  Force them back across the border. And I suppose, if necessary, to cross  the Manchurian border into China. That   s where the problems started  coming with MacArthur and Truman.  That Manchurian border was about forty miles north of the reservoir, is  that right? Roughly.  I   m guessing. I haven   t researched that.  Okay. So your unit is ordered to move forward to the Chosin  Reservoir     Not specifically.  Where were you actually headed towards?  We were headed towards the Chosin Reservoir up the winding road that  leads to the reservoir, but ahead of us, already on the way and up there,  were the Fifth and Seventh and elements of the First Regiment. They  were up in the general vicinity of the reservoir and the reservoir itself.  Now, the Thirty-first Infantry, army, was already on the east side of the  reservoir.  Can you tell me about your trip up there, heading north towards the  reservoir?  Yes, I   ve got a date there as to when our outfit kicked off from  Chinhung-ni, going up the road towards the reservoir. It was snowing at  the time we kicked off. Lieutenant Colonel Donald Schmuck was the  regimental commander at the time   was the battalion commander,  battalion commander because Chesty Puller was the regimental  commander.  So you were heading towards     North toward the Chosin Reservoir up the road, the single road, single  winding road that led to the reservoir and passed it.  12  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  As far as your unit, you were with the Twentieth, right?  No.  Who were you with at that time?  I was with Weapons Company, First Battalion, First Regiment, First  Division.  Okay. So the First Division was heading that direction, heading north.  Yes. In fact, that was the only division that was over there. But the  whole division had been ordered north towards the Manchurian border  on the east side of Korea, up into North Korea, up towards the reservoir.  My particular company, which was back-up for the Able, Baker, and  Charlie company of our battalion, left on November 23rd. No, I take  that back. The reservoir battle started on November 24th. We left  Chinhung-ni going north at 0200 on December the 8th. So, the Fifth and  Seventh had already engaged the Chinese and needed some back-up and  reinforcement. Our first regiment was, you might call,    in reserve    at  that time with elements of our regiment already being up there. But then  they knew that the problem was   everything was hitting the fan so they  needed about everybody that they could get so our regiment then started  north.  What are your first recollections of when you arrived there, where you  set up near the reservoir?  We got as far north as a bend, short bend, in the winding road just south  of the Treadway, of the blown Treadway Bridge. I don   t know if you   re  covering that or if you   re familiar with what happened to the Treadway  Bridge.  Yes, actually.  My particular unit got as far as a bend in the road just south of the  Treadway Bridge where we set up. Now, when we set up, there really  wasn   t any setting up like we normally did because the ground was so  frozen that we couldn   t fire our mortars accurately, because the base  plate had some prongs on the bottom. Generally, when you fire the first  round, the back inertia sets the base plate in the ground. With it being  frozen, the base plate just bounced on the ground. So, we really couldn   t  get any accuracy, but we did the best we could with what we had. We  stayed there firing for these companies.  Also, to our right, on hill 1081, there had been quite a fight and there  13  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  were a lot of dead and/or wounded marines. When we weren   t firing, we  sent a lot of our guys up on hill 1081 to get these guys down. Either  fortunately or unfortunately, I was never in that group because at the  time I was in fire direction center and I needed to be with the guns in  case we got a fire order that needed some calculations for the guns. So, I  stayed with the guns. We did leave Chinhung-ni going north on  December 8th. This was at 0200 in the morning, in the snow.  So that went through Funchilin Pass? Funchilin Pass area?  We did not go through that pass. That was north of the Treadway  Bridge.  I see. So, you get to the Treadway Bridge. Can you tell us a little bit  about the Treadway Bridge?  The road going up to the Chosin Reservoir was relatively narrow. It was  not probably any bigger than the width of this room.  It   s probably about fifteen feet wide or so?  Yes, fifteen, twenty feet. There was a   oh, gosh. The Chosin Reservoir  supplied generation for   generated electricity. There was a bridge that  spanned a break in the road, and the Chinese blew that bridge. Since  there was only one road going up and going back, with the Treadway  Bridge blown, there was no more going forward or no more coming  south. The Treadway Bridge was between sixteen and twenty-four feet  long, counting the abutments. There is more information about the  Treadway Bridge if you want that.  Sure. Sure. That   d be fine.  When the Fifth and Seventh and elements of the First started advancing  in the opposite direction, they couldn   t go any further along with the  equipment because the bridge was blown.  So, they were coming back to the south from the     Coming back to the south from the reservoir area.  Okay.  From Hagaru and Yudam-ni. I can   t be certain if it was the army air  force or who it was, but as best as I can remember, either seven or eight  bridge spans were dropped in our area. Several of the spans were lost  down in the valley. A couple were bent, but they salvaged enough to  14  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  span this sixteen to twenty-four feet where the bridge had been blown  out, which was used to allow the troops and what equipment was still  functioning to come back south.  I   d heard some stories about those abutments on either side as far as the  spans, the things that had to be done so those spans could actually reach  across.  I   ve got pictures of those.  Can you tell us a little about that?  No, I really can   t. I just saw it and knew that it was eventually fixed by  the engineers.  So, you had gotten there on December 8th. How long were you there at  the Treadway Bridge?  We stayed there and the Treadway Bridge was installed. Then the  division started clearing, coming from the  north  on December 11th.  We stayed there in reserve, and the First Battalion of the First Regiment  brought up the rear as the last unit that came out.  Did you have any direct contact while you were there on the Treadway  Bridge or when you were set up in reserve? Had the North Koreans or  the Chinese worked their way back that far? Can you speak a little to  that?  Well, we could see them in person. They were that close. Of course, we  lobbed a bunch of shells in their direction hoping we would hit. I can   t  say that our position was ever overrun by Chinese, but they were close  enough that they were within mortar range.  Are you talking about maximum or minimum mortar range?  I don   t remember.  Okay, so, maybe three hundred meters, four hundred meters?  I just   if I said something, it would just be strictly a guess. I just don   t  know.  Part of the research, I   ve heard stories of how the Chinese would  launch, and the North Koreans would launch, their attacks at night. Did  you see any of that or hear any of that going on?  15  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Yes.  Can you speak to that?  Dark, cold, snowy. During the day, planes could not help us because of  the snow. They liked to come at night because you couldn   t see. But you  could usually hear whistles, bugles, roman candles, or whatever. But we  would, a lot of times, we would fire some   lost the name.  Illumination rounds?  Illumination rounds for the guys that were actually on the front lines  where the Chinese were coming up so that they could see. But we did  fire a lot of illumination rounds.  How many rounds do you think you went through in the time you were  set up there in support?  You know, that thought had never entered my mind. We had assigned to  us a weapons carrier with a trailer. That stayed with us all the time, it  was full of ammunition. But if we were going to be engaged in any  major thing, we would try to get a number of trailer loads of ammunition  brought up and stacked up in the areas where we would have fairly easy  access to them. But as far as how many rounds, anything I would say  would just be strictly a guess. Two, three hundred, I just don   t know.  Okay. And those were, as far as eighty-one millimeter rounds, those are  eighty-one millimeters in diameter.  Yes, about three inches.  Can you tell us about the different types of rounds you   d be firing?  Various types. We had HE  high explosive  Lights, which was a less  heavy round. It didn   t have as much punch. We had HE Heavies, which  was a larger shell, a heavier shell.  HE stands for high explosive.  High explosive. We had some TSQ, which stands for time super quick,  that we could adjust the nose of it to explode above the ground for the  shrapnel to go down, as opposed to hitting the ground and shrapnel  going up. So, we could fire it down. We had some illumination rounds.  We had what we called Willy Peter, WP, white phosphorous. Those  were smoke and magnesium. If some magnesium got on the person, you  didn   t want to pour water on it because that just made it worse. The only  16  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  way you can get the magnesium off of you was to dig it off, dig it out.  And that   s because the water would actually   the oxygen in that water  would actually feed the magnesium.  Exactly. Exactly. But it was used a lot for smoke, also, in the movement  of troops.  So, on what date did your unit pick up and start moving south?  We probably started south about December 12th or 13th. The reason I  say that is because the division started loading ships on December 14th  in Hungnam Harbor. The navy had accumulated all kinds of different  vessels. The division started loading ships and leaving. I can   t say  exactly what date we left, but it was   the division had cleared  Chinhung-ni on December 11th so it was between the 11th and 14th.  Is there anything in particular that just kind of comes to mind about the  Battle of Chosin that   s a very vivid type of memory for you?  Several. Several things stick out in my mind. Not discounting the guys  that we lost, the cold came to mind because at night, it would be  between thirty-five and forty-below. Not chill factor, actual temperature.  The cold, a lot of the guys, when they did get hit, in some ways the cold  was a blessing because if they got wounded and it wasn   t severe enough  that they got killed, when the blood started flowing, it froze which kept  the rest of the blood inside. The corpsmen in the aid stations and all the  medical personnel were just overwhelmed with that.  Cold from the standpoint we didn   t have anything to build a fire with,  and we didn   t want to build a fire to expose our position. A truck came  through that was loaded with supplies and it had a whole bunch of  Tootsie Rolls in there. We would get the Tootsie Rolls, and since it was  in sections, we could break a section off and put it in our mouth. It  would thaw and that was   the food was frozen, your water was  frozen   just very miserable circumstances. We probably lost two-thirds  of our division from either wounds and/or death and/or frostbite.  My goodness. Anything else? Any other vivid memories from that time?  Well, of course, at the time we had no idea what was going on. We were  in a particular place at a particular time, seeing what was around us, not  knowing what was going on anyplace else until after it was completely  over with. We found out what had happened and just thanked the lord  that we made it out okay and alive.  17  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  I know several of the other gentlemen that I   ve spoken to and read  about, read their accounts as well, talked about humanity, either good  examples of humanity or bad examples, poor examples of humanity. Did  you see anything like that?  Oh, yes. Yes. From a North Korean population, they were forced out of  their homes. They did a lot of clogging of the roadway going south. In  fact, when we got to Hungnam and evacuated, gosh, I   ve heard the  figure and I can   t pull it off the top of my head, but it was well over one-hundred  thousand, I think, civilians that were forced out with whatever  they could carry. The United States and the other countries helped get  those civilians back into the South Korea and brought them back on the  ships, too. The Chinese were merciless in taking care of civilians. It just  broke your heart. Broke your heart. The children, especially, that  just   that was just tough. Of course, it was bad for everybody, but  especially the children.  Yes, lots of orphan children.  Oh, yes. Yes. Unfortunately, you got pretty much reconciled to death  and slaughter and things like that. I really have to hand it to those guys  in the Fifth and Seventh. They just faced overwhelming odds. I didn   t  see that with my own two eyes, so I can   t speak that as factual. I can  only speak from what I have seen and read from a documentary  standpoint. Those guys were in terrible shape and in a terrible position  and performed admirably. The Thirty-first Infantry army unit, they were  almost completely wiped out. A lot of them did manage to cross some of  the frozen ice and they were able to get with the marine group and came  through the withdrawal. And I hate to use the word withdrawal. It was  an advance in the opposite direction, type thing.  Did you have any injuries? Did you sustain any injuries, there?  No wounds of any type. Close, but no wounds. I did get some frostbite,  but not enough to disable me or to cause me any problems. Just from an  uncomfortable standpoint, especially in the wintertime.  On your extremities, your hands or   ?  On my feet. I can speak to a particular weapon that we used.  Sure.  Our group were assigned to carbines. The carbine was a lighter weight  because of the weight we had to carry. But the carbine, in most of our  minds, did not function satisfactorily for three reasons. First of all, they  18  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  didn   t have the knockdown power that the M1 rifle did. Secondly, it was  easily stopped up and wouldn   t fire. Third, if there was any moisture  whatsoever in the area of the safety, the safety either froze on or froze  off. You had to blow on it with your breath to try to thaw it enough to  get the safety either on or off.  Wow.  So, as time progressed, I think the majority of the guys would make a  midnight requisition and trade carbines for M1s. Those were just   you  just felt safer with an M1 than you did a carbine.  Sure. Sure. Did you have any contact with family while you were there?  Get any mail or anything like that?  Yes. In fact, my fianc  e wrote me every day while I was over there. I  would generally get five, six, or seven letters at a time. What is just  amazing to me now, sending letters or getting letters would take a couple  weeks or so. And now, over in Afghanistan or Iraq, they pick up the cell  phone and they call direct or get on the computer and they email back  and forth. It   s just amazing. Just amazing. We were issued long johns,  uppers and lowers. They came in two sizes, too big or too little. I wrote  my folks and they sent me a pair of the old-timey long johns that was  one piece that you got into with the rear seat.  Like a union suit?  A union suit. When I got those, I put them on and I didn   t take them off  until, oh, it must have been February or March of the next year.  Wow,    51.  There wasn   t any way of washing anything. So, you just kept what you  had. (Laughs) Boy, when you were up at the reservoir, if you had to go  to the bathroom, you had to do it in a hurry and take a chance.  I   d heard accounts of that. Fellows having to go as quickly as possible  and wherever they could.  Exactly. If you were on the mountain and you had to have a BM, it just  kind of rolled down the mountain as it steamed.  Oh, my gosh.  But you wore about three pairs of trousers and sweaters and vests and  everything else. Well, you were just bundled up because it was so cold.  19  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  So, you had to get rid of all that stuff before you go to the bathroom.  (Laughter) So, you didn   t go to the bathroom unless you had to. I have  heard that a lot of guys had impacted bowels because of it.  I imagine. Was there anything special you did or you might have carried  for good luck? I know a lot of folks I know     Oh, yes. There is a picture I carried in my billfold of my fianc  e, and  just to the left up there is a bracelet that she gave me before I left. I wore  that. I   m a very sincere Christian, and I carried my New Testament  religiously. But as far as just wearing or carrying anything, probably  those two things meant more to me than anything.  Okay. Did you keep a journal or diary during that time?  No, but the letters that I wrote home to my folks and to my fianc  e were  kept. I   ve still got those.  No kidding.  This was all sixty-two years ago.  Where were you when the Korean War ended?  You mean the name of the town?  Yes.  It was in no-man   s-land. But I was one of the last of my battalion to be  rotated and the reason was because I made it to buck sergeant, and I  went down to the bottom of the buck sergeant rotation list. So, I got my  orders to leave on about October 3rd of 1951. By truck, the group was  taken down to Sokcho-ri, S-O-K-C-H-O-dash-R-I. We, actually, after  being deloused and turning in our equipment, except our sleeping bag,  we left by LCVP  landing craft vehicle personnel  to go to an APA on  October 4, 1951.  And that was headed back to Japan?  Went back to Japan, got back to Kobe, got aboard a train, went to Otsu,  which was a camp of the Japanese Imperial Marines. Got my first  shower in a long time and some new clothes. We were there about two  days, took a train back to Kobe, boarded an APA, and I   ve got the name  of it someplace. Came back, took a couple weeks, came back to Treasure  Island, which was in San Francisco Bay. As I passed under the Golden  Gate Bridge, I said,    I can swim from here,    which I knew I couldn   t,  20  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  but I thought I could. (Laughter) Was in San Diego a couple days getting  haircuts and so forth, drawing my pay. Caught a plane directly from San  Francisco to Oklahoma City and landed in Oklahoma City on Halloween  afternoon of 1951, in the midst of rain, sleet, snow, and hail. When I got  off the plane, I cocked my head to the side so the snow and sleet  wouldn   t get in my face, and my mother thought I   d been wounded and  hadn   t told her.  Oh, no. (Laughs) So, what did you do when you came back? Did you go  to school, or did you go right back to work?  Well, when I came back, I had thirty days leave. I just did what any guy  with thirty days of leave does. Had my picture made and then I was  ordered to Hastings, Nebraska. There is a little guard company up there,  which was guarding an ammunition depot. I reported up there on  November 1, 1951. I forgot to tell you, while I was in Korea, my  enlistment ran out and I got involuntarily extended for a year. But when  I was sent to Hastings, Nebraska, I was up there and I got my discharge  on January 4, 1952. Came back to Oklahoma City, went to Myerding  Jewelers and bought a set of rings. My fianc  e and I were officially  engaged on January 8, 1952. I needed some money, so on January 15,  1952, I went to work for Oklahoma Natural Gas Company in Oklahoma  City and worked for them thirty-five years.  I   ll be. I   ll be.  And then I started back to school. Started back to school, then I got  transferred to El Reno, Oklahoma, which at the time, was a long way  away so I couldn   t commute. But now, it   s thirty minutes. (Laughter)  That was the end of my schooling.  I   ll be. Did you join any veterans    organizations after your service? Like  the American Legion or the VFW  Veterans of Foreign Wars  or  anything like that?  No, I didn   t. The only thing I joined was in 1984, I joined the Chosin  Few. I   ve been a member of that continually since then. Unfortunately, a  lot of the guys are dying or physically unable to attend functions. It   s  going downhill. It   s a last man organization so I just don   t know how  long it   s going to last.  How do you think your experience at Chosin affected your civilian life,  afterwards?  Well, I can   t honestly say that I feel like that the Chosin experience by  itself was a contributing factor as to how my life was. I would say the  21  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  Bavousette  Myers  whole time I was over there, with that included, would be a major part.  Of course, like any veteran coming home, any noise or   I can  remember, after I came back I was leaving Oklahoma Natural Gas and  walking downtown. A car backfired and I just immediately fell on the  sidewalk. After our children were born, if I would take a nap on the floor  Sunday afternoon and the kids were playing and they would jump at me,  it would scare me. So, they were cautioned not to do that.  I do remember one time after my wife and I were married, we were in  bed and for some reason I heard this,    er-er-er,    noise and I woke up and  I had my left arm around my wife   s neck and I had my two legs wrapped  around her body. I was trying to choke her. But that   s the only time that  has happened. I   ll probably have some flashbacks maybe twice a year.  But it   s never something that I   ve been through. It   s something that  might be completely different or some activity where someone is  coming in, or I   m in my foxhole and I can   t maneuver my rifle around.  It   s generally never anything that I   ve already been through. It   s  something different.  I see. Is there anything you   d like to cover, or that you   d like to add that  we haven   t covered in the interview so far?  Well, I know you were in the army. I   m sure you know how marines  think. I   m not an ex-marine. I   m a former marine. Now, I am so glad and  thankful that I did pick that branch of the service. At the time, I would  have traded it for a soft bed on the ship or in the barracks to fly the next  day. But now, looking back, it   s something that I really appreciate.  Do you have anything more that you want to talk about?  I can   t think of anything that just jumps out at me.  Okay. Well, then I   m just going to say thank you very much, Paul, for  your time and for agreeing to meet with me here about your  recollections and remembrances about your service and the battle of the  Chosin Reservoir.  I   m sure glad to. It was a memorable battle that is compared to Belleau  Wood and Iwo Jima. I   m very thankful to the lord that he brought me  through safely. I wouldn   t do it again for a million dollars, but I  wouldn   t take anything for the experience and memories that I can  recall, now.  That   s great to know. Thank you. I appreciate your time.  22  Bavousette Pleasure.  -------  -------  
