 Larson  Bonelli  Today is July 16, 2011. My name is Mary Larson. I   m with the  Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at Oklahoma State  University, and I   m here today at the Oklahoma City Museum of Art  with Mr. William Bonelli, who will be talking about his memories of the  1930s and then of World War II and some of his later life. Thank you so  much for joining me today. We really appreciate this. To start out, could  you tell me a little bit about when and where you were born?  Indiana, Pennsylvania. Nice town. Jimmy Stewart was born there, about  a block away from me. His dad had a hardware store, and I had nothing.  (Laughs)  Were you born at home or in a hospital?  At home, as I understand it.  And what year was that?  1921, March 17th.  Ah, a good luck baby.  And it so turned out. (Laughter)  Now, did you have brothers and sisters?  One brother, very nice brother. I could not have asked for a better  brother.  And where in line did you fall? Was he older or younger?  He was older by three-plus years.  5  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Now, what did your folks do for a living?  My dad was a miner   well, what else was anybody in those days, as  well as a bootlegger. (Laughs)  Okay. That sounds interesting. (Laughs)  Well, you had to make up for it.  Did your mom work? She was at home?  No, she was a housewife.  Do you know where your family was from, originally?  You mean my dad, or   ?  Either   well, your mom or your dad.  My dad was born in Italy, just northeast of Rome. And my mother was  born in El Tuna, Pennsylvania. She had been an orphan, and they were  married, and they kind of fought like cats and dogs. (Laughs) That   s  about it, I think. What more can I say?  Besides being a block away from Jimmy Stewart   s dad   s hardware store,  or his home, I can   t remember which     His home.  How would you describe the home that you grew up in? What was the  house like?  Average house, but he  Jimmy Stewart   s father  had quite a large house.  He was born on what was called Vinegar Hill, something like a little  classy section in Oklahoma City. Of course, his dad had the money from  the hardware store.  What was the house like? How many bedrooms or how was it laid out?  I have no idea, but very likely, several bedrooms. It was a large house.  Two floors and so on.  And did you have any other relatives living nearby?  The only relative that I know of is my grandmother   s sister lived, also, in  6  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Indiana, Pennsylvania, and they were a little better off than we were.  Did you visit on a regular basis?  Not regular, but spasmodically, you might say.  Okay. What were some of your chores when you were growing up?  Well, yes. We had coal stoves then. I had to chop the wood and bring in  the coal and the wood and clean out the stove. A good example is when  my mother gave my dad a bath. It was in a tub in front of the coal stove  in the kitchen. And I can still recall she would keep two or three buckets,  ten, twelve-quart size, on the stove to get them warm, and then after my  dad was through washing the coal dust  off , she would then start with a  bucket over top of his head and then his shoulders and what have you.  Just work her way down.  Yes, that   s right. That   d give you some idea of what    And I can  remember as a kid, sometimes there would be an explosion in the mine  and you would see the cadavers, ten, fifteen, piled up along the entrance  to the mine and stuff like that, which I thought was pretty close to  slavery in the way they handled things. There was a company store, and  they made sure that you were in debt to the company store. At least two-thirds  of your pay you owed to the company store, and the reason was to  keep you there. And if they found that you didn   t owe them anything,  they laid you off for a few days, that kind of stuff. It was pretty rough  back then.  Do you remember any union activity when you were growing up?  No, and I think it was just getting hold. John L. Lewis was just  beginning, and he won some particular case, I remember, back in the late     30s, somewhere around there. Yes, I do recall that. Late    30s or early     40s. Matter of fact, he was still alive when Truman was president. I  may be wrong on that.  Now, at your house, did your family have a garden?  Oh, yes. Oh, yes, I tended to the garden, nice big red tomatoes, and I can  recall taking a salt shaker and a hunk of bread and going out into the  garden and pick the nice, ripest tomato and have my meal. I don   t  suppose many people did that, but I did.  Right warm off the vine?  7  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Yes.  Nothing like it. Did you have any fruit trees or berry bushes or anything  like that?  Oh, yes. In the woods, where I was, I spent quite a bit of time in the  woods, and we played in the woods. As kids, we   d built log cabins, and  we   d built, shall we say, in one case, a pulley, tie it to a   we   d go down  to the mines, get a cable and string it to one tree, and then take a slanted  train and gradually lower it to the final tree and wrap it around it and put  a pulley on the cable, then ride right through the woods. And we would  put swings, I remember, we   d take a big tree, just on the edge of a cliff,  and then it would take two kids to pull the swing back. And we built a  stand ten, twelve feet high, so that you   d go up the stand and then hold it  until the individual gets in position and let him go. And then when  you   here   s the cliff, and then you swing down like this. (Gestures)  Now, all of a sudden, you   re much higher. Oh, yes. We had a lot of fun.  It sounds like you found plenty of ways to entertain yourself.  Oh, yes.  Did you have an after school job, or anything, when you were growing  up?  No.  Now, just talk about food real quickly. Did you have a favorite meal  growing up?  I didn   t. My brother liked spaghetti, but he gained weight on it. I was  always slender, and I didn   t have the love for food that he had, for some  reason. He lived for food and I ate to live. (Laughs)  Was your mom Italian, too?  Oh, yes, very much so.  Was her family from the same general area?  Yes. She came from   well, her family, if I may inject that, her mother  and her mother   s sister and I think there was a brother involved, three or  four, their father was a doctor in Venice or near Venice, as I understand  it. And he decided there was nothing in Italy that they could do to get a  job or whatever, so he saved his money and bought them a ticket, three  or four of them, and sent them to the States. That   s how they got here.  8  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  That was my grandmother, her sister, and brother, or whatever it was.  But, now, they fared out well. My grandmother didn   t fare out too well.  And so your mom grew up in El Tuna, but she had that Italian  background, too.  Oh, yes.  So you would have had a lot of Italian food growing up.  Oh, yes. That   s true.  Now, do you remember if there were any foods or any ingredients that  were hard to get during the Depression?  Gee, I never gave it a thought. No. I knew we got milk every day, and  the bottle would freeze in the winter if you left it outside. (Laughs)  Were there any foods that you had for special occasions, like birthdays  or holidays?  They called it polenta. It was, gee, I can   t   cornmeal was used, and then  they made the spaghetti sauce. You could put spaghetti sauce on  anything. And this polenta was made from cornmeal. Yes, that   s right,  flat, and they put the sauce on it. I always liked that.  Was it fairly firm polenta? The kind you could cut, or was it a little more  like oatmeal?  You could cut. If you kept it in the oven long enough, then it would, yes.  Were there recipes that were particularly important in your family that  you remember?  I don   t think so.  Nothing that   s been passed down through generations, anything like  that?  No.  Did you learn to cook from your mom?  Not really, no.  Just to the extent that you   re around the kitchen. Are there any favorite  9  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  foods from childhood that you still make on a regular basis?  No, I think I use mostly cans. (Laughs)  Is there anything food wise from your childhood that you never want to  see again?  I don   t know what that would be. I can   t think of it, no.  Every now and then you   ll talk to someone who, during the Depression,  they ate such and such all the time, and they just don   t want to ever have  it again. (Laughs)  The only thing I can say, you made me think of spinach, and I liked  spinach. My brother didn   t like spinach, and to get away from eating it,  he would stick it in his pocket   yes, in his shirt pocket. And then he  would go outside and empty it. He wanted spaghetti, which he was a  little heavier than me. I was slender.  Which explains the difference with the spinach versus the pasta.  Yes, my mother was after us to eat that spinach.  Did you have a smokehouse or anything?  No, we didn   t.  Did you ever do sausages or anything like that?  No. That kind of stuff, no.  And how did you keep things cool? Did you have an ice box?  Yes. Later, that   s right, an ice box.  And before that, it was just the porch, pretty much, the back porch?  That   s it. That is absolutely it, and you had to cook your meat before too  long.  Now, what would you say an average day would have been like in the  1930s for your dad, maybe his daily schedule?  Well, about the only thing I can say was either school or playing in the  woods. And when he came home, after his bath, then we would eat, and  that   s about it.  10  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Was he usually on the same shift at the mines or did that change?  Now, that varied quite a bit, my father returning from the mines. That  varied. It could be late. And not my father, but I do know of miners,  because of the hours that you mentioned, did not see the sun for six  months, especially in the winter. Going through the winter, they   d get up  early in the morning and come home late. And I believe they made a  little more money because of the hours and what have you, and more  responsibility in the mines. But my dad being also a bootlegger did take  a few days off here and there, so to speak. (Laughs)  Was that done out of town someplace?  Yes, of course.  More out in the hills?  Oh, yes. I remember going with him at night, moonlight, through the  woods, and finally stopped at an old farmhouse and went inside. And  there he had three or four big barrels. Not fifty gallon or a hundred  gallon barrels, they must have been three hundred gallon barrels. They  were large, and I guess he was making whiskey, and you could see the  foam on top of the barrel. He   d push it aside, and then I saw him take  sugar and heat it, burn it so to speak, and that gives it a brown color, and  then pour it into the whiskey, which gives the whiskey the  color .  Whiskey is white to start with, and the sugar gave it the color that you  see, brownish color.  So it goes from being white lightning to being     Yes, that   s right.  So do you know anything else about that part of the business?  No, no.  What distribution or anything at that     No.  Well, there were a lot of folks doing that.  Oh, hell yes   What would you say an average day was like for your mom when you  11  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  were growing up?  I guess taking care of the housework and getting the meals, yes. That   s  pretty much what she did.  Did she sew at all? Did she make your clothes?  Not very much that I can think of. I think I can say only when necessary.  (Laughs)  Now, what would an average day be like for you? You mentioned going  to school and then playing in the woods after school. When you got into  high school, did you have any activities you were involved with?  No. Let   s see. What did I do? (Laughs) That   s a good question. I   ve  given it all up. Oh, well, I got involved with the sports at the time, the  school sports. I guess that   s where I used up my spare time.  Any particular sport that was a favorite for you?  Basketball, mostly.  You   ve got the build for it.  So to speak, yes. (Laughs)  Was there just one school in Indiana at the time?  Well, I   ll have to explain that one.  Okay.  I only went to Indiana school, that I can recall, the last two years of high  school. Prior to that, I was in Homer City, not too far away, for a few  grade schools and the first two years of high school. We moved around  quite a bit, and that interrupted quite a bit. And I can also remember  living in Tearing Run, not too far from Homer City. And I can tell you  this, it was a one-room school, one stove in the far corner. We had to  take turns going out, getting the wood and the coal, stoking the furnace.  I don   t recall precisely, but the first row from the front seat, back, was  either second or third grade, fourth, fifth, sixth or seventh. No eighth  grade, I do remember that. Whether it stopped at six or seven, I   m not  sure. But there you were, having four or five grades, front to back, one  teacher. And she had to spend time with each one, and then we had to  amuse ourselves, that kind of stuff. And if she hadn   t been smart enough  to put the alphabet across the board, I would have never learned it.  12  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  (Laughs) That kind of stuff.  And then in the summer part, I went to school barefooted. I remember  one occasion   well, several   she would come by, and I would be  barefooted, and she would go,     imitates tishing noises .    And then this  one time, she came by and,    Oh, my gosh     And so, I looked down,  there   s my little feet and there   s her big feet, and it was black because of  the coal dust. And also, it was red, my blood. In other words, I stubbed  my toe on the bony coal. In the western part of Pennsylvania is  bituminous, anthracite in the eastern part. There   s coal, if it wasn   t soft,  then you couldn   t use the bony type in the furnace or stove because it  would cause clinkers, and so they used it to make roads. And so, when  you walked on it, it was black, of course. And then, of course, some of  the sharp stuff would stick up through.  So no matter how tough your feet were     Yes, a lot of people don   t know that, and this Tearing Run town was  made up of Poles, Germans, I-Ties, or Wops, or whatever you want to  call them, such as myself, and we got along. Yes, very nice.  So you were moving according to which mine your dad was  working ?  Yes, which was frequent, it seemed.  Were most of the mines owned by one company, or did he move from  company to company?  It would seem one or two companies. That I don   t recall.  Now, when you were growing up, would your family do anything special  on Saturdays or on Sundays?  Have big meals. That   s about the only thing I can recall and visit other  relatives. That   s about it.  Besides your grandmother   s sister, did you have other relatives in the  general area?  Well, when we were living in Tearing Run, the only relative I had, or we  had, was my grandmother   s sister, living in Indiana, Pennsylvania. And  then a cousin by the name of Joe Golarti. He lived in Erie, I think.  The name sounded familiar. I was wondering.  Yes, Golarti, Italian. Yes.  13  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Well, in either Homer City or Tearing Run or Indiana, what were those  towns like when you were younger? How do you remember them?  Well, Indiana was just about like any other town, smaller. And then, of  course, Tearing Run was just a coal road through a bunch of houses.  And up over the hill was the school, one-room school. (Laughs) And,  let   s see, Greensburg was, oh, at the time was smaller. It seems bigger,  now. And well, I   m not sure about Indiana, but still a small town.  You mentioned for fun that a lot of times you would be out playing in the  woods. Did you have a good group of friends in the neighborhood?  Yes, yes. And we had gangs, too, and but mostly, we did get along.  How were the gangs   were they based on neighborhoods, or   ?  I think they were, yes. I would say more closely neighborhood rather  than German or Italian or whatever. That   s right. There was a mixture.  Okay. So what else did you do for entertainment, besides being off in the  woods? Was there a theater in town?  Oh, yes. Oh, yes. I can recall   yes, in particular, Homer City, and it   s  funny you should ask me that. I was looking for something to do, and I  wanted to see this movie and didn   t have any money. So I went home  and got all my Indian head pennies and bought the ticket. And the gal  behind the counter took those pennies and put them in her own pocket,  and then brought out pennies because they were Indian head pennies,  and they were probably worth something. But it was worth more to me  to get in to see the movie than the pennies were worth.  Do you remember how much it cost to see the movie at that point?  In this particular case, I think it was twenty, twenty-five cents or  something like that. Yes, very cheap. But that was still a lot of money  back then.  Right, right. Was your family at all musical? Did anyone play  instruments or did you sing a lot?  No music. My brother liked to play the harmonica, haphazardly.  (Laughter)  What kind of music did you like when you were growing up?  14  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  I never gave that much of a thought, to be honest, in those days.  Were there community get-togethers, like church potlucks or anything  like that?  No, I can   t recall.  Now, during the Depression, when you were growing up, did you have a  radio in your house? Did you listen to the radio?  Yes, KDKA. Yes, that   s right, KDKA. I listened to that, mostly. And I  don   t know if there was another one, even, hardly, so to speak. The rest  of the dial was static.  So that was mainly what you got? (Laughs)  Yes, yes.  Do you remember listening to the news or politics on the radio?  Yes. I can   t think of the name. Yes, there was one individual in  particular who came on with a voice you recognized right away, but I  can   t think of the name.  Do you remember hearing your parents talk about politics at all when  you were younger?  No, never.  Do you know what they thought about President Roosevelt?  They said he was a good president. Yes, four terms, he was elected.  Do you remember hearing about the WPA  Works Progress  Administration  and the CCC  Civilian Conservation Corps  when you  were growing up?  Oh, yes. Workers Progress Administration, yes.  Were there any projects around Indiana that you remember seeing?  I think they were mostly road projects, yes. And if I   m not mistaken, my  brother worked on some with them.  I was just about to ask, did you know anyone who worked for either of  the two? Did your family have a car or a truck when you were   ?  15  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Yes. My dad was mechanically inclined and probably, that   s where I got  the inclination, from watching what he did. He was pretty good at it, and  he would take them apart. That   s the only way he was able to get a car,  was work on them himself. And I recall tearing the transmission apart,  putting it back together again. It was very simple. The clutch had clutch  bands, and you had to change the band, Ford band, frequently. And I  recall one time, he didn   t get a chance to put a new shoe on the forward  band, and so what he did was couldn   t get up the hill. The band would  slip. It wasn   t tight enough. It was worn. And so he backed down and  turned around, used reverse because the band was good and backed up  the hill. (Laughs) That kind of stuff.  Pretty ingenious.  Yes. (Laughter)  So did you spend a lot of time working with your dad under the hoods of  things?  Well, enough to get the hang of it.  Growing up, at what point did you become aware   because as kids, we  take certain things for granted as we   re growing up. At what point did  you become aware that there was a Depression?  Let me put it this way. The only way I knew there was a Depression   I  didn   t know at the time, I just thought that   s the way things were, but  later I realized it was a Depression. I have to put that a little more  accurately   we didn   t have enough of everything. Simply that. Now, if  my mother had let my dad do the bootlegging business, then we would  have had cars. (Laughs)  So she was not enthralled with that line of work?  That   s right. Well, they couldn   t get along. That was the whole problem.  During the Depression, did you remember seeing anybody coming  through Indiana on trains, anybody hopping trains or people traveling,  stopping through town, trying to find odd jobs?  It seems like there was, but I can   t recall at the moment who that might  have been. No.  Do you remember hearing about the Dust Bowl when you were growing  up?  16  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  I learned about that in high school, yes.  I just didn   t know if with the news reports, how much at the time it was  in the news. And following right after the Depression and the Dust Bowl  and everything, you had World War II. And you have quite a  background with the military. Do you want to talk about how you first  got involved? You enlisted in 1940, I understand?  My brother had been trying to get me to join up with the National Guard  because the guy across the road where we lived was in the National  Guard, and he kept after my brother to get me to join. And I told my  brother,    Look, I don   t want to carry a rifle.    I said,    I want airplanes.     And they kept after me, so finally, that was one thing that pushed me, as  well as after I left high school, there wasn   t any jobs, so to speak. So I  decided to enlist in the Army Air Corps, and my first assignment was  Hawaii.  That must have seemed pretty exotic, coming from Indiana.  Yes, it was very interesting. I had six boat rides all together. My first  boat ride was leaving   we went to Harrisburg. That   s where I signed up.  And then we went to Fort Dix, New Jersey, and from Fort Dix, New  Jersey, we were put on board a boat around the Panama Canal, up to  Frisco. And then we stayed there in Frisco for a few days near Alcatraz,  I think it is. And then we were on the boat, army boat, Republic, to  Hawaii, and that was my second boat ride, so to speak. And, well, that  was in    40, 1940. And so    41, that was late    40, and then    41, of course,  December 7th is what occurred.  And I probably shouldn   t say this, but it was pretty obvious we were  going to be at war, which was another reason why I enlisted. Might as  well get in and see if I can get something I want to do than rather they  tell me what to do. See, it was obvious. As a matter of fact, in high  school there, somebody drew up a cartoon, and the cartoon showed three  flowers. One was Hirohito, Mussolini, and Hitler,    Let us grow.    Well,  it was obvious that things weren   t going to get better, so that I may as  well get in. And so that   s why, one of the reasons that I joined up, and  mainly to try to get to do what I wanted to do instead of carrying that  darn rifle.  And being shot at.  I didn   t want any part of that.  Right.  17  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  See, my brother carried a rifle when he was called, and he was wounded.  He got a Purple Heart. He was wounded in France. I was never  wounded. I   m lucky, very lucky. If I may inject, you   ve heard the old  adage,    A cat has nine lives?    Well, you   re looking at one cat that had at  least a hundred lives, as you   ll find out. (Laughs)  So you   re posted in Hawaii at this point, and you   re there in December  of 1941.  Yes, yes, learning to be a mechanic on aircraft. And the old 47, I have a  picture with Dorothy Lamour. Have you ever heard of her?  Certainly have.  My daughter has it. It was taken before December 7th, standing beside  the old 47 aircraft, single engine aircraft. Yes, I was mechanic on the B-  18, which was comparable to the DC-3 twin engine, and they made a  bomber. A lot of people don   t know that, that the DC-3 was a bomber B-  18 at one time. Yes.  I did not know that. Well, why don   t you tell me what you remember  about that morning in Hawaii?  Okay, yes. Well, this is somewhat odd, it might seem. I was on a three  day pass. I might as well start with Saturday evening. Downtown,  evening, there was   you couldn   t drive a car down most of the streets in  the main part of the town. I guess the fleet was not necessarily  completely in, but it was loaded with sailors in uniforms. Very few cars,  and it was even hard to walk because the sailors were crossing back and  forth, so to speak, there were big line-ups here and there to get into the  beer joints and what have you, and there were free drinks. That should  have told us something. I didn   t think too much of it, but a buddy and I,  we had an old piece of junk car, Model T. So we were supposed to stay  on the other side of the island. This is Oahu, was a small island, and  Honolulu is on that island, Oahu. Anyhow, I will inject this. That  evening, around, it was now about ten o   clock, at this little camp we  were going to stay at   we did stay. And that evening, I noticed a mafia-type  car, two-seater with the spare tire in the back, and two short  bumpers on each side in the rear. Can you picture that?  Yes, got that.  Yes, that   s what I call a mafia-type car. At least, that   s what they used.  And here it was parked on the beach, and it didn   t make sense. And I  thought,    Well, lovers. Okay.    When we were kids back in  18  Larson  Bonelli  Pennsylvania, we used to get on the running board and help them out.  Just rock the car. And I thought,    Well, I   m going to run over there and  do the same thing.    And I got  to it and  I could see, there was sort of a  moonlight, and I could see through. I saw four heads, and they weren   t  in any compromised position, shall we say. They were motionless, and I  stop. And then I noticed in the rear bumpers two large antennas. They  must have been twenty feet high.  And to this day, I think they were in communications with the Japanese  fleet, and they could have been sending out a signal for them to hone in  on. In other words, they could have been transmitting a signal as to  where the Japanese fleet could pick up the signal and the direction to  that point. Call it a non-directional beacon. I didn   t know much about  communications at that particular time. I learned mine much later.  And so therefore, the only thing I could think of,    Hey, this looks  sinister.    And I thought,    I   d better get the heck out of here     So I  backed up. I actually made back steps, and then I got back far enough, I  turned around and ran like    And I never gave that a thought until the  day, or the night I had dropped bombs on a Vienna marshaling yard in  Europe, and there were thunderstorms all over the area. It was a special  bombing, single aircraft. They asked me because I was good at  instruments   flying. And so I took it. So I volunteered.  Because you wouldn   t have been able to do visual, you would have had  to have done IFR instead of VFR.  Yes. We did it using radar. The lead aircraft had radar instead of a ball  turret gunner, and so that   s what we did, used radar for direction. But it  was not precision. We had the Norden bombsight. That   s precision, but  you   re in the soup, so to speak. You can   t see. The bombardier can   t put  his cross-hairs on the target, you see, and tune up his rates. We had a  three-way conversation between the bombardier, the Mickey man   we  called him the Mickey man, the radar man   and myself, the pilot. And  so he gave us courses and said we were heading in this particular  direction. He could pick up the view on his scope, and so the bombardier  said,    Okay, let me know when you get to this point,    which he did, then  the bombs dropped.  And, of course, the bombs, you release them here, they   re going this  way and, of course, we can turn that a way. But it was strange that I  never gave that a thought. Now, had I known something about  communications, I could have alerted somebody. What I saw, there was  no question as to what it was, but I didn   t have enough background to  analyze what I   to me, I was just,    Get the hell out of there.    It was  something sinister.  19  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Right, you knew something was wrong. You just didn   t know what.  And I mention it because to my surprise, why did it occur to me to think  about Hawaii? Here I am, just leaving the Vienna area, the marshaling  yard, so to speak. And the only thing I could come up with was that I  was in a get-away mode. Get away, I had to get out of there. And, of  course, that was my attitude. Now that I dropped my bombs, I wanted to  get back over the Alps and head south down the Adriatic. And it   s  amazing how these things work. And here I am at 31,000 feet, nighttime,  thinking of Hawaii at that moment.  Well, and you   re following the signal, too, that the radar guy is getting.  Yes, yes. Well, but then I knew nothing about radar, except I heard the  word radar, and even the word radar was secret at that time. The guy  who was working in on one of the equipments that could pick up the  signals or the scope knew how to operate it. And he thought he gave  information away when he said,    radar.    And all that is ranging and  detection equipment. That   s all the words were. That meant nothing by  it, even then. If you knew the words, it didn   t tell you a damn thing. But,  anyhow, okay. Now, getting back to Hawaii. The next morning, since  there was no messing facility, we get up sunup.  And which camp was this, by the way? Do you remember?  I cannot recall. The camp was on the west side of the island, northwest.  Which made sense, because that   s where the car would be parked,  having a free range to the Japanese fleet. And so anyhow   and we  didn   t have much money in those days, so we   re going back to Hickam  Field. I was stationed at Hickam Field, which is right adjacent to Pearl  Harbor, to get breakfast. And so we left somewhere around six or seven  o   clock. It wasn   t very far, about forty miles, thirty, maybe thirty-five  miles, something like that, and we were in our flivver.  Approaching Wheeler Field, which is not very far north of Pearl Harbor,  three aircraft fighters flew right over our heads, very low. And I looked  up, and I thought,    I wonder who the heck those aircraft are? They  certainly aren   t American.    And then I turned around, and I said to my  buddy, I said,    Hey, you know, we could be at war     I just was joking,  but I certainly never saw those aircraft before. I saw the red ball on the  side, and I said,    I   ve never seen those.    And I made the   I couldn   t  believe I made the statement,    We could be at war     Of course, one of  the reasons was, if you looked at the Honolulu Gazette, I think that   s  what it was called, and talking about what the Japanese were doing to  the Chinese and in Korea as well, and it left no doubt as to what was  20  Larson  Bonelli  happening.  But anyhow, in about five minutes, we were now able to see   we were  at slightly high elevation, able to see Pearl Harbor and hear the attack  was just starting. They were bombing the hell out of our destroyers in  the bay there, Pearl Harbor Bay. And what was sad, and I learned this  later, as I mentioned to you what happened Saturday evening, there was  a lot of drinking going on. Well, the patrol   except for the SP, Shore  Patrol, carrying the drunks back to the boat, and they put them in the  brig. And then I understand that after the brig was full, they laid them  out on the deck. Now, a lot of them never knew what hit them, and a lot  of them were in the brig.  So they wouldn   t have been able to get out.  That was a sad, sad thing to see. And then I got to the gate, and we were  in civilian clothes, and I showed them my pass, and they waved us on in.  I went to my squadron and the adjutant was there. Now, this is Sunday,  you have to remember, most people are gone. My commander,  immediate commander, Major Rudy, at the time, who knew Dorothy  Lamour, and he hobnobbed with the movie stars quite a bit, it seems. He,  of course, was not there. The adjutant, the lieutenant, was. And so I  asked the lieutenant,    What do we do?    And he said,    Beats the hell out  of me.    I said,    Well, if you don   t know, okay. It   s Sunday, okay.    So I  felt free to move around, which, because I was free to move, so to speak,  he didn   t tie us down, I got to see more than what you would. Most  people just saw what was right there. And things happened fast, so I   m a  little confused which one of these happens first and second.  I now was going to run across to the barracks, big barracks. We had  what was called the biggest barracks in the world, across the parade  ground. It was one, two, three floors all together, and the mess hall  inside was big enough to put a mess hall and a bowling alley, that was  that large. And I was going to go over there for protection, but that  turned out to be pretty darn dumb, because they were trying to torpedo it  like they would a ship. Yes, believe it or not  And I made a mistake of  getting in the sight. He didn   t pick me out. I was dumb enough to cross,  get into the open, and all I was was in his sight. He pulled his trigger, but  he missed me. And so I turned around and went back to the barracks  where our squadron was.  And after about five or six minutes, I noticed outside that a line began to  form. So I went down and we were   the supply sergeant was letting  people come in, sign for .45 calibers, pistol and rifle, and so I got in line.  And that was the second time I got strafed, and it was a good thing I was  on the end of the line. There were several who were hit, but nobody got  21  Larson  Bonelli  killed, but they were hit. And then when that happened, the supply  sergeant said,    Come and get them     In other words, we didn   t have to  sign. Hell, we were at war. How can you   he was trying to be  accountable. I can   t blame him at first, but then he finally got the  picture.  So let   s see. What else can I explain? I ended up helping the hospital.  Oh, yes  I saw the meat wagon at the large barracks, and the hospital  was not too far away. And I saw the bulldozer dig a trench right near the  hospital to put body parts. And they asked me if I would stand guard for  a while, which I did for about an hour, and some darn jerk come along  and said,    Don   t drink any water because it may be poisoned, we heard.     I was like,    Hey, I just filled up my belly over there     Well, it couldn   t  have gotten to me, because I just got the water out of the tap, so it  couldn   t have been poisoned. (Laughs) And I thought, Well, if I   m going  to die, I   m going to die. (Laughs) Anyhow     It gives you something to think about in the mean time.  Yes. So and we went to the PX and it was ransacked, and I got out of  there, because I didn   t want to be accused of stealing anything. Well,  there was a lot of motion. That night I spent under the palm trees helping  the Coast Artillery put anti-aircraft machine guns together and clean the  Cosmoline off the parts and assemble the guns. And here I am, inducted  into the Coast Artillery, and I didn   t know it. The next morning, when I  woke up, so to speak, here was all these gas trucks and tanks, and here  was all these bombs over there. And I thought,    How the hell did I get  myself into this?    But anyhow, one of my friends in my squadron came  by and said,    Hey, the commander   s looking for everybody. We need to  work on aircraft.    I says,    Good. I   ll go tell this captain here that I   m  leaving.     As I went into the little shack he had for headquarters and told him that I  had to go back, that I was leaving, and that dumb jerk said,    I could have  you shot  You left your post without being properly relieved     Then I  thought   I wanted to poke that son-of-a-gun. So anyhow, I left and got  back to my squadron so that I could work on aircraft. And, well, I guess  that was it. I can say this. It was obvious that the Japanese made two  mistakes that day, as I have always said, but I haven   t heard anybody  else say the same thing. The first mistake was for attacking. The second  mistake they made, they didn   t take the island. All they had to have was,  in my opinion, one troop ship ready to move in, disembark the troops,  and there   s no doubt in my mind, they would have had some civil  assistance. I hate to say that, but there were Rising Sun flags downtown  on certain streets. So who knows what would have taken place. And  you   ve got to also keep in mind that at that time, the Japanese population  22  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  was about 51 percent. And I always say and I still say that   I hate this to  be public, but the IAC down fifty years from now, maybe a hundred  years from now, maybe Hawaii might belong to Japan.  Well, after you were in Hawaii, where did you go after that? Where were  you sent next?  Oh, man. I got shuffled around. A lot of us, all of us of that squadron,  they   oh, okay. The squadron I was with was called the Hawaiian Air  Force. It was not Hawaiian. It had nothing to do with Hawaiians, but it  was called HAF, Hawaiian Air Force. I was in a squadron. Major Rudy  was the commander and, like I say, he was a celebrity, so to speak. And  we had the aircraft that the high ranking officers depended on to make  their short trips and what have you. And, of course, that being somewhat  of a luxury you might say, it was disbanded, and then I ended up in other  squadrons. I can   t think of the name of the squadron I ended up with.  We went over to Bellows Field, which was past Honolulu and around  the bend, so to speak, another airport, one runway, where the B-17s were  coming into. And some of the B-17s got shot down that day, by the way.  See, that was another thing. The radar picked up the Japanese fleet, the  aircraft coming in, and he reported it. But this guy knew that there were  B-17s coming in from the States.  So he assumed that was what it was.  It seems like, yes, which is why they ignored what was coming in. Why  we were caught with our pants down, so to speak. And, anyhow, I ended  up in this particular squadron, and we were now transferred to Fiji  Islands. And since I was an electrical specialist, engine specialist,  propeller specialist, hydraulic specialist, instead of going by boat, I went  by air   and also a gunner. And for that reason, I had all those  qualifications. So therefore, I was with the head team. And now the time  was the last part of    42. Yes. October-November, September-October,  somewhere in that area, we went to Fiji Islands, Nadi, spelled N-A-D-I,  one runway, gravel, so to speak. Yes, and we were there maybe about a  month. The navy pulled in, I forget which carrier it was, and they  decided to do practice night landings on that runway. And on take-off,  the tower, which was a shack built on a couple of palm trees or  something like that     Basically a tree house.  And the control tower says,    Keep the control tower well to your left.     They did. And they ran into three of our B-17s. Three SBDs. Three  SBDs and three B-17s destroyed. And we came in with seven. Now  we   re down to   seven, six or seven   now, we   re down to about three or  23  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  four. Anyhow, we were there, I think, about six months and   well, I  would say we were there about four months.  This is very interesting. A black warrant officer came down to the  squadron and was curious about the aircraft. And everybody shied away  except myself. I was curious, so I took him through the airplane and  explained everything and had him sit in the pilot   s seat. And, boy, he felt  like he learned something. Well, he did  He   d never been in an airplane  before, and I explained everything to him, and he says,    Are you  interested in flying that?       Yes,    I says.    I   ve got my application in  Honolulu.    I said,    Before I left, I went up to the headquarters and  grabbed my papers because I   m hoping maybe I could apply from here.     I said,    I doubt very much if you can,    and I says,    But I did submit my  application.    And he says,    Okay.    And that was a miracle, I think, that  I had that conversation with this black warrant officer. Real nice guy,  and he came back down to the squadron about a week and a half later,  and he said,    I   ve got your papers, and they   re on top.     Now, it   s March, nearing March 17th, and I was on board the Bosh  Fontaine, Dutch freighter. Apparently, they contracted to haul about  twelve or thirteen of us back to Los Angeles. It was a good, somewhere  around nineteen days on the high seas, very slow   pong, pong, pong,  pong, that kind of stuff. And I wish I had gotten that warrant officer   s  name. I   d sure liked to have met him back in the states, or whether he  ever got back to the states, who knows, but that was a break. Yes.  So at this point, you are on the Dutch freighter, coming back to the US.  Okay. And on the Dutch freighter, to get around the boredom, I  volunteered to be a cook. (Laughs) I made sure I got the food I wanted.  So anyhow, got back to the States, Los Angeles, Santa Ana, and was  there for about a month or so. And from there, I went to Thunderbird   Field  1, Phoenix, Arizona, for primary flying training on the Stearman  single engine, double wing biplane. And after that, basic at Marana,  Arizona, on the BT-13. And then after that, to San Marfa, Texas, for the  BT-13, twin engine, light twin engine. And there, I graduated, got my  commission, second lieutenant, and my wings, pilot wings. And from  there, sent to Hobbs, New Mexico, for first pilot training on the B-17,  Flying Fortress, and I really enjoyed that. I don   t mind saying how sweet  it is. What a difference from what I was doing. And I was very thankful  for all the mechanical background I had, because I knew the airplane  backwards and forwards, all the systems. I didn   t have to think about,  when I pushed a button or a switch or a lever what was on. I knew what  was going on.  And if something went wrong, you also knew how to adjust for it.  24  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Oh, yes, and it made a big difference. There   s no two ways about it. So  now then, after the first pilot training at Hobbs, I was sent to Plant Park,  Tampa, Florida, on the west coast  of Florida . And there, I was assigned  my crew, bombardier, navigator, co-pilot, and six gunners. One of the  gunners was an aerial engineer, which I was also in the Pacific, aerial  engineer. The one who understood the aircraft, and the pilots depended  on what they have to say. Is the airplane flyable, mechanically speaking,  you see? And so okay, that   s a total of ten per aircraft.  From there, we went to Gulfport, Mississippi, for combat crew training.  And, well, let   s see. What would you like to know about Gulfport? Well,  I can cite one instance, they had a mission for us to perform,  navigational, and that was to depart Gulfport, Mississippi, fly straight  north, Tennessee, right east or a little east and then come on back. But  the weather was such that it had a frontal activity, and we would be in it  all the way. I thought that was crazy  Now, here   s what I   m going to say.  There are times, even though you do get a command or an order to do  something, sometimes they   re crazy. They   re nuts. Somebody   s not  thinking very well, and I was not going to fly, although I knew I could,  but I wasn   t going to subject nine other men. What could they do but sit  there and suffer? Why would I take the gunners when there   s no  Messerschmitts over the United States? Only thing they would do is sit  there. Why expose them to these hazards? I would be the only one  working. Not even the co-pilot. Matter of fact, now I learned a lot about  navigational aid, see? Hell, I can tune it in myself. Matter of fact, the  only person they really needed was the pilot to go up there and back.  And so, I thought,    Hell, I   m not going to go.     So after I took off, I called in and said,    Lightning and thundering and  thunderstorm, yack, yack, yack. I suggest the mission be called off.    Can  you imagine me telling the commander down there? They didn   t hear  anything for another twenty minutes, and I called again, and then they  say,    Mission called off.    About time somebody woke up. It didn   t make  sense. You penetrate a thunderstorm or a squall line, it   s one thing, but  to     But to stay with it     On purpose, staying in one thunderstorm after another is crazy, because  you never know what other mechanical difficulties you   re going to have.  Anyhow, it was called off then. And now, why I said all of that is to say  this   about a week and a half later, a flat truck, big one, pulled in with  pieces of aircraft on it. And you could still see clothing, and you could  still see some body parts. So one of the pilots was not fully capable on  instruments. It   s a little tricky, there   s no two ways about it. And so we  25  did lose one, and we could have lost, maybe, more than one. We   re not  told that information.  Another incident occurred. My aircraft was   okay, inspectors from  England, they were combat crew members, and they were going to  inspect the combat training given at Gulfport, Mississippi. They put  them on my crew. All right. Didn   t bother me. In other words, I had  about three extra people on board. And I got out to the runway and got  lined up and pushed the throttle forward for takeoff and got about  halfway down the runway. Good thing I had a habit of moving my  rudders to get a feel of the pressure on the rudder and, hell, it was  frozen     Hey, what the hell is this?    I pull all four engines back  immediately, and finally got stopped, because I had enough room to  stop. And I go,    What the hell?     Then I notice,    Oee     There   s some red handles. If it   s up, you   re  locked. It   s got to be flush with the floor, and I said,    What in the hell?  Who in the hell?     and I says,    Forget it.    It had to be one of these     When I called for a tail wheel lock, I did notice a bunch of hands out of  the corner of my eye, and I guess that and then everything else    So  anyhow, I told the co-pilot, I said,    Don   t say anything other than    We  are taxiing back for takeoff.       Which I did. And I got a beautiful write-up.  (Laughter)    The pilot this and that. The co-pilot this and that. The  gunners this and that, and the navigator this and that. The bombardier  this and       Hell, he didn   t even use the sights. But we got a glorious  write-up as to what we did with that. Yes, we could have crashed at the  end of the runway there.  Well anyhow, I thought I   d give you these little incidents. What I   m  really telling you is although you do get command orders, there   s room  to wiggle, which I will explain later when I go to Europe. There   s one  point I must get across. Where am I? We graduated. They sent us by rail  to Charleston, South Carolina. Hunter field, I believe it is, and gave me a  late model new aircraft, B-17, and told me my destination was Foggia,  Italy, via Granier, New Hampshire, Gander, Newfoundland, Azores,  Marrakech, Africa, which is on the west coast, Morocco, and Tunis, and  then to Foggia, Italy.  Now, I want to make a comment about departing Gander,  Newfoundland. There was another mistake, but it was a little different.  Thunderstorms again. I took off, actually, on instruments. Lifted off on  instruments, and I felt sorry for some of the pilots who didn   t quite have  the knack. It was a little tricky, and I penetrated thunderstorms one right  after the other, so to speak, for about an hour and a half, and sometimes  the water on the windshield was about an inch thick. And after about an  hour and a half the thunderstorms subsided, but we were still in the soup,  26  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  until it started getting white. It was black, now it   s getting white,  morning. The sun is coming up. I   m heading east towards the Azores.  And I got kind of worried because the variation was about twelve  degrees in that area, and if the navigator misapplies, he can double the  area, double the error, I should say, and we   d be way off course. And  thank goodness, about halfway I was able to pick up the non-directional  beacon emitting from the Azores. I turned my aircraft, and it was a good  solid reception, and I was really happy about that. But I only got to see  the ocean for about an hour or so, because when I got near the Azores,  they were loaded with thunderstorms. Aye-aye-aye  Anyhow, so, I had  to make an instrument approach at the Azores, and when I broke out, the  ceiling was about 500 feet, but the crosswind exceeded the limits of this  B-17. In other words, normally, you find another runway.  But there is no other runway. (Laughs)  You   re ahead of me. (Laughs) That   s good.  You   re in the middle of the ocean.  That   s good. I   m glad you   re doing that, because, maybe I   m explaining  it     Well, I didn   t mean to steal your thunder. (Laughter)  Yes, okay. On final, I was looking out of my left window instead of the  front windshield because I had a more than a thirty degree crab. That  exceeded limits for that aircraft, and I   m landing on this iron sheeting,  and it   s slippery when it   s wet, and it was raining. But the ceiling was up  about 500, so I could see the runway, oh, maybe just about half a mile  out. The only thing they taught me is on a crosswind, you get lined up  with the runway center line and when she plays off, you kick the rudder  and straighten it out. Well, wait a minute. This was not a concrete  runway. This was tin, we call it tin matting, steel. And so the wind was  pushing me off the runway to the left. Yes, it was strong because I had  the nose into the wind.  So I had to skid the rest of the runway   not the rest, but a good part of  the runway   on the crab, going down the runway. I thought, maybe,     Oh, my goodness, I might have spun the gears on this thing     So after I  landed and parked it, oh, I came close of going off the runway. But  anyhow, I checked the gear out and it looked okay, so I was happy with  that. But after that, boy, hey, I thought to myself,    I am an expert at  instrument flying.    And here I am, foolish enough to think that there is  no such thing as weather. You get a little cocky, shall we say, but I   ll  27  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  have to admit, after I came back from the States, the Oklahoma  thunderstorms, tornadoes changed my mind. Anyhow, where was I? I  landed at the Azores, and then from there I went to Marrakech.  You   re on the way to Foggia.  Yes. I   m on the way. Any other incident? No. And then I arrived at  Foggia, Italy. All right. Now, I   m at Foggia, Italy. And it wasn   t long  before   in a few days I was   I had a pilot, and I   m over in the co-pilot   s  seat, and he had seventeen or eighteen sorties already. He flew  co-pilot with some other squadron lead guy, and he was rough on the  controls. There was no need   I mean, he was one of these, like this.  (Gestures) And all I use is two fingers, except for takeoff, landing, or  turbulence. And it was murder for me to have to sit there and watch him  try to fly that airplane. By the time we got to 17,000 feet, he was worn  out, sweating, and I   m freezing. So I tap him on the shoulder, I said,     Have a cigarette. Relax. I   ll take over.    And he says,    Okay.    So at that  altitude, you need oxygen. You have to put your oxygen to 100 percent  to get oxygen to light your lighter, so you can light your cigarette. Oh,  and he dragged on that cigarette  He needed that nicotine badly.  But anyhow, after two flights, first thing I knew, I was asked by his first  pilot, lead pilot, squadron lead pilot, if I would fly squadron lead. Now, I  mention him. I don   t know whether it was what he had to say about me,  because I could fly formation overlapping the wings, even. It was very  easy for me. But he couldn   t do that. He couldn   t get near another  aircraft. Anyhow, it was that or it was I had the bombardier   my  bombardier was a bombardier instructor, had been a bombardier  instructor at Deming, New Mexico, which was near the border, which I  was tickled pink to have him because he was good. He was   oh, he was  damn good  And whether that had something to do with it, because we  were a pretty good team. Pretty good crew, and so he said,    Would you  like to fly squadron lead?    And I says,    Well, I   m going to lose my ball  turret gunner because radar is in place of the ball turret.    And so I  thought it over and the next day I said,    Yes, I   ll take it.    Okay, so I flew  twice with him as a   he checked me out and just took two flights, and  he says,    Okay. You   re a squadron lead pilot from here on out.     That was quick.  Yes. (Laughter) That   s exactly right. I was absolutely surprised, but it  was to my advantage. I already got promoted to first lieutenant, and I  made captain before   just before Hitler blew his brains out, I think.  Well, it sounds like you certainly had an aptitude for all of this.  28  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Yes. And primarily, it had a lot to do with the bombardier, because he  was good at that. And this is what I   m going to explain. I want to make a  point of this. Now I   m a squadron lead pilot, and my bombardier was  darn good. And on my about the second sortie as a squadron lead pilot, I  got a big hole blown out from underneath me and a slug lodged right  below my butt within an inch of my suit, shrapnel about that big.  (Gestures) Then, I said,    Wait a minute. What did I get myself into?  Maybe I   d better just be a wingman and forget all this other stuff.     Anyhow, I said to my bombardier (this is where he really came into the  picture). I said,    Andy,    Fred Anderson, called him Andy. I said,    Will  you have any problems if I delay turning on to final?    I don   t have to fly  the final course they give me, the track over the ground, to the target.  And I says,    If I delay my base leg and come in, let   s say if the  designated final course to the target was 0-3-0, I   d continue on a base  leg and then turn and come in on a target 0-6-0 degrees. Thirty degrees I  would be offset.    Yes, I spent five or six nights awake, figuring out how  in the hell can I keep from getting hit, because there   s no question we   re  not going to last very long. We   re going to be shot out of the sky.  So I said to Andy,    Would you have any problem if I delay my base leg  and come in on a       And as soon as I said that, he was tickled pink. He  knew exactly what I had in mind, and I   m glad we went for a walk to  talk it over. I says,    Okay, let   s just keep this to ourselves.    And I didn   t  have to tell him that, but in other words, from here on out, I   m going to  be offset. Well, it   s just a little pilot error. What the hell? I don   t have to.  If the commander knew I was doing it deliberately, he would have  ordered me otherwise, you see.  So he gave me the answer I knew he would give. So I can say this,  getting back to the cat having nine lives. I can tell you without hesitation  that I could count twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen different times that  when I was flying offset on the final bomb run to the target, I would  look over to where I was supposed to be, to the right maybe another  2,000 feet or 3,000 feet,  imitates gun fire  eight, nine, ten, eleven,  twelve bursts of flak. Right where I was  supposed to be . Hell, that  would have blown us out of the sky. So what I   m getting back to is there  is room to wiggle even though you do get a command order to do  something, and you   ve got to figure out how to make use of that wiggle  room.  Well, and you   re of more use to them if you   re all in one piece.  Oh, yes. (Laughs)  Both you and the aircraft, too.  29  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Oh, yes, yes, yes. And as it turned out, after I started doing that, I lost  the least number of aircraft and the least number got wounded from the  flak, and I had the least number of holes in my aircraft. Some of the  shrapnel would burst over on the side that I was near. So to me, that  turned out to be very important. If I had not done that, like I said, eleven,  twelve, thirteen, fourteen different times, I know distinctly, look at all of  that flak that   s over there, and some of it just kind of hits us on our side,  but nothing severe.  So in the end, how many sorties did you     I flew a total of twenty-seven sorties, twenty-one of which were as  squadron lead.  And usually you only had, was it twenty-five was the norm to get out?  Okay, now, what you   re getting into is the number of missions.  Okay, which would be different.  The 8th Air Force in England, different from the 15th Air Force that I was  in, in Italy. They went by missions. A mission could be called two  missions, so you could have flown only twenty-five sorties. Sorties is  out and back. A mission, they gave them credit for two missions for one  sortie. So twenty-five sorties could have given you fifty missions,  England. Whereas the 15th Air Force, we had to fly thirty-five sorties,  and I had flown twenty-seven. And if they had used missions and they  doubled them, I would have had the full amount.  And the end of the war came while     Yes.  Now, were you mainly flying   were you out of Italy the entire time you  were in the European     Yes, yes. Out of Foggia, Italy.  Okay. And were you mainly flying over Germany or various     Yes, primarily Germany and German occupied territories, Vienna,  Innsbruck, Vienna   what else in Switzerland? North of Yugoslavia, in  that area there as well. Let me see if I have something there. Oh, by the  way, here   s a picture of my crew. (Gestures)  30  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Let   s see if we can hold this up for the   we   ll try to make a scan of this.  That one you can keep. I have another copy.  Is that your bombardier?  Unless   I have a better one, but I want that one. I don   t want to give that  one away. Where the hell is it? Let   s see. I didn   t bring that with me.  Here   s the better picture, but I don   t want to lose this one. That   s it.  (Gestures) Okay. All right. And let   s see, where are we?  Well, just because we   d like to get a little bit of sense of how you ended  up in Oklahoma, do you want to talk a little bit about   well, are there  particular things in World War II that you want to wrap up, first?  Okay, let me finish the military if you want.  Right, okay.  I was told to get home right after the war was over and Hitler blew his  brains. I wanted to stay for a couple of months and visit Europe. I never  got the chance to do it. And because of my Pacific points and the points  I got out of Foggia, Italy, my points went way off the chart. And the  commander, I went to the group commander and said,    I want to stay.     No, I can   t. He goes,    You   ve got too damn many points. They would  fire me if you   yack, yack, yack.    So I was onboard a Liberty back to  the States. And so, when I got back to the States, I went from base to  base. Oh, my gosh  Somewhere in South Carolina, and I came through  Oklahoma. I was stationed at Stockton. They sent me from Stockton to  Granier, New Hampshire, to fly B-29s, the Super Fortress. And when I  got there, they only had one on the runway, so to speak, and they sent  me, they said,    Here   s your orders, go to Morrison Field, Tampa,  Florida.     Bases were closing up after me, and I already had maintenance officer,  training officer, and flying. I had three specialties. They were kicking  people out left and right. And plus, the fact that I was a captain kind of  helped keep me in. I now had five years. In fifteen more years, I can  retire from the military, which is what I did. And so on the bulletin  board, they needed a pilot to fly a DC-3 out of Mitchell Field, Long  Island, for a weather group. So I volunteered for it, and it was a good  thing I did. I went up there, and I flew. I did quite a bit of flying with the  DC-3 in the northeast, mostly in the northeast quadrant of the United  States, all the way to Minneapolis, Maine, and Tennessee and what have  you. I had that area and made other trips outside of that area.  31  Larson  Bonelli  Then I saw on the bulletin board, our bulletin board,    Maintenance  Officer   s course school at Chanute Air Force Base,    so I put in for that. I  went through the school, 4.0, I made of 3.8 grade, and they asked me to  stay back as an instructor, which I was. Then I became in charge of the  course. And then the headquarters at Scott Air Force Base, Illinois,  Bellville, Illinois, transferred me from the school to there, where I had  control of all A E training for the Air Force, which was conducted at  Amarillo, Lackland, Francis C. Warren, and a few other places. I had  control of all of those courses. After five years in the headquarters,  which is unusual to be that long in one spot, this was now    55, and so I  called Air Force. I used to come up to D.C. frequently from headquarters  training command.  Now, I got an assignment to England, F-84F. I wanted to fly jet fighters,  and so I got checked out in the T-33, and then I sent myself to Luke Air  Force Base, got ten hours, got checked out on the Hog, as they call it, an  F-84F. And so, then I was sent to England, and no guns at the school,  Luke. I said,    Well, this is a fighter. Where are the guns?    I dismissed it  because, well, they were trainers. When I got to England, no guns. See, I  didn   t learn this. It was like learning it as I go along. The F-84F is a  fighter called a fighter-bomber. It   s a fighter aircraft, but used as a  bomber. There are four pylons below the wing, one, two on the left wing  and three and four on the right wing. The number one outboard would  carry a tank of 230 gallons. Number two would carry an A-bomb.  Number three would carry a 420 gallon tank, and number four would  carry another 230 gallon tank. And you needed JATP  Jet Assisted Take  Off  to assist to push that thing off a two-mile runway.  But anyhow, the A-bomb   this is something a lot of people don   t know,  and I didn   t know it until it got there as to how we delivered the A-bomb.  Normally, you drop from altitude like any other bomb. But this  one, you deliver the bomb performing a loop over the target or an inline,  whatever you want to call it. Let   s say that   s the target, and here   s the     and I used to end up at 8,000 feet, and the terrain was only a couple  hundred feet that we used to do a lot of practice down in Africa from  England. And so, if you take a 4,000 radius, it would look something  like this. (Gestures) Now, if the air   this is going straight up, ninety  degrees from level, and another twenty degrees, the bomb would release  from the aircraft and then come on over and hit its target. I used to be  pretty good. I used to get the practice bomb within a 1,000-foot circle  with no problem.  Now, is there a particular reason they used that approach?  Yes. With a fighter, see, this you have to say,    Well, I   m going to use a  fighter.    It   s a smaller bomb, tactical A-bomb. Whereas with a bomber,  32  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  you   re up at 35,000, 40,000 feet, which would be Strategic Air  Command, General Lemay   s command. And there, of course, you would  drop normally. Whereas, this, it would be a tactical maneuver, and what  you do is when you see your target, you reset all your instruments and  gyros and whatever and what have you. And now, once you do that,  you   ve got all your instruments set, and now you fly as close to that  target as you can possibly get. And with the Hog   or with the F-84F, the  most air speed I could get is   with a clean   with no gas tanks is about  525 knots, which would be about 600 miles an hour. It was under-powered.  Very much under-powered, but at the time, you see, we had an  A-bomb threat.  And carrying that much, I mean, that   s a lot to be carrying. (Laughs)  Yes, you hit the red button and dropped your gasoline tanks as soon as  you saw the target and then reset all the instruments. Then, now, you  pull 4-G, pull back on a 4-G, and you have a needle that keeps your  wings up. And so when you got up there about 110 degrees and the  bomb released, now, you would try to get out of there. You only had  anywhere from thirty-five to forty-five minutes of fuel left. So if you  went to Moscow, you   d have to land someplace in Poland, very likely.  You wouldn   t get very far back, almost suicidal, in my opinion. And, of  course, I   m the materiel officer. I didn   t have to do that, but I did. I got  checked out and qualified. After all, if I   m going to make cookies, I   m  going to have some. That was the whole idea. I wanted to fly them as  well as being the materiel officer. It was very surprising, but I enjoyed it.  So you stayed with the military?  Okay, now, I came back to the States, and they were having what they   re  having now, too many people. Now, they   re going to start discharging,  and they ask me,    When would you like to leave?    And I said,    How  about 1960?    They could have   no, they couldn   t. I had less than two  years to go, and for those who had less than two   I was a reserve  officer. Less-than-two-years were then allowed to go the twenty and  retire, which is what I did. I retired at Greenville, South Carolina. I was  with an organization that had the C-124s, the big transport-type aircraft.  I was a maintenance officer there, at Greenville, South Carolina. So I  retired, and I picked 1960. I said,    I already have the full twenty years,  but I   m not sure about   I   ve already put a bid in Civil Service  Aeronautics for a job with the       My job would be air space systems  inspection pilot.  My first job with them was in Minneapolis. In other words, for two years  while they was up there, my primary job was to flight check all  navigational aids, including radar, and there was set procedures and  33  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  standards that we had to go by. We even had an extra instrument panel  that would pick up the signals and put them on a chart, so we could read  how the signal was. If it was too rough or too many bends in it or not  enough signal or whatever, we then would ask the facilities people to  readjust and this and that or not, put a new facility in and that kind of  stuff. It was a very interesting job. And also, the development, we had  the    chore,    the word you used a while ago, of developing instrument  procedures. I got pretty good at that, and a matter of fact, after two years  at Minneapolis, I transferred to the Academy here, at Oklahoma, and this  was in 1963, again in March.  Now, was this the FAA  Federal Aviation Administration  at this point  or was it still CAA  Civil Aeronautics Administration ?  Now, the FAA.  I didn   t know at the time, back in    63, if it was still the CAA or if it was  the FAA.  I   m pretty sure it was now the FAA. We changed it.  So you   re here, it   s the Will Rogers Academy, right?  Yes, Will Rogers Academy, and I was an instructor in both flight  inspection as well as the instrument procedures development.  Now, this would have been the first time you were in Oklahoma for any  length of time?  Yes. That is absolutely right.  Yes. You   d mentioned you   d been through, previously.  That   s right. I   ve been through many times, and this is the first time.  That is absolutely right, and so, yes. And so I was here six years as an  instructor, and then I transferred to a regional headquarters, which I   m  glad I did. I got the experience. In other words, I worked all levels and  transferred to the regional headquarters in Los Angeles, and I was there  four years. And then they reorganized Flight Inspection, and they  developed flight FINFO, Flight Inspection National Field Office was  here at Will Rogers Airport, on the far side. And so I came back and  now, I am now in the top headquarters and responsible for all the  procedures, worldwide, even what air carriers used in foreign countries.  Reviewing, make sure their procedures were in good order, and let   s see.  I stayed with them    I came down here from Minneapolis in    63, and     63 to    69 I went to Los Angeles,    73 I came back to the new  34  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  headquarters here at Will Rogers, FINFO, Flight Inspection National  Field Office, and I was with them until 1994. I retired from civil service.  Thirty-three years with civil service, twenty years with military. That  was fifty-three years of service. I have both retirements.  So for people who don   t know, the FAA really does have a big presence  in Oklahoma. I mean, the headquarters are here now.  Oh, yes.  Most of the training, I understand, is all here at the Will Rogers  Academy.  Yes, the Academy pretty much is, they train air traffic controllers. FAA  is made up of three major, Air Traffic Controller, Facilities, and Flight  Standards. I was in Flight Standards.  Okay. We didn   t talk too much about your personal life, in the mean  time, but at some point, I know you got married     Well, that was     Way back early in your story.  Yes, that was when I was at Tampa, Florida, Morrison Field. And I was  there   oh, gee, not too long, and that   s where I met my wife. And she  worked for the government, too. And so when I transferred to Mitchell  Field, Long Island, and I flew with that weather group, she then  transferred to D.C. I would come down to see her every weekend, and I  was allowed to take an aircraft, back then, to get your time in, although I  was already getting my time in. And so anyhow, I transferred to  Chanute, she transferred to Chanute, and she got a civil service job there,  too. She was pretty good with statistics.  What branch did she work for?  Well, I really don   t know. Whatever the statistics, that was her main  efforts, I would say.  So what year were you at Morrison Field? I   m just trying to figure out  where     Morrison Field I did nothing. I was at Stockton, transferred to Granier to  get checked out on the B-29 Super Fortress, and when I got there, they  said,    Here   s your orders. You can leave now or wait until tomorrow.     And I think I spent the night there and then left the next morning.  35  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Okay. I was just trying to figure out where in your chronology you met  your wife.  Oh, that was when I  was at  Stockton, transferred to Granier, one day  there and then down to Morrison Field, and so now you   re looking     So this was after you got back?  Yes, oh, yes.  Okay.  In other words, all the bases were closing up right after   after I left, they  did close. They even closed Morrison Field. It was a good thing I  grabbed onto the job up at Mitchell Field, yes, on Long Island. And so  that was   what year was that? Roosevelt was still president. That was in  your latter part of    40s. Yes.  So you folks met, and then you kept transferring together, essentially.  That   s right. That   s what it boiled down to.  Hop-scotching around the country.  And so, we got married at Kankakee, Illinois, on our way to Chicago for  a little vacation. Yes, and     So she transferred to Oklahoma as well?  That   s when I was at the school, Rantoul, Illinois, Chanute Air Force  Base, Rantoul, Illinois. And I was an instructor, then. I was a student and  then an instructor and then in charge of that course. And then, of course,  from there, I transferred down to Bellville, Illinois. I was with the  Headquarters Training Command for five years, very interesting jobs.  So just looking back, if you   re looking at your whole life and your career  and everything, what do you think are some of the things you   ve done  that have given you the greatest satisfaction?  Well, from a personal viewpoint or   ?  Yes, from a personal viewpoint.  Well, I   ve got to fly a lot of aircraft. I also, when I was stationed at  Mitchell field I went to helicopter school at San Marcus, Texas, and they  36  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  Bonelli  wanted me to be an instructor. Every school I went to, they wanted me  to be an instructor, and this one I had to refuse because   and you got  double flight pay. If you weren   t flying status, you got flight pay. And in  this one, you got double because there was an extra danger there,  because you never know what a student is going to do, and you   re close  to the ground, and they make a little mistake, and you   re only hovering  over the ground. The hazardous situation is increased, no question about  it.  There   s no glide time with that one. (Laughs)  But mainly, I mainly turned it down because I didn   t like locality. I  wanted distance. I want to fly fixed wing aircraft, and I didn   t want to be  limited to   helicopters were limited to a certain area. I could see that  right away. But I enjoyed it. It was a man-sized toy. That   s how I looked  at the helicopter, and I was thankful for that. (Laughter) And I got to fly  jet aircraft, and I got to fly the   I flew the bombers in World War II, and  then I flew the jets, and also in England.  Well, just to sort of wrap up, since we   re actually running a little past  four o   clock     No kidding  I didn   t know I could talk so long.  Time flies when you   re having fun. (Laughter) But if you could name one  thing that you   d most want to be remembered for, what would that be?  Oh, I   d have to really think that one over. If I were remembered for one  thing     Or what would you most like people to remember about you, or how  would you like them to think of you?  I did my best. Whether or not they remember me, well... I heard a  profound statement the other day,    A man is not dead until he   s  forgotten.    That   s very true. You can be dead and if you   re not  forgotten, you   re still alive. It   s an amazing, profound statement, the  more you think about it. Okay, well, I can say this. Whatever I did, I did  my best, and I got very good write-ups as an instructor when I was down  here teaching instruments and flight inspection. I was always tickled  when they would ask me to be an instructor. I don   t know what they saw  or whatever it was. I was surprised one day when this instructor, he was  teaching me how to fly the helicopter, and then he looked over at me,  and I guess I was doing everything all right and he said,    Would you like  to be an instructor here?    I almost fell through the floor   or through the  seat. I couldn   t believe it. But I really never gave that much of a  37  Larson  Bonelli  Larson  thought   whatever. (Laughter)  I enjoyed everything I did. I have no complaints. I enjoyed my military  time, and I was very lucky, very lucky. And I enjoyed my civil service  time, and I had responsible positions. I couldn   t believe it, one day at the  regional headquarters in Los Angeles, I had some deal that I had to work  out with a lawyer in the organization, and he says,    Are you one of those  who accomplish this and do this?    I said,    I guess I am.       Oh, it   s nice  to meet you  Nice to find somebody that does something around here.     (Laughter) That kind of stuff. I thought,    Oh, boy,    I never saw it that  way. Can you imagine that?    It   s nice to meet somebody who does  something around here.    Wait a minute  That kind of stuff.  Well, it sounds like you did a lot of wonderful things.  Oh, yes. I have no complaints. I had a full enjoyment.  Well, thank you so much for telling us about all of this. We greatly  appreciate it, and it   ll be wonderful to have your recollections in the  collection. So thank you for your time today.  -------  -------  
