 Little Thunder  Tiger  This is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is Friday, September 14,  and I   m interviewing Tony Tiger as part of the Oklahoma Native Artists  Project, sponsored by the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at  Oklahoma State University. We   re at Tony   s home in Tahlequah. Tony,  you   ve always had a distinct painting style, and over the last couple of  years you   ve been experimenting with not just mixed media but canvases  that are more three- than two-dimensional. You   ve also been busy  reviving the Bacone art program. Thank you for taking the time to talk  with me.  Yes, my pleasure.  Where were you born, and where did you grow up?  I was born in LA in 1964. My parents lived out there during the  Relocation period, and I was the first child born in LA. After LA, we  moved back to Oklahoma in 1970, or around that time, and moved to  Shawnee, Oklahoma, where my grandmother, who was Sac and Fox,  lived. We were introduced to our entire family and didn   t have an idea  that our family was that big. We had all the extended relatives and a  huge family.  What did your mom and dad do for a living?  My dad was a Baptist minister, and my mother was more of a  homemaker. She worked on occasion, as well, doing different things but  primarily a homemaker.  You mentioned your grandparents     Yes, my grandparents. My grandmother was Sac and Fox, and she was  full-blood. She probably was born right after statehood. My grandfather  5  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  was born right before statehood. My grandfather and my grandmother     I   m talking about my mother   s mother and my father   s father. Those are  the grandparents that I really kind of grew up knowing. My grandfather  was Muscogee Creek and Seminole. He was kind of elusive as a child. I  met him probably later on in the mid-   70s, and so it was kind of  interesting to meet him for the first time.  Were there any other members of your family involved in the arts, or  extended family?  I did. I had an older brother who was an artist, probably natural artist. He  could draw and paint, but he never really did anything with his work. He  did do some work for the tribal newspaper and for the Sac and Fox  newspaper, but he never took it beyond that. I wish he would   ve because  he was a gifted artist. He was really the early inspiration for me in  wanting to become an artist because I thought it would just be an  interesting way to make a living and you wouldn   t have to punch clocks  and timecards and all that good stuff. He was probably the first  inspiration in becoming an artist.  When did you see your first piece of Native art?  My first piece of Native art was probably while we were living on the  Standing Rock Reservation in the Dakotas, North Dakota primarily, at a  small town called Fort Yates. My father took a pastorate there in the  mid-1970s. I was probably about ten years old. It really was probably  more historic things, photographs, probably some of the photographs of  some of the early photographers of Native art, Native people, really.  Later on, seeing some more traditional work by some of the Lakota  artists, Oscar Howe. Probably saw one of his pieces early on. Then later  on, seeing Allan Houser   s work and then Richard West and then a few  other artists. Those were primarily the guys who I saw first.  Back here in Oklahoma.  Back in Oklahoma, yes, because we   d go back and forth. We had an  opportunity to go to some museums. The Sac and Fox tribe would take  their tribal members to museums sometimes. I think we went to the  Bartlesville museum up there. There   s a museum up there. I remember  going up there. I remember seeing a lot of the artworks. Saw some  Woody Crumbo prints and Acee Blue Eagle   s work and some of the  early artists.  Were you with the rest of your family?  I was with the rest of my family, and it was probably pretty early on,  6  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  too, in like mid-   70s. My brother was there, too, and we probably looked  at a few things. It was pretty fascinating because, at that time, growing  up in LA and growing up around people that are more urban, you didn   t  see a lot of tribal regalia and things like that. Then when we moved back  to Oklahoma in early    70s, we began to see that whole culture that we  kind of missed out on growing up.  What was your first experience making art?  My first experience making art was probably in the Dakotas. They  offered some classes that dealt with art and culture. Back then, I was  primarily interested in the outdoors, and I still am. I remember doing  some drawings of animals and some horses. My dad still had those in his  collection when he passed. Birds and four-legged animals, those types of  things.  What kind of exposure did you have to art in primary school?  In primary school, mainly just in books. Back then, the technology was  not what we have today, so it was more books and occasional visits to  local museums and that type of thing. But mainly just books, magazines,  if you had the opportunity to see magazines.  Not really any art lessons, per se.  No, not necessarily art lessons, per se. Just occasional school  assignment.    Paint this,       Draw that,    and you just did the best you  could.  How about secondary and high school?  High school, what   s kind of interesting is that I was an athlete growing  up, and my family were athletes. That   s how we made a distinction on  the reservation. We were accepted by becoming athletes and being pretty  decent athletes because it was not easy growing up on the reservation  because we were a different tribe and we were outsiders. Being athletes,  we were able to be included in all the activities.  What kinds of athletics did you participate in?  I played   gee, I played it all. Baseball, ran track, played football,  basketball, and did a little rodeo. I loved the rodeo, but my parents didn   t  like that. They thought it was too dangerous. I never got hurt riding  horses or anything like that, but I broke all kinds of bones and injured  myself playing sports. The secondary and high school opportunities  were vast.  7  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  I went to Standing Rock High School first. They had a pretty good art  instructor. I kind of gravitated to that and didn   t really produce anything  out of that experience, I don   t think, because I was just dabbling in it a  little bit and still playing the sports, but when I came to Shawnee (we  moved back to Shawnee in    82 from Fort Yates) had an opportunity to  start taking some art courses at that time. That was really what fueled  my passion, I guess, because I was not a very good student. I think some  of my earlier teachers would probably roll over in their grave, if they   re  still alive, or just roll their eyes to think of Tony Tiger as an assistant art  professor now and teaching in his own program. (Laughter)  That experience was really eye-opening to me because I realized I was  good at something other than sports, being creative and learning the  different processes. William Malone, Bill Malone at Shawnee High  School was a teacher there. Also, Kim Kimerling was also an instructor  there, and learned a lot from them. They really encouraged me to  continue, to continue to study, and I pretty much did.  Did you make a conscious decision that you were going to be an artist,  or was it just a process?  At that time, I was young and rambunctious and didn   t listen to many  people, like a lot of young people do. I went through a time right after  high school that I just went and did my own thing and made some bad  decisions, wasted of a lot of time, really. Wasted about seven, eight  years just having fun and not really producing anything, even trying to  really learn anything. It was mainly about partying and running around  and chasing girls.  You weren   t even selling a few paintings here and there?  Not then. Not then, no, but what was interesting about that time is that I  still had opportunities to work, and so I worked with Joe Rice. He did  these workshops in teaching students how to bead. I got a summer job a  couple times, helping him as an aide. I picked up beading from that, so I  know how to bead. I can teach those things, and I still do. I was doing  that, so I was still around the artwork but just not in a formal manner. I   d  draw a little bit and paint a little bit, but nothing really serious. I was still  kind of dabbling in it, so I never really left it completely. It was always  there.  At some point you decided you were going to go back to school.  That was interesting because I made some bad decisions and really lived  a lifestyle at that time that was not beneficial to life, but I did, I made a  8  Little Thunder  Tiger  decision. I knew that I needed to make some changes, and so I got  married. We established a home with my wife, Brenda, and it was good.  We enjoyed the time that we had together, (and we   re still married now,  twenty-two years) but that wasn   t enough, just being established in our  home.  It wasn   t too long after that that I was working in Shawnee at Wolverine  Tube. They make copper tubing. One day I was running these machines.  What I would do is I   d have this cycle. In between the cycle, you   d have  about forty-five seconds to thirty seconds, so I   d keep a little journal  with me and I would draw, just from memory sometimes. Sometimes I   d  have a small photograph, and I would draw. One morning, this  gentleman came, and he was working behind me. He knew that I was  drawing or writing or something in this book. He came over, and he  looked, and he said,    Is that yours?    I said,    Yes.    He said,       What are  you doing?    I said,    I   m drawing.    He said,    Can I look in your book?    I  said,    Yes, go ahead.     He looked through the book, and he saw some of the drawings. He says,     If you can draw like this, what the hell are you doing here?    From that  time on, I began to ask myself those important questions about,    What  am I doing here, because I   m bored out of my mind.    Factory work was  the same thing over and over again. It wasn   t too long after that I quit  and began to look at school and enrolled at Seminole State and began to  study art again.  What was the instruction like at Seminole State?  Seminole State, the teacher down there, professor is Kelly Kirk, and he  did a wonderful job of preparing me and giving me a good foundation  about what art could be and what it is. He taught both studio and art  history and did a wonderful job. He taught me how to write a little bit  and how to think about art and good responses to what I was looking at,  and just really fueled the need to go and study further. When I finished  there   I made some really good grades, and I was older. I was thirty,  thirty-two when I finished, probably. He   s the one who really  encouraged me to go on and study. He said Oklahoma State had a  transfer day that you could go up and take your work and take your  portfolio and talk to the instructors. They would look at it, and they may  give you a scholarship. I went up and ended up receiving a scholarship  for my undergraduate work.  So I went to Oklahoma State, and it was a good experience. It was a  good experience, not just in the arts but in growing up, as well, and  understanding responsibility and challenge. It was a wonderful challenge  because I commuted from Shawnee to Oklahoma State. It was an hour  9  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  from my house to the parking lot. Sometimes I   d spend all day taking  classes and waiting for another class to start, being patient and learning  some of those things, but I did have a wonderful experience at  Oklahoma State.  How did your style or subject matter change there?  What   s interesting, I think, when you   re studying art, for the most part  you really don   t necessarily have a style as you begin that process.  You   re learning processes, and I was. I was just taking it all in and just  listening and looking and thinking about the possibilities and learning  process.  I was always interested in watercolor and painting thin media, water  media. I was interested in transparency and textures, so while I was at  Oklahoma State, I took a class with Jack Titus, a wonderful watercolor  artist. That   s really what kind of grabbed my attention with the intensity  of color and the transparency because you can overlap and build depth  with the watercolor. That   s what he really helped me do.  I think the one guy at Oklahoma State that really was beneficial to me  was Mark Sisson. Mark was a drawing professor and printmaking  professor, and he   s the one who really began to see some possibilities in  what I was doing. Sometimes I   d have an idea, and he says,    Oh, that  might not work out. Maybe you ought to try something else.    I said,    I  think this will,    and so I   d talk him into allowing me to go ahead with  the project. In the end, I   d come out with a pretty decent project and  piece of artwork. That happened a couple of times. I think he was really  the one who really helped me to begin to understand that I have  something, I had something, and my creativity was something that I  could probably build on.  Were you entering any competitive shows?  Actually, I was. While I was at Seminole State, Kelly Kirk encouraged  me to enter some competitive, just local shows. I think Wewoka had a  show. Seminole had a show. Holdenville had a show. I entered those and  did well. I started winning prizes at those, and it got to the point where I  don   t think they really liked me coming to their shows. (Laughs)  Was it with Native subject matter?  Primarily, it was. It primarily was Native subject matter, but I don   t  think everything was Native. I think sometimes I was still kind of  experimenting with color movement and forms a little bit. But also at  that time I wasn   t primarily a painter. I was kind of dabbling in  10  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  everything. Kelly was a strong clay artist, so I was dabbling in the clay,  also. I was making ceramic portraits, and those were pretty popular. I  began to market   well, not really market those but sell those after I   d  create a piece or two.  So they were pictures but three-dimensional in ceramic?  Yes, they were three-dimensional and very lifelike, sometimes with their  mouth open, eyes, and teeth, the whole works. Every now and then I  might stick a small painting inside the mouth, and it would just kind of  speak to whatever the individual was expressing.  Then there was another transition to University of Oklahoma for your  master   s degree. What motivated that move?  Interesting story. Actually, while I was at Seminole State, my mother  passed away. She was very instrumental in my education, as she really  wanted the best for her children. She had eight children all together, and  I was kind of in the middle and kind of the black sheep, I guess. She  wanted the best for her children, and she understood that education was  going to be one of those things that would be beneficial to her children.  But she passed away when I was at Seminole State, and while I was  attending OSU, my father died.  That   s close together.  Yes. They were good people. They were good people, and they did well  by us, even though neither one of them really were educated, I think  both received their GEDs later in life. When my dad was fifty, he went  back and got an associate   s degree while he was on the Standing Rock  Reservation. He was very instrumental and inspirational in helping me to  understand that if he could do that at fifty, I could do it at thirty, so I  went, and I began to take my studies serious.  But he did die, and it was right at a time when I was pretty close to  finishing my degree at OSU. Actually, I just walked away at that time. I  got through the semester, and he passed away, I think a week before  finals. I think I even missed a final, but I had talked to the professor, and  he understood what was going on. He allowed me to make up the final  that I had missed. I walked away from OSU, but I had a wonderful  experience there.  I went into youth ministry for a time. I was a youth pastor at a large  church in Oklahoma City, and I did that for a couple of years. I was still  making artwork at the time. I was still making artwork and got more  involved in the ceramics and making the ceramic masks. It was probably  11  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  about two years before I went back. What I was doing, I was working in  Oklahoma City, just down the street from the Oklahoma Indian Art  Gallery. One day I walked in there and showed   I think Robert Taylor  was the manager then. (Laughter) I had a load of work and said,    Hey,  man. Will you take a look at this stuff? I   m interested and am looking  for a place to be represented.    He was a really nice guy, very cordial,  and he said,    Yes, I   ll take a look at it.     He looked at it, and he kind of liked what he saw. Then he said,    Can  you leave these here?    I said,    Yes, I can leave these here.    He said,    I  think the owner would like to take a look at this work.    I left it there and  began a relationship with the Oklahoma Indian Art Gallery and Doris  Littrell. That was during the part where I was kind of searching and  thinking about what I wanted to do with the rest of my life. Like I said, I  was still making artwork. I got curious after I did the youth ministry  work for a couple of years and kind of found some relief. I did a degree  check to find out how many hours I had on my BFA. Come to find out, I  only lacked ten hours, and it was all in foreign language. Yes, foreign  language.  I tried to take Spanish at OSU, but the teacher, she never spoke in  English. It was all in Spanish. I just could not do that, so I had to  withdraw from that class. But I found out that it was just ten hours. I was  interested in language at that time, and I knew that OU was offering  Muscogee Creek language. I went down and applied, got into OU. I  asked OU if I was able to maybe study the Muscogee Creek language  and transfer those last ten hours back to OSU to receive my BFA, and  they agreed. So that was good.  Wonderful.  I did that, but while I was at OU and working on that degree  requirement, I happened to be walking by the school of art. I said,    I  need to go walk in here and see what   s going on.    I walked in and had a  chance to talk to one of the painting instructors. I think later on, I met  Mary Jo.  Mary Jo Watson?  Mary Jo Watson, yes. She wasn   t the director then. She was just one of  the professors there. I started taking a class, so I became a half-time  student. I was still doing some youth ministry work and making another  commute from Shawnee to Oklahoma City to Norman and then back to  Shawnee. (Laughter) I did that for about a year, I guess, until I finished  my language requirement.  12  Little Thunder  Tiger  I got connected with a gentleman by the name of George Hughes. He  was a professor there in the painting department, and he was from  Ghana, Africa. He was a black gentleman and really, really a  tremendous artist. He   s the guy who, really, at that point in my career, he  really began to help me to see that it   s not always the most gifted artist  who is successful. It   s the artist who has the most drive and is in the  right place at the right time. He really inspired me to work hard and to  study and to learn all I could, and to start exhibiting a little bit, and not  being afraid to push things a little further than most people would like.  So I began to really work hard. It wasn   t too long after that, after I  received my BFA, he said,    You need to apply for graduate school.     During that process, I realized I couldn   t go right into graduate school  because I had some financial responsibilities I needed to take care of. I  stayed out a year, and it was pretty competitive. I knew that there was  some competitiveness in getting into the program.  I wanted to do everything myself. I knew there were some students, they  were having professional photographs taken of their work, and it was  kind of a God thing, I guess. I just said,    If you want me to do this, I   m  going to do everything myself. I   m going to take my own photographs,  learn how to do that, and do my own writing.    I think I had a little bit of  help from somebody that re-read what I   d written and gave me some  ideas about what to change.  So I applied for graduate school at OU and got in. I had a wonderful  time at OU. At the time, George was still there. George was there. Had a  chance to befriend and meet Mary Jo Watson, who was teaching  primarily American Indian Art History courses. I had a chance to meet  her, and then there was a lot of other artists, Native artists, there at the  program. Marwin Begay, Heather Ahtone was there, working on their  master   s degrees. Gerald Cournoyer was there, Shane Brown was there,  and myself.  It wasn   t like you were culturally there by yourself. You had people  around you who understood where you were coming from and maybe  even part of your identity as an individual. We had a wonderful time,  and we exhibited together, and we could talk to each other. We never  really did any collaborations, but it was good to bounce ideas off each  other and encourage each other. I think we did a couple of group shows  together, and so we had a pretty good time at OU.  Were you thinking at all about the possibility you might teach, as well?  I did. That   s really when I began to kind of think about teaching. We had  talked about finances a little bit earlier and trying to be responsible. At  13  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  that time, I wasn   t making a lot of money, but I was selling artwork and  my wife was working full-time. We began to sell a little bit of artwork at  that time. Also, some different individuals would encourage me.    You  ought to teach. That way we could help pay some of your tuition.    I was  taking a class with the director at the time. He said,    You can write  anything you want to, to me. Write me a letter about art.     So I wrote him a letter and asked him for a job. (Laughter) I said,    I   d  like to have a job. I   d like to teach one of the courses here.    He  responded to it. He says,    All right. Next semester you can teach a  painting class or a drawing class.    I ended up being a TA as a grad  student and taught beginning drawing, beginning painting, art for non-majors.  Then I worked up in one of the wood shop labs and taught  students how to use the machinery and build stretchers and build other  types of stretchers.  That   s a great teaching background to have. After you graduated, were  you sort of primarily trying to earn your living as an artist?  I think that was my plan. Well, it was my plan. It was my plan to do that.  My plan, out of graduate school, was to primarily make a living at my  art. At the time, the economy was probably doing well enough that an  artist probably could make a living off his art.  Because we   re talking mid-   90s, here?  Well, 2007, actually, was when I finished grad school. It was good, and I  was selling artwork. I was going to shows and doing...  What were some of the shows?  I was doing the Eiteljorg  Museum of American Indians and Western  Art  at that time. I   d go out to the Santa Fe Market, the SWAIA   Southwestern Association for Indian Arts  Market and show there. I  was showing at Doris    at the same time, at the Oklahoma Indian Art  Gallery. Then I was also getting into different competitions, any  competition I could, basically. I was going down to Florida and showing  in the museum market that they have down there. Actually, I was doing  that. I was on my way back from that market in Florida     What   s the name of the market?  It   s the name of their museum  Ah-Tah-Thi-Ki . I don   t want to butcher  the name, but it   s at the Big Cypress Indian museum there on the  reservation, the Seminole reservation. I was on the way home, and I  received a call from Ruthe Blalock Jones.  14  Little Thunder  Tiger  Kind of a funny story. Every time I   d see her, she never remembered  me, I don   t think, from the time I was at Bacone. I was there for a short  time, but every time I would see her, I   d tell her,    Hey, I   m getting ready  to work on my master   s degree.       What   s your name?    and I   d say,     Tony Tiger. I went to Bacone.       Oh, okay. Yes, I remember you.     (Laughter) Every time I   d see her at a market, I   d just kind of refresh her  mind that I was working on my master   s degree.  Then finally one day I was in Santa Fe the year before, and I   d said,     I   m graduating in May. I   ll be looking for a job.    She goes,    Oh, okay.  Who are you again?    (Laughter) But it paid off because in the fall of  2007, I   m returning home from the Seminole Reservation in Florida, and  she gave me a call and said,    Hey Mr. Tiger. Is this Mr. Tiger?    I said,     Yes, it is.    She introduced herself again and said,    I would like you to  come and teach at Bacone as an adjunct.     We were still living in Shawnee, and I agreed, so I drove from Shawnee  to Bacone to Muskogee, probably about a hundred miles or so, twice a  week to teach two classes. I taught the American Indian Arts and Craft  course, and I also talked her into allowing me to teach a special course  on concepts. I think I had four students. Four students.  The program at that time at Bacone, it was definitely not right. Few  students. A lot of students didn   t even know that they had an art  program. The students that were there, they were good students, and  they were willing to learn. We had a good time. I had a good time  teaching the small amount of students that we had. Then at the end of the  semester she said,    I   m retiring. You want this job?    I said,    Well, I   ll  talk to somebody about it. I   m not sure if they   re going to give it to me,  but I   ll talk to them about a job.    (Laughter) She talked to whoever she  needed to talk to, and then they asked me to come in for an interview. I  talked my way into a job at Bacone College as their art director, and  because I have my master   s degree, I   m an assistant professor.  That   s wonderful. So you had some history at Bacone already?  I did have some history, and it actually went back further than that  because my grandfather, he went to school at Bacone. Had a wonderful  experience there. He understood the ideas behind education and  knowledge and that that was going to be very beneficial to his  grandchildren. He always wanted someone to go to school at Bacone. I  did go to Bacone right out of high school, (I didn   t mention that earlier)  but I didn   t stay very long. It was in 1984 in the fall, and I just graduated  high school.  15  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  At that time, too, I think they were in a transition period from when  Ruthe had taken over and Dick West was on his way out. I had Dick for  a class and probably not the best situation for a freshman to be in a class  where there was a lot of leeway. I don   t think I took a lot from that class.  And then Ruthe was teaching some drawing courses, which I took. Even  that, there wasn   t enough going on on the campus to really keep my  attention, so I only stayed for one semester. Because of some of the  issues with the classes, I realized that I could probably get more out of  going to the library. Basically, that   s what I did. I didn   t return the  spring semester and just began to live the life that I lived during that  time.  Now that you   re art director and you   re teaching these classes at  Bacone, is your work with the students impacting your work at all?  I think that as a professor of art, it causes you to think more closely  about what you   re doing as an artist. Before, my ideas were make a lot  of artwork so I could go sell at these markets and to collectors. Now that  I have fewer opportunities, less time to make art, it   s more precise. I   m  dealing with what I really want to do, new ideas that I have, and so I   m  more precise and particular about what I   m doing. Even though it may  be small, there   s still something there that I   m trying to challenge myself  by thinking of design elements or even applications of paint, really  thinking about the small piece in that,    Is the process or the content  worthy of taking it to a larger scale?    That   s kind of what I   m doing  today.  But the students, I don   t really think they inspire me to do work.  Probably just the idea of not having enough time to work causes me to  really value my time. They   ll tell you, too. I tell them,    My time is  money, and time is important.    They know if they want to talk to me,  they have a limited chance, an opportunity to talk to me. I do make  myself available to them, but I   m working, and they know that I   m  working.  What do you try to communicate to them in terms of art instruction?  I think the major point that I like to make (and it   s not even to just the art  students but to every student who comes in because we do have a  mixture of non-majors with majors) is that they   re in the educational  portion of their career, no matter what you   re doing. This is the time for  you to really learn and to take your high school education to the next  level. You will utilize a lot of this information as a student, whatever it  is.  Because we   re at a little art school, they have an opportunity to study a  16  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  lot of different things and to grasp a lot of different knowledge. I really  encourage my students to think more seriously about their education, if  it   s in the arts or if not, in some other area, so that they can really be able  to do what they want to do once they get out into the professional areas.  Because not only do I paint, but because of my paying attention to other  areas in the arts, I   m able to do other things. Not only do I make art, but  I teach. I can lecture a little bit more. I curate exhibitions, do a little bit  more of that, as well. It   s not just about making art, but it   s also about  what I   m doing in the art world away from just making artwork. I think  that   s very important. I think paying attention and trying to gain all the  information that I could, even from the art history courses, it   s really  helped me to do those things.  Is there still a Native art component to the program?  There is a Native art component to the program. There   s a class called  American Indian Arts and Craft, and the AIS  American Indian Studies   degree teaches that more as a lecture-theory course. We had an  opportunity to go just pure theory and look at books and read  information about American Indian art. As a studio professor, I really  wanted to make sure we still held onto some of those techniques, so we  still offer a studio course in beading. We deal with some beading; we  bring in some potters; we bring in basket weavers. This coming semester  we   re going to bring in Molly Murphy, who works in soft materials and  beads. She   s going to be a visiting artist. Michael Elizondo Jr. is actually  teaching that course this semester. He   s a recent graduate of OU with his  master   s degree. The idea of Native art is still alive at Bacone.  I know you have a friendship with Bobby Martin, and it   s been important  to you, personally, but also I think you guys have collaborated a bit. Can  you talk about how you and Bobby met?  Oh, yes. I met Bob, actually, through Ruthe. The first semester I came  over, she allowed me to organize the student exhibition. I didn   t really  know anybody in the area. We work on a limited budget, being a small  school, so we try to utilize professionals in our own area, northeast  Oklahoma. She suggested that we use Bob Martin to come and judge the  exhibition. I said,    Okay,    and I really didn   t know Bob.  Was he still at NSU  Northeastern State University ?  At that time, I think he had just moved to John Brown University. I think  his first year there was my first year at Bacone. I didn   t know him. I  didn   t know his work, either. He exhibited a piece in the show along  with   actually, I think we had a couple of pieces by Ruthe and a couple  17  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  of pieces by him out in the foyer, and then inside the small gallery was  our student show. I saw his work, and it incorporated photographs and  text. I thought that was pretty interesting because I   d never really seen  too much of that from a Native artist. I guess there were a few who were  doing that.  He came over and judged the show. We began to talk. We   re both  Muscogee Creek, and we both were kind of older when we went back to  school. We definitely had a passion for the artwork and for teaching and  for people, and we also have a religious background that we both agree  with. We could meet and connect on a lot of different ways, elements, so  we became friends. It wasn   t too long after that that someone asked me  to show at Bacone because they wanted to know who their new director  was, after I became the director at Bacone.  Someone came, and they asked   one of the professors here on campus,  they said,    We   d like to see some of your work. When are you going to  exhibit?    Because by that time I had already curated a couple of  exhibitions by   I think Tom Fields the photographer came in, and he  did a show. I think the next year, we did an exhibition with three ladies:  Anita Fields, Heidi BigKnife, and Sylvia Nitti-Hunter. They came in and  did a female show. Wonderful time. Then someone asked if I would do  something.  I could   ve did a one-man show, but I said,    No, I want to bring  somebody else in.    By then, I had seen a few pieces of Bob   s. I asked  him if he   d like to do a two-man show, so we did a two-man show at  Bacone. Then because he also worked at John Brown, (they have a nice  exhibition space) the show started at Bacone, and then it went to John  Brown University. Then I think we showed it again someplace, so we  had three opportunities to show together, same work. We found that we  could work together and had common values, and we could stand each  other. (Laughter) We   ve continued to collaborate, and we continue to  collaborate to this day.  You did a show at the Capitol in 2010. What was the title and theme of  the show?  That show was titled Full Consciousness, and it really speaks to the idea  of how mankind is created. Not only do we have a physical body, but we  also have a mental capacity to learn and to understand, and then also we  have a spiritual component to who we are. That   s what that was really  about. It was about the full idea of who man is. I had a wonderful time  putting work up, getting work ready for that.  How many works did you make?  18  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Oh, I think there were about a dozen pieces, maybe a few more.  Mostly new pieces?  Not really. It was more retrospective, pieces about two, three years old. I  had a chance to show some new work along with some older pieces, but  mainly, primarily, new work. Had some nice comments. I was really  new at Bacone, too, and so I did a lot. I had a lot set up, thinking about  making a living just as an artist. I had these things set up before I even  agreed to become the director and teach at Bacone. I had these things  right after another in one year, so I had a lot going on at that time:  teaching, directing, making artwork, and exhibiting. I was a very busy  man.  The selling part of the art business is sometimes the trickiest. What   s the  best business advice you ever got?  The best business advice that I have ever received, while I was at the  Oklahoma Indian Art Gallery, there was a number of artists in that  group: Robert Taylor, Merlin Little Thunder, Virginia Stroud, Jay  Benham, Benjamin Harjo Jr., and a few others. These people, even  though I was the young guy and was working on a master   s degree, they  welcomed me, and we talked. A lot of those people gave me advice and  encouraged me to continue. That was really the main thing, was that  they encouraged me to continue. I watched them. I think Robert Taylor  was probably the most instrumental in giving me advice about selling  and pricing things and what he thought. Actually, there   s a Robert  Taylor on that wall. He was probably the most instrumental, and it was  not just one thing that he said. It was all that he had said.  That was pretty interesting because earlier as a young artist, I think,  when I was dabbling in the arts and I was doing more beadwork and I  was interested in art making, I had approached a few artists who were  older, and they wouldn   t give me the time of day. I would ask them a  question, and they would just kind of blow me off and say,    I learned  this stuff on my own, and you   re going to go learn this stuff on your  own, and I   m not going to give you any help.     I didn   t have that reaction there at the Oklahoma City Indian Art  Gallery, and I really appreciated that. It was a very important aspect to  my professional career. So, now, that same philosophy, I kind of hold. I  really try to hang onto that philosophy. It   s not just about me and what  I   m doing. It   s about what   s going on around me in the art world.  You   re looking at my house, and you see all the work that I   ve collected  19  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  from other artists. Just last night, Michael Elizondo Jr. came to my house  to stay because he lives in Oklahoma City and I offered a bedroom. He  said,    Yes, I   ll stay.    He came in kind of late in the evening, and he said,     Hey, I   ve got a couple pieces of artwork in my car.    I said,    Well, bring  them in  Bring them in. We   ll take a look at them.    (Laughter) He had  just entered the holiday show that the Cherokee Nation puts on, and he  won a Judge   s Choice ribbon for a painting he has. That was the painting  that I liked. I guess he brought them in because he wanted to trade  something, (Laughter) so we ended up trading a couple pieces of  artwork. We traded some artwork, so I have another piece now from  another artist.  I think something I really enjoy is I can barter my artwork for somebody  else   s artwork, and we both get something good. But it   s also about  building and supporting other artists and their ideas and really just trying  to be supportive of the art world. I don   t think that was always the way,  (it was so competitive) but I think that attitude is beginning to change.  Hopefully, that   s something that I   ll be remembered for: trying to  change that attitude of exclusion, to try to promote the ideas of  contemporary Native work. I have a lot of good friends who are artists,  and so we   re continuing to work on some projects, even now.  I notice that you   re in an exhibit that   s just going around right now,  Changing Hands  Art Without Reservation 3 . Would you like to talk  about that exhibit?  Yes, that   d be a good topic. It   s really a wonderful opportunity to be a  part of that exhibition. I believe it   s eighty-five artists, over a hundred  pieces of artwork. The exhibition opened back in June of 2012 at the  Museum of Art and Design in New York City. Ellen Taubman is the co-curator.  She primarily did a lot of the leg work. This is the third  installment. I   m not sure if it   s the last installment, but I think it is. They  did the Southwest artists first, and it   s been a decade since the first  exhibition. Then they did the Central Plains artists, and now they   re  doing the Eastern artists. It was very, very interesting to go to New York  City. We went for the opening.  Was it your first visit?  It was my first trip, yes. It was my first trip, but I   m definitely a rural  kind of guy. (Laughter) I like the open spaces, and I like the fresh air and  the landscape of eastern Oklahoma. Going to New York City, I really  gained a great appreciation for Oklahoma, (Laughter) but it was  interesting. It was interesting, and we had an opportunity to do all the  things, the sightseeing, and had an opportunity to visit the Met, the  Metropolitan Museum of Art, also MOMA  Museum of Modern Art .  20  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  We did that, and then we went to the opening. Then we did all the other  New York tourist things. Went down to the 9/11 Memorial. We did that,  and then we went to Ellis Island, Statue of Liberty. Ate some expensive  food, rode in some cabs, some death rides in cabs. (Laughter) Interesting  times, but definitely had a good time.  To be able to take part in the exhibition, it   s really, I think, what artists  live for, to be included in some of these major exhibitions. This work,  this body of work deals with mainly contemporary Native artists or  contemporary art created by Native artists and not necessarily two-dimensional  work. A lot of it was conceptual ideas, sculpture, three-dimensional  work. Very interesting to see that type of work from Native  artists. There were a few emerging artists and some established artists.  Primarily, not everyone was educated with an art background, but I think  most were.  It was very interesting to see the ideas the artists from the East had. I  heard that it was probably one of the stronger shows of the three, but  that   s subjective. It was very interesting. A lot of mixed media, video,  and new materials that artists were using: wax, found objects, fibers, but  not woven. Sometimes it would just be suspended. Then taking some of  the old media and weaving photographs, different things like that. Very  powerful exhibition, I think.  It   ll travel for the next three and a half years to, I believe, eight different  venues. I think one of the venues is in Canada. Right now, it   s not  coming to Oklahoma, but we   re hoping that they might work something  out where it can come to Oklahoma. I think the closest right now would  probably be Indianapolis to the Eiteljorg Museum. The other closest  venue would be Santa Fe at the  Museum of Contemporary Native Arts .  That sounds wonderful. It needs to come to Oklahoma. (Laughs)  Yes, it does. It does.  Let   s talk a little bit about your creative process and techniques. Are you  primarily working with acrylic on canvas?  Right now, no. I don   t think I   ve worked on a canvas piece in quite a  while. If I do, it   s not a stretch canvas, a typical light-weight canvas  stretcher. I like the firmness of board because     Masonite board.  Masonite board. If I want to work on canvas for the texture, I will glue it  down to a piece of board, whether it   s wood or just a Masonite, over a  21  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  three-dimensional structure. I really do, I like the firmness of it, and then  I don   t have worry about someone sticking their finger through it, or  somebody accidentally doing something to the surface. It   s kind of rigid,  and I like that.  Acrylics, then?  Acrylics, primarily acrylics, yes. Earlier I stated that I was really  interested in watercolor. At OSU, I did a lot of watercolor, took a few  watercolor courses and some special studies with the watercolor  instructor. Later on, I realized that the watercolor itself would lose its  intensity when you applied it to paper. I really like the intensity of color.  Maybe it   s about my own personality, but I think a lot of it, too, has  something to do with the regalia that Native people wear, very beautiful  combinations of colors. I think Native people want to be recognized, and  so those colors really attribute to that. I also like the colors, the intensity  of color.  I was painting on paper, and one day   I think it was when I was at OU,  and it may have been George Hughes. He said,    You ought to paint  with       because at the time, I was painting with watercolor quite a bit.  He said,    You ought to try painting with acrylics. You can do the same  thing with acrylics that you do with watercolor, but once an acrylic  dries, it   s permanent, and the intensity, a lot of times, stays. You won   t  lose it. You can build up or even take away if you wanted to when it   s  still wet on paper.     So I began to experiment with acrylics. There   s a lot of different things  you can do with it. It   s a very versatile medium, a lot of different  polymers you can add to it. If you want to extend it, there   s extenders  that you can make it work a little bit like oil paint. You can thin it down.  You can change the sheen. You can make it thick, and it   s transparent.  There   s a lot of different things that you can do with acrylics. I think  that   s probably why I like it. Oil paint dries, it takes a little while for oil  paint to dry. Maybe I   m not that patient. Acrylics is something that you  can paint with very quickly, also. I think that   s why I really like it. Right  now, primarily, acrylic paint.  I   m glad you mentioned Native regalia because it used to be that some of  your bright colors reminded me of patchwork a little bit, Seminole  patchwork, but I see you incorporating some ribbonwork designs right  around the image. Do you want to talk about when you started doing  that?  Oh, sure. It goes back to, I think, the ideas behind where I grew up. I  was born in LA, and we grew up mainly around urban Indians. We  22  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  didn   t see a whole lot of regalia, but later on as we moved back to  Oklahoma in the early    70s, we began to attend dances and some cultural  events, and we had access to more traditional dress. The colors that I  saw and the patterns that I saw, the motifs, they were being used in the  patchwork, and how they used them. Different cultures used them  differently. I think the Sac and Fox used them a little bit more vertical.  Then there was a combination   there was geometric shapes along with  very organic lined images. I was really kind of drawn to that because I  am such an outdoorsman. I like to hunt and fish and love spending time  outside when I can. I even take my students outside, and we do organic  observations in class.  The outdoors has definitely influenced that idea behind some of the  designs I incorporate now and even learning how to do that. My  grandmother, who was full-blood Sac and Fox, she lived north of  Shawnee. I   d visit her every now and then. I asked her,    How do the Sac  and Fox come up with their ideas for ribbonwork designs?    She grabbed  a newspaper, and she grabbed a pair of scissors, and she said,    This is  how they do it.    She folded the paper in half, and she began to cut away  and cut a simple design. Then she opened it up and said,    Well, this is  how they start.     That idea, it never really left me. Even now, and probably even more  now, I   m thinking about taking those woven designs, and creating my  own, and building designs, and incorporating into the work and taking it  even further. Even thinking about new media, illuminating things from  behind is a new area that I   m kind of looking at right now. Taking  transparent images and some nice lines, line work, and then illuminate it  from the back.  It wouldn   t be on board at that point?  It would probably be on Plexiglas.  Interesting.  Plexiglas. The new media, the new ideas, new concepts that we   re  coming up with are very interesting. That   s part of what you see as an  artist. I don   t think we steal things from other artists, but we can be  inspired by other artists and by what they   re doing, to see the  possibilities of what you could do with that and take it to the next level  in your own work.  You   re also doing some three-dimensional painting.  I am. I   m taking not just the two-dimensional form of equal sides,  23  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  rectangles, but taking and creating three-dimensional triangles and  rectangles and all the other geometric shapes that are not necessarily  rectangles, and also creating recessed areas and raised areas. It   s a little  difficult to work with because you   re so familiar with working in two  dimensions. As you begin to work with three, you have to think about  more space and more planes to work in. It   s a challenge, but I really like  it. As people come in and look at the new pieces, they definitely make  an impact. That   s the first piece that people mainly walk to, is to the new  work that I   m doing that is not rectangular.  You mentioned how one of your professors honed in on this, you loved  color, and acrylics would be a good step. Since you started using  acrylics, do you think your palette has changed much?  It probably has a little bit. Even now, I think I   m still exploring color.  Color is something that is very mysterious. It takes a long time to fully  understand combinations of color sometimes, especially if you do a lot  of layers of things. There   s a lot of layering that goes into the work that  I   m doing right now.  Even underpainting, underpainting and adding colors on top of colors,  and next to colors, it really is a challenge, and to be satisfied with it. Not  only that, but some of the underpainting that I   m doing when I pour on  wet artwork, I may use some other type of material to hold the paint  there and infuse and to create other rectilinear lines in the underpainting.  Coming back and painting on top of those with designs is really, it   s part  of exploration that an artist does.  Right now, I   m working on some small pieces just to kind of see  whether or not this design element or this combination of colors is  worthy to take it to a larger piece. I   m doing a lot of that right now.  From this small body of work, larger pieces will be created, I think, in  the next couple of years, next couple of months or whenever, and then  also incorporating other ideas, concepts, with illumination.  What is your creative process from the time you get an idea?  My creative process begins with reading, writing, observation. I like to  read. I didn   t like to read as a kid. As a child, I did not like to read. I see  this a lot in young men. We don   t read, primarily. We like to watch and  play sports and be active and be outside. Reading is something that I see,  even in my students, that the guys don   t like to do a lot of that, so I   m  constantly encouraging them to read and to build a vocabulary. As I read  more, primarily, the main book that I read is the Bible, but I like to read  philosophy and different people who speak about philosophy and  religion. History, I like to read a lot of history. That information plays an  24  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  important part in the content of what I   m doing.  I think that every artist works from a different viewpoint. It   s not  always,    Well, I   m going to paint. I   m going to just come up with an  idea and paint something.    I think subject matter, content, and form are  the three components. Some just start painting, and then something  evolves from that. Some people have an idea about an image. For me,  it   s a little bit of everything. It just depends on what I   m doing, from  visually researching things, from nature or photographs. I like  photographs, old photographs. Then also, the writing that I   m reading  plays an important part. Now I   m incorporating a little bit more text in  my work, not a lot, definitely dates. If you look at some of my current  work, there   s dates incorporated into it     Historical dates?     historical dates, primarily, to kind of get a sense of time.  And that will trigger associations?  Yes. What   s interesting, too, is that for Native Americans, dates mean  something specific, but to non-Natives, they also represent something  that   s significant to them. I   ve had that happen a couple times. I thought  that was pretty interesting, that for me it represented a certain time, but  also for them, for non-Natives, it also represented a different time and  event in their life or in history. The process is definitely   there   s not one  element that I gravitate to. It   s kind of a combination of different things.  Not only that, it   s the collaborations, the opportunities to speak with  other artists. I   m a part of a group called the Southeastern Indian Artists  Association, or SEIAA. There   s quite a few Native artists that we get  together. Last night, we actually had a meeting and talked about some  issues and talked about art. Primarily, most of the artists have some type  of art background or art education.  It   s kind of interesting that we can really bounce off some pretty  challenging ideas around each other and see where we could take those.  It   s really fun. We have a good time doing that, and there   s a strong  body of artists there. Those are some of the artists that I also use when I  curate exhibitions. Just to name a few of the artists, Bobby Martin, Troy  Jackson, Joseph Erb, Roy Boney, and now Michael Elizondo Jr. There   s  a few other artists, too, that are around that we   d like to incorporate into  different shows but, primarily, those gentlemen that I get to see on a  regular basis.  I don   t think we necessarily feed off each other or borrow from each  25  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  other, but we do encourage each other with what we   re doing, ourselves,  and it gives them the courage to really kind of push the envelope a little  bit. Right now with Troy Jackson, he works with me at Bacone, and we  see each other every week. We always try to spend a little time talking  about artwork and what   s going on and what we could do together or  just whatever and encourage each other. The new artists, too, that idea of  not excluding but including young artists is very important to that  collaboration, to that effort as we move forward as artists.  What   s your creative routine?  My creative routine (Laughter). It   s challenged now that I   m a director  of a small program and I teach. (Laughter) I teach quite a few hours. It   s  been very, very good that Bacone understands that I need to spend some  time in my studio, so they   re very lenient with my time. I try to give as  much as I can to Bacone, but I also need to spend time in my studio. In  my garage I have set up a table saw building area where I can build  things. It   s not perfect, but it   s doable. I   ll open my garage door, pull up  my truck, and take my cutting instruments out there, and I   ll cut with my  miter box and my table saw and other hand tools. I do enjoy it when the  weather is nice and the temperature is agreeable. I enjoy being outside  and seeing fresh air, birds, and all that good stuff.  I work in the house, as well, have a finishing studio, which is basically  an extra bedroom, but it   s set up pretty nice. Have a nice easel and a nice  rack. It has all my materials and equipment in it. Then even sometimes  in this living room where we   re sitting, the small pieces, I may do some  finishing in here because I have some nice windows that give me some  good light. I like to get up early and take a walk, take my dog for a walk,  make a pot of coffee, generally pray, do a little reading, and then I   m  ready to go. Then I start painting and usually spend the rest of the day  painting.  Sometimes my wife will see me in the one spot when she leaves, and  she   ll come home for lunch, and she   ll say,    You   re still in that same  spot     (Laughter) I say,    I   m still working.    Then she   ll leave and go  back to work, then she   ll come home, and I   m still in that same spot. She  said,    Didn   t you do anything today?    I said,    Yes, I worked on five  pieces today     (Laughter) Sometimes she doesn   t realize the work that I  do, but she likes the benefits of what we receive from it. (Laughter) The  process is definitely good. I really enjoy what I do. Being able to be  creative and use the talents and the gifts that the Creator has given me is  really worth living.  And you have a project you   re excited about that   s coming up.  26  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Yes, right now I have numerous things that I   m working on. I   m looking  at different curation opportunities, so I   m talking to some different  people in different cities outside of Oklahoma about curating some  contemporary Native shows. Don   t want to say anything right now  because they   re not finalized, but definitely looking outside of  Oklahoma. Minneapolis is a city that I   m interested in. Chicago is  another place that I   m interested in. Maybe LA. Seattle is another place  I   m interested in curating some Native work. From primarily the  northeast Oklahoma area, I think we have a really strong body of artists  here, so I   m thinking about trying to get us out further than just into  Oklahoma or even Santa Fe. Actually, repeat your question again.  You mentioned that you had an upcoming project you were excited  about.  Oh, the project, yes, yes. Curation is definitely something I do, and then  also the collaboration I   m working on with Bob Martin. I spent some  time at his studio. He has a nice little place just east of Tahlequah, here,  along the Illinois River, so we go out and hang out sometimes and talk.  He had some metal, some sheet metal with some Dawes Roll names cut  out with a plasma cutter. He had created a piece for the water show that I  helped co-curate along with the America Meredith and Heather Ahtone.  The water show, we brought together eighteen artists, contemporary  artists, from Oklahoma. They had some kind of connection where they  lived in Oklahoma.  The H2OK water show dealt with Native issues with the water in  Oklahoma. We had printmakers, painters, but Mr. Martin created a water  piece. He built a box. Then he put a water pump in the box, and he had a  piece of steel that was horizontal, and it had these holes cut out. Then he  had two little holes that looked like maybe photographs could fit inside.  He   s also working in encaustic on paper. It   s a wax on paper. He created  a light box with water running through the cut-out holes of the steel.  Then he incorporated two small paintings, encaustic pieces, into the  openings, but he also illuminated it from inside. It had water and the  illumination and metal and steel and paper and wood, so it was a very  strong piece in the water show.  He had some other steel laying around his studio. We were in there  talking one day after I just came back from giving a noontime lecture at  the Philbrook. Christina Burke had just put up an exhibition called  Seeking the Sacred, and so she had some religious work and spiritual  work from different artists from the area. She asked me if I   d give a  noontime lecture on it, and so I did. It was a subjective response to what  I saw.  27  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  After that, we kind of had this idea of spirituality, thinking about our  ancestors and how they had passed on their belief to us. It   s not the  typical Native belief in spiritualism. More of it   s Christian. I saw the  names, and some of those guys were some of the first Christians in his  family. I said,    Why don   t we build a gravehouse, a Muscogee Creek  gravehouse, in full size?    The idea just began to grow. What we   re  going to do is we   re going to build a Muscogee Creek gravehouse, and  then we   re going to attach the steel with the cut-out names to the  openings around the sides of the gravehouse. Then we   re going to use  wood to kind of make it look like a structure, an older structure.  Then we   re going to illuminate the inside of the gravehouse with light.  On the top where the roof would be, what we   re going to do is we   re  going to use a transparent, maybe Plexiglas or maybe some other type of  transparent plastic. The shingles are going to be individual paintings,  drawings, photographs of our ancestors and have that illuminated. An  interesting piece, definitely conceptual, incorporating light and  drawings, paintings, photographs but not a whole lot of painting. Just  more construction and concept. Very interesting piece, I think. That   s  what we   re working on right now.  It   s very different, but we got those ideas from looking at contemporary  work and even non-Native work, just ideas. That   s kind of where we   re  heading right now, and I   m very excited about it. Also, Mr. Martin is  working on an exhibition down at the Sequoyah National Research  Center on the University of Arkansas-Little Rock campus. He   s going to  curate an exhibition of Native printings, different types of prints. He   s  going to draw from the Bill Wiggins collection. Mr. Wiggins didn   t  realize how many prints that he has. He has quite a few, so he   s going to  use a few of his pieces. Some of the artists who are in Mr. Wiggins  collection, he   s asked if they would contribute a printed piece to the  collection.  Do you have a piece?  I   m actually getting ready to work on it. (Laughter) Yes, I was notorious  for bringing it to the very end, so I   m working on the monotype for the  piece. Actually, I   m going out to Bob   s studio on Sunday, this coming  Sunday, and work on some of that. I   m very, very excited about being an  artist right now and being creative and being part of an art world of  really good artists. I   m excited about the future.  If there   s anything else you   d like to add or talk about, we can do that.  Otherwise, we   ll move on and look at your artwork.  All right. Just really in closing, it   s been a good trip. The opportunities  28  Little Thunder  Tiger  I   ve had to make something of my life, really it goes back to all the  individuals in my life, not just my parents but the instructors, the  professors at the institutions, other artists, and family members who are  no longer with us. I have a really blessed life. The Creator has given me  a life to live, and I   ve been able to really receive major blessings, I think,  from that and from a spiritual life and understanding who we are as  people, and being able to do the things I   ve done and still plan to do. I  was probably the least likely out of my family to succeed as an  individual, definitely to be able to go as far as I did in my education. A  lot of individuals played a part in it, and I   m very thankful for that.  I just encourage anybody out there who may see this material. My tears  aren   t tears of weakness. They are tears of appreciation for what I do  have. If any Native person sees this information, sees this video, I just  want to encourage them that what happened to our people in the past, it  was tragic that it happened the way it did and that many of our people no  longer exist. Whole tribes and whole clans are gone, but we are still  here. We   re still here, and the Creator gave us that. He gave us an  opportunity to live and to express ourselves and to remind people that as  a Native people, we still matter. We can still contribute to this world and  to the understanding that there is more to life than just the physical, and  we should definitely be passing on what we know to the next generation  so that they, too, can find their place in the world and in their  occupation.  I just want to say thanks to Oklahoma State University because I did, I  received a wonderful opportunity to study art there. It was really just a  major, major blessing to be able to do that. They helped prepare me to  go on and take the next step in my art career. To be able to say that is  just wonderful. I   m very pleased with how life has turned out so far, and  I   m looking forward to the future.  Thank you for sharing that, Tony. Would you like to talk about this  piece?  Yes, this piece is an acrylic painting on stretched canvas over board or  panel. It   s twenty-four inches wide by forty-eight inches tall. The piece  is titled Friendship and Protection. You   ll see this red outline, an area of  an individual. Some people look at it and don   t necessarily see the  individual first.  The content of the piece really deals with the dates in the piece, so 1789  is when the Sac and Fox were first introduced to a relationship to the US  government. There were some Sacs at one of the forts. I think it   s Fort  Harmon. They were just there at the fort at this time when the US  government was trying to create these relationships with some of the  29  local Natives in the area. Really, they had no authority to sign anything,  but because they were at the fort, they signed a document or put their  mark on it:    We had Sac and Fox here,    or,    We had Sacs here,    or  Meskwaki or the Foxes.    We had a group here.     By them being there, they just basically initiated them into a relationship  with the federal government and began to turn and change their way of  life. As that relationship continued to foster many, many, many  thousands, maybe millions of acres were ceded away to the US  government. In reading some of the treaty, I read in the treaty this one  major part in the first paragraph, it talked about friendship and  protection, so it   s not necessarily a good thing because of all the land  that was ceded away at that time.  Later on, in the 1830s, the Blackhawk, they call it a war. It really wasn   t  a war. It was Blackhawk was trying to free his people and take them to  freedom. A lot of the people died in that incident, and some of the  political leaders wrote about there was really never a war. It was just  them trying to chase this group of people down. In the end, many of the  people were slaughtered at the Missouri River. Blackhawk and his  entourage survived, but many, many, many, even thousands of people  died in that so-called war.  So the piece is filled with a lot of icons and symbolism. First, the date  there, 1492. Native people, they don   t necessarily always see that date as  a positive thing. Then you see that Fort Harmon date, the 1789. Then  1776, definitely, the US ratification of becoming a country. In 1907,  Indian Territory became Oklahoma. There   s even some information  there about that. This group of people, the Sac and Fox, when they came  from Kansas to Oklahoma after being run out of the Illinois area and the  Missouri River were given a small patch of land in northern Iowa.  Wasn   t all that nice.  Then eventually, they were moved over to Kansas. Part of the group  went back to Iowa, and then part of the group   because Kansas really  didn   t care to have any Native people in their new state, were trying to  forcibly remove Native people from their state. This group of people  who stayed, Sac and Fox who stayed in Kansas, heard about Indian  Territory, so in 1869, created a treaty with the US government and were  given some land in Indian Territory. That actually happened in 1867,  and in 1869, they made the physical move down to Oklahoma. They  were given land from the Creeks. The Creeks participated in the Civil  War on the South   s side, and because of what they did, they took land  from the Creeks, and they sold it to the Sac and Fox. That long strip of  land that the Sac and Fox have in Oklahoma was actually Creek land.  30  The idea behind it, there   s a lot of different symbols and some icons  there. You see the concentric circles. Those represent life. The outer  circle represents the physical. The inner circle there, it represents the  mind, the soul. Inside the circle is the red which represents the spirit of  the individual.  They   re laying on top of each other, representing time, the different  generations that passed before us. Even the outline of the piece  represents more of an idea of how we see ourselves as Native people.  Not everybody sees us   we see ourselves the same. I think there   s a  very strong, I would call it a romance with our identity as Native people.  There   s strong belief, and we want to retain our culture. Even looking  back at that time, it was very hard to make a living and to live on the  land. Modern American Indian, I think we   re very spoiled, and we   re  very accustomed to the new trends of technology.  As the Sac and Fox moved into Oklahoma at that time, they were also  introduced very closely to other tribes, and, really, Oklahoma is kind of  a melting pot of Native peoples. Talk about America being the melting  pot of the world, Oklahoma is definitely a melting pot of Native tribes.  Right now, there   s thirty-nine state- and federal-recognized tribes in  Oklahoma.  At that time, the Sac and Fox were very close to the Creeks and also just  north of the Seminole reservations. My ancestors became friends with  Seminoles. My grandmother who is full-blood Sac and Fox, she ended  up marrying a Seminole man, so we have Seminole blood as well as the  Sac and Fox blood. Then my mother, who is Sac and Fox and Seminole,  ended up marrying my father who was Creek and Seminole. So I   m Sac  and Fox, Seminole, and Creek, but I   m enrolled in the Sac and Fox tribe.  So that   s what the different little motifs there. There   s a woodland motif  that runs along the left side there that   s painted blue and purple, and then  you have light blue designs going horizontally across the top. Those  represent the Seminole patchwork designs that are readily used in the  clothing. They kind of represent how the two different tribes use their  designs, one vertical and one horizontal.  The stars represent the different states that the Native people came from.  Actually, there   s quite a few stars on the piece. Even on the sides,  there   s a dimension to the sides. They represent the states that the tribes  came from when they came to Indian Territory. They were looking for a  place where Native people could be and could live in peace.  Then, if you look closely, there   s a stripe that runs through the piece,  both vertically and horizontally. It represents the Creator, Father, Son,  31  Little Thunder  Tiger  Holy Ghost, and that really by His will we   re still here and we still have  a part to play in the history of the world. I think we still have things to  contribute to the world, so this piece definitely speaks about that. At the  bottom there   s a bag there. It   s a tobacco bag. You see    2011.    That   s  when I finished the piece, but it really kind of represents Native people  in the twenty-first century.  There   s a lot of different layers of application of acrylic paint. There   s a  lot of layers of loose painting applications of acrylic paint being applied,  very transparent-like and in liquid form. Then I would take different  types of plastic and cloth and pour the paint on, to create those  rectilinear shapes, very organic-looking, also, where the paint really  infuses together and creates a background. Then I just began to paint  freehand with a brush and create the rest of the painting. Lots of levels  of depth in the piece but a lot of interesting areas.  I think the composition takes the viewer around the piece pretty well.  It   s some fairly decent content, I think. I   m really pleased with that.  There   s a series of things being developed in this style. I have another  piece similar to it called Twenty-First Century Man, and I have a piece  in the studio that I   m currently working on. Very pleased with this piece.  Would you like to tell us a little bit about this one?  Yes, this is a piece called William   s Descendants. I think in the graduate  program at OU, I began to incorporate photographs into the piece  because it dealt with my own identity as an individual and as an artist. I  had seen the photographs of this individual, this man who   s in the stairs,  stepping downward. As I began to learn more about this individual, he is  one of the gentlemen who came from Kansas to Indian Territory in the  1860s.  His American name was William Pattiquah. He was a great-great-great-grandfather  on the Sac and Fox side. The photograph is a Smithsonian  photograph from 1912. He (he   s my paternal grandfather) and my  maternal grandfather are in a photograph together, sitting side by side  when they went to Washington, DC, on behalf of the tribe to talk about  land issues. I had that wonderful photograph of a relative from that time  period. Not many do. I have both the maternal and paternal  grandparents    photographs, grandfathers. Very, very valued image that I  have in my collection. The piece is called William   s Descendants, and as  I learned more about this individual in talking to relatives, talking to  tribal members, doing some research, it was like I was beginning to  know him better and beginning to know more about him.  Also, he gave some land to my grandmother, so I grew up on that  32  Little Thunder  Tiger  property. There   s a live creek running through the property, and there  was a train trestle in the back of the property, and the train track. Trains  would run by. We spent a lot of times running around, fishing in the  creek and swimming, and then later on, began to hunt the property with  a fellow cousin. We really appreciated their efforts to hang onto the  land, and it is still in the family   s possession to this day. We really  benefitted from this gentleman   s efforts to remain intact and not sell his  property. We really had a wonderful experience there on his land.  The triangle images are his descendants. There   s one image with  children towards the center. It   s an Easter Sunday. His great-great-great-great-  grandchildren are on his property and enjoying that space almost a  hundred years later, actually a hundred years later and then some. Just a  wonderful opportunity to spend time with your relatives on his property.  The gentleman who   s just to the right of that in the yellow triangle is my  uncle who was a paratrooper in the Vietnam War. I don   t think he ever  saw battle, but he was definitely right there, and he was preparing to go  over. He may have seen a little bit of battle, (his name is Jim Wood) so  carrying on that idea of being a warrior because they were definitely a  warrior society. I think that was a very nice image to include into the  piece, talking about his descendants.  Then to the far right is myself and my son. He   s probably about a day or  two old in that photograph. I look pretty rugged in the photograph  because I was working graveyard at that time. (Laughter) I   d just got up  from sleeping all morning, and my wife was dying Easter eggs, and our  baby was just a few days old.  I love the continuity of that.  Then to the far left, there are images of people that he would   ve known  in his community, so you see a couple there. In the full photograph (I cut  away part of it) the family is standing next to a bark house. There were  still some people living in those types of structures in Indian Territory.  To the far, far right was the agency school that, eventually, some of his  children went to and grandchildren went to. Very, very narrative, I  guess, in the content of the piece.  Then you see some imagery in the back. You see the motif there, the  woodland motif. Again, you see the stripe there, representing God, and  that it   s by His hand that we are still here and by His grace that we still  live and can contribute. Again, you see the concentric circles that  represent life. I wanted to include those because it talks about the  generations before us that lived and died. We still have a responsibility  as individual Native people to continue and contribute to society and  33  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  carry on our traditions and carry on our beliefs. So the piece, Williams     Descendants, I think, is a very strong piece.  We   re going to look at this real quickly. This is a piece in progress, I  understand.  Yes, this is a new form that I   m working in, not working in the strictly  two-dimensional rectangular shapes but taking these triangular shapes,  not only that but also working in multiple planes for the center. Where  the concentric circles are, that   s recessed. Then, again, there   s another  piece that is raised even further above the overall triangular shape. It   s  raised off the surface quite a bit. I have a background in building homes  and building things and spent some time working in remodeling and  construction. I really appreciate that time because it allowed me to learn  and to use some tools and to build things. I like doing that. I think that   s  one reason why I   m creative and I like to be creative, is because I get to  use my hands.  In the arts, you can be ever-changing, or you can stay and create the  same thing if you want to. I like the latter. I like to change. I   m  constantly looking at new concepts. This is definitively one of the latest  concepts. Very interesting shape. Every time someone sees the piece,  they kind of gravitate toward it and ask questions about it, (Laughter) so  I definitely need to get this one finished. I have a couple other pieces  very similar to this in shape. These are some of the newer pieces that I   ll  be working on and getting these out in, probably, 2013.  You know you   ve got something there. Okay, well, let   s look at the big  piece. I like the richness of William   s Descendants, too. It looks like it   s  done on cloth, it   s so rich-looking.  Oh, yes. That was about restraint because there   s really not a whole lot  of paint on it. It   s really transparent in a lot of its quality and not a lot of  paint.  This piece is entitled Life. The main thing, I think, that sticks out to  everybody is the three stripes again representing God: Father, Son, Holy  Ghost. Very dark. I think a lot of times that   s really kind of how life is  perceived, especially as you get older, maybe not as a child. I think  when you   re young, life is very carefree. You don   t have responsibilities  for family or a job or income or anything like that. When you   re a child I  think you   re very much more carefree, but you   re not eliminated from  pain and suffering. As you get older and older, I think your realization of  what life can be and what it basically can become is pretty dark.  So, again, you see the concentric circles in the back, completing the  34  Little Thunder  piece both from top to bottom. Filling in that space represents mankind,  and not always seeing each other clearly. I think it deals with more of  man as a whole and not necessarily Native man, just mankind as a  whole. You see some differences in different colors and shapes, and  they   re not all the same, kind of the idea of different cultures, not fully  understanding each other and not seeing each other clearly as God sees  us.  I think that   s where we have a lot of trouble in our world, is that we  don   t understand each other, we don   t respect each other, and so it  makes life hard. We see that even today, with all the rumors of wars and  all the different actions that different countries are taking against  everybody.  The thing that I see about the piece that   s most important and even the  title of it is that we can change. We can begin to understand and try to  understand why we   re here. I think that   s really what life is about. It   s  about God gave us an opportunity to experience life, to get to know Him  in a way that can change your life. I think a lot of times we really believe  that we are here for us, but, really, I don   t see that in the things that I  read and in the Bible, especially. He says that He created us for Himself,  to have a relationship, to know Him, to know why He   s created you.  And the way that He   s created you also represents the idea of a triune  being. We do have a physical, we do have a spiritual side, and we also  have the capacity to think and to learn.  If you think about the Creation, itself, everything is pretty much in its  perfect order, how we rotate around every twenty-four hours, how every  thirty days the moon rotates around us, and how we, every 365 days,  rotate around the sun and at the perfect axis. If there was one degree  change, just even a small amount, somebody   s going to die on earth.  God has placed us in a very particular way in a very particular creation,  and He   s given us seasons to understand who He is and how we are to  live and respond to Him.  So, the piece, even though it   s very dark, I think it has a lot to say about  humanity and the possibilities of an idea that there is a Creator that we  cannot see. The little rectilinear shapes on the surface (they are blue)  represent His spirit going out to mankind and trying to touch them in a  way that they would understand,    I   m God, and I   m in control. I created  you, and I created you for a purpose.    The piece is titled Life, and it   s an  acrylic painting stretched on canvas around a wooden stretcher. I think  it   s a very interesting piece.  Thank you for sharing that story, and thank you very much for taking  time out to interview with us today.  35  Tiger Well, thank you very much for coming.  -------  -------  
