 J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  My name is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is October 31, 2010.  I   m interviewing my husband, Merlin Little Thunder, as part of the  Oklahoma Native Artist Project sponsored by the Oklahoma Oral  History Research Program at OSU. We   re sitting in our Tulsa home.  Merlin, you   re a member of the Cheyenne-Arapaho  C A  tribe of  Oklahoma, especially known for your miniature work. Can you tell  me a bit about your background, your folks, where you were born?  I was born in Clinton, Oklahoma, at the Clinton Indian Hospital.  During that time, nearly all the C A children were born at Clinton  Indian Hospital. I grew up west of Canton along the North Canadian  River, west of Canton Lake area. Close to that area they called Fonda,  a small town, small trading post area that thrived for a time, and then  just like a lot of other small towns, it shut down.  Your grandmother was an important influence in your life. Can you  talk a bit about her and your folks?  At that time frame in history, a lot of things were practiced that   aren   t  generally practiced  today . The grandmother was usually  responsible for raising the children. The grandmother would raise the  children until they were around eight or nine years old. Then they  would go back to their folks and be raised by their folks. The reason  for that was that they had great respect for their grandmother. The  grandmother never had to really have any disciplinary problems with  those children. She would just give them a light shake on the shoulder  and they would stop, they would behave. She was the disciplinarian  and she taught them. She taught them during that time. She taught  them and then the parents didn   t have to be the disciplinarians.  Whenever it was time for them to go back to their parents and live  with their parents   at a doings, some kind of dance   the  grandmother would point to people sitting in the distance and she  5  would tell them,    There   s your mother and father right there. Go to  them. Go to them.     These children would have this Peter-Pan like effect, and they would  go run to their parents and they would be really brand new. They   d be  new, so in essence, the grandmother would have already done the  groundwork for their parents. From that point on, they stayed with  their mother and father, and their father and mother resumed raising  them. That   s essentially how we were done. We were mostly raised  with our grandmother. Our grandmother took care of our early,  formative years and she brought us along. She taught us. She spoke to  us. She told us stories at night time. There were times when we  couldn   t sleep and she would tell us stories. Sometimes, she used to  illustrate on the wall through the camp light. She would illustrate with  hand shadows on the wall. She   d say,    It looks like this. It looks like  that.    Anyway, she   d done her best to bring us up traditionally.  Then they had a meeting over there, some of the headsmen and some  of the principal men had a meeting. The concern was that the land  people, the land management people, were continuing to bring papers  before these people and these people would read them. They wouldn   t  read them, actually, because they couldn   t read. These people would  look at them and the land management people would explain what  was on that paper, then they would sign it. A lot of them, it was just a  thumb print. They would sign it, put their mark on that paper and off  they would go. Then they would lose something.  These chiefs and these headsmen and these principal people started  saying,    Every time they come around with a paper for us to sign, we  lose something. We   re going to have to have some of our children go  to school and learn, learn these ways, so they can read us what is on  that paper, so we won   t continue to lose our land or lose our rights or  lose something.     So they had a meeting and they said,    Some of you children are  already going to school and some of you children are not. We   re  going to decide who   s going to all go to school.    So, they sent these  people out to the community, these headsmen and these principal  people. They came to our house and they said,    George, your kids are  already in school. Continue to let them go to school.    From that point  on, the battle cry was,    Go to school and learn all you can. Ask  questions. Participate.    So, that   s what we did, in essence. From that  point on, we stopped talking Cheyenne. They wouldn   t talk Cheyenne  to us anymore after that. We talked English from then on. We   d come  home from school and my grandmother and father was in the living  room, they were talking Cheyenne. And they   d stop when we came in  6  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  and they   d look at us. Then he would tell her to go to her house.     We   ll continue the conversation there.    So, he   d leave and go to her  house and they would continue their conversation there.  We kind of grew weary of that and we told him,    We want to talk  Cheyenne again. We want to learn Cheyenne.    There was a principal  man who was an Arrow Keeper. His name was Joe Antelope. He said,     Joe is coming over here this weekend. He   s coming over here. Ask  him. If he says alright, then alright.    There was a  Native American  Church meeting , a birthday meeting over there, across the river, and  Joe came. He came and  our father  said,    There he is over there, go  ask him.    And we didn   t want to go ask him. So, he said,    Come on,  let   s go.    He led us over there and he said,    Joe, these boys want to  ask you a question.    He said,    Okay, yeah, what you want?    We said,     We want to learn how to talk Cheyenne again. We want them to  teach us to talk Cheyenne.    He stopped and looked at us and kind of  pondered for a little bit and he said,    No. You won   t need it  anymore.    And that was it. We stopped talking Cheyenne after that.  What schools did you attend through high school?  First, everybody went to Longdale. We went to Longdale Elementary  School. It was what they call today a middle school. But back then,  they said it was a grade school. Longdale Elementary School. That   s  where we started going to school. As time progressed, my father had  the GI Bill, and he told us,    I can go to school on this GI Bill. I think  I   m going to Okmulgee. I   m going to go to Okmulgee Tech. I want to  go to school over there.    He asked all of us,    What do you think  about going to Okmulgee Tech? I   m going to take you away from  here and you   re going to learn new things. See different people, see  different parts of the country.    He said,    We   ll come back. We   ll  continue to come back.     It was something that was kind of ingrained. My grandmother  required him to come back for our annual ceremony. She wouldn   t  allow him to miss it. We used to always go to our annual ceremony,  every year. She made sure that we went. It was very important that  we attended. So, that was one of the stipulations that  if  he  went  off  to school that he come back every summer for the ceremony. We had  to move up  to Okmulgee . We had to literally move everything up  there because we didn   t have the money to go back and forth. We had  to just stay up there. We came home Christmas. Sometimes we didn   t  come home Thanksgiving   we had to choose Christmas or  Thanksgiving. And then we came home summertime for the  ceremony. But when he attended Okmulgee, we went to Okmulgee  schools. I went to Lee School. I don   t know if it was Robert E. Lee or  7  J. Little Thunder  if it was just called Lee School. My brother, Jimmy, went to Franklin.  I don   t know if it   s Ben Franklin or Franklin. We just knew schools  by their last names. I went to Lee, he went to Franklin.  Then we moved back after my father finished. First, he went to auto-body   school . And all the hammering and working on metal was too  hard on his hearing, his ears. He got earaches. He told my mother,     I   m going to switch. I   ve already talked to the people in the office.  I   m going to go into offset printing.    So, he went into offset printing  and he finished offset printing and from there, we moved back to  Canton. He went around all over looking for jobs around El Reno,  Oklahoma City. He found one briefly in Oklahoma City, but we  didn   t want to live in Oklahoma City. So, he continued to look and he  found one in Enid, Oklahoma. An elderly man, his name was Otis  Phillips. The company   s name was Otis Phillips House of Fine  Printing.  This man, he didn   t have any children. He liked my father. My father  worked real diligently. He used to clean up. He used to sweep when  he got through with his shift, and the old man would come in and say,     George, you don   t need to sweep. You don   t need to do that, you  don   t need to sweep. We   ve got people that come in and sweep at  night.    He   d say,    Oh, okay.    And he   d just continue to sweep. It was  the same scenario every evening,    George, you don   t have to sweep.     My father would say,    Okay, okay,    but continue to sweep, finish up.  Over there, we went to two different schools. First, we went to  Adams Elementary School, which was by Phillips University.  And then we moved across town. When we moved across town, we  went to another school called Harrison, Harrison Elementary School.  I think the pull of the Cheyenne ways was hard on my parents  because we continued to go back to Canton every single weekend.  Fonda and Seiling area   that pull was really strong. He couldn   t  really practice his ceremonial ways while we were in Enid. It was  really alien to us, it was different. Everything was different over  there. So we ended up moving back to Canton again. He quit his job  at Otis Phillips   . Otis Phillips, since he didn   t have no children, he  wanted to leave the printing shop to my father, as an heir. He wanted  to do that, and my father, he just didn   t have it in him. Couldn   t do it.  So, we moved back to Canton and resumed school at Longdale again.  After Longdale   Longdale only goes to the eighth grade   we went  to Canton High School. That   s where we both graduated.  When did you first get interested in art?  8  M. Little Thunder  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  A lot of artists always say that certain elements in nature caused them  to want to be an artist. Certain structures or certain landscapes or  animals. But for me, it was different. It was totally different how it  came to me. I think I   m going to go out on a limb and say my  experience was more of a spiritual one. It was a spiritual element that  caused me to become an artist. I was in bed one night, sleeping, and  this bright light came to me. It was a real bright light. It illuminated  the whole room, but it wasn   t physical light. It was like an inner light.  It came to me. It hovered around and it came to me and when it got  close to me, I got afraid. I was scared. I was real scared and I couldn   t  breathe. I couldn   t talk. It just like, overtook my senses. I couldn   t  make a sound.  Then, for some reason, I was able to make a noise again. I jumped out  of my bed and ran to my folks and said,    Something   s in my room   It   s a light  It   s a big light  A bright light. Something   s in my room.     And I didn   t want to go back in there. They said,    It was nothing, it  was just a nightmare. Go back in there. Go back to bed.    I didn   t want  to. I wanted to sleep in there with them and they said,    No, come on,  come on. We   ll take you back.    So, my mother took me back to my  bed and said,    See, there   s nothing here. It   s alright. Go to sleep.     That experience continued four times. Four times, it happened the  same way. It seemed like on the fourth time, I wasn   t that afraid. I  wasn   t that afraid of that light anymore. There was a lot of anxiety  there, but it was not as intense as before.  Shortly after that light came, I started drawing on everything. I drew  and drew and drew. I drew on boxes. I drew on anything that had a  smooth surface on it. I just drew. I continued to draw and draw and  draw on everything I could get my hands on. Being at that young age,  I never attributed it to that light, that light source. It didn   t dawn on  me until years later that something came to me. Something came to  me, something touched me. Something caused me to have that talent  because that   s what I did as soon as I experienced it, I drew and drew  and drew. Then, later years, it used to come again, but not so intense.  There was not a lot of fear there.  What kinds of things were you drawing after you started?  I was drawing everything I seen. I would draw trees. I would draw  cars. I would draw dogs, cats    I drew telephone posts. I was already  establishing the connection between perspective, mass, distance. I  was already looking at how telephone poles used to differ with birds  sitting on them. They used to have these insulators on these telephone  posts, these big insulators, glass insulators. And those glass insulators  used to look like birds. I continued to look at these poles and I seen  9  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  those insulators. Pretty soon, I started counting them. I said,    Hey,  wait a minute. There   s more insulators on there.    They were actually  birds. So, I was distinguishing all those fine points. And I was  mimicking everything I could.  I was watching how the grasses bent. I was watching how the leaves  shake and how the wind blew them and caused them to shake  differently. I was noticing everything. Everything was so strong and  so intense. I was watching it and I was recording it. I was recording it.  Back then, the dictionary had all these illustrations inside them. They  had these amazing little highly detailed illustrations and so I would  copy from the dictionary. I would duplicate them exactly like they  were without tracing them. One of my classmates saw me doing that,  and he said,    Why don   t you do it like this, it   s easier.    She brought  tracing paper over there and traced it. I said,    No, that   s cheating.  You want to do it on your own. You want to try to do it on your own.  As close as you can get it.     I know your Uncle Raymond was an influence on you.  Raymond was a talented artist. He was really super gifted. He could  only look at  something  once and then replicate it. Person, trees,  river, anything. He   d just look at it once and he could replicate it.  Make it look exactly like that. He was a very talented artist. He never  did   well, I think he might have sold some paintings, but he never  developed a career. Where necessity deemed, he would sell a painting  or two or trade it. But he was very talented, very gifted. I spent a long  time with Raymond. We   d travel down to the river bank and we  would walk, and he would look at things. He would stare at things for  a long time. I said,    What are you staring at?    He said,    Look over  there, look at that water there. Look on the bottom where the  reflection is. Look at the bottom there. See it? It   s dancing on the  water.    I said,    Uh-huh.    He said,    Look at the top of the reflection  and the bottom of the reflection. Which one is brighter?    I told him  the bottom is brighter and he said,    Yeah, that   s right. It is brighter.     It was brighter because it was in full sunlight and  light  was shining  on it, so that   s what made it brighter.  But then he walked down the river another place and he was looking  in the water again and he said,    Look over here, now. That   s the same  tree over there. It   s the same reflection. Which one is brighter?    I  said,    This one on the top is brighter and the one in the river is  dimmer.    He said,    Right.    He was looking at a lot of color. He was  making distinctions between color in nature. He was showing  everything. He would say,    Look at the green tree. Look how green it  is. Look at the sky behind it. Look how blue it is.    He would say,  10  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder     They   re the same. Blue and green are the same.    I didn   t know what  he was talking about. I was just kind of intrigued that he was making  all these distinctions toward nature.  When we were looking in the river and I was looking at the reflection  of this tree in the river, I seen fishes swimming around way in the  bottom, way in the bottom. They were catfishes. They were browsing  on the bottom. He said,    Look over there. Look at that limb. It   s  making it a dancing reflection in the water.    I wasn   t actually looking  at the limb or the water, I seen a frog over there, a frog, and then a  bird    I had a real acute vision. I could really see a lot of little things.  I seen a dragonfly. I was counting the creatures I was seeing instead  of paying attention to the dancing water.  When you were in high school, you were already making money on  your art. You even had commissions. Could you talk a little bit about  that?  I was always constantly drawing in high school. Always constantly  drawing on notebooks and on papers. I would illustrate all of my  homework, actually illustrate it. Some of these teachers would send it  back to me and say,    Do not draw on your homework.    Another  teacher actually kept them. (Laughter) Another teacher gave me extra  credit. She gave me extra credit for those illustrations on the  homework. I continued to draw and draw and draw. Then in art class,  I had the same art teacher from Longdale to Canton. The same art  teacher all the way through and this art teacher was more like an old  school art teacher. This art teacher taught us only to use the primary   colors and mix them . So, that   s what I used. When I went to Canton,  he was my art teacher at Canton, and he put me in charge of the art  class.  I was drawing quite a bit in art class. I was working out of subject  matter because the  other students  were working on lithograph and I  was still painting. Or they would be working on silk screen and I  would be painting. Or they would be working on charcoal and I  would be painting. Somebody said,    Why do you get to paint when  we have to work on charcoal?       Because I   m in charge here. He put  me in charge. Now be quiet and draw.     So anyway, after that, I was drawing on notebooks. I had independent  sketchbooks that I was drawing on and a lot of these kids they   d say,     I really like that.    So I   d tear it out and give it to them. I did that for  a couple years. I   d tear it out and give it to them. Pretty soon, they   d  start competing for it. They   d say    I   ll give you two dollars for it,    or     I   ll give you three dollars for it,    so I   d say,    Okay, alright.    Pretty  11  soon they weren   t free anymore.  Our high school logo was the tiger, so I did a lot of tigers. I did it for  me, creatively, as a creative process, but people were looking over my  shoulder and they were bidding. They said,    I   ll give you four dollars  for it.       No, I   ll give you five.       If you make my number, the number  of my jersey on this tiger, I   ll give you seven dollars.    I said,     Alright.    So, I was making money in high school, selling these little  drawings and sketches and prints and stuff. I got pretty proficient in  painting. I started painting more and more. I started painting different  scenes.  People used to bring me canvases and oil paints and acrylic paints and  brushes. They would constantly bring them to our house. Farmers     wives and various townspeople would say,    Your son is an artist. I  had a relative who passed away who was also an artist. They had all  this art equipment and I don   t really know what to do with it and I  hate to throw it away. I know I can   t sell it, so I   d like to give it to  you.    People were constantly giving us art equipment, art supplies.  And I utilized them, I used them and I   d paint on them. Then, this  woman who worked in a print shop that was actually the newspaper  shop had an in-house printing press and she said,    Why don   t you  bring some of your paintings and put them in the window over here?     So, I did that a couple times. I wasn   t very successful at it because I  didn   t market it very well. I didn   t make it attractive. I didn   t put a  nice frame on it, I didn   t put a mat on it. I just bought a frame from  TG Y. It was the equivalent of a Target store, because it had  everything in it. I bought a frame from TG Y and I just put a frame  on it and put a glass on it and put it in the window. I never sold it  because it wasn   t very attractive.  I distinguished that early. Early on, I knew that marketing was real  important. So, at school, I would take some of those pictures and I  would actually cut mats. Cut mats with an X-acto knife. I was just  using poster board for mats, but I would double up on them and I  would reinforce them and make them strong, and they sold. So, at an  early age, I was learning marketing techniques and marketing skills.  Knowing that people will buy something if it   s attractive, if it   s  properly displayed. It   s really important how you present things to  people.  After that, I started getting photographs from townspeople. They   d  say,    Look at this ship. Isn   t this a beautiful ship? It   s in this harbor  and look at the mist behind it and the sun. Look at the sun. The sun is  actually pink. Look at this.    So, I   d take it home and I   d replicate it  12  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  on an oil painting. I was replicating from photographs way back then.  I was doing photographs and I would take them to these farmer   s  wives and they would buy them. They would buy them for forty  dollars, sometimes sixty-five. That was a lot of money for a high  school kid. I continued to paint and paint in high school and sell to  these farmer   s wives. Some of these merchants would buy them. The  merchants and the townspeople would buy them. I was constantly  selling in high school.  How did you use that money? Did you use some of it when you went  to Southwestern  Oklahoma State College ?  No, I just spent all of it up. Just recreating.  You went to Southwestern in what year?  1975.  Did you go with the intention of pursuing art?  No, I went over there to run track. I wanted to run track. Coach  Thomas was instrumental in getting me up there. He wanted me to  run track. But then, on the other hand, there was another coach who  came to our high school to recruit me. His name was Glenn Stone. He  was from Eastern Oklahoma State College. I don   t even remember  him, but here our high school superintendent said,    Stone really  wanted you. He recruited you heavily.    I told him I don   t even  remember meeting him. (Laughter)  You won a couple of  state running  titles in high school.  We were taught to be competitive from an early age. I was real fast.  Really, really fast. We used to have these doings. One of our Arrow  Keepers would have a meeting and they would invite all the people.  All the people would come and they would eat and they would have  races. They would have little contests. I would beat all the kids in my  age group. So, they moved me up to the next age group, and I beat  those guys.  They had a system where they would say,    Okay, everybody this high  (Gestures) in this group, everybody this high. (Gestures)    So, I was  beating everybody this high, which was my age group. Then they  moved me up to that age group and I beat them guys and finally, the  older, older guys, I would beat them. I would beat them and they got  mad. They would chase me around and they would try to hit me.  They said,    Quit beating us. Quit beating us.    I   d say,    Okay,    and  13  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  then I would beat them again.  These older men came over because they were laughing at those boys.  They   d say,    That little guy is beating you guys, isn   t he? He   s really  beating you guys.    They were really laughing at them. So, those older  men came to me and said,    You better quit beating those guys.  They   re going to beat you up.    I said,    Okay, I   ll quit beating them.     So I let them win. That didn   t leave a very good taste in my mouth,  even at a young age. That really left a bad taste in my mouth. I went  and told those old men, I said,    I thought you told us to try our best. I  thought you told us to do our best.    They said,    Yeah, you should do  your best.    I said,    Oh, okay.    So, I went and beat them again. They  used to chase me around all the time because I beat them.  Anyway, I excelled in athletics because that   s what we were told to  do. We were told to be very, very competitive. They said,    The best  way you can be good is don   t compete against other people, compete  against yourself.    I didn   t understand that for a long time. My brother  and I were very athletic and we competed with one another. So in  school, naturally, we became competitors. We played football and  basketball and ran track.  You didn   t take any art classes at Southwestern?  Yeah, I did. I took some art classes there, but mostly just drawing  classes.  How did you get from Southwestern to Bacone?  Southwestern was just too big an environment for me to be in. I  needed to be in a smaller environment. I had a lot of trouble at  Southwestern. A lot of problems, a lot of trouble there, and I went  ahead and withdrew. The Superintendent of Schools, who was Jim  Bradford, said,    We think you need to go to Bacone. You need a  smaller environment. You need one-on-one with teachers.    He said,     It   s a great school.    So, I went ahead and took his advice and I went  to Bacone. I went over there because I thought Bacone had a track  program also, and I was going to run track at Bacone. Turned out,  they didn   t. I think that was 1976. The fall of 1976.  Were there any well-known Indian artists teaching at Bacone at that  time?  No, Dick West had just left, he   d just exited. I think he went to  Haskell. My art instructor was Gary Colbert. His approach was just  14  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  go upstairs and paint. Just go paint, that   s all. Or go downstairs     (Laughs) I know there were a lot of students from the Southwest,  Zunis, Navajos and Apaches, in the art program. Your experiences  with them    How did they inform your work?  My roommate was a Navajo. He was from Flagstaff, Arizona and he  could speak his language really well. He was really into Native  American church. He never really painted it. He never really painted  Native American church. He spoke a lot of Navajo. Our styles were  different. My style was more based on a realistic approach. His style  was in between flat, two-dimensional and realism, so it was hard to  characterize what style he was. We became friends. His friends would  come to our room and they would talk Navajo. They would talk their  language. I would sit there and I would listen. Listen and listen.  I just listened to their tones, the tones of their language. I kept looking  at these two other guys, they were different than the main group and I  finally approached them and said,    You guys are Apaches, aren   t  you?       Yeah, yeah, we   re Apaches.       How come you   re talking  Navajo?    He said,    Our languages are similar. There   s a few words  that are different.    That was interesting to hear them.  Anyway, we kind of did a cultural exchange. Ray Joe would ask me  about my tribe, my beliefs, and then he would tell me his. He would  tell me his beliefs and his tribe and legends and lore, et cetera. He  would say,    Paint a Navajo painting and I   ll critique it. I   m going to  paint a Plains Indian scene and you critique it. Tell me what I did  wrong.    So, we   d do that. We   d critique  them .  How did you end up at Eastern Oklahoma State College in Wilburton,  Oklahoma?  Well, I really wanted to run track. I did continue to run and train at  Bacone. I used to get up every morning and I would run three, four or  five miles every morning. Then I would run in the afternoon,  sometimes in the evening. I did that for a while. I noticed I was  cutting down a lot on that. I think the pull was pretty strong. And I  wasn   t really doing anything at Bacone, I wasn   t really achieving  anything. I wasn   t going to the places I wanted to go because I wasn   t  there as an art student. Anyway, I finally did go to Eastern Oklahoma  State College. I went to Eastern and I was introduced to Coach Stone.  He said,    I wanted you right out of high school.    He said,    We   ll start  you in. We   ll start you with your track program.    So  I  started the  track program. That   s where it all began right there. I realized that I  was out too long. I was out too long to really have that kind of edge. I  15  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  didn   t continue over there in the track program. I only went a certain  distance. I didn   t go the whole distance.  You had lost your parents, too.  Yeah, lost my mother and father. So, that really took a lot out. Took   out  a lot of drive and a lot of passion. Kind of left you listless, so to  speak.  You did meet someone and got married and moved to Arkansas for a  while where you worked in a factory. What did you do there?  I worked on a paint line for Ream and Rudd air conditioning units.  All I did was take these painted parts off the line and put them in  baskets or stack them up. It was a pretty mundane job, a factory job.  It wasn   t any fun. But I kept journals and sketchbooks and I  continued to draw and sketch.  How did you end up in Tulsa?  Well, the marriage failed over there in Wilburton and I just walked  away from it. After the divorce, I just walked away and went to Tulsa.  A lot of people were saying,    You should go to Tulsa. You   re really  talented. You   re wasting your talent over here.    I was painting signs,  being a sign painter. I was selling paintings to people, here and there.  I wasn   t really doing anything with it. Anyway, they used to  encourage me,    you should go to Tulsa.    So I went to Tulsa.  I know that you had a rough time at first, until you hooked up with  Jim Hewlett. Do you want to tell us how you met Jim and how he  helped you out in your career?  At my wit   s end, I finally decided to go to Tulsa from Wilburton and  I went literally with the clothes on my back. And this preacher was  going to Henryetta. He was going to Oklahoma City  but  he was  going to go through Henryetta. He said,    I   ll give you a ride.    So, he  took me to Henryetta. He said,    I   m going to buy you lunch over  here. You continue on this road and you   ll get to Tulsa. You ought to  get a ride between here and there. The next time I see you, you   ll be  so dang rich you   ll be buying me lunch.    (Laughter) So I said,    Oh,  okay.    I continued on and I went to Tulsa. I didn   t have a clue what to  do. No clue what to do.  Anyway, I continued to just wander around in Tulsa and these street  guys said,    Hey, this guy over here, his name is Jim Hewlett. He  collects Indian art. You should go over there and you should show  16  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  him your drawings.    When I got to Tulsa, there was this printing  company   I didn   t know it was a printing company, but I was  walking, taking a shortcut through the alley and I seen this dumpster.  It was just overflowing with paper of all descriptions and sizes. I  guess these guys were just throwing out their stock that was no longer  available. So, I took a bunch of that paper. I took it and I put it under  my arm. I was walking downtown to the big buildings and I found  pencils on the ground along the way. And I went to the ice rink over  there. It was called Williams Center Forum. I went down there, I  started drawing pictures. Sitting there, I had all this paper, and I was  drawing pictures.  And all of a sudden, all these people started coming out of nowhere.  They were dressed up like they came from church. They had these  suits on. It was the Williams Company   s employees. They came  down for lunch. On the bottom,  by  the ice rink was a restaurant and  they would go eat lunch there. I continued to draw pictures and  people would walk behind me and look over my shoulder and they  said,    Oh, man, where are you seeing that? Are you just drawing that  from memory?    I said,    Yeah.    And they said,    Wow, that   s really  nice.    Pretty soon, someone would say,    How much you want for  that?    I   d say,    Oh, I don   t know.    They said,    Well after work, we   ll  come back down and see how far along you are. If you want to sell it,  we   ll buy it from you.     The security guard was kind of watching me, too, and he was part  Cherokee. He said,    Man, that   s really good. That   s really nice.    And  he started telling me about all the artists he knew. He said,    Are you  going to sell it?    I said,    I don   t even know how to price, I   ve never  sold this kind of work before.    And he started looking through there  and he looked at one and said,    How about this one? I really like this  one. How much you want for this one?    I said,    Oh, I don   t know. I   ll  let you have it for ten dollars.    He said,    Are you kidding me?       No,  I   ll let you have it for ten dollars.    He started digging through his  pocket and he said,    I only have eight dollars. Wait a minute, let me  see.    He started digging through this other  pocket  and he got  change. He gave me eight dollars and change for that pencil drawing.  Was it a portrait?  No, it was horses. It was horses. Indians on horses. It was a big old  cedar tree. They were all standing around a cedar tree and they were  all on horseback. One of them looked like he was looking on the  ground. I think that   s what this security guard was attracted to. So, he  bought it. Anyway, I continued to draw. And those people did come  down. Quitting time, they all came down and they asked,    How much  17  for this, how much for that?    I was selling for twenty, twenty-five  dollars. Next thing you know, I had, like, seventy dollars. I was really  amazed.  Anyway, these street guys, these street chiefs said,    This guy named  Jim Hewlett, he collects Indian art. Our friend, Troy was going to  make a deal with him. He was going to give Troy a space to paint  at  his office  and he was going to pay him. He was going to buy his  paintings from him and he was going to trade him a space to paint,  give him a studio space. But Troy messed up and he went to prison. I  bet you he   ll do that with you. Go on in and show him. Show him.      Jim Hewlitt   s  place was really, really not very attractive. It was a  really desolate-looking place,  a labor hall . It was a harsh  environment, and I thought,    This guy is not going to buy art.    Later  on, a week later after they told me, I took a number of drawings and I  showed them to this man. And he looked at them and he said,     Actually, I don   t really collect Native American art. I collect  Oriental art, but Oriental art and Native American art, for me is  really, really close. So, I like Native American art. Let me take this  inside the office and see what they think.    He took it in there and I  thought,    Oh man, that   s it.    I was just thinking about who I was  going to go visit  after that . He brought it back and said,    You know  what? You   re a winner, man. They love your work.     He told me about the deal he was going to make with Troy. He said,     Come back here, look at this space. There was another Indian artist I  was going to give this space to paint and I was going to buy paintings  from him and I was going to trade him this space for paintings. You  think you   d be interested in the same deal?    I said,    Yeah, sure, I   d be  interested.    He said,    Okay, let me buy a number of these drawings  from you. You paint, don   t you?    I said,    Yeah, I paint.    He said,     Well, you can go get you some supplies, paints and stuff. What else  do you need? Whatever you need, let me know, I   ll see what I can do  to get it for you.    I didn   t need any lights or equipment because I  could still see really, really good under regular hundred-watt light  bulbs.  So I painted there for a number of years and Jim Hewlett continued to  buy paintings from me. Continued to buy them and trade me paintings  for the space there. I didn   t have any driver   s license. He had a labor  hall and this guy up and quit on him   he was a van driver. He said,    I  need a van driver, I need a van driver. Can you go and pick up these  men over here?    I said,    I don   t have any driver   s license.    He said,     That   s alright. I just need them picked up. They have to get here.  Nobody   s here, nobody   s here.    I said,    Okay, I   ll go get them.    So I  18  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  get in the van and take off and I went to get them and they showed me  how to get back. I said,    How do you get back to Tulsa? I don   t even  know my way around here.    They said,    Go down this way, go down  that way. Turn here, turn here, exit over here.    They showed me how  to get down and I got them back safely.  I thought that was the end of that. I got back there and he said,     Thank you, thank you, thank you so much. I don   t know what I was  going to do. I   ll try to get another van driver.    But he didn   t get  another van driver because they were hard to come by, those that  were really reliable. Some of them were not very reliable. So, I  continued to drive the van for him as he needed and he would pay me  for it and I didn   t have any license.  (Laughs) You were also selling a bit to galleries, then, weren   t you?  What were some of the galleries that you were dealing with?  I walked up to the Art Market, which was on 51st and Memorial. They  told me about that gallery. Somebody said,    There   s an Indian art  gallery here in town. It   s a really nice gallery. You should go over  there. I bet they   ll deal your work for you.    So, I said,    Okay, I   ll go  over there. Where   s it at?       51st and Memorial.    So, I asked Jim,     Where   s 51st and Memorial?    He said,    It   s over there by where I  live.    He lived at the Falls Apartments on 61st and Memorial. He said,     It   s way out there. I can get a van and let them take you out there if  you want.    I said,    No, that   s alright, I   ll walk.    He said,    Walk?  You   re going to walk out there?    I said,    Yeah, I   ll walk.    He said,     You better let me use a van to take you out there.    I said,    No, that   s  alright.    So, I walked out there with a painting under my arm and I  thought to myself,    I should   ve let him send a van out here.    It was a  long, long way. It was like ten miles, eight miles, something like that.  Anyway, I went over there. I told the gallery lady,    My name is  Merlin Little Thunder. I   m a traditional Indian artist.    I had a painting  that was matted. It was on mat board because usually, back then,  Indian artists used to paint on mat board. I showed it to her and she  said,    That   s really nice. I really like this.    At that time, her resident  artist was Ben Harjo. She showed it to Benjamin Harjo and she said,     What do you think?    He said,    Yeah, it   s nice.    She asked him,     Should I buy it?    and he said,    Do you want it?    So, she bought it.  I didn   t know how to price it. I said,    What will you give me for it?     She said,    You have to price it.       I don   t know. I   ve never sold a  painting this big before.     So, I told her eighty-five dollars. She said,    Eighty-five wholesale or  retail?    I said,    I don   t know. I don   t know what that is.    She  19  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  explained to me the process of wholesale and retail. I told her     Wholesale, I guess.    She gave me forty-something dollars. Then she  said,    I   m having a show  in  three weeks or so. Would you like to be  in it?    I said,    I don   t know. I   d have to think about it.    She said,    Do  you have any more paintings?    I said,    Yeah, I have some more  paintings.    Ben Harjo said,    Of this quality?    I said    Yes.       Well,  you can put them in the show.    So, that became the relationship  between me and the Art Market. That was the first gallery I was able  to get in. I think it was 1981. I came up with a few paintings. I met all  the Indian artists there and was able to show a few paintings over  there.  Was it your first experience, mingling with people who were there just  to buy Indian art? What was it like?  Well, it was a big crowd. It was real brisk activity. People were  actually buying. They were in there buying. They were meeting the  artists and they were talking to them. I seen them in little groups, here  and there. They were meeting their favorite artists. They were getting  them to sign things for them, and they were talking to them about  their work. Then Ben Harjo started with a round of people,    This is a  new artist. His name is Merlin Little Thunder. This is his work. Go  show them your work.    So, I   d show them and sit and discuss and  talk a little bit. I met another artist there at the same time. His name  was Randy Wood. I befriended Randy. We became friends and he  done the same thing. He said,    This is Merlin Thunder, he   s a new,  new artist. I want you to look at his work. This guy   s going to go  really far. Where else are you showing at? Tell them where you   re  showing at. Where else?    I said,    This is the only place.    They were  real aggressive at first.  We met around 1985, but in addition to selling to galleries, you were  selling to individuals at different businesses, and you had people  selling for you. How did you know what individuals to visit with what  paintings?  Mostly, it was from word of mouth. People would say,    Go to so and  so, they collect Indian art. Go over here and go over there.    I  cultivated friendships with some people and I would send them out to  sell art. I was living at the YMCA and I was painting there. They  would come up there and I would send them out with paintings. I   d  say,    Take this one to       and I would name the name and address,  and they   d take it over there. (Laughter) They would come back and  say,    He wasn   t there.    So, I   d say,    Okay. Take it over here.    And I  would send them another place. Send them to various places. I said,     Do the best you can to get cash. If they don   t have no cash, just  20  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  bring the check back.    Sometimes they   d bring cash back and  sometimes they   d bring a check back. At the end of the day, I   d pay  them. I would pay them some money. I would give them a percentage  of what they sold. Continued that relationship for a time and it  worked pretty well.  What kinds of things were you painting?  Well, I was selling mostly warriors on horseback. I had this starburst  effect where I did a series of templates. Smaller moons, bigger  moons, sort of mimicking  the  aura around a bright object. I would  use that as a background. And a lot of toothbrush spray. I didn   t have  no airbrush, and I wasn   t really interested in doing airbrush.  That was pretty popular back then?  Yeah, that was pretty popular, toothbrush splatter. But I done it with a  baby toothbrush. I got the toothbrush and I frayed it on the cement,  like this. (Gestures) I frayed until it was real, real super fine and I had  to control the effect by applying a light, light, light color on it. Then I  would gently tap it and  that  would give it the airbrush quality.  Describe what the 1980s Indian art landscape was like.  It was a real interesting style back then. I think the majority of it was  still flat, two-dimensional work. With the addition of certain artists  that came onto the scene, it became a departure from the flat two-dimensional  into more of an individual style. People used to say,     You have to make a voice of your own. You have to have your own  voice. Don   t rely on these old Indian artists to carry your voice. You  have to make your own voice.     We didn   t really know what that meant. We continued to try to do  flat, two-dimensional work. Then we tried to evolve from that. Tried  to evolve into a different style. Every time we tried to evolve to a  different style, we always ran up against a wall where people would  say,    This ain   t Indian art. This ain   t Indian art.    We had that trouble  for a time. It was just the end of the Philbrook Annual show where  they had their competition. It was the end of it. It was the end of that  show. And they were designating Santa Fe as the Indian capital, the  Indian focal point, the universal center of Indian art. So, Indian art in  Oklahoma kind of fell off.  People started looking toward other progressive artists. I think R.C.  Gorman came on the scene. R.C. Gorman said to leave the flat two-dimensional  work to those who brought it to glory and do your own  21  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  thing. Do your own thing. So we started to try to do our own thing.  Throughout the years, I used to paint landscapes. I done a lot of  landscapes. To me, landscapes was the pull, it was the draw. I really  enjoyed doing landscapes. Growing up along the riverbed, we were  down there all the time. We watched it change, watched the seasons  change, come and go. That was real strong for me. I think that   s why  I was so drawn to landscapes. I done landscapes and I couldn   t sell  them because it wasn   t Indian art. I would put Indians in there, riding  horseback and tipis and everything, and people just were not buying  them. They   d say,    It   s not Indian art. That   s not Indian art.     So, I had to kind of sneak them in there a little at a time. I would put a  bush in there or a tree, and do it real, real sneaky like. Next thing you  know, they were buying landscapes. They were actually comfortable  enough to buy them. I think the battle cry back then was    Buy what  you like.    People then were saying things like,    Don   t buy art for  investment purpose. Buy what you like.     Was it a new generation of collectors?  Yeah. I think the oil boom was partly to blame for that because  back  then , people were coming to the gallery with disposable income.  They would say,    I want that, that, that and that. Ship them to me.     They would write out either a check or a credit card and they would  leave. That was it. They had a lot of play money. Then, as time  changed, people didn   t have that kind of income and they wanted to  know what they were buying. They wanted to know. They were  asking questions. Their buying habits were different. They didn   t  really have that much disposable income, they didn   t have that much  play money, so it was really different. The patrons were different  because they wanted to know. Suddenly, these paintings have to have  a narrative. They wanted to know what they were buying.  Did this shift happen in the late    80s or is this a shift between the    80s  and the    90s?  I think it was a gradual change between    83   it really started gaining  a lot of momentum around    89,    90,    91,    92. People wanted to know  what they were buying.  What kinds of shows and competitions were you entering at that time?  I was entering the Trail of Tears art show in Tahlequah   I don   t think  Red Earth was even started yet. Mostly the Trail of Tears art show.  There was a few little art shows, here and there, that I went ahead and  22  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  J. Little Thunder  entered. Pow-wow shows, things like that. Mostly galleries. Another  gallery opened up in Tulsa called the Western Heritage  Gallery .  Galleries started opening up.  There was  one in Sapulpa called the  Indian Territory Gallery. So, I was dealing with those galleries.  The owner of the Western Heritage Gallery was sort of an inspiration  for you in terms of developing miniatures.  Yeah, he did say some things about miniature painting. He said,    If  you look around, all these galleries are full of large paintings, full of  bigger things. You don   t hardly see very many small paintings. You  see some small paintings, but they   re not what you would call fully  realized paintings. They   re just small, small expressions. There   s not  very many miniature painters around here. Just a very few miniature  painters. Even nationwide,  there   s  not very many of them. You  could actually make a profession as  a  miniature painter.     So I explored it. I was already doing smaller work. He knew I was  doing smaller work. The only thing I could really do at the time was  smaller work. I didn   t have the time, the space or the money to do  larger paintings, so I was doing a lot of smaller works, really small.  And people were attracted to them. I noticed how they were attracted  to them. A lot of the people that we were selling to outside of the  galleries were actually buying smaller paintings because they could  afford them. They could afford them space-wise and financially. So,  they were buying a lot of miniature paintings. That   s what Otis  Wilson picked up on. He said,    These miniatures will always sell.  When these shows are happening and these big paintings are not  moving, miniatures are going to sell.     I think Red Earth started in the late    80s, but what was the  importance of entering shows and competitions for you? Why were  they important?  Well, back then, in that time frame, it was important to garner some  first place ribbons. Get recognized as some of the top artists who are  able to win ribbons, win competitions. They started pinning artists as     award-winning artists.    A lot of people seemed to go by that. It  carried a lot of weight for some collectors to say,    He won first place  here or he won first place there.     In 1990, the Indian Arts and Crafts Act was passed and in addition to  protecting from knockoffs, say, of    Cherokee pottery    made in China,  the act also required artists who claimed a particular tribal affiliation  to provide proof of enrollment or be certified by their tribe. Do you  remember how this impacted some of the galleries and individual  23  M. Little Thunder  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  artists?  From the onset when I first came to Tulsa, from that security guard  over in the Williams Center who bought this painting, he said he was  a Cherokee, but to me he was Anglo. It   s really hard for me to  distinguish between Indian and Anglo here in Tulsa because a lot of  people were more Anglo than they were recognizably Indian. They  would say,    I   m Indian, I   m Indian. I   m Native American.     The same goes with the artists. A lot of them were Indian artists, but  they have blond hair and green eyes. To us, where we came from in  Northwest Oklahoma, an Indian was an Indian if he had black hair  and dark eyes and dark skin and that was it. There was no other  distinguishing qualities for an Indian other than that.  So it was real different for me to come up here and see these people  in galleries who were saying they were Indian artists, and they were  not. And it was particularly hard on them whenever you had to finally  say,    I have documentation that I am an Indian   not just a letter  saying,    I have Indian heritage.       It was hard on them.  Some of them were more Indian in the sense that they had all of the  qualities of an American Indian person. They had the temperament,  they had the beliefs, they had all the strong points that you would give  a Native American more so than the others, and these ones were  affected really, really strongly. It was hard for us to see some of them  not do Indian art anymore because of this. I think it really hurt them,  it really hurt them because this is what they started with, before a lot  of those other artists came on the scene.  Today, what media do you prefer in painting?  I prefer painting acrylic. I usually use rag board, paint on a rag board.  Acrylic on rag board. I like to paint on rag board because it absorbs  all the color. It   s like a sponge. You continue to absorb color, absorb  color. I usually paint in layers of color. Slips and undertones. That   s  why I like to use that board instead of canvas. Canvas is really hard to  do slips and it   s hard to make layers of paint.  How many layers do you typically do?  It depends on if it   s a strong light or if it is suffused light. If it   s a  strong light, then it   s going to take at least ten, twelve, fourteen layers  of underpainting to really be effective. If it   s suffused light, like a  cloudy day, it doesn   t take that many.  24  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  Your work has developed three distinct branches starting with fully  developed landscapes with 19th century Cheyennes. Why do you like  those? Why are they important to you?  Well, for me, it   s like I   m putting the Indian back in their  environment. I saw that Dorothy Dunn school and the environment  was blank. There was nothing there. Just a few rocks in front of them  and maybe some blades of grass. Maybe a bush here and there, and  that was all. That was taking the Indian out of its environment. It was  saying that you have nothing, you have no land. There   s no landscape  behind you. It was getting Indians kind of used to the fact that they  had no land anymore. Blank canvas, just blank behind them. You  have nothing now. Just a few blades of grass and a few rocks. To me,  that was symbolic of that.  I used to ask my father,    Where did we live?       Oh, man, we lived in  the most beautiful places on this planet. We lived over there in  Colorado around Estes Park. It   s a very, very beautiful scenic area.  We lived high up on the mountains. We lived on the plains in the  summertime towards Kansas, between Kansas and Colorado. We had  these beautiful, beautiful places to live. We lived at the Yellowstone  Park. Our backyards were national parks.     I really pondered that quite a bit. I used to look at these cowboy  artists and they were actually doing that. They were putting Indians in  their environment. That   s what attracted me to this type of work. I  wanted to put Indians back in their environment, where they came  from. To see them in their natural environment, doing what was  natural to them. That   s what I strive for.  How about your medicine paintings? How are they different in terms  of your palette and the subject matter?  Medicine paintings originally started out as a tool to relax. Relax  everything, relax principles. In landscape paintings, you have to  adhere to strict principles. In medicine paintings, you don   t have to  because they   re spiritual. They   re spiritual. You can go out of the  realm of physical restrictions and you can make it whatever you want  because these are spiritual paintings. You let your spirit free to roam  and you do the same thing on the canvas or on the surface where  you   re painting. You   re free to roam. You have unlimited artistic  license to do whatever you want because these are spirit paintings.  You   re guided by the spirit, not by the restrictions of landscapes.  You   re guided in that sense. So, originally I started doing those to  relax. To relax and to take it easy and to have a good time with what I  was doing.  25  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  Then we had a show at Doris Littrell   s gallery,  Oklahoma Indian Art  Gallery , where I had a limited supply of paintings. We introduced  these medicine paintings to that show and they just took off like mad.  People started buying them. They really, really connected with these  little small spiritual paintings. That   s where that spiritual painting  business came from. I didn   t originally intend to be part of the  market. I intended them just for me, to relax. And then, I was doing  these different styles. I was doing this realistic style and this spiritual  style, these medicine paintings, and I noticed I was constantly  reinventing myself. This reinvention, to me, stems from   there are  four seasons in a year. Each season is kind of consistent with what  our styles are. We   ll go to the realistic style and we   ll go back to the  medicine painting style. That   s sort of like seasons, to me.  There   s another vein of work that you do that,    50s period work. I   m  thinking about your Hawk Eye paintings. Can you talk a bit about the  importance of that?  The importance of that came from my  great- grandfather, Old Bear,  who was a cowboy. He was an Indian, but he was a cowboy. I would  sit and listen to them talk about his experiences on the trail. He would  go on a cowboy trail drive  and there were  different outfits that he  worked for. I heard my grandmother talk about Charlie Daylight. He  rode on the Daylight-Loving Trail and I think he rode on the Jesse  Chisholm Trail. He rode on that trail, too. Anyway, he rode on  various cattle trails back then.  They would talk about his exploits on those trails. How, when they  wanted to pay him money, he would look at that money and he would  say,    No. No good. No good.    They   d say,    What do you want,  then?    He wanted those livestock   he   d point to the stock. He  wanted stock, so they would give him what he wanted, equivalent to  whatever he worked for. Whatever the money was, he would get  those livestock. He was an Indian and a cowboy and he also rode in  the 101 Ranch Wild West Show.  That   s when it was out there in Western Oklahoma, not in Ponca City.  He started out there. One time, he was coming off of a trail ride. He  still had his chaps on, he still had his cowboy uniform on, and he  threw a vest on real quick, a beaded vest. He threw on a black silk  shirt and beaded vest and threw his arm bands on. Then, he waited in  line   still had chaps and boots on   waited in line. Had a big hat, too.  Big old ten gallon hat. He waited in line and waited and waited and  finally the man came over and said,    That   s okay, that   s alright.  We   ve got enough now, everybody. Go home.    Then Old Bear started  26  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  cussing. Cussing in German. That man looked around and said,    Who  said that? Who said that? Come on, who said that?    Then that man  turned to walk away and  Old Bear  cussed again in German. The  man looked at him and said,    You   re saying that, aren   t you? Come  over here, come over here.    He took him to another person and that  person talked fluent German. He spoke German to Old Bear and Old  Bear replied back to him. He said,    I can use you. I can use you. You  can be my interpreter.    Because he was a linguist.  He could talk German and he could talk Cheyenne, he could talk  Arapaho and Sioux and limited, limited English. He started out  interpreting for that 101 Ranch show. Anyway, that goes back to  Hawk Eye. Where I lived in Canton, we used to have fights with  these cowboys. We fought them. I told my dad,    I don   t like those  cowboys. I just don   t like those cowboys.    He said,    What for?    I  said,    Because I just don   t like cowboys.    He said,    What do you  think you are?    I said,    What do you mean?    He said,    You ride a  horse, you fix fence, you do everything those cowboys do. What do  you think you are?    So, my experiences with Hawk Eye go back to  those experiences.  What is your creative process?  Creative process    The creative process stems from memory. It all  stems from memory back then. Growing-up years. Things that  influenced me, stories I heard. We used to hide underneath the table  and listen to the  adults  talk. They wouldn   t talk freely in front of us  children, but they would talk freely when we were gone and we  would hide under the table. Back then, the table was huge and round.  They had a table cloth on it that draped all the way to the bottom and  we   d hide under there and listen to them talk. They talked and they  talked, and the wheels were turning in our head. Imagination. What  they were talking about, we were imagining. So, over the years, it   s  stored it in a databank up there. (Gestures) A lot of times, when  there   s a strong scent or a particular event will happen, it will cause  me to think about those stories or things that we heard as children,  and they filter through into paintings.  Sometimes you   ll show me a background for a painting. It will be this  empty landscape but you   ll have this entire story line in your head.  When you develop the landscape, does it develop along with the  story? Does the story come first or does the story sometimes come  afterwards?  The story comes first. The story comes first and the landscape  develops around the story because it has to be that time frame, it has  27  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  to be that location, this particular location where this event happened.  A lot of times, they told us where it happened. They   d say,    This  happened in New Mexico,    or    This happened in Colorado. They  were coming back from Montana when this happened. It happened  over there in Western Oklahoma by Fonda or by Woodward.    They   d  tell us the locality of the story. I develop it according to the story and  the location.  How important is humor in your titles and your subject matter?  Humor is important because we were always portrayed as stoic  Indians with a stone face. We were never portrayed as people that  laughed. But all throughout our growing up years, we were always  around laughter. In the hardest of times, in the worst of conditions,  these people were laughing. That humor. They saw humor in  everything. They were a happy people. Even if they were poor and  hardly had anything to eat, they were still happy.  You mainly paint Cheyenne subject matter, and you do a lot of  research, so you can portray that era accurately. What about other  Indian artists depicting Cheyenne subject matter or going intertribal?  What are your thoughts on that?  I was always taught to paint what you know. Paint what you know. I  see these other artists trying to paint other tribes and they don   t do it  truthfully. You look at their paintings and you see a lot of  discrepancies. If you know about your tribal ways, then you   re going  to tell right away when somebody   s paintings are not authentic.  They   re not expressing what is supposed to be portrayed there, in a  truthful manner. It   s off historically and it   s just off. If it   s  about   Cheyenne s , I   m going to look at it and say,    This ain   t right,  because this is not Cheyenne.     In order to paint another person   s tribe, you have to experience it first.  You have to first experience it. You can   t rely on your artistic license.  You have to actually experience it. I used to paint Navajo paintings  because my roommate taught me some of those things. He said,    This  is how you do it or this is how you don   t do it.    He said,    The women  have the wealth in the family, the men didn   t.     A lot of times, the men will ride first and the women will ride behind  them. Sometimes in other tribes it   s different. It   s different, it   s  reversed. You have to know these ways before you can actually put  them down. People will look at those paintings and say,    Why is this  here? Why is that here?    You have to be able to explain it to them or  else you   re not selling a product that is truthful.  28  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  So, you have to do the research and have a background. How about  non-Indians who are painting? I   m thinking about the incident in  Santa Fe. Do you want to explain what happened?  This man was a non-Indian. He painted this Cheyenne Sun Dance  piece. He painted it inaccurately. It was really, grossly inaccurate.  There was hardly anything accurate about it. Now, whenever you  paint something like that, a ceremonial object like that, these things  are not to be taken lightly. What these men don   t realize is that you  earn those rights. You earn them. You earn them through suffering,  you earn them through sacrificing and suffering. You sacrifice a  whole lot to go down there and to have those ways. This man that  painted this picture, he had no sacrifice. He didn   t earn it. He didn   t  have the right. He didn   t even earn the right to try to portray it. So, we  got together. Some of us went over there and we told him that he  didn   t have no right to paint this picture. He said,    Well, I was told  earlier that I portrayed everything right on the money. It was perfect.  Just right.    We told him,    No, nothing   s right on this painting. It   s all  off. Nothing   s even correct.     We told him why it wasn   t correct and we told him that he had no  right to paint it. You   ve got to have the right to paint it. Even if you  was to ask permission to paint certain phases of this ceremony, you  wouldn   t actually have that much. But he didn   t even have that much.  He was not supposed to paint that picture. It belongs to the people, it  doesn   t belong to one person. To add insult to injury, he had  30,000  on that painting. And these  Cheyennes  are poor people. They  sacrifice quite a bit. They sacrifice a lot. To see a painting in the  window that says  30,000, it   s overwhelming to the people because  these things do belong to the people. They don   t belong to one  individual. They belong to the people as a whole.  Looking back on your career, what do you think have been some  really pivotal moments, where you could have gone in one direction,  but you went in another?  Well, I got into playing music with various bands in high school and  college. I could have continued doing that. I could have continued  playing music. I could have continued in that direction. I enjoyed it. It  was a lot of fun. It was kind of like painting for me. There was a lot  of personal enjoyment and there was a lot of satisfaction in doing it.  But the lifestyle is what really didn   t appeal to me. It wasn   t a very  healthy lifestyle. A lot of people who are very talented in this music  industry, for some reason, they always want to party a lot, real hard.  That was the thing in this music industry, you would be partying all  29  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  the time. You would be living this lifestyle. And I had to weigh the  lifestyle between painting and the lifestyle between traveling with the  band and playing with the band and chemical abuse. Alcohol, drugs     A lot of my family members succumbed to alcoholism. And it would  be like going back to that. That   s something I didn   t want to do.  Was it around 2006 when you began teaching in the Canton  Alternative Education program?  No, it was earlier than that. I think it was the year 2000.  What do you find rewarding about that work?  These students are last-chance students. They   re problem students  and they   re hard to work with. That   s where I was in high school. I  would have been in alternative education in high school because I  was like that. I remember those teachers whenever you were a last-chance  student, how they used to talk down to you. You wanted them  to just talk to you like a human being, that   s all. That would   ve made  things a lot easier. That   s how you handle them over there. You  handle them like human beings. You don   t have to talk down to them.  You just treat them like human beings and they respond. They  respond to you. They   re lost. They   re at a junction they don   t know  how to get out of, and they   re trying to look for a way back. They   re  trying to look for a way to get back on the main stream of high  school, the high school experience.  So as we paint   I paint with them hands-on. It   s an accelerated  formula where I do the work and they do the work. We do it together.  We do a painting. I paint on it and they paint on it. I say,    What did  you do wrong here?    I show them what they do wrong, and we  correct it, and we work on it and it unfolds. It totally unfolds and  then, these students have a new look on their face after they finish a  painting. Then, after we mat it and frame it and hang it on the wall,  they have a marvelous sense of accomplishment.  You notice their demeanors change throughout the course of the  class. When they first sit down to a blank piece of paper, they have no  idea what they   re doing. They just have this disgusted look and  they   re ready to fight, you know.    What am I doing here? What are  you doing here?    They want to sleep. But after the program starts and  we start accelerating, then they start accelerating. They wake up.  They wake up and their energy level starts to rise. They get energy  from this art. Their energy level  rises  and they have this really,  really, really marvelous sense of accomplishment that they never had  30  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  before. They never, ever had it before. This is the first time they ever  had it and they change. And they   re different people. They   re totally  different people. That   s why I work with these students because it   s  worth it just to see their reaction when they look at the painting they  completed.  Is there anything else you   d like to add to our discussion? Something  we didn   t talk about that you feel is important to talk about?  It   s hard to give interviews, especially people who are visual artists. I  always feel reluctant to give interviews. I just want to tell these  people my words are painted. If you want to know everything about  me and my background and my art, go look at those paintings. My  words are painted. It   s all right there.  A strong point that I want to make right now is about all these ledger  artists. These ledger artists are doing this ledger work because it   s  easy. It   s easy. It   s easy to do. It   s popular. It   s kind of like a  bandwagon thing to me.  They don   t ever attribute it to these Cheyenne Dog Soldiers, who first  made ledger paintings. They made the first ledger paintings with a  book that they confiscated from some teamsters. They wrote their  daily happenings, important events, important events that happened,  they portrayed it in there. They wrote it in there. They made a record  of it, these Dog Soldiers.  Nobody ever says,    I   m attributing       or    I   m going to dedicate this  ledger drawing to the Cheyenne Dog Soldiers who brought it into  being.    They never say that. These Dog Soldiers are the ones who  made these ledger drawings. The first ledger drawings were made by  Dog Soldiers. They were not made by Kiowas or Comanches or  Pawnees or none of those guys. Those Dog Soldiers did these ledger  drawings, and all over everywhere, the Southwest and the various art  centers, they never attribute it to the Cheyenne Dog Soldiers. That   s  what really, really needs to be said.  They need to tell people these things. And whenever they found the  Dog Soldier ledger book with all of their exploits in it, they looked at  it. They looked it over real carefully. Some of those people took it to  those old Indian chiefs and those surviving Indians. They showed it to  them, and they were able to say who it was, who painted it, who drew  it, who did this. They laughed and they looked and they lamented. It  brought back a lot of memories because these Dog Soldiers portrayed  very, very accurately what was happening in those books. After they  got through looking at it and after the researchers were finally able to  31  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  get a reaction from these older Indians, they said,    What do you  people think?    An old Indian man responded to the interviewer, he  said,    A picture is a rope, tight, strict, tied firmly to the stake of  truth.     We   re going to take a look at a few of your paintings, now. What   s  this painting called?  This painting is called Crane Woman. What it portrays is that this  young woman got a calling to be a healer. A lot of times, people  would come forth with a call to be a healer, but it wouldn   t be  authentic. Sometimes it was just a passing thing. But this young  woman got the call to be a healer, so she went to the principal men,  the ceremonial men, and relayed her message to those men. She said,     I   m going to be a healer.    These men told her,    Well, you have to go  to the Four Directions. You have to go to the Four Directions. Go to  four places, four directions, and go be among four people. And when  you come back, you   ll be a healer.     Her name was Crane Woman. She went to the Northeast People and  she told them,    I   m going to be a healer. I need something from you.  Whenever a time comes and you need us, I   m going to be over here,  and I   m going to be able to give you something to take back.    So, she  lived with them for a time. A time means one season. She lived with  them for a time and they let her go.  And then she went to the Southwest People and she told them the  same thing. She lived with them for a time. And she went on to the  next people and she lived with them for a time. She went to all the  Four different Directions where all four different people lived and  they gave her something and she went on.  The thing was, if she went to these people and they kept her     because, a lot of times, in that time frame, these people used to  capture women, they wouldn   t let them go.  But  her calling was  authentic because she went over there and these different people   were  compelled to let her go.  Right here  in this painting , she   s coming back from the people from  the Southwest. As she   s coming out of New Mexico, going towards  Utah, towards Montana, all these cranes are following her. So, her  name is Crane Woman. When she gets over there and they keep her  for a time, these cranes will follow her back home again. Then she   ll  have a new name because they   ll deem her to be a healer. She   ll come  into the camp from the East and they   ll recognize her and they   ll  know that she   s a healer. She   s real. She   s authentic.  32  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  J. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  M. Little Thunder  You want to talk about this one?  That one   s called Cradle in the Minnehaha Gulch. This area from  Estes Park all the way through Snow Mass and Aspen area, it curved  around, came around that way. It was called the Minnehaha Gulch,  and this was a route. Those Cheyennes used to go back and forth to  this area, from their hunting, wintering grounds to their hunting  summer grounds. They used to travel through here.  These are two scouts, two Bowstring scouts. They smelled and they  seen smoke, so they went to investigate. And when they came upon  this tipi, they saw it was a Cheyenne tipi  at  this place, Cradle in the  Minnehaha Gulch. What they   re going to tell this man is that a big  storm is coming. Better hunker down, this big storm is coming. In  fact, they   re probably going to end up staying with him for a few days  because that big storm is coming in. They   re going to call all his  people over there, call them all in from hunting and they   re going to  put up another lodge and winter there, in the Minnehaha Gulch.  What   s this painting called?  This one   s called I Ain   t Morning People. This is one of the Hawkeye  paintings. It talks about growing up years, when you were into  staying out all night and playing cards and doing the things you were  told not to do, but also, this kind of stems back to when my  grandmother used to play cards with all her friends.  They used to play cards late in the night. They used to play cards  because there was no casinos, no bingo, so they used to all play cards.  Way out in the country. All the relatives used to come around and  there would be seven or eight old ladies around the card table and  they would all play cards until the wee hours of the morning.  It was a good thing. It was harmless. It was just for them to visit and  to be with each other and talk and all that. It was really never about  money, more about gathering together and visiting and talking.  Alright. Thank you, Merlin.  -------  -------  
