 Little Thunder  Mitchell  My name is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is Friday, November  11, 2011. I   m interviewing Anna Mitchell for the Oklahoma Oral  History Research Program at Oklahoma State University. We   re in  Vinita at Anna   s apartment. Anna, it   s rare for an artist to actually be  able to be pointed out as the very first person to do this or that, but you  really were the first Oklahoma artist to revive the Southeastern tribes     pottery traditions. Since then, you have won multiple awards and honors  that have secured your place in the art world. Thank you for taking the  time to speak with me. Where were you born, and where did you grow  up?  I was born east of Jay, Oklahoma, in a community called Sycamore. The  name is still there, but there   s not much there anymore. I think it   s just  almost close to the Arkansas line. I don   t remember a whole lot about  that because I was born there. I barely remember my grandfather lived  close by. The thing that I remember about that is (of course, I was very  small) my brother and I walked knee deep in snow up to my grandpa   s.  Knee deep wasn   t very much for two little kids. We went up there to  visit him, or he would come down and visit us. I barely remember that. I  just remember how high the snow was. Things fade out from there and  pick up later.  When I was older, we moved from the community area, not Sycamore,  but the Piney area. Piney is still there. There was a community building  and a church there. They also had a school for Indian kids. As a matter  of fact, my sister went there. My oldest sister went to school when they  had a country school there. There   d be a government car to pick some of  them up to go to school. I remember I didn   t go because I would go  down to the gate every day and wait for my sister to come home from  school. I thought it was wonderful that she   d get in this nice, fine car, go  off to school, and she   d come out of this nice, fine car. We were still  traveling around in wagons. (Laughter) So, anyway, that   s what I  5  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  remember about that. We moved from that community to Jay, briefly.  Then we moved south on Brush Creek, and that   s where I grew up.  I see. Did your dad farm?  Well, my mom and dad didn   t have a long marriage because I was a very  small child, I understand, and she said I cried every night when my dad  was gone, so they were divorced. He later remarried three times after  that. I have half-sisters and -brothers from his second, third   I guess just  two times. I still have brothers and sisters, half-brothers and -sisters.  Since I was sent off to Indian school when I was old enough, back in the    30s, I was not as fluent in my language as I was when I went there. I  couldn   t speak English at all when I went there.  What school did you go to?  All the Indian schools were set up to take our language and our heritage  away from us, but I didn   t know that. They wouldn   t allow us to speak.  That was Seneca Indian School, Wyandotte, Oklahoma. My mom used  to come up and visit us there. She   d take the bus, and it   d let her off at  the foot of the hill, and she   d walk on up. For some reason, we   d be  playing out somewhere, and I   d look down, and I knew it was my  mother because of the way she walked. We   d run down and help her  with whatever she had. I grew up at the Indian school and graduated  through the ninth grade. At that time, I was not fluent in Cherokee,  again. Then I went to school at Haskell. One summer, I came to Vinita  with my sister. She worked here, so I got a job that summer to work in a  little hamburger joint     Were you in high school?     yes, as a waitress. It was during wartime, and my husband was part  Cherokee. His family, his mother and dad   s family, when they allotted  land, they were up in this part of the country. His dad was born at Oaks,  Oklahoma. His grandmother was from that area. She was Cherokee, and  Mr. Mitchell was not. I met my husband during wartime. He was home  on leave. There was a lot of soldiers around. He came over and talked to  me because he thought I was Cherokee, and I was. He asked me if I  could say this or that, and he tried writing it down in his little handbook.  My sister also came, but she worked out at the state hospital. We looked  like two peas in a pod. We were very close together in age, and our hair  was styled alike. It was back during the time they were wearing  pageboy, with their hair turned under. We just looked like two peas in a  pod. He asked her for a date one day, thinking it was me, (Laughter) but  he soon found out it wasn   t.  6  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  I went to shows with him, and a friend of his had a car. He   d drive it.  We   d drag Main, (Laughter) go down south on Main Street and listen to  the first, I guess, drive-in you ever saw. It wasn   t really like they are  now. It was just a man who had a bunch of places where the girls would  carry the food out to the car. That was the first car-hop that we knew of.  They   d play real loud music, and we   d go down there and listen to the  music. Of course, eventually, after the war, I was in high school at  Haskell. When he came home, I married him. We had I think it was  fifty-one years of marriage when he passed away. We had five children.  I outlived two of those children. My oldest child had cancer, fought it for  ten years. Then my son had the heart problem that his dad and his uncles  did on his dad   s side. Some of them died young from heart problems.  My son lived close to us, and I saw him just go down. He was a strong,  healthy-looking guy. They told us at the time of surgery he might not  live through the surgery. He did live through the surgery, but he had a  very bad heart. The doctor said,    Your body might be strong and want to  do things, but your heart is not going to let you. You might live three  years.    He lived five, but they weren   t good years. He just kept going  down. So I outlived those two. I have  three  daughters left  Victoria,  Betty Gail, and Julie . I have one that lives in Denver. Her name is Betty  Gail. She married a doctor, and she   s a pediatric practitioner. Julie went  to OSU and graduated, and married her husband. As many times as we  made trips there to see our girls, I thought,    Well, this is the last trip.    It  wasn   t. She married a guy from there. (Laughter) She still lives close to  Stillwater. She had two boys and a girl and a boy. The youngest boy is in  his last year of college there. They all went to OSU except the girl. She  wanted to be different. She went to Edmond. My son went to OU. He  didn   t want to be like the girls. (Laughter)  When you were at Seneca Boarding School and also at Haskell, did you  take any art classes? Were you interested in art at all?  They   d let us draw, but it wasn   t called art. Then when we were at  Haskell, I guess you could, but it was your choice. I worked at the  school library where we put books together and things like that, so I was  always busy over there and knew what kind of books they had, and years  later, ordered some for my information.  So you weren   t into sewing or any three-dimensional work?  Yes, we did have sewing at Wyandotte. They called it Home Ec. We had  it until we graduated. As a matter of fact, we made our own graduation  dress. We went to Joplin, Missouri, with our teacher and picked out the  material. We made our first pajamas and robe and things like that in that  7  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  place. Then at Haskell, it was your choice if you wanted to sew or do  some other things. I went into athletics and played basketball. It wasn   t  that great because we had a big girls    basketball and a little girls     basketball. We didn   t get to go anywhere the big girls did, but  sometimes we   d have to play with them and get knocked down.  (Laughter)  You have a quote about how you can   t learn the culture without the art  or the art without the culture. I don   t think many people of the younger  generation realize what a sea change there was in terms of this new  attitude toward Native arts and Native cultures that began happening in  the    60s. Were you and your husband pretty active, then, around this  community?  We were always active in our neighborhood. The Shawnees had their  stomp dances and their rituals, but they had all of that the week before  they opened it up to the public for Saturday dances, where people could  come and join in the dances if they wanted to. We were very good  friends to a Shawnee woman who was full-blood. She had a lot of  grandkids. She lived next door to us, and she always had to have  somebody, some relative, take her out to set her up in her tent. A lot of  times it was us because we lived next door. It was very interesting what  we learned about their culture because we   d go out the week before and  see what they were doing.  This was for their Green Corn  Ceremony ?  They had what they called a Strawberry Dance, and they had their Bread  Dance. Then they had their Corn Dance in the fall. They also joined the  Senecas over by Seneca in their dances. They could go back and forth.  Then they had the Quapaw Dances up near Miami. We went to a lot of  these Indian things, so our kids grew up knowing these different things  about other Indians.  Did your kids also powwow dance at all?  Yes, we went to powwows, but, you know, it   s strange. Cherokees had  two kinds of Indians. One was the ones who went to church, and the  other was the ones who followed the dances. We were the ones that went  to church, but we went to our church that preached in Cherokee. You  learned everything in Cherokee. They even taught them how to read and  write in Cherokee in church so that they could read the Bible and  understand that and what the preaching was about. About the time that  we were old enough to do that, we went to Wyandotte, so only those that  stayed home to go to school could go home every day and talk with their  family. That   s where we missed out. We didn   t keep our language at that  8  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  time.  When your children were young, were you a stay-at-home mom? Was  your husband working, and you were staying with the kids?  Yes, after the second child was on the way, we decided there   s no way I  could pay a babysitter for one, much less two, so I began to be a stay-at-home  mom all the rest of my life until my youngest child, my fifth child,  was going into the third grade. Our older kids were getting ready to  think about college, so I thought I better go to work. When my little girl  came home from school, which was just a block away to where we lived,  her brother says he came in right behind her, and she was going through  the house crying because she couldn   t find Mama. (Laughter) I guess  she forgot I went to work. I worked all the way through. I made all of  their, for college, their pantsuits. I sewed for all of them. I also sewed for  other people, and I also altered clothes for other people. That   s what I  did, staying home. Plus, we learned beadwork, and we   d do beadwork.  Were you doing some sewing of tear dresses or anything like that, or just  whatever people needed?  Just whatever people needed. They   d come to me for the children   s  Easter clothes or the mother   s Easter clothes. I would take those early,  and then I   d take that money and buy our material. I was very late  getting the last button on, on Easter. (Laughter)  I bet they were beautiful. I know you   ve told this story many times, but  your journey towards pottery actually started with something quite  different.  Yes, I remember I was forty-two years old when we built our house out  there in 1965. We had the land two years before we built.  Remind us where your house was, where you built your house.  We built our house, probably,  three miles east of Vinita  and, I guess,   the property is  five acres across. We were on the other side of five  acres behind there, on a ten-acre place. We bought the ten-acre place.  All the houses were built facing the highway in those five acres between  us and the highway. We were just, I   d say, a mile, maybe a mile and a  quarter, from town and then south across five acres. We built the house,  I believe it was probably    66 or    67. We   ve got it marked. We made a  little concrete thing to hold up a water fountain, and under that on the  fresh cement we put the year that our place was established. Two years  before that, we went out every day we could and worked on it.  9  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  And that in was the Tahlequah area?  No, it was right out here, east of town. I   ve never lived away from   Vinita , Craig County since I married.  Then you got to digging out a pond, I guess?  When I was forty-two and we built our home, we dug a pond on our  place, thinking we   d have a couple of cattle, and fatten them and sell one  and keep one. That didn   t happen. The pond was there, and it was a dry  summer in August, and our kids played in this ten-foot hole. I went  down there, and I saw the clay. I told my husband I was going to   he   d  always wanted what we called a Sequoyah pipe, a clay pipe with a cane  stem. We did have cane north of Vinita on Cabin Creek, so we   d go up  there and get the stems. When I first started doing the pipes, I did about  a dozen of them, laid them out. Next day went down there, and they  were all cracked. I had no idea what I did wrong or what the clay  should   ve been. I just thought I could do it like plain mud pipes.  I shaped them, and every time I saw somebody, didn   t matter if they  were doing wheel-thrown art in clay, I would ask them questions about  the clay. I asked one man that was throwing pots on a wheel, I told him  what was happening, and he said,    Well, what you   re doing is drying  them too fast in the sun. Also, your clay might not be just right.    I didn   t  know what    right    was, so I had to weed through all of that to find the  right information to even start the clay.  Eventually, when I first got my little clay pipes and I got about five of  them through the firing   I   ll have to tell you the story about the first  time I put ten of them in. (Laughs) My husband built a pit fire because  they said that   s how they fired them. So I did dry them in the garage in a  box, but I didn   t realize that during the night, the garage door was open,  and when the dew falls and the atmosphere turns, the clay just absorbs  water like stone. I had studied that clay is an erosion of stone over  thousands of years. It depends on what kind of clay you have. Ours is a  lot of earthenware clay. The clay we eventually used did have some  kaolin. I could fire it higher. All those things I found out after a lot of  work. I began to grind my clay, after it dried, on a big grinding stone I  made. I   d sit on the edge of this big stone. There was a man out in  western Oklahoma that had found real grinding stones that had been  used in his field, so he gave me two of them, and that   s what I used all  those years, grinding the clay.  My husband would help me when he could. He   d always build my fires,  and then he   d have to go off to work. A lot of times I   d be crying,  practically, when all of my things burst in the firing. I was going back to  10  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  the first time I fired about a dozen pieces. I   d had them drying in the  garage. Well, evidently, they absorbed a little moisture. I put them all  around the fire. He had dug out a hole, and around it was a ridge, so I  put my things all around it so they would absorb some heat. I thought  they   d had enough heat, so I gradually scooted the coals back, and I put  all of them in the fire. Then I pulled the coals back over it. I put some  little sticks and things in it to start a slow fire. As soon as those pots (I  had a couple of little pieces) and those pipes got too hot, they started  exploding like fire crackers. They were popping out of there, so I ran  away from the fire. (Laughter) I was just sick because they exploded. I  had to weed all of that out.  So let me get clear. You and your husband are going to arts and crafts  shows from time to time, or whenever you have the chance, and you see  a potter, Indian or non-Indian, and you   re telling them about this  situation that you have at home. (Laughs)  Yes, anybody that has anything to do with clay, I would ask them  questions, and then I   d go back and try if I was doing this right because I  had no idea what    right    was. What made me stay in it, (it took so long)  I just had to prove to myself,    If my people did it, why can   t I do it?    I  just kept on with the clay pipes. As a matter of fact, I think I have one of  those pipes in this, in here.  I tell you what. We   ll get it out at the end of the interview, and we   ll take  a picture. I know you went to North Carolina at some point. Did you  successfully make a clay pipe prior to that?  We had gone to North Carolina when the kids were very small. Then  when I started this, I thought,    Well, they make pottery, so I   m going to  go see them about this.    But I was ahead of them. I had already fired  some pieces and had some pieces that were ahead of what they were  doing.  So they were also trying to revive that?  Well, what they did, they had Catawbas that lived among them at one  time. They started doing pottery like they did, and this is what they  made. They knew about old stuff, but they started doing this pottery  that   s small pieces for tourists because they were having a very hard  time after the Removal. They sold baskets, and they sold pottery. They  would just pack it up and travel across the mountain to go sell it. They  stayed with the tourist stuff. Theirs was dark, and they wondered how I  could get color, so I was a little ahead of them, but I still learned about  the things when I   d go talk to a potter. I   d learn something that would  help me.  11  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Were you paying for this out of your own pocket, Anna? It was just you  going on your own, or did the tribe sometimes help you?  We just went on our own.  And your husband went, and your family?  Husband and family. A lot of times it was a vacation trip, and we   d be  gone a week or two or ten days, whatever, to make the trip there and  back. What we did was we took enough money that we could stay there  and come home. (Laughter) We didn   t spend very much.  Are we talking like the    60s?  It was before then because the first time we went, my youngest daughter,  I was breastfeeding her. That   s my youngest daughter. The next time we  went, one of the girls, the middle girl, I think she was about five, so that  might   ve been when this little one was a baby. We had been more than  once on our own because my husband always said he knew about them.     Someday we   re going to go see the Cherokees in North Carolina  because that   s where our ancestors came from.    He knew the whole  story about his ancestor because his white great-great grandfather was a  Presbyterian missionary and had a boarding school in Tennessee. Came  out of Connecticut and came down there to enlighten the Cherokees.  They had a boarding school for kids there, and that   s how he got hooked  up with a Cherokee. He married one. They came over the Trail of Tears  and came here. Of course, right after the Trail of Tears (I say right after  because it was soon) we had just established our area, our ancestors had,  when the Civil War came, so that was a whole new thing.  So you were using this clay with the nice red colors in it. You had  successfully fired some pipes, and you went to the Heye Foundation in  New York?  That happened later. After I was successful, I entered the Five Tribes  shows the first time. Knokovtee Scott and some of them, they were  doing art and stuff, but when I entered my things, they wanted to know  what some of the stuff on my pots was.  Because you had added some designs already.  Yes.    What is this design?    or,    Why did you put those knots on there?     Things like that. I entered the first pot that had a spider on it. That was  the story of how the spider brought us fire. That had quite an eye-opening  thing to the Cherokees. They still use it in their art. They  12  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  wanted to know about the spider.    What did he do?    and,    What   s this  about?    I said,    Well, it   s just the stories that       I can   t think of his  name now, that was with the Cherokees a long time ago, and he wrote a  book.  Was it  James  Mooney?  Yes. Mooney had told those stories about all this stuff because he   d  heard about it and lived among them and knew about it. That   s the  stories that we were told. I have a necklace that   s got a shell carving  with a serpentine on it, and the serpentine has wings. They told us about  this when I was a child. The elders would sit around and talk. I  remember hearing them tell the story about this huge snake that lived at  one time. My idea was,    What if I   d run into that big snake? What  would I do?    I thought it was living today because we   d go berry  picking. Of course, that was a far-fetched idea that I had because I was a  child. I   d hear these stories that Mooney had in his book, and perhaps  the Cherokees knew them before him and passed them down.  Reading some of that triggered remembrances for you?  Yes, and I also started researching in the archives. I was asked to come  to Gilcrease  Museum  and then later to University of Arkansas. They  had a lot of Southeastern things.  Who invited you to  University of Arkansas ?  I can   t think of his last name. He lived at Springdale. He and his wife  came one Sunday. He called me. There was a little spread in the paper  about our shows over here. He read about me, and he called and asked if  he and his wife could come out after lunch and stay a little while, visit a  little bit. Little bit was all afternoon once they got started, and he   d start  telling us about things. He said,    We have an enormous amount of  information that you could get on the Southeastern stuff at Fayetteville.  You   re welcome to come on my invitation, and if somebody tells you  you can   t, you let me know who it is.    That was the kind of invitation  we got, and we did go. The only thing they told us when we got ready to  come over, please tell them so they could save a parking spot where we  wouldn   t get hauled away. (Laughter) So we   d always call them.  We went over there many times because we could hold those old pots. I  could draw some of those designs, and you could actually see what it felt  like to touch them and how they finished them. I thought,    How could  they get these so straight?    I started just etching my stuff in my things.  Later on, I did different, but at that time, Dr. Hoffman, (I can   t think of  his first name) he and his wife, she was the person that taught how to  13  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  restore pots, and he was an anthropologist. He would say,    I   m going to  open the archives. You can go up.    Well, of course, they let us go up the  first time. There was three or four of them sitting there watching us as  we came down and brought stuff down and sat it on the table to look at  it. We   d ask them things about it. After a while when they realized we  were serious, they were thrilled to death there was an Indian that was  serious about doing this. I couldn   t understand why. (Laughter) I learned  a lot from them.  Yes, just actually holding those pots and seeing them.  Yes, yes. He   d say,    Well, I   m going to open the archives. You just go  up and stay as long as you want to. I   m going to go teach, and I   ll be  back at such-and-such time.    That   s the way they treated us over there.  Then, Gilcrease, I was going out Southwest. I wanted to see how they  fired their pottery.  In New Mexico area?  Yes. We were going out there. Years ago when they homesteaded land,  way back when, some of Robert   s family had gone and homesteaded  some in New Mexico. There were a lot of states that would let you do  that. The land was free as long as you established a place and so forth.  He already had relatives out there. He was always very curious about  them, too, because he hadn   t met some of them, so during these trips, we  did. We visited them and learned about their trip out there and what they  had to do.  His uncle got out of the military and settled in Albuquerque, so the first  time we thought about moving out there, he went out and stayed with his  uncle. Then he found out that places that you rented didn   t want  children. There were things like that, so he said,    I don   t think it   d be  good.    We didn   t move. We stayed here, but during the times I went out  to research, a Gilcrease anthropologist (I can   t think of his name right  now) gave me a letter to go to the college where they tested pottery of  the peoples out there, pressure point and all that kind of stuff. Sent me  with a letter, and he told me of a family that would be firing if we  wanted to go visit them. We found that, whereas our family used wood  because we were woodland Indians, they were desert Indians, and they  used dung, dried dung, for their fuel to do pottery.  Later, we went to all of the pueblos, visited all of them. Where we went,  we went to the museum, see what we could find. We found books  sometimes. Sometimes it was information we didn   t know about. All of  them were very good about wanting to further your work. Eventually, I  spoke with the archeological and anthropologists    group from Texas and  14  Little Thunder  Mitchell  different places. The person who asked me to do that, he was so proud  that I had stuff in the Five Tribes  Museum  that he asked me to do that.  I was scared to death. He said,    All you have to do is tell them what you  know. They don   t know it. They   ll be glad to hear about it.     On that, I realized I did know a lot. I could tell them a lot. A lot of times  in the research books, I would read where they would find pots that had  holes in the bottom. They assumed that they were made because they  were ritually broken, to be put in that grave. I said,    Well, I think what  happened in those cases where the pots were broken, it   s because the  potter had a lot of bad luck.    (Laughter) They would just roar because to  me, it makes sense that they   d have broken pots. What   s the matter with  you, that you   d think it was ritually broken? (Laughs)  I guess we never really quite discussed the first pot you entered at Five  Tribes must   ve created this huge stir. Did it?  The first pot was a very small pot. As a matter of fact, I think I still have  it among my things. It was a couple of little crooked pots. I think it was  in the early, early    70s, I went to the first Indian market in the malls, in  Southroads Mall at Tulsa. Then later, we went to the one in Oklahoma  City. It was in the mall. Anyway, I went to my first one, and I didn   t  have a booth, but the tribe had a booth. They knew my work by then.  They said I could put things on the edge of the corner of theirs, so I had  two little ugly pots and some pipes. I lined them up there on their corner.  What I did enter for seriousness was, my daughter was first runner up  for Miss Cherokee, the first year of her sophomore year. They said they  wanted her in a Cherokee dress and moccasins about a month before it  was due. (Laughter) I knew what a Cherokee dress looked like. I didn   t  like it because it was cloth. I always knew of   my husband   s mother  described one, and it went to Smithsonian back then. Said they were  buckskin, and the Cherokees have a top that came down to the waist.  Then they had a skirt that came up here, and they had leggings that came  up to here. Then they had their moccasins. That   s the vision I had of a  Cherokee outfit.  I thought, even if you had to make it out of cloth, it should be that, not  the way they have them now with all those ruffles and things. I had to  follow what what   s his name was doing down at Tahlequah, so I made  my daughter   s first runner up for Miss Cherokee dress out of some  material. I went shopping for it and everything. I have it here because  she left it for me to keep. I   m going to give it back to her one of these  days and tell her to keep it awhile because I don   t have the room. But I  do have it. A lot of people copied it after that, too, because I did mine  just a little bit different than the rest of them.  15  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  When was the first time you made a serious pot?  Actually, when I first went to the Southroads Mall in Tulsa, I didn   t have  anything to enter, so they let me place my things on the corner of the  Cherokee crafts. I did have that dress that I entered. I got not first. I can   t  think of that man   s name that did those Cherokee dresses down there.  One of his students got first, and I got a little prize on mine. There was a  lady that came to that show. It was before they invited the Oklahoma     what is it they have in the Smithsonian every year? Folk art. I think it  was the seventy-fifth year or something. They invited the Oklahoma folk  art people, but it was long before that. She came up, and she said,    Who  made this?    I was sitting there. I embarrassedly said,    I did.    I wanted  her to look at the dress. It was hanging up there. She said,    Who made  this?    It was the pipes. I said,    I did,    sheepishly. (Laughter) She said,     Now, I want to watch you and see what you do from here. I   m going to  keep an eye on you.    I didn   t have any idea who she was. She went on to  the next booth, and never had met her.  So I went to   they had a luncheon, and she was going to be speaker, and  so was that guy that won the Olympics.  Billy Mills . He was also the  speaker, and I wanted to hear him. I went to this dinner, and when she  got up and started talking, I was real interested in the Olympic guy   s talk  and wanted to get his autograph and everything. Then when she got up  and started talking, she said,    I   m with the Smithsonian Folk Art  Organization, and my title is       Her title was Indian Awareness, and she  traveled through the country and picked out things that would go into  this. It just baffled me, who she was, that she was interested in my ugly  things. (Laughter) It was a couple of years or so later, I saw her at a  show in Oklahoma City. I had some pieces that were much nicer and had  designs. She bought one of them. She said,    I want to keep watching  you.    What was her name? I knew her name so well. She was Cherokee.  Clydia Nahwooksy, isn   t it?  Yes. She married a Cheyenne. She was telling me when she married  him, they called her a white person because the Cherokees live so much  like the white people, and they didn   t. I knew both of them. Eventually, I  had had several shows. Of course, she   d seen the dress and all that, but  she was still interested in the pottery because there weren   t any  Cherokee potters. That   s why she was interested. I kept going. Every  time we   d go to Cherokee, we had this good friend, Betty Dupree, that  was with the   where they had their arts and crafts there. She bought for  them.  First time I walked in the door with a pot, she said,    What are you going  16  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  to do with that?    I said,    I   d like to sell it.    She said,    Well, I want to  buy it.    (Laughter) So she bought my first pot. I had more than one, so  she bought pipes and things, and sometimes she   d trade for other crafts.  All those years, I did that. I have a double woven basket right in there  that   s from that time.  So she was putting your pots in the gift shop back there at Cherokee,  North Carolina.  Yes. And then I have a picture somewhere of their best potter that I met.  I was supposed to jury their show. Of course, she was good, so I gave  her first prize. I have a picture of her and myself. I think she   s still  living.  So in the    70s, you went to the Cherokee Tribal Council, and you  proposed that they help you put together a workshop on pottery?  No, I didn   t ask anybody. They asked me. I was doing the JOM   Johnson O   Malley  Indian Workshops in the schools up here at Vinita.  Then, Claremore would ask me, Commerce, Miami, so I would make up  a calendar. When I ran out of time, I   d say,    I can   t do anymore because  I   m full.    I   d go to all these places up here. Eventually, I got down into  the Cherokee country. I wasn   t working for the tribe. I was working for  the school.  What happened in Vinita, the person who came out to our house to get  the Indians together so they could get the program in the first place was  part Cherokee, and he was the principal. He came out to our house. So  we got the Indians, and we got the program. For some reason, they got  the idea that they could buy buses and school stuff with that money. It  definitely said you could not do that. I was the only person that was  standing up saying,    You can   t do that.    I was fighting the system. I  didn   t realize I was by myself in it. (Laughter) When he visited other  places, especially Miami, they were very strong together as a tribe. He  didn   t say a whole lot about that, but he   d go down to Tahlequah. I   d see  him down there. He was trying to learn all he could about it.  At the end of school in the first of May, I realized we had not even had  the kids to have all the stuff they should have. I was just going around  with my pottery and doing that. They enjoyed it, and the teachers  enjoyed it, but they got so they would tell the kids,    If you even waved  at an Indian, you   re Indian,    and things like that. I was fighting all that.  So at the end of school, I went to the superintendent and told him that  this wasn   t supposed to be that way. They had a public school get-together,  and they called Washington, and Washington told them the  same thing I did.  17  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  They were misusing those JOM monies.  Yes, and they had summer school for Indian kids to use that money so  they wouldn   t lose it. We still have the program, but it   s run the way it   s  supposed to be run. It was not very popular in public schools. That is  something I know.  You made a real difference there, by standing up.  You can leave that out. (Laughter)  I think that   s important. Did you like teaching? Did you get restless  because you felt like it was taking some time away from your pottery?  How did that work out?  I liked teaching because the kids were learning a lot. When they asked  questions, I would tell them Indian things I knew about our tribe and that  each tribe was different. I   d say,    What nationality are you?       I   m  American.    I said,    That   s not a nationality. America is a place where  you   re from, but where did your family come from? That   s your  nationality. Go back and ask your parents.       I don   t know. We   re  Americans.    (Laughter) So I did teach them they had another nationality  and how that worked, that each nationality had its own language, just  like each Indian has its own language. They don   t all speak the same.  They don   t understand each other. I did tell them a lot of things that I  knew for sure, that I wouldn   t say it if it wasn   t true. I think it was good  because sometimes the school didn   t teach it.  When Bill Glass co-taught with you, those workshops were for students  in the public schools? They weren   t for community people?  Well, what we did, those boys came up here to ask me if I would be on  that committee. Of course, I had to speak to my husband because it was  an evening thing, so he would go with me. Of course, he had his Indian  card, too. Anyhow, they all got acquainted with my husband and knew  he was part Cherokee. We had to go through the Council and see if we  could have a place. They wanted us to do something, but we had to have  a place, so we rented for one dollar, I think, this school. It used to be an  old school. Later they turned it into a community building. That   s where  we had our meetings. They told us if we wanted it, we could have it for a  dollar a year and fix it up, so that   s what we did.  We shined up the floors and did everything we could. Used it, and then  we rented it to community people for their singing conventions or  whatever, but it was ours. There was a man that lived close to it that was  18  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  sort of a caretaker. I think even coon hunters would rent it sometimes.  (Laughter) They   d rent it for singing conventions and things like that, so  we made a little money and kept going. What we did, we worked with  the community people that did the arts, all the arts that Cherokees did.  We pulled them in and got them on the list. They would come, and we  would have kind of a school for them, to have them to present a program  to us so they would know how to sell when they got out in public. We   d  always tell them,    You   re the one that makes it. You know how to make  it. That   s what you tell them.    Some of them, was easy. Some of them,  they   d back out, and they wouldn   t come back. (Laughs)  So it was really focused on helping them market and present themselves.  Yes. Then we worked with Oaks Boarding School, the kids there. We  taught them.  You did do Santa Fe Indian Market. You entered pottery in the Santa Fe  Indian Market.  Well, there   s Bill, Knokovtee, and there   s one other guy. They went out  there, and they kept telling me,    You ought to sign up, but you   ll have to  wait because there   s a lot of people signing up. Sometimes you can   t get  in. You have to wait your turn.    They kept saying,    You ought to sign  up and go out there.    I decided that I would go out there. It was in the  early    70s, I think. I signed up, and I didn   t get in that first year. The  next year I got in because I was the only traditional Eastern potter.  Wow, that was fast.  I put my stuff out there. Even some of the Pueblo people would ask me,     Are you Indian?    I said,    Yes, don   t I look like I am?    (Laughter) Then  I   d tell them,    Yes, I am. I   m Cherokee.       What kind of pots are those?     I said,    They   re Cherokee pots.    They   d never seen the designs.  Sometimes they   d say,    How did you do this?    Just to have fun out of  them, after I   d been there about the third year, this lady come up and  asked me how I did my corncob design. I told her,    With my teeth.     (Laughter) She looked at me, and I was grinning. She walked away. She  came back later and talked to me. I said,    That   s a Cherokee design.     You got into making stamps to use on your work. Did your collection  grow over the years, of stamps that you used on your pots?  Well, I have them, but when I first started doing them, I told you I just  etched them in. When I saw that piece at the Heye Foundation, our  group, the Cherokee Art Association, was invited as a tribe to send our  arts up there. Even Willard Stone, we asked him, and he sent one of his  19  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  art pieces up there. People that made the spear that you spear fish with     there   s a name for them in Cherokee. Anyway, there was a man that  made those, and we sent some of those up there that he had made.  The public had never seen things like that before. They made a big hit  because they were Cherokee. People came there and saw that stuff, and  they didn   t realize Cherokees still did things like that. Gigs  the fishing  spear  was what they used to do. My family, the men used to go out in  the night and have a light, and the fish would come up, and they would  spear those fish and get the big fish.  We had the shell carvings and anything in baskets. I had some baskets  that I had bought from Ella Mae Blackbear, who is gone now. I had  bought some from her. I sent those up there as her representative of her  work. Whatever the boys could get out here, we told them that they  would be back, that they would take care of them and send them back.  So they went around collecting everything they could and sent it. Up  here where there was people that had collected things, I collected those  and shipped it. Nobody paid me for the shipping, but we did those  things.  Was this in the    80s?  No, I think it was more in the    70s, but they showed there. Eventually, I  don   t know what happened, whether the Cherokees said we couldn   t  have the building anymore or what, but we had to quit doing that. We  had a big list of people on those sheets. Some of them are gone now and  the things that they did, whether it was jewelry or what, basketry. I do  have a collection of baskets. That was a good thing for the tribe. Then  they built up their Cherokee holiday show with people that could do  things like that. In the    80s, Wilma Mankiller started the Living  Treasures of the Older People.  What has that meant to you to have that title?  I was surprised because I was the first woman. When we were inducted,  there was me and another man, and then two that had died, that did  things. From then on, they had people that would do different things, and  they might be related to the older people.  There   s a bronze sculpture bust of you at Northeastern State University.  Well, that happened in the    80s. Jane Osti and I became acquainted  because she was a pottery student at NSU. I was hired by the Cherokees  to come to the village, out at that place where they would go and have  programs  the Cherokee Heritage Center . I had a stand where I was  demonstrating my work. I remember that Jane and one of her friends that  20  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  was in school came over and asked if they could watch me. I said,    Yes,  that   s what I   m here for.    Even tourists that came through could watch  me and learn.  It wasn   t very long after that that Jane came back and said,    I want to do  that. I want to do what you   re doing.    Meaning that she wanted   she  was doing wheel throwing, but I also knew she was a painting artist. She  came up to my house one day, and she was writing her paper, her thesis  for the college. She did an interview, and she asked me if I had a shawl.  I said,    Yes, I do.    She said,    Would you put it on and go out here? I  want to take a picture of you.    I put it on and went out there. Lo and  behold, a few months later I was called to come down there to do a  workshop. I was called to the college Art Department, and a teacher  came up out of there. He said,    I know you.    I had no idea what he was  talking about. I went down to the basement where the Art Department  was. There was Jane with this wax sculpture of me, a bust of me. She  had the Cherokee Indian designs all over the shawl. She told me, she  said,    This is 150 years since the Removal, and you represent the  women on the Trail of Tears.     You had no idea     No, it just blew my mind. Later on, the college wanted to have it  bronzed, and the tribe wanted to have it bronzed. Neither one of them  could afford it, so they went together and had it bronzed. It sits in the  Bacone Indian Studies building, just off campus  at Northeastern State  University in Tahlequah . Things that   s happened to me, I just couldn   t  fathom anything.  That journey, from those little pipes.  Yes, from the pipe. That   s what started it because I wasn   t a potter. I  have a painting that a local artist did of me, a full one, in the bedroom.  She did that before. Not that, but she did one before that was put out in  Tulsa. She had prints made, and she gave me prints for each one of my  kids. There   s one that hangs in a restaurant down there. After we had the  unveiling of the bronze, she and some of the Vinita people came to that.  That is what came out of it. She told me afterwards, she said,    I want to  paint you just like you are tonight.    For some reason, Jane and I both  picked a black dress to wear that night. She had on a black dress, and I  had on a black dress. Mine has quite a story.  My daughter and her husband were in Thailand, working with the Thai  people over there. Of course, she had access to getting silk. She asked  me if I needed any because I sewed a lot. I said,    Yes, I   d like to have  some black and some blue.    That outfit in there is what I made out of  21  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  that. Their yardage was only thirty-six inches wide. She sent me enough  to have some made. I got that out, and I cut it up and made a dress and  wore it.  That   s what you wore.  Yes. They were wearing cummerbunds at that time. They were stylish. I  made a cummerbunds out of a finger-woven belt. Then I put it on black  so it would show up. She said,    I want to paint you just like you are  tonight.    That   s what she did.  Well, we   re going to look at a few of your pots in a minute. Looking back  over your career, what do you think was one of the most decisive forks in  your life, when you decided to go a certain way?  With my pottery? You know, I never did change the idea. My idea for  my pots was to create them in the shape that I found those that I saw,  the old ones, and not veer away from those shapes. I could do anything I  wanted to with those designs. When I found a design, I could just repeat  it around the pot. It could be up here, or it could be in the middle, or  whatever. An anthropologist and an archaeologist came together to my  booth at Santa Fe. They said,    What tribe are you?    I said,    I   m a  Cherokee.    He said,    Is this Cherokee pottery?    They, being who they  were, they looked at them and said,    I never did see a Cherokee pot with  designs around it like that.    I said,    You have now because I   m  Cherokee.     I used the designs any way I wanted to because I wanted them to get out.  I wanted our people to know what was there. I put them on a pot even if  they were off of a shell carving. I found a design. I put it on a pot  because a lot of times they were on pots. I won a big prize one year with  one that had just a bunch of snakes swimming. The top ones had wings,  and these in the water were just going around the pot. It was a pretty big  pot. It got a good prize. I don   t even remember who bought it.  I   ll just have to tell you this story. My children lived in Hawaii after they  came back from Thailand. They had their first child over there. Betty  and Bennett, and his last name was Parnes. We went over there four of  their eight years simply because my husband didn   t like to fly.  (Laughter) He said,    We   ll go over there this year, but we won   t go the  next year.    We did that, and I   m glad we did because that   s a special  time. We learned other things from the Natives over there because they  knew some of the Native families. I was going to tell you something  about that.  Related to the pot with the snake designs?  22  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Well, I think what I did, you   ll never see in any other pots of the old,  because I decided to do my designs anywhere I wanted to.  Effigy pots were also a big part of what you did, weren   t they?  Yes, I did some of those but not as much, sculpturally, as my daughter  does. She does little Nativity scenes and things like that. She   s going  into something in pottery. She   s established some traditional   she does  something that my husband didn   t ever like for me to do and didn   t want  me to do. It   s those head pots. You   ve seen those.  Oh, yes, yes.  What I wanted to see in those head pots was the way they wore their  hairdos. I wanted to copy those, so I copied them on a drawing. I did  those. To an early extent, I went to the Five Tribes. At that early time, I  entered a piece that was called The Spiro Man. His hair-dress was like  that. What he wore, jewelry he wore, that   s what I wanted. I decided to  do it that way instead of the head pots. I made one mask, and my  daughter   s still got that. I just did it because I was looking at a head pot.  The exciting thing that happened out of this was the fact that we went  back to my Smithsonian lady. I had just had surgery in Tulsa and was  convalescing, and she called me, and she interviewed me for a trip to the  Smithsonian. I said,    Do you think I   ll be ready to go?    It was the first  of June through   we were up there two weeks. She said,    Oh, yes. I  think you   ll be able to do this. All you have to do is talk to people that  come up to you, and you   re demonstrating and so forth.    I didn   t realize  it was going to be thousands and thousands of people. But that was very  exciting to me. It came out of the little pots.  Well, is there anything else you   d like to add? If not, we   ll start to take a  look at those pots.  There is one more thing. Back in the    80s, we had a minister at Guthrie,  a Presbyterian minister. They were both ministers, the woman and the  man. My daughter was acquainted with them, and I just loved them both  and got acquainted with them. She wanted me to come over and give  programs and so forth. Out of that, one year she asked me and some  other Indian artists,    Could she ask those people,    Anna Mitchell would  like for you to do so and so,    or,    Bill Glass would like for you to do so  and so.       You know, like that.    Invite your friends to send some pieces  to the Peace Museum in East Berlin,    because it was a little bit before  the wall came down over there.  23  Little Thunder  Mitchell  One of her relatives had come to West Berlin because of the war because  Hitler didn   t like Christianity or anything good. He wanted to kill  everything. They had come out of there, and she had, too. Her cousin  was a minister. He took his young ministerial students over where they  had bombed and shattered the cathedral over there. Near the cathedral  was a Jewish man   s place, a store. They decided to make the little  museum, the Peace Museum, in his little building. They fixed it up, and  they asked us to send our pieces over there. She asked me if I would  make a pot for that. They had a little dedication at Christmastime in  Oklahoma City. I asked some people if they would. Some of them did,  and some of them didn   t.  There was a man that sent peace pipes that he had made, and we wrote a  little thing about our work,    That was from the Native Americans of  America and their share of peacemaking.    They hand delivered them  over there. About two months later, they started tearing the wall down,  not because of that, but, of course, we said it was. (Laughs) Her cousin  has been to my place, came to our place and helped us fire. They love  Indian art, the Germans do. He took pictures of that museum and took  pictures of my pot in there, and he wrote all the story about that  museum, typewritten. Then she added the letter she   d sent out. I have all  those in some of my packing. I hope a rat didn   t get into them.  Well, let   s take a look at some of your work now. That   s beautiful. Is it  eagle motif, or warrior motif?  That   s a falcon. This is what I was saying about putting the patterns  where I wanted them. That way, you can have a shot of what that falcon  looked like. A lot of times, I would draw him with his wings all out. I  would look at an eagle   s picture, picture of an eagle, and I   d spread its  wings out like it was. Then it had these little cross-hatch markings on  people   s faces and on birds and sometimes on other animals, so that  seemed like it was very important. I know that the Cherokees have a  ritual about the eagle. There has to be a certain person that can get the  eagle, and certain people handle it, and all that kind of thing for its  ceremonial.  This is the largest pot I have, here. The only reason I have it is because it  had a small crack over here in the neck. It   s one of my early ones. I  didn   t realize you were  not  supposed to grab the necks when you were  polishing. When I would fire them, it would have those little cracks, so I  had to learn not to do that. You have to hold them like you   re holding a  baby.  This is a dark one. It   s got a kind of swirly design that I took after a  melon. Later on, then I did this little other design around it. I did this  24  early in 2004. It   s been in Washington until this year. She had this letter  in it, and it tells what price she had on it and so forth. Every year, she  bought pottery from me at Santa Fe for the Department of Interior. The  one thing that I found when you do a show, you sell directly to the  buyer. You get your money instantly. You don   t have to wait two weeks  or a month or whatever, according to somebody else   s plan. They come  around, and they buy. Now, with her, I never sold to a museum or a  gallery because I learned long ago that they want half. I could kind of  bicker with the others and tell them,    If you   ll buy several, you can have  a certain percent off.    So that   s the way with her. She had a certain  percent off, and she would buy more than one every year.  This is a little canoe that my daughter made. She made it for my  cardholder. It   s out of our clay, too.  I   ll have to tell you about this. I was in Santa Fe, and we went up to a  place where they had people from Mexico in Oaxaca. This woman had  black clay, and she gave me enough to make a pot, which was this pot. I  told Robert coming home, I said,    This is not going to fire out black.     He said,    Why do you think it   s not? It   s black clay.    I said,    It   ll fire  out light color. When you fire it and smother your firing is when you get  black pots.    So that   s why I made this in 1994. It did turn light.  I made this design many times. I found this idea in the Southeast coast  pottery. These represent, to me, the ocean waves, how they come. It  makes two of them: one going this way, one going that way. I would  always put it on a pot like this in four directions because it was a very  important thing that our tribe did.  This is slipped darker. I was working on this pot when I had my stroke.  My daughter went out there, and she fired this pot for me so that I could  have it. I told her I wasn   t through with it. (Laughter) I said I wanted to  paint this again so it would be smooth and show those    She said,    Yes,  but you weren   t able to, so I did it.    (Laughter)  I   m glad that one of my children  Victoria continues the pottery    I  think that my youngest daughter would have been a potter had she had  the time. Her boys came and stayed with us when they were little. They  each made a pot, a pretty good-sized pot. One of them copied my  designs exactly. The other one went his own way, and it looked like he  was drawing petroglyphic designs because these little stick people were  in certain angles and stuff. I said,    Oh, you drew petroglyphs.    He said,     I don   t know what that is, but these are people in chaos because the  world is in chaos.    He said,    That   s why they   re acting like that.    He  had a bigger idea than I did. (Laughter)  25  Little Thunder  Mitchell  Well, Anna, thank you so much for your time today.  You   re welcome.  -------  -------  
