 Little Thunder  Goshorn  My name is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is February 15, 201l.  I   m interviewing Shan Goshorn as part of the Oklahoma Native Artists  Project sponsored by Oklahoma State University and the Oral History  Research Program at OSU. We   re at Shan   s house in Tulsa. Shan,  you   re an artist who works in a wide variety of media and who is  especially concerned with issues of representation of Native Peoples.  You   re Eastern Band Cherokee. Thank you for taking the time to speak  with me today.  Thank you.  I understand you were raised in Baltimore, Maryland. What was it like  growing up there?  I grew up outside of Baltimore, attended school in Bel Air, Maryland.  But every summer, my family and I would pack up and go to Cherokee,  North Carolina. As I got older, old enough to be of working age, my  parents would leave me there for the summer and they would go back.  Both of my sisters had this experience, too, because it was just easier to  find work there. So we lived with my grandmother. My parents have  since moved back to Cherokee, so that   s home base now.  What did your folks do for a living?  My mother was a registered nurse, but she became a homemaker when  the children came along. My father worked for the government. He was  an electronics technician.  Is your Cherokee on both your mom and dad   s sides?  My mother.  5  Little Thunder  Goshorn      Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  During some of those summers that you spent with your grandmother in  Qualla,  North Carlina ,what were some of the things that you did?  My first job was working as a waitress. No, I take that back, my first job  was six hours long. I worked at Kentucky Fried Chicken. (Laughter)  Which seems ironic, since now I   m a wildlife rehabilitator and I work  with birds. It only lasted six hours. But after that, I worked with the  Qualla Arts and Crafts Mutual, which is a cooperative of Cherokee  people, Cherokee artisans and craftspeople. So I became aware of  Cherokee crafts that way and I met a lot of our craftspeople and artists. I  then started working with the Indian Arts and Crafts Board with the only  field representative left outside of Washington D.C. I worked with him  for several years.  You were in your teens at this point still?  Yes. I did that through high school and college. I would go down there  and work for the summers.  Was your grandmother a Cherokee speaker? What was your exposure to  the language?  Yes, she was, but she didn   t speak it very much. She was of the mindset  that it wasn   t a good thing anymore to speak Cherokee, but she would  talk at my urging. So, I would pick up words. I   m not fluent by any  means, but I do have an understanding of words and counting and  food   survival words. (Laughter)  Were you involved with the Baltimore Indian community at all?  No.  What kinds of art experiences did you have in public school?  I had a phenomenal art teacher in the eleventh grade. At my parents     urging I was very involved with music up until that point. And it took a  lot to convince them that I wanted to use up my one elective and drop  orchestra and go into visual arts. (Laughter) But I had an incredible  teacher in the eleventh grade. In one year, he helped me get a portfolio  together, so I was accepted into the Cleveland Institute of Art  CIA  in  Ohio.  That   s very exciting.  CIA was a five year school.  6  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Did you have any extended family members that were artists?  No, I was the only one in my family. We didn   t even have any basket  makers or bead workers, but    I feel like most Indian people are very  artistic, so it was all around me. But it wasn   t in my immediate family.  When you decided to go to the Cleveland Art Institute, had you already  decided that you were going to be an artist?  Oh, yes. Oh, yes. In fact, growing up, I felt like I was really cheated  because it was like,    What do you mean you only get to pick one thing?     Because I was really drawn to being a veterinarian. Or I really wanted to  be an artist. There were a couple other choices that dropped off earlier. I  went to the Cleveland Institute of Art because their silversmithing  department was one of the best in the country with John Paul Miller. I  took two years there and decided it just wasn   t a good fit at that school  because they didn   t understand. They just had no appreciation of Native  American art. None.  So it wasn   t even something that you could explore through jewelry?  Oh, absolutely not. No, in fact, it was very difficult because you  absolutely had to do things their way. In the silversmithing department,  it was even more amplified. And I was being wooed by the photography  department   they were trying to amp up their department a little bit. I  just couldn   t believe how much faster it was. I thought everyone should  know how to photograph their own work, and I took this photography  course and it   s like   in silversmithing, you were tink, tink, tink, tink,  tink for a year on one piece. And in photography, you could go in and  knock out ten, fifteen in a day.  Did they have a different attitude toward Indian subject matter?  It was not valued at this school. I was the only Indian there at the time.  Was that the end of your higher education?  Yes, I got my Bachelor   s of Fine Arts. I went to school there, but I also  went to school at the Atlanta College of Art. I actually got my degree  from the Atlanta College of Art, but I only went to school there for one  year. I was in Cleveland for three years, and I went to a local university  for a year, so I really felt like my affiliation was with the Cleveland  Institute of Art.  Who were some of your artistic influences aside from your exposure to  the Eastern Band Cherokee artists?  7  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Well, at the Cleveland Institute of Art, I discovered American Indian Art  magazine. Every month, back cover, Elaine Horowitz Gallery, was Fritz  Scholder. I was just completely knocked out by him. I also became very  interested in the work of T.C. Cannon. This was back before you could  get online and research people. So, if a book came out, I   d look at the  same book thirty, forty, fifty times. Or if a magazine like American  Indian Art came out, I would covet those, and just go over them and  over them and over them. So, I learned about a lot of people that,  ironically, I started showing with when I moved out here. So that was  very exciting for me.  At the Atlanta Institute of Art, had you kind of switched your focus to  painting?  No, I actually ended up with a double major in photography and  painting. At the Cleveland Institute of Art, the way they introduced  hand-tinting   which is probably what my work is most recognizable as,  hand-colored black and white photographs    the teacher  just brought in  a box of Marshall photo oils and said,    These are Marshall photo oils.  You use them to hand color black-and-white photographs. You apply  them to the surface of the photograph, to a matte surface with cotton ball  and Q-tips. I want to see three examples.     Was it partly your interest in pursuing Indian subject matter that  brought you to Oklahoma? How did you decide to make the move here?  It was because I was living in Atlanta at the time. I had just graduated  from the Atlanta College of Art and it was time to change, it was time  for a move. It was sort of for self-preservation reasons. I had a former  roommate from Cleveland living out here, and she said,    Why don   t you  move out here?    So I decided on a Thursday and moved on a Monday. It  was just quick. And it was a real shock when I moved here. But being in  an intertribal environment has been fabulous. That   s really been the best  part of living here.  Did you live with your friend initially?  Yes.  And got introduced to the galleries right away?  I stumbled across Linda Greever   s gallery, the Art Market, first thing.  And met Ben Harjo. He actually was my neighbor. He lived in the  apartments right next door to where I was living, so we spent a lot of  time together. He was real helpful with helping me navigate with other  8  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  artists. One of the first people I met when I moved here was Kelly  Haney because as I talked to people, he was one of the people that I  looked at work in books, and oh my god, he was just bigger than life.  And they said,    Oh, Kelly, you should call Kelly. He   s really a nice  guy.    And I   m like,    Call Kelly?    And I did. And he   s like,    That   d be  fine, young lady. Why don   t you meet me at the Thunderbird Restaurant  and we   ll have lunch, because that   s halfway between you and me going  on to Oklahoma City.    So, we met, and he said,    Bring some photos of  your work,    and I did. He said,    We   ve got this big going show coming  up, it   s called Red Earth. I think you should apply.    That   s the first  booth show that I ever did. It was the first year that Red Earth opened,  and this was their twenty-fifth year, this year.  In terms of Indian artists who shared your interest in multimedia work,  did that come a little later?  Well, I was really interested in the work of Fritz Scholder and T.C.  Cannon. They were big, big, big influences. But then once I started  meeting Indian artists, I started working with Edgar Heap-of-Birds. He  formed a group called    Makers    and it was Edgar, Richard Ray  Whitman, Patricia Mousetrail Russell, Joe Dale Tate Nevaquaya and  myself. The premise was, as Indian people, it   s not about making  artwork to hang on the wall, it   s about the process of making it and the  ceremony involved in making it. So that became more of a multimedia,  inter-dimensional type of thought.  What year was that approximately?     86 to    88, I think, up to almost    90. Late    80s.  With regards to photographs, of course there   s this whole history of  non-Indians photographing Native people in ways that didn   t represent  them truthfully. Was that one of your motivations in taking  photography?  Absolutely. I became part of this group in Canada called Native  Indian/Inuit Photographers Association, NIIPA. That was part of the  premise of that group. We had images taken of us and from us for so  long   and that was back when you could get a nice little instamatic  camera. It was affordable to take pictures. People were encouraging  Indian people to take more photos and I became part of that group. It   s  no longer around, like a lot of Indian groups, but it was really important  during that ten to twelve-year period. I was on their board for a little bit.  Even though you   ve been involved with the Indian community here and  you   re Indian, in terms of taking photographs, did you ever run into any  9  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  resistance?  No, but I always tried to make sure I had permission before I  photographed at a ceremony or a wedding or at an event. In 1992, that  was the big Quincentennial, and NIIPA actually spearheaded this. It was  going to be a book, and then it was going to be an exhibit, and it was  going to be a collection of photos, and nothing ever really happened with  it. But they were encouraging photographers to document that year. It  was called,    A Year in the Life of Native America.    The title changed a  bunch of times, too, but that really helped me square in on making sure I  had permission slips signed and model releases. So, I   ve been really  good about trying to keep up with that and getting permission from  people.  That was probably a great base that you accrued in terms of  photographs     I have a lot of negatives. (Laughter)  Another thing about photography is the way it captures contemporary  identity and yet it becomes a historical artifact the minute it   s taken.  Yes. And that was one thing that was really important to me. When I  first started showing work people would see burial scaffolding, and they  were like,    You mean, Indians are still around?    I wanted these  photographs to show that this is a contemporary part of life, that we are  still here. I may paint things around it, but this has a contemporary basis.  As you mentioned you   re especially well known for your hand-tinted  colorized photographs. What has sustained your interest in that  process?  After ten or fifteen years, it was starting to feel like I was doing it by  rote. It just felt like it wasn   t challenging enough. It was with the  pregnancy of my daughter, who   s now fourteen, that I upped the ante a  little bit because I was bedridden with her for the last four  months . I  was doing a lot of political work, and my doctor even said,    That strife  will be here after your baby comes. Your job is to have a healthy baby  now.    So I would stay in bed and I would look at my negatives and I  conceptualized this entire body of work. And as I lay in bed, I wanted to  make it more challenging than just,    I   m going to put yellow here and  I   m going to put green here.    I was visualizing double-exposing all these  images. This was before Photoshop, this was before anything was  digital. It was all  done  in the dark room. I was figuring out how to do  all this layering in the dark room, so they were double-exposed black-and-  white photographs that were hand-colored. It was about going to a  10  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  more nurturing place, rather than the warrior and the militant place. It  was more a place of paying homage to our original mother, to the Earth.  So, it was all about remembering our traditional teachings to help me  carry this baby to term.  So you were actually working it out in your head     Yes, I wasn   t in the dark room at all. I was making notes all over my  contact sheets and making little studies.    Rest for four months?    Are  you nuts?  (Laughter) Especially for an artist. Another vein of work that you   re  well known for involves photographing commercial products that use  stereotypes to promote their brands. Can you talk about how you got the  idea for those series?  It was when I was doing work with Richard and Edgar. Amnesty  International was coming to town, and they wanted to do some work to  show how Indian people are still being stereotyped. Edgar had heard me  talking about this. This was kind of a new idea for me. I didn   t grow up  in a family that was aware of this. Like a lot of America, it was kind of  under our radar. When I did have that ah-hah moment   it   s just like Red  Man Smokeless Tobacco. That   s the largest-selling smokeless tobacco in  our smoke shops. Indian people go in and they say,    That   s an Indian.  This brand is for me.    We get caught up in the commercialization just  like everybody else does. So, when I finally had that    ah-hah    moment  that this is not right, that this continues to perpetuate us as cartoon  characters and dehumanize us, that   s when I started doing this work.  Edgar had heard me kind of working through some of this. Edgar and  Richard really challenged me to start thinking politically and to make  some statements with my work. He said,    Why don   t you do something  for this show? The show   s coming up, why don   t you work something  up?    And I   m like,    Okay. So I   ll go to the grocery store and maybe I   ll  find five or ten things around me.    In the grocery store, I just told my  kid,    Anything you see with an Indian on it, bring it back and put it in  this basket.    I mean, we were piling stuff in there. It was a huge  awakening for me just to become aware of how insidious this was, just  to become aware. I just showed that exhibit for the first time in years out  at Western Carolina  University . I think I had 250 actual items   I   m  not talking about cigar store Indian stuff that   s old. I   m talking about  stuff that was being produced. Some of that stuff is not being produced  now, but at the time that I collected it, it was all being consumed. No  sooner would you get one thing taken off the shelf, five more would  replace it.  11  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  So this show in North Carolina was relatively recent?  Yes, it was last fall, 2010. But, to counter that, I would do a lot of  lecturing. I would do a lot of talks to school groups and such. A lot of  times, I   d have people that had to be there, they   d be sitting there just  wrapped up with barbed wire  practically . And then, sometimes I   d  have a really enlightened group that would say,    Okay, okay, we get it.  But with what do we replace these images?    That   s when I started doing     Reclaiming Cultural Ownership: Challenging Indian Stereotypes,     which is the only documentary-style photography that I   ve ever done.  That was just images of Indian people by an Indian person, knowing  Indian people enough that I could get into their lives and watch them.  An all-Indian board of directors, or a Native American television show  or people playing a game of Indian dice,  or  gathering supplies. Just to  show who we really are.  So that arose out of your desire to respond     Yes, it was a counterpoint. Not this, but this is who we are. This is who  we are.  There   s a more recent series with the double-exposed photographs and  colorized photographs. It focuses on images in which the people and  landscape elements are merged.  That really was what spawned out of my pregnancy. It was showing our  relationship to the Earth Mother and just showing  that  she cares for us,  and in return, that   s what our ceremonies and our dances are all about.  It   s about renewal of the earth, and hence, ourselves.  I think that it is interesting Indian women artists are really focusing on  those particular relationships. Especially at this point in our lives.  I was just talking to Louis Gray, who is really outspoken about Indian  rights and the inappropriate use of mascots to represent Indian people.  The thing I admire so much about his approach is he   s just so kind and  gentle. And that   s becoming more of the way that I   m approaching it.  I   m less in your face with,    You really ought to believe this, and you  don   t have the right       I   m doing less of that. I just don   t have time for  that, anymore. I have a message and if people want to hear it, fine. If  they don   t, fine. I just don   t have time to be in their face anymore.  Your work   s been shown in France and China and South Africa, among  other places. Did you travel to some of those places with your work?  No. (Laughter) But I   m going to Italy in May, and we   re trying to work  12  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  out the logistics to have a show while I   m there.  You   ve also worked as an artist in the schools for over twenty years. Do  you still do that?  No.  During the time that you did, what art media did you teach?  We would do collaborative   there wasn   t one thing I did, there were a  lot of different projects that I did. I did storytelling and the school would  collectively illustrate the story, so classes of children would come in and  contribute to these paintings. A lot of organizing there. A lot of projects,  showing them simple basket weaves and equating that to math. Self-portrait  projects to create yourself in a positive way.  How do you think teaching impacted your art during that period?  It taught me to appreciate my own time in my own studio a lot   (Laughter) It wasn   t that I didn   t enjoy children, but you have nothing  left at the end of the day. Nothing. It   s an exhausting job. And I was  much younger then, but it was just exhausting.  I know that corporate commissions or commissions from businesses are  part of your income. Do you have to eschew art with a message? How  do you approach workplace art?  Luckily, I feel confident  enough  as an artist now to not feel like I have  to do work the client likes that I don   t like. The work is always  something that I like. And I think all the clients are thrilled with their  work. To my knowledge, everyone   s happy. I   ve reached the point in my  career that they   re hiring me because they like my work, so they have to  have the confidence that I   m going to produce something good for them.  A lot of what I   m trying to do when I create work in a corporate setting  is to create a space where people can take a deep breath. Just so they can  quit their working on the computer or talking on the phone or crunching  numbers or just all that crazy stuff that goes on in corporate America. I  had a job, briefly, in corporate America. Kind of like Kentucky Fried  Chicken, it was very brief. (Laughter) But you need a space where you  can go in and you can just get grounded. Even if it   s an abstract piece     I   m not  saying  it always has to be the grass pieces, which is something  that I have been doing   but even abstract pieces, I think, challenge us in  a different way. It stimulates a different part of the brain, so that people  are more productive at thinking.  13  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  We   re moving away from just doing    jobs.    We have to move into  creatively learning how to do these jobs because jobs can be outsourced  to computers now. You have to be a creative thinker so you can figure  out what you want the computers to learn to do. I think a good work  space creates that kind of atmosphere. I am a big believer in abstract  work around us. I think it really encourages us to be more than we know  that we are.  It   s mentally stimulating. Are they primarily paintings or has it been a  mix of media?  Photography and paintings. Digital technology has revolutionized the  way that I work. As soon as I found someone that could print  photographs on canvas, so I could hand color these canvases   you don   t  have to worry about framing it   all of a sudden, they got really big. I  was doing pieces that were nine feet tall for this one client. I did a piece  that   s up in Bartlesville that   s twelve feet long. So it revolutionized it for  me, completely changed the way that I work.  You   ve had over twenty solo exhibitions. What   s one that really stood  out for you?  There   s not one, but the year that I was pregnant with my first child, I  had eight solo shows. (Laughter) So, that year just kind of blurred them  all together. People were packing up work and sending it directly to the  next place. I just kept wondering what this work was going to look like  when it came home.  (Laughter) Have you done any installations?  No, but I   d like to. Every time I go to an installation show, I think,    Why  is all my work flat on the wall?    But then I think,    How are you going to  store all that stuff?    Just storing paintings is such a challenge. Unless  you count the installations I do with the stereotypical work. I have some  ideas for installations that I think would be a lot of fun and I think they   d  be good shows, but I   m just not ready to go there yet.  (Laughter) How about collaborations with other artists? Have you done  any of that?  Yes, there   s an artist from Cherokee, North Carolina that does wood  sculpture. And we did a collaboration where he would carve these  abstract forms, and I would paint them and then I would put beads on  them. They were wonderful. They were wonderful. One was real tall and  blue. He let me name them and everything. He just said,    Here you go.     So I called it,    Long Man,    which is what we call our river. It was  14  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  painted to show the current and the undulation and the twinkle and the  beads. The other one was shorter. It looked like a real tall lotus. I called  that one Eternal Flame because we carried the flame from North  Carolina to Oklahoma, and then they carried it back. That one was  painted in coppers and golds and reds. But really, any corporate  installation, I feel, is a collaboration.  When the Tunica Biloxi invited me to come and do work for their  casino, they said,    Okay, we   d like to fly you in.    And I   m, like,    Fly  me in? Just send me something to work from     They wanted to fly me in  so I could be inspired. (Laughter) I   m like,    Well, that really rocks, but  just send me something.    They said,    We really can   t.    And the reason  they couldn   t was, the Tunicas and the Biloxi came together because  they were such small tribes. But their tribe was the catalyst for  NAGPRA  Native American Graves Protection Repatriation Act of  1990 . There was an entire mound that they didn   t even know about, as  contemporaries, that this amateur archaeologist was selling off piece by  piece. And they managed to use that as the example of an entire culture  that would be dissipated because of this man   s gold digging. So, that   s  how the decision was made that it would become illegal to dig up these  Indian graves. And they had decided, as a tribe, that their pieces would  never leave again. So, they did actually let me come down and go  through some of the pottery shards and go through the beads that they  found, and I came up with ideas of pieces to put in their casino based on  their pottery. It   s very much a collaboration when I work with  corporations or companies like that.  Is casino work still an important thing for you?  I never thought it was going to be important. I never thought it would,  but my tribe commissioned me twice. I thought,    Wow, that   s a good  gig.    And then Cherokee Nation asked me to do a piece, and I thought,     Well, that gig   s up. Got the two Cherokees.    There   s the Ketoowah  Band, but their casino, I didn   t think, was hiring artists. But then the  Tunica Biloxi hired me to do that. And I did some work for the  Quapaws.  For the Tunicas, that   s been fairly recent?  It   s been within the last six or seven years I think. But the Quapaws was  a couple years ago.  You   ve done some book illustrations and one of them was for a book of  Cherokee stories. What was that process like?  (Laughter) Just like every other deadline process. They contacted me for  15  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  the cover, which was going to be a photo of my grandmother   she  actually modeled for me. She was telling these stories, and I was  painting everything around it for the cover. They had talked to another  Eastern Cherokee to do the interior. There were fourteen interior black-and-  white illustrations. He was going to get some studies, and it was all  coming together, and it was all coming together, and I said,    You  haven   t seen any of the work for the inside, yet? Don   t you be coming to  me in the last hour and ask me to do this.    That   s exactly what  happened. I did all fourteen interior black-and-white paintings. They  were just washes. In thirteen days.  (Laughter) That   s amazing.  It was insane   You   re a member of Urban Indian Five, can you tell me when that group  was started and what is its purpose?  Let   s see. I think it was started in    06 or    07, but I wasn   t one of the  initial five. One of the artists, it just wasn   t a good fit for her, so they  pulled me in. Since then, let   s see, it   s Brent Greenwood who is  Ponca/Chickasaw, Tom Poolaw, Kiowa, Gerald Cournoyer who is  Lakota, Holly Wilson, she   s Cherokee/Delaware and me. Holly came in  when another member had to leave because he was going to be a single  dad while his wife went off to get her PhD. So, he felt like he had to pull  back for a while and Holly came in. But it was an original collaboration  between five artists and the Oklahoma City Indian Clinic. The intention  was the artists were going to be deliberately creating artwork with the  intention of inspiring wellness. We were going to be putting work up to  inspire people in the clinic to remember indigenous memories, tribal  memories of what we know about healing ourselves, of what we know  about healing ourselves spiritually. So, part of what we   re doing is  addressing historical trauma, which keeps us in an ailing state. And  we   re kind of looking at the traditional use of the word,    disease.    It   s  dis-ease. Where we   re out of relationship, out of harmony, where we   re  not grounded, we   re not balanced, and so we   re open and vulnerable for  deterioration in our body. It   s not like the work is obviously about  health. It   s not using the icons you might know in the white medical  society, but it   s about using icons that Indian people know have  importance.  Are you rotating works?  We have had work at the  Oklahoma City  Clinic. We have shown work  at the Health Science Center at OU, we had a show at the Southern  Plains Indian Museum in Anadarko. We have had some smaller shows,  16  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  but what our goal is right now is to get two pieces from each person     even if it   s a high-quality reproduction   and have several sets of these  ten images. We want to travel them through Indian clinics. We want to  remind people of the power that we have from within to heal ourselves.  You won First Place or Grand Award at Red Earth with a conceptual  piece about baskets. Let   s talk about your baskets a bit because these  have been pretty important in your work.  I feel like they have been important, but it   s just kind of comical how  they even happened. (Laughter) When I was working with the Indian  Arts and Crafts Board back when I was a teenager, one of the things they  commissioned me to do on the side    when I wasn   t even in the office     they commissioned me to do twenty-one black-and-white, pen-and-ink  illustrations of traditional Cherokee basket designs. By the time I got to  number sixteen or number seventeen or number eighteen, I   m thinking, I  bet I could do this. (Laughter) Because it   s math. It   s about patterns, it   s  about seeing the patterns in something. My family was,    No, you  couldn   t,    and I   m like,    Really, I think I could.       No, you really  couldn   t.       I really think I could.    It wasn   t then, but it was later that I  had this idea for a basket.  I know the process of gathering white oak or cane or honeysuckle   I  know this process. I have photographed people doing it. That   s quite a  bit of what we were doing at the Indian Arts and Crafts Board, was  promoting these kind of crafts. But I didn   t want to do that. There were  people doing it way better than me. I wanted to do something different. I  just got this idea to weave baskets out of paper and not just paper, but  paper that had been digitally printed with reproductions of treaties. So, I  contacted the Cherokee Nation, and I said,    What is the most difficult  treaty?    They were like,    Hands down, tobacco compact.    And I   m like,     Why?    And they said,    It   s been in arbitration, two different chiefs  have been in there, trying to negotiate on it. Under Wilma Mankiller and  under Chad Smith. And it   s in arbitration again     It   s been resettled two  or three times, and no sooner they sign it, they think the other side has  the unfair advantage, and they   re in arbitration again. So I   m thinking,     Alright      This is a compact that allows   do you want to explain?  It   s a contract between the state of Oklahoma and Cherokee Nation. And  this is because of the smoke shops. If you   re on Indian land, you can sell  tobacco without the tax. That   s what it is. So, I got a copy of the tobacco  compact and I had my friend that does the high quality reproductions  print them on watercolor paper. I cut them into splints and I wove them  into the basket. And I used the traditional pattern called    spider   s web     17  Little Thunder  Goshorn  because I wanted to show how tangled this all was.  (Laughter) What a great metaphor.  I   d never woven a basket, so I wasn   t real sure about how to finish it off.  Then I thought,    Finish it off? What am I talking about? This is  ongoing.    So, I deliberately left it unfinished. That piece is in the  National Museum of the American Indian now. The Smithsonian bought  that. I did another version of that, which is in the Kaiser collection here  in Oklahoma. I thought,    Okay, so done with that piece.    (Laughter)  Whenever people would see it, Eastern Cherokees are like,    Yeah, okay,  you can do that. But you could never do a double weave.    And I   m like     Why not? People are doing the double weave. Why couldn   t I figure  that out?    I taught myself how to do a double weave. I actually learned  here in the studio. My dad was very ill in North Carolina, so I would go  back and forth every sixty days. I would pack this basket up and when I  would sit there with him, I would work on this double weave. You hear  stories,    I learned at my mother   s feet. All these little clippings would  fall down there and I just learned how to do it.     Well, my mother doesn   t make baskets. So, I would have one hand on  the finished piece, and I would count. I would figure out, okay, okay,  okay, I   m right here. Then I   d get on the piece I was working on, and I  would count and I would count and I would count. And I would say,     Okay, okay, okay, here I am. I need to go under four and turn left.     (Laughter) So, this hand would run over here and try to help this hand  learn how to do it. I   d go as far as I could and then we   d start over again.  I would go back over and count where I was and just keep going.  That basket was so difficult because it would start on the inside. You  weave it up as high as you wanted, and then you turn the splints and  weave down and finish on the bottom. This one was also woven out of  paper, but this one had a different message. This one was called    Sealed  Fate.    It was about the Treaty of New Echota, which a handful of  Cherokee men signed under the cover of darkness, which supposedly  gave the United States Government the authority to remove all the  Cherokees to Oklahoma. That   s on the outside. But on the inside, I got a  copy of the over ninety-five pages, which is between twelve and fifteen  thousand signatures by Cherokee people, that these men did not have the  right to represent them, that this was an invalid document.  The interesting thing about that protest document is that it was on sheets  of paper that were roughly eight and a half by eleven, but they were  stitched together like this, so it was this long roll when it was done. On  the inside of this basket   it   s actually kind of a buff color, but there  were also some pages on this document that were this pale blue   I don   t  18  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  know why. I don   t know where these pale blue papers came from, but  they were the papers that people were signing on. They would just have  all these columns of signatures. Sometimes they were in the Cherokee  syllabary and sometimes they were in the English translation of the  Cherokee name. So, that   s on the inside. And I did a lid, same thing,  Treaty of New Echota on the outside and the protest document on the  inside. But then on the top, I wove a traditional Cherokee pattern called     Man in the Coffin.    I made that all out of Andrew Jackson   s signature  because he absolutely refused to even view the document. This is one of  the few documents that actually went to the Supreme Court, and the  Supreme Court said,    You know what, you   re out of line, Jackson. This  is an invalid document.    And Jackson said,    Watch me. I   m removing  them.    This was really unfortunate on his part because at the battle of  Horseshoe Bend, the Cherokees saved his life. So, this was a fine way to  repay the Cherokees.  What an amazing piece. Did you see the original protest document at the  Smithsonian?  No, I saw them in Tahlequah. They had them on exhibit.  The shape of this basket is coffin-like     See, I didn   t know that. That   s the basket that I was modeling it from.  That center one up there.  Points to a shelf.  When I took it finished back  to Cherokee, North Carolina, I showed it to the museum, and they said,     Looks like we   re going to have to be fourteen.    I said,    What do you  mean?    They said,    We currently recognize thirteen living people as  being able to do this basket, and now we   ve added you as the four-teenth.     I was showing it to one of the premier basket makers. First of  all, she approved, which just thrilled me. She really approved of it. She  said,    This shape is called a coffin shape. This was the hardest shape to  make and it was considered sacred.    I don   t know, in fact, I   m not sure  that anybody knows because I have asked, and either nobody knows or  nobody will tell me, I don   t know which. (Laughter) I don   t know  whether it carried sacred regalia or sacred herbs. I don   t know what its  sacred use was. But that piece was purchased by the Gilcrease   Museum , so it will stay here in Tulsa, which thrills me to no end.  Is it on display right now?  No, no. I don   t know what the plans are, when it will be.  The Eastern Bank Cherokee gave you an honorarium in 1992 for your  truthful representation of Cherokee people back East. How did that  affect you?  19  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  It validated the work I was doing.  I understand your husband has built some aspects of this house, but you,  too, had a studio built for you.  I built this studio, Julie. (Laughter) I have saved my money for twenty  years and I built this studio.   With  money from art. That   s probably very satisfying.  That   s right, that   s right. Prior to working here, I was working in the  smallest bedroom in the house. The thing that pushed me right over the  edge was when I was doing those pieces that were nine feet tall. They  wouldn   t fit in my studio. They were at a slant. No matter what side of  that slant I was on, the phone would be on the other side, which would  ring. (Laughter) So, I ended up working with Linda Pierson at Boston  Avenue Frame on Cherry Street. She let me set up in her lobby and work  on these pieces. It   s like,    Great, are you going to hang flags out and sell  popcorn? We   re all set     (Laughter) We   d been trying to decide for  years, do we build over the garage? Do I rent a place somewhere else?  But it   s really important for me to have it here in my house because I  raised my kids, I   m here after school when they get here. I can start  dinner    I can be an integral part of the house, and I can work really,  really late and not worry about having to get home. I am home.  Wildlife rehabilitation has become an important part of your life. Can  you talk about when you first became involved with rehabilitation?  As a child. We were one of those families that, when we would find  birds, we would try to take care of them. I actually had amazing success  because as an adult and having my federal license now, I know how hard  it is. It was just lucky that we got so many of them to fly away. (Laughs)  It really was just lucky. But I   m averaging    The year before I had over  a hundred birds, but last year with all the traveling, going to North  Carolina, I had maybe eighty. It   s a huge, huge, huge time commitment.  It   s so hard to keep up with baby birds    feeding schedules because they  need to eat every twenty or thirty minutes. When the sun is shining,  you   re putting food in mouths.  As you say, it just takes a lot of love and care and time. Does it feed your  art?  Yes, that   s exactly where I was going with this. The thing that was so  interesting to me   because, remember, I wanted to be a vet, too   so  here I get to do both things. My aviary is right outside this door. It is so  20  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  rewarding to me to get to see the personality of different species of  birds. And to have it validate the stories that tribal people tell about  birds, about the way that different birds have a part to play in legends, or  in the way that you make decisions. That   s the best part of it for me. It   s  also a really important part of giving back to the earth. We   ve taken so  much from our environment. It kind of ties in with what I   m doing with  the Urban Indian Five. It   s all about keeping ourselves well and finding  our balance and becoming part of that hoop of life, instead of just  thinking we   re at the top of the pyramid all the time. It   s all about being  united and being in harmony.  In terms of your colorized photos, what kinds of paper and paints or  markers do you use or does it depend?  Well, at one time, when I was printing my own work, it was easy to be  able to answer that question. But now with inks and dyes changing so  much    I have completely folded up my dark room. I pay a lab  downtown. It   s a dark room process, but it   s not on the fiber paper that I  liked so much. Then moving into tinting canvas   nobody really knows  how this is all going to do. (Laughter) We   re just all kind of winging it  as we go along. You can do research, as far as how archival the paint is,  but I   m using Marshall photo oils, which is older than color  photography. I have used acrylic paint, I have used pastel, I have used  pencil on them, but it doesn   t work on the papers now. But I   m using  glitter now. That   s new.  (Laughter) How much of your overall production, then, consists of  paintings and how much are photographs?  I don   t know. I wish I had a secretary so  that  so much of it wasn   t  office work. That   s what just eats up my time in the studio.  Having to write grants and apply for things?  I haven   t. I need to. I   d like to, just to keep things moving slowly in  here, so I can keep working. But when I sold that basket to Gilcrease, it  was the greatest thing, because it meant this winter, I could work on  projects I had always wanted to work on. I finally had a little bit of  financial freedom that I didn   t have to worry about finding the next gig.  That was such a huge relief. But with the conceptual work, so much of it  is just thinking. It took me two months just to wrap my head around just  how to do these corners on that basket. I just couldn   t figure out how I  was going to start on the top and then go.  What is your creative process, starting with how you get your ideas?  21  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  I am always thinking. I   m not kidding, I am always thinking. If it   s a  really important idea, I   ll make a note of it and sketch out some ideas.  Or if I see something I think would really inspire    I   ve got a whole file  of ideas and sketchbooks with ideas. But sometimes it   s a deadline.  So what research do you do for photographs or paintings?  Well, the basket that I am researching right now is about boarding  schools. I got some books at TU Law Library, the Indian Law Library  loaned me some books, and I have been in touch with the Carlisle  Institute  in Pennsylvania . The computer has made it so much easier.  Used to be, you   d have to go to the library and borrow books on their  intergalactic loan system, you know.  (Laughter) What is your creative routine?  We had two weeks of snow days and it was a slice of heaven because,  ideally, I like to work until 1:00, 2:00, 2:30 in the morning. I love that. I  love being in here all by myself with the music playing and working.  There   s no phone calls, I don   t have to worry about e-mail. And then I  like to sleep until 9:30. That is a slice of heaven for me. But we still  have one child left at home. Now that my husband   s retired, he   s good  about getting her up in the morning. But you have to get up by 7:30, just  so you   re not sleeping until noon. (Laughter) Because by the time you  work out and stuff    Usually I start working in the late afternoon and  then I work after dinner. That   s really my best time to work.  Looking back on your journey so far, what do you think was kind of a  pivotal, fork in the road moment for you?  I had a really challenging time in the mid-eighties, right after my  husband and I got married. I did a series of work called    Coming Into  Power,    which we had made into posters, which was about spiritual  awakening, that had a statement that went with it. It taught me to work  in series. It taught me about putting more into work than just being  happy with a finished image. It taught me about the impact that it had in  other people   s lives. I still have people coming back to me and saying,    I  have this work in my home, in my office.    Or,    I ran across this and it  was really powerful for me.    So, that   s very rewarding, that my work  can have an impact on someone like that. But it was also a pivotal piece  that got me some awareness as far as galleries, being recognized as part  of the Native American Indian art movement.  The advantage of series is it allows you to do what?  To really work through an idea. It was a piece of artwork, I didn   t ever  22  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Little Thunder  expect to show it when I first did it. It was really about catharsis for  myself. It was about clearing out some of the negativity that was really  just consuming us. It was something my husband and I were going  through together. It was allowing myself to be receptive to the  positiveness of the universe. People would come over and see what I  was working on, and they were really inspired and really encouraging.  That   s really why it became a piece that I agreed to exhibit.  What was one of the high points of your career?  Selling something to the Smithsonian. No, I   m going to back up. I got a  call from the Smithsonian and they wanted to use one of my images for  a Native American women   s music festival. It was the weekend before  Fourth of July and the weekend after Fourth of July. They had all these  women from North America from all different tribes coming, and they  used an image of mine on the CD cover. And the more I began to hear  about it, the more I kept thinking,    Man I wish I could go up there. That  sounds like a lot of fun.    So they called me back and they said,    We   d  like to negotiate the rights to use this for more, to promote it.    I   m like,     If you can get me up there for the weekend, you can use it however you  want to for this event.    So, they fly me up there. This is the  Smithsonian  They fly me up there and I get off the plane and this guy  has a sign that says    Smithsonian Institution. Ms. Goshorn.    (Laughter)  So I get there and on the main Mall, there   s my image on banners all up  and down the main Mall. I   m thinking, I can just die now.  How about one of the low points?  With my art? None come to mind. Yes  (Laughter) All that doing away  with negativity worked   Is there anything else you   d like to talk about that we didn   t cover or  anything you   d like to add?  Yes, I am recognized as a Native American photographer, but I have  never, ever really thought of myself, really, as a photographer. I think of  myself as an artist. So, people are always surprised to see how many  different media I work in. They   re like,    Oh, I didn   t know you did this.     I would encourage young artists, especially,    Don   t get caught up in the  medium. Your ideas are so much more important than the medium  you   re working with. Your ideas    you   re going to find the medium to  work in. As long as you have that brain, eye, hand coordination together,  you can do anything.     (Laughter) Which reminds me of your beautiful necklace that you  showed me before this interview began.  23  Goshorn  Little Thunder  Goshorn  That   s my point, whether it   s bead work, leather, or whatever. Once you  are established as an artist and you have the ability to make your ideas  come out of your hands, the learning curve is much shorter for each  project.  Excellent. Now we   re going to take a look at some of  your  work. Do  you want to talk about this piece?  Last fall, I flew into the Atlanta Airport and I saw these big black-and-white  photographs that were tinted with glitter and it just knocked me  out. They were artsy/craftsy sort of, but they were just so fun. I like  twinkle. I just like all that. And I like the idea of pushing the photograph  a little further. But I really like the idea of applying it to a Native person  because of all the glitz with our casinos. I like showing the tradition, but  all the flash of the casino   all the glitter and all the sparkle. I started  asking people when I was home this last trip in January,    So, do you  think the casinos contributed to the revival of our culture?    Because  we   ve had a huge renaissance. Even though the artists in Atlanta used  Southern icons, I immediately saw that I wanted to use traditional Indian  people in their traditional clothing. I wanted to play up that dichotomy of  the casinos, of the sparkle and glitter of the casinos, and all the shmanzy  that goes on. But when I was home this last January, I started asking  people,    Do you think that the casinos have contributed to the  renaissance of the Cherokee language and clothing that   s been going  on?     Interestingly enough, people felt very strongly, but they felt both ways.  Some people said,    Yes, because it   s opened up the fact that we have  this historical preservation going on. We have an entire allotment of  money that goes into historical preservation.    And a lot of people said,     No, I don   t think so at all.    It   s not that this actually is a statement on  my part, this is more about evoking dialogue so that people can compare  those two, the dichotomy of the casino and the traditions. But I like the  idea of tinting with something besides a transparent paint. I like that a  lot.  This piece evolved into a work that was a statement about the  complex tension between the casinos and traditional ways, entitled     High Stakes, Tribes    Choice.      This is from a series called Industrial Trade Blankets. This was actually  inspired from a commission that I did with some corporate headquarters  here in town. They had a western motif and when they brought me in to  talk they had all these pictures of cows being steered, and cows being  roped, and cows being herded, and cows stampeding. And I thought,     What am I doing at this table?    I said,    Your building is just beautiful,  but if you want cows in here (it was for a barbecue place) I can help you  24  Little Thunder  Goshorn  find another artist. But you have such a beautiful building, you have  such an interesting marriage between natural elements and industrial  elements, why don   t you let me do some studies and I   ll have them back  to you on Monday? If you don   t like them, it won   t cost you anything,  and if you like them, we   ll negotiate.     So, I was interested in introducing that idea of including industrial  elements into the pieces. These were, of course, inspired by the trade  blankets, but instead of elk   s teeth or instead of shells, I added this  element of copper washers. This is something else that I really like about  art, is finding out the tradition, Cherokee tradition, of copper. Copper  was really, really important to the Cherokees. They actually attributed  this rose color to the sun because they attribute   instead of the bright  shining yellow that you see in Anglo  representations  they would see it  when it first came up off the horizon, at its most important part. Not at  the zenith looking straight up. Right at the horizon line. The healing  elements of copper, too, were really important. In fact, now, they   re  showing that copper has true medicinal properties. They   re talking about  putting copper in all the places that people touch all the time in  hospitals. It   s got these really strong antibacterial properties. In ancient  times in Rome, the soldiers that would suffer bad cuts, they would  scrape some of the sword off into the wound because the sword had  copper alloy in it, and they realized that if you were struck with a copper  sword, it didn   t fester the way it did with other swords.  We   re going to look ahead at a couple of photographs, next.  This piece is a straight digital photograph, no manipulation. It   s called     Indin Car.    It   s kind of a play on words with how you   re always talking  about Indin cars on the reservation falling apart and stuff. But these  guys   I was tagging along, these are the warriors of the Annikituwah,  which is our first line of defense, traditionally, for the Cherokees. I was  tagging along on this photo shoot for National Geographic, and it just  cracked me up to see these guys in a car. (Laughs) It was totally  impromptu, it wasn   t staged. I said,    Hey, hey, hey, you guys, roll down  the window, look over here.    It was just perfect. They went into a hotel  room to change, and one guy walked out to get one of his sticks, his  weapons, and as he walked out, there was this other couple coming in to  check into the hotel. They just watched him go to his car and they  looked at each other, and they went back to their car and they left.  This is from the Earth Renewal series. This is the series that I was  talking about that I conceived when I was pregnant. This was a new way  to do it, because this is one of the few that I   ve done digitally. So, it was  a digital combination. It was done in Photoshop, but I   m still hand  coloring it with the transparent photo oils. This piece is called Earth  25  Little Thunder  Goshorn  Renewal, Kituwah Motherland, because this is the Kituwah Mound. This  is the birthplace of all Cherokee. This is our ancestral origin land. This is  the place where the Creator put us on the earth. It   s one of the most  important  places . This is the sacred Mecca. This is the place. This is a  woman dressed in her traditional clothing. She   s one of our few speakers  that grew up speaking the Native language.  This piece was done last year as a result of Duke Power planning to  build a substation up here on the mountain. Nobody knew about it until  they started opening up the earth, and there was this big red gash in the  mountain. So when we found out what they were doing   I was really,  really proud of my tribe   because there was this big grassroots effort  where people got really involved to stop it. And we were successful. The  Chief got behind it and he actually got into negotiations with Duke  Power. They traded him for some land somewhere else. So now the goal  is to buy up all the land in the mountains all around it, because not only  was it visibly ugly, but all that electrical energy going over that site, it   s  just not good. So, I actually did another piece. I donated the rights to use  the image to the Legal Fund to raise money to help with that effort.  Shan, thank you so much for your time today.  (Laughter) You   re welcome.  -------  -------  
