 Wilson  Fisher  Today is April 5, 2012. My name is Latasha Wilson and I   m with the  Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at Oklahoma State  University Library. I   m in Frederick, Oklahoma, at the home of Myrtha  Fisher. I will be interviewing Myrtha today as part of the Spotlighting  Oklahoma Oral History Project. Thank you for having me here.  You   re welcome.  To start out, would you mind telling me when and where you were born?  I was born between here and Tipton, kind of northeast of town in the  country.  Was it in your parents    farmhouse?  It was on the land that my grandpa drew in a lottery at Lawton and we  were tenant farmers. He and his brother-in-law drew that land in the  lottery.  What were your parents    names?  George Conrad and Lota Conrad.  And your grandparents whose land you were living on?  G.W. Conrad and Emma Conrad.  Did your mother   s parents live nearby?  They lived northeast of Tipton. My grandpa was an Indian and he was a  surveyor.  5  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  What was his name?  I   m trying to think of his first name.  John Howard , I believe it was,  Etheridge.  So do you know how he came to be a land surveyor?  No, I don   t.  There weren   t many people doing that at the time, I guess.  No, I don   t know. I think it was probably unusual since he was Indian.  All I know is that Grandmother Etheridge was going to school and he  was their teacher and when they started dating, she quit because she was  embarrassed to be dating her teacher. (Laughter) People got embarrassed  easier then than they do now.  Do you know what grade she was in when she     I really don   t.  Or what school was he teaching at?  I don   t really know. I just know that he was working at Altus, around  there, he bought a farm northeast of Tipton. There   s a lot of things you  wish you had found out about your family history, but you were just too  busy being a kid, you know.  What Indian tribe do you think he was a part of?  I don   t know. He was not one of the broad nosed ones. He was a nice  looking Indian. He didn   t have that big broad nose like a lot of them do.  I thought he might be Cherokee, but I don   t really know. I think they  were better looking Indians a lot of times.  So did you spend much time with them growing up?  No, not too much, but I did stay with them when my parents bought a  farm next to Manitou to finish out the semester. But I think he   d already  passed away, then. We went on holidays, we spent time  with them . But  I didn   t live with them.  What is your birth date?  August 11, 1927.  6  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  So did your father and mother build a home on your grandfather   s land?  There was a house there. It wasn   t very much and was a three room  house with a lean-to back porch. That   s where we lived.  Did you have brothers and sisters?  No, I   m an only child. My mother, later years, had a fibroid tumor  removed and they think that   s probably why she didn   t have any more  children.  So your Grandfather G.W., did he farm, also?  Yes, after a period of time, he quit barbering and I guess he had to make  some money before he quit. (Laughs) As I remember, the style was to do  your hair when I was a little girl, was bangs and straight hair like this. So  he did our barber work. Shingled up the back. (Laughs)  And what did you say about him being a barber?  He was a barber in Frederick with Mr. Sanderson.  Who was the first?  They had the first barber shop in Frederick.  So they were partners, Mr. Sanderson and your grandfather?  Yes.  Do you know when that barbershop opened approximately?  Oklahoma become a state, when? 1905?  1907.  I imagine it was within five, six or seven    I don   t remember the date. I  have a history book they made of Tillman County here that might tell  me, but I don   t have it in here, right now.  And how did you say your grandfather got the land?  Well, the one we lived on, they got from a lottery in Lawton, but I think  he bought the one where they lived. I   m not sure, but I don   t believe he  got that in the lottery.  7  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Did he grow up in this area?  No, they came from Illinois. I think he was working for her parents and  they met and they came to Oklahoma. They were young and didn   t go  back for thirty years, I think.  Wow.  But we had relatives come on vacations because times were kind of  tough then. They could come and live with my grandparents and we  would have dinners and feed them, you know. So they got kind of a  cheap vacation. (Laughter)  Do you know how your grandparents got to the area from Illinois?  No, I don   t. Probably by wagon or something like that, I don   t know.  How did your father meet your mother?  They went to school at Tipton and they were in high school together. He  was in Circle Valley School in the younger years, that was the country  school. They were in high school at Tipton and graduated in    24, I think.  Well, did you have chores helping out around the farm?  Yes, we milked cows and I had to gather the eggs, naturally. I was sick  quite a bit in the first grade. I had measles and scarlet fever and chicken  pox. I was making a lot of visits to the doctor and he said if they didn   t  take care of me, they would lose me. So they bought me a pony. He  wanted me to get out in the fresh air. So I had a pony. Part Shetland  Arabian pony that I rode a lot. So I would ride after the cows and one of  the neighborhood kids and I rode quite a bit together.  So how old were you when you got that pony? First grade?  Yeah, about six. Six or seven.  Would you ride the pony to school?  Oh, no. I just rode it around home. But when Daddy bought it, later on  I    In later years, I rode one from Tipton on over to where we lived east  of Manitou when I was in high school. (Laughter)  Wow, that   s quite a stretch.  And I   d never seen the pony before. They really trusted me. (Laughter)  8  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  It was a Palomino.  So how old were you when you started to school?  Well my birthday is in August, so I was six. You had to be six by a  certain time, but mine was before school. So I was six years old.  And where did you start going to school?  Tipton. They didn   t have kindergarten, then. If they did, they didn   t have  it at Tipton.  How would you get to school?  We had a bus. I always had to walk to the corner. There was one time  that I was at Manitou that the bus driver would come and get me, but  everywhere we lived, I had to walk about a quarter mile to catch the bus.  Were there many kids in your class?  I don   t know about today   s standards, but we had A and B classes, then.  I was in the A class and we would have, I guess, thirty or so. I   m not  sure. But we had pretty good classes in the first and second grade. I  don   t know how many years we had A and B classes. Later on, they  decided that wasn   t a good idea and they didn   t call them that, you  know. But if you were in A class, you were a little better student than  you were in the B class.  How long did you go to Tipton for school?  Until I was a midterm sophomore.  And then where did you go?  Manitou. I finished high school there.  And your family moved?  Yes, they moved and I stayed with my grandparents, the Etheridges for  several weeks until the middle of school. I guess they moved the first of  the year and I finished the semester before I lived with them east of  Manitou.  So then you graduated high school from Manitou?  Yeah.  9  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  What year was that?     45.  And you still get together with some of your classmates?  Yes. They   re thinning out pretty fast, but we still have about every two  years, we have an alumni  gathering , usually.  How many did you graduate with?  Twelve.  And that school in Manitou doesn   t exist as a school anymore, but what  is it today?  It   s a juvenile correction center.  And what was it called?  I think it   s Southwest Juvenile Center. I believe that is what it is. I don   t  know whether it   d be in the phone book or not. My daughter worked  there a long time. I think that   s the technical name. But I married one of  my classmates.  At Manitou?  Yes. (Laughter)  And what was his name?  Walter Fisher.  So when did you start dating? While you were still   ?  As a junior in high school. (Laughter)  Did your family grow a big garden in addition to the crops that they  farmed?  Yes. Oh, yes. During the war, you know, times were kind of tough. They  called them victory gardens. People in town even had them in their  backyard and called them victory gardens. When we lived at Tipton, we  grew nice watermelons,  cotton, and wheat in the fields. We had smaller  gardens near the house.   10  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  So do you know why these gardens were called victory gardens?  I guess they were a part of the war effort for victory. I don   t know, but  that was during the war and after, you know. Those times were kind of  tough. Even after the boys came home for a while, I   m sure it took    I  wasn   t aware of it very much. Kids don   t know. If you eat soup for  supper, you just figure everybody else does, too.  Do you remember anything else in the community during the war years  changing?  All that was back before television, you know, and when I lived at  Tipton, our church had parties a lot at night for the grown-ups. You  know, they   d get together and have a party and eat together. We kids  would go down and play on the church lawn. So I don   t know, I think  TV kind of stopped a lot of that, but that was a time you could get  together. Farmers were pretty busy working. They didn   t have a lot of  time to goof off because that was back before tractors got real prevalent  and there was a lot of work to be done. Took long hours on the farm. But  that was our social life, was through church, mostly. And on Saturday,  people took their butter and eggs to town and bought groceries, you  know. They had programs sometimes downtown. Of course, they had  some preachers come in, usually holiness preachers. You know,  Pentecostal preachers come in and preach down on the streets and  people, some people, would gather around and listen to them. I  remember Quanah Parker   s daughter, I believe, or sister   one of his  relatives   sang one day downtown. I remember hearing her sing.  Did she sing in English?  Yes. I can   t remember for sure what she sang. Seems like it was Nearer  My God to Thee, but I may be thinking about when the Titanic went  down, that   s what they sang. So I can   t say for sure what she sang, but I  heard her. They put her up on a wagon or something in the main  intersection and she got up and sang.  Did you hear much about Quanah Parker growing up?  Well, we went to the lake that the mountains are named after and a place  up there. (Laughs) We knew a little bit about him, knew a little bit of the  Indian culture. I took Oklahoma history in high school. Of course,  Oklahoma means    Home of the Red Man.     So would your parents play cards?  11  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  My parents were in a group of twelve couples and they laughingly called  themselves    The Dirty Dozen.    They would get together and play cards  and us kids would play outside or whatever. That was their social life  besides at church. That was not just a church activity, that was  neighborhood.  Did they ever participate in dances or musicals?  Not my parents. I heard about some people that did go out of town.  Can   t think of the town down here by the river. Somewhere there was a  night club called the Red Roof  at Electra, Texas  that some people went  to. It sold alcohol and we didn   t do that.  Do you remember the first tractor that your father got?  It was a John Deere. We called them Poppin    Johnnies. (Laughter)  Was it a big deal?  Seems like he drove one of grandpa   s old Farmall   s for a while, but no, I  think it was called a B, but it wasn   t a big one. Probably all he could  afford. Was not a little bitty one either.  Did you drive it?  No. Well, I did one year when I got older. That was later, though. That  was after I married. I forgot. Anyway, I drove the tractor a little while  and to get the thing to come up, you had to kick it. I think I was  cultivating for a little while, while Daddy and Walter did something else.  It didn   t come up and I looked down and kicked it again, and I looked up  and I was going through the fence. So I went around and turned around  and came back in the same place. I looked up and Walter and my daddy  were sitting there just laughing aloud. (Laughter) Having a big laugh  about it. So I didn   t do much tractor driving. (Laughs)  Who had to rebuild the fence?  (Laughter) Not me.  What about a car, did your parents have a car from the beginning?  Yeah, they had an A Model, I think it was. A Model Ford. We had to  because we lived out five or six miles from town.  So did Tipton have movie theaters?  12  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  They had one.  Would you go to the show on Saturdays?  Yeah, Daddy would give me a dime and I   d go to the show and if he   d  give me an extra nickel, I could eat popcorn or something. That way, he  knew I wasn   t out on the streets. Go to the shoot    em ups, is what we  called them, the westerns.  (Laughs) Do you remember the first one you saw?  No, they were all similar. It was Hopalong Cassidy and Roy Rogers and  Dale Evans. I took my cousin one day and they would usually have a  little short subject that would be continued and it would be pretty  exciting. They would go around the curves and nearly meet somebody,  you know, and Jimmy just got so tickled. He   d get up and stand up and  clap and laugh. (Laughs) I got more fun out of watching him than I did  the movie. Then they say,    To Be Continued       to come back next  Saturday, you know. Well, when I didn   t go to the movie, I   d take my  skates to town because out in the country, I didn   t have any place to  skate on the dirt roads. There was a street sidewalk in Tipton that was  east of Main Street that would go downhill. If I   d get up to the top, you  could skate all the way down. Real easy. (Laughs) Then there was quite  a space around the Methodist church we could skate. So that was part of  my entertainment as a kid.  So was there one mercantile store in Tipton that your mother would buy  staples at, like sugar and that type of thing?  Oh, they had several grocery stores. There was Jemison and Lee   s Dry  Goods Store. Then there was a produce house where they sold    And  my mother would make butter. People liked her butter because she  washed it. Have you ever heard of that? Put ice in it and    She was  careful to be sure and get all the milk residue out of it and it wouldn   t  get old. She would sell her butter at the grocery store and we would  trade it for groceries. People liked to get hers because it didn   t get old on  them.  And which grocery store was that?  I don   t remember the name of it. It was on North Main. That   s all I  know. (Laughs)  Did she sew all your clothes?  Yes.  13  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Or did you have any store bought items?  Not very often. Just a coat, usually. She   d make jackets, too. She   d  always have me a jacket made when school started because it usually  rained when school started and the fair was on and you needed a little  lightweight jacket.  Did she quilt?  Yes, but I don   t quilt. She belonged to a quilting club and they   d get  together and they   d all quilt. Go from one house to another, different  times. It was kind of a social occasion as well as getting the quilt done.  Do you remember any home demonstration agents in the area?  Yes, Mother belonged to a club that took part in that. They entered stuff  in the fair. They learned certain rules. Better ways to sew and things like  that.  Did you ever play sports in school?  I wore glasses and that was a handicap then. I was mostly warming the  bench. They might run me in the last two or three minutes of the game  so they can say I was in. (Laughter) When you take off your glasses, you  don   t see as well. I don   t remember, I guess we didn   t have guards, then.  Glass guards, or I didn   t have one anyway.  Did you have a radio in your home?  Yes, we would turn on the radio while we ate supper. When we lived at  Tipton, our house was just a three room house and we ate in the room  where my mother and daddy slept. It was kind of a front room, bedroom.  We didn   t eat in the kitchen at night. We had a big grand oak table in the  kitchen where we ate most of the time. But in the evening, we would eat  in there and turn the radio on and listen to Fred Waring and his  Pennsylvanians, I think it was. Some big orchestras, big bands they had,  then.  That sounds nice.  Yeah, we would eat our soup in there. (Laughs)  Well, do you ever remember listening to President Roosevelt and his  Fireside Chats?  14  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Oh, a little bit, but I wasn   t much interested in politics in those days.  Were your parents? Did they talk about politics much around the house?  Not too much. I think Daddy was a democrat. I had an uncle that liked to  talk, but he got rather heated. His wife would try to change the subject.  (Laughter) But you know, the party doesn   t stand for what it used to,  anymore. I don   t think so. It   s kind of    I don   t know if Daddy was  living if he   d still be a democrat or not. It   s a bit different, nowadays.  Did you hear about the WPA  Works Progress Administration ?  Yeah, I knew about it. And the CCC  Civilian Conservation Corps   boys, you know. That was a group that was headquartered up by the  reserve that the young men could make a little money and stay in that.  Do you know of any projects they did in the area?  Well, they worked on roads and things like that. And then during the  war, we had some German prisoners they put to work on the roads and  doing things like that.  Where were they based?  I don   t know where they kept them, but they would come out and work  in our area some. I think they would even work for some farmers,  sometimes. I didn   t pay much attention to it, but I remember we had the  German prisoners that worked.  Were there quite a few?  I don   t know, I guess. I don   t really know how many. That was  something unusual, so you know, I remember that. My mother   s oldest  brother was a schoolteacher and he was a superintendent at Snyder and  Laing quite a few years. Then she had two sisters that were teachers, so  her family    Her daddy had been a teacher. So that was kind of a  teaching family.  What was your favorite subject in school?  Reading and English. I didn   t care much for history, but I think the  reason was usually the coaches had to teach something, so they taught  history. They were not very interested in it. They were interested in their  football or whatever. But I did have a good Oklahoma history teacher.  He was our superintendent of the high school at Tipton. He taught  Oklahoma history and I enjoyed it.  15  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  What was his name, do you remember?  Oh, I   m not sure. I think it was Wheeler, but I   m not sure. That was a  long time ago. (Laughter)  Well, I heard the train earlier. Were there many trains down here that  came through in the thirties?  Yeah, we always had a train. I don   t know how many, but there was a  depot in Tipton out on the edge of town.  Were there ever any hobos or people that would be riding the trains that  would   ?  I   m sure there was. They would go through the country anyway. My  husband told one time that they would come to their house and he  remembered one time that they let one sleep in the cellar. He was a twin  and they were rather active in getting into things all the time. They went  down there sometime and saw that he had a gun. (Laughter) Of course,  they remembered that. They probably told their mom and daddy. He  didn   t use it or anything, but he remembered that, that one of their hobos  had a gun.  Was their much dust blowing around in the mid-   30s down here?  Yes. When I lived at Tipton, yeah. You just couldn   t hardly see  sometimes. I guess it was pretty dry at that time and of course, the  farmers would plow and it   d be easy for it to blow. Then that land down  south of Tipton was probably easy to blow. There   s quite a bit of sand in  some areas, there.  What were some of the crops that your parents were farming?  Cotton and alfalfa mostly with some wheat and oats, too. When we  moved to Manitou, mostly it was just wheat and cotton. We had some  pasture land. I still have that farm. It has some pasture land on it.  Is it being farmed at all?  Yes. One of my friends rents it from me. He just mostly plants wheat  and grazes the pasture.  When did you get married?  Well, my husband went in the army and we planned on getting married,  16  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  but I didn   t feel cosmopolitan enough to be a war bride and move around  and he didn   t want me to, either. So after he got out of the army, we  married. We got a house. Graduated in    45, we married in    47 and  Pamela was born in    49.  And did you correspond through written letters while he was in the war?  Oh, yes. One time, my best friend and I went over    I had him to  reserve us a motel room down there and we went down to see him when  he was at Little Rock, when he was stationed there. Just went on a  weekend. Spent one night there.  Was he stationed overseas, ever?  No, he thought he was going, but they kept him here to help train the     He was a cadre. He had to train the troops to march. That was his job, C-A-  D-R-E, cadre. He was disappointed and I was glad he didn   t go  overseas. (Laughs) He had a way of getting along with people, so I  imagine he was good to work with the new guys.  What did you do after you got married?  We lived on one of my husband   s farms. His daddy   s land. Then when  my daddy died, we moved over on, well, it   s my farm, now.  Near Manitou?  Yeah, southeast of Manitou. Mostly east and a little bit south.  So did your husband farm cotton and wheat?  Yeah, and we had cattle. He was from a big family and his mother and  daddy just lived about two and a half miles from my farm. He was a  twin. His twin brother had gotten killed whenever he was twelve. I never  did know him. He was from a bigger family.  So would you have big family get togethers with his family, then?  Yeah. The Conrads, too. Grandpa Conrad really believed in family get-togethers.  It was wartime and money was tough, but everybody had to  eat. Gas was pretty cheap, you know. We could get together and  everybody would bring something to add to the dinner, you know. We  would go to the Wichita Mountains and have a picnic and eat up there.  Go swimming. Go swimming before breakfast, even. (Laughs) I  remember one time, somebody read that if a skunk was running, it  couldn   t throw its scent. There was a mother with her babies and so they  17  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  thought they would try that, but they found out that didn   t work   Good to know.  The skunks were real bad about getting into your food. They learned that  people brought food up there and if you left it unattended, they would  get into it.  Were there many raccoons, too?  I suppose. I know there was. They   d get into the trash barrels.  What were some of the foods that people would bring to these  gatherings?  Well, fried chicken, and Mother always made canned beef. She would  make some homemade mayonnaise and boiled eggs with it. That would  make a good sandwich.  Did she make her own bread?  Yes. She won the blue ribbon at the fair on her bread every year, nearly.  When we moved, one of the other ladies that took bread out there said  she was glad, now maybe she could get the blue ribbon. (Laughter)  Was it a white bread?  Yeah.  Did you keep her recipe and make it yourself?  No, I don   t fool with making bread very much. I make biscuits, but I  didn   t make a whole lot of bread.  What were some other amazing things your mother would make? Did  she have any other blue ribbon winners?  I don   t know. She was a good cook. But it was mostly her bread at the  fair that she won. She might have entered some other things, I just don   t  remember that.  Did she do a lot of canning?  Yes. We had a garden and she canned even potatoes. She   d can beef,  like I said. We could always open up a can of beef. She canned black  eyed peas. We always could grow black eyed peas in the field. When I   d  18  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  come in from school and I was hungry, I   d open up a pint of black eyed  peas and eat them. I found out they   re good in chili.  So would you eat them cold? The canned peas?  I guess. I guess so. I suppose    They were good. You couldn   t run to the  store when you live five or six miles out. (Laughs) I wouldn   t have had  any money, much, anyway.  Did she make pies?  Yes. She made chicken and dumplings. I don   t ever make dumplings, I  make noodles. I like them better, but Mother made dumplings. I didn   t  eat them much. I didn   t care much for them. She made a chocolate cake  that had potatoes in it. A potato cake.  Really?  It was supposed to be a real good. I guess it was moist, you know, but I  just wasn   t too crazy about chocolate in those days.  Do you remember if you could taste the potato?  No, you couldn   t. They just made it moist, I think. They were probably  mashed potatoes that were left over. I don   t have her recipe because I  wasn   t real crazy about it, but she had a lazy daisy cake she made quite a  bit, too. It had a caramel icing with coconut. She put it in the broiler at  the last, I know, and I liked it.  What would you have for breakfast, normally?  Cocoa and either cereal or toast and eggs. They let me sleep late because  I hadn   t been very well. I could eat when I woke up. A lot of the times,  one of the neighbor boys would be over there when I   d eat breakfast and  he   d eat with me. Fred Elsner. We rode horses together.  What about on your birthday? Did you ever have a special dish  prepared for you on birthdays?  I guess so. The birthday I remember the best was I woke up and found a  note to go here and go there and that   s where I found my gifts and stuff.  That was fun.  Kind of like a scavenger hunt.  Yes. I had some birthday parties, but I don   t remember much about  19  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  them.  Well, on that scavenger hunt for your birthday, do you remember some  of your presents?  No, it probably wasn   t a whole lot. I probably got bubblegum and  different stuff like that. I just remember it was fun to go hunt it up.  Do you remember about how old you were for that one?  Probably seven or eight or something like that. I don   t remember. That  was a long time ago. I   m eighty-four now, so that   s a long time ago.  What about for Christmas? Did you have certain Christmas traditions?  Not too much. My mother wasn   t too much on Santa Claus. She thought  that wasn   t to be the focus. I don   t either, too much. But anyway, I  always got something. I remember one year, Daddy told me that I  wouldn   t get much for Christmas because times was hard. I got a little  pair of red house shoes and I thought, well surely I   ll get something else,  but I didn   t. I didn   t say anything. I was kind of disappointed. (Laughter)  One year, I got a bicycle, but it was one they bought second hand and he  painted it. It was a boy   s bicycle, but it was strong. It was a good one,  but it wasn   t a new bicycle.  So would you ride the bicycle on the country roads?  Yeah.  Did you always have a Christmas tree?  No.  What about for Christmas meal, would you get together with   ?  We had family Christmas. I don   t remember too much when I was little.  After I married and all, we still had family Christmas. Walter   s from a  pretty big sized family and I enjoyed that like we had with the Conrads,  you know. All the people didn   t just have one child. They had more than  one and I had somebody to play with, you know.  Did you do turkey or ham?  Whatever. I don   t know whether they used turkey too much. People  usually raised hogs and cattle in those days. We had quite a bit of pork  and chicken. We raised chickens. Even when I first married, we raised  20  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  chickens and I would butcher them myself and cook them. The fryers.  What was your method for butchering a chicken?  Wring their head off like this. Let them jump until they quit. (Laughs)  Then dip them in hot water to get the feathers off. Then I would dress  them. I bet my mother-in-law could do one in fifteen minutes.  Wow, the whole thing?  Yeah. She had a big family. She would cook three chickens for dinner, I  think, every day and each one got three pieces. Then her mother-in-law  and her foster mother lived in a little house out close to them and she  was feeding them a lot of the time, too. She was a real worker. The in-law,  the two old ladies lived out in a little house in the yard. People had  to take care of the elderly people in those days. They didn   t have nursing  homes and all that.  Are there any more stories you remember your grandparents sharing  with you about when they were growing up?  Not so much, but I remember, we were talking about the demonstration  clubs. Grandma Conrad belonged to one of those and they would go to  the Wichita Mountains and have a get-together. They would come home  laughing. She was the life of the party, I think. She would get down to  laughing one time about a game, you had to roll a peanut or something  across the floor and she was down there and they had some good times.  (Laughs) My mother was more serious nature. She was not a cut-up like  Grandma Conrad. She was kind of serious-minded and a hard worker.  My daddy was the silly one. He teased everybody, me too. I learned to  not let on if it bothered me because he   d just do it that much more.  (Laughter) I told my daughter when she started to school, I said,    Laurie,  when the boys tease you, if you really holler and all that, they   ll just do  it that much more. Just don   t let on like it bothers you.    She said,    I  found out that was true.    (Laughter)  What are some other lessons you learned growing up?  I don   t know, I made good grades in school and I had nice friends. I  remember one boy in my class when I was about in the fifth or sixth  grade, he was mad at a teacher and he had an apple or something, he  soaked in coal oil or something and gave it to the teacher. I remember  that, and he got a whipping. Of course, naturally, she could smell that.  They used a rubber hose back in those days to whip somebody that did  something like that. I doubt if they hit them very hard, but they whipped  them.  21  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Did you ever get a whipping?  No. The teacher hit me on the shoulder one time with a yardstick  because I was talking to Grady Clark. (Laughs) She came along and  tapped me with the yardstick.  But it made an impression.  (Laughter) I remembered. Mother and Daddy said if I ever got a  whipping at school, I would get another one at home so I wouldn   t have  told them if I did. (Laughs) But no, I liked school. There was somebody  to play with at school and I made good grades, so I enjoyed school. I  don   t remember any bullies like they talk about, now. Of course, might  have been, it just wasn   t me. Nobody bullied me. I   d have probably  biffed them one if they did. I was used to taking care of myself.  Did you know anyone before you moved to Manitou, at Manitou?  Nope, not really. Didn   t take long to get acquainted.  And you weren   t too far from Tipton, so you could still visit your friends.  Yeah, we still went over to Grandpa and Grandma   s on the holidays.  One time, where we lived out there is red mud. It was a while before  they graveled the roads. So Daddy always had to go to grandma   s for  Christmas and we started out and got stuck. One of the neighbors who  became my brother-in-law later on, got in and just drove real fast and  got us out. Daddy was trying to drive real slow. In the mud we had at  Tipton, it was slick and you would slide in a ditch. He had to learn how  to drive in that red mud that was sticky. Friends drove us out and we had  Christmas with the Butchers that lived right across the creek from us that  year because we couldn   t make it to Tipton. But that was alright. My  best friend in those days was a girl that lived there.  So that worked out pretty well. (Laughter)  Then later on, when Walter and I were dating    Billie was the girl that  lived right across the creek. We double dated with another boy that lived  down below the hill. We went to a party on horseback one time, several  miles. It had rained. It was too muddy to get a car, so we went to a party  on horseback. I was telling my son that one time and I said,    Kids  nowadays would do that?    He said,    Well, nobody has a horse  anymore.    (Laughter)  Sounds like a pretty romantic date. (Laughs)  22  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  It was fun.  What would they do at parties?  We called them swing games. It was like  square dances . The dances  they do when they form circles and all. We called them swing games.  Old Joe Clark and all that, sing a song and dance in a circle and go  around and around and all that.  So would there be someone calling the dances?  Yes. Then we   d always have some refreshments, you know. The parents  that lived there would furnish refreshments. But we would just play  party games. We used to play gossip, did you ever play that?  Yes.  And when I lived south of Tipton, one night, a bunch of my relatives  that were young people that were dating came to see us. Several couples.  So Daddy got the cards out and there was a game they called Pig. When  you had a book, you   d put your finger on your nose. (Laughs) You  know, they had a real good time. Those kids that were dating came one  night. People had to do things that were not expensive in those days, you  know. Nobody had any money. My husband   s sister said when she and  Les got married, they just had a quarter. She didn   t think anything about  it. I don   t know how they bought groceries, she didn   t tell me that. I  guess he was working somewhere, I don   t know.  Where did you go to get married?  I had a church wedding in Manitou.  In Manitou.  Yes, church in Manitou. There was people looking in the window  because that was right after the war and it was something unusual. We  had people peeking in the windows. (Laughter)  How long did you plan for it?  I don   t know. Probably not very long because it wasn   t very fancy. I  didn   t have a long dress or anything. I had a lady make my dress and she  charged me six dollars to make my dress. You couldn   t get very good  material, so you   re lucky if you could find material. I didn   t get white, I  got a    Well, I still have it in there in the cedar chest. Kind of a dusty  23  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  pink and put black lace on it. Had a thing she tied around here and had  some stuff with lace on it. But that was what I could find at the store.  Did you go on a honeymoon?  Yeah, we went to Turner Falls. (Laughs) Mother and Daddy said the  phone rang that night, it scared them to death. They were afraid we had a  wreck. It was Daddy   s cousin that I had asked to play for my wedding  and she didn   t because her husband wasn   t well and he died that night.  He called to tell them that   s what it was. She taught music in Frederick  and I was going to have her play for the wedding but she didn   t want to  because he was not well. So I got a neighbor girl, Fern Elsener, to play  for our wedding.  And was she Fred   s sister?  Yes.  Are they part of the bigger Elsener clan around Tipton and Altus?  They are Walter Elsener   s, two of his children. They   re all gone now.  Most of them died of cancer. Walter died of heart  trouble . He was a  big man. He had a heart attack and died. But Mrs. Elsener died of cancer  and Fred and, I think, Gordon was heart. W.A. died of cancer. I think  Gaye did    Their whole family and the Pickrells, a lot of them died of  cancer. So it does kind of run in families, sometimes. But I don   t think  any of them are left now, except Fred   s wife and she doesn   t live in  Tipton now. One of her children had a child that was    It wasn   t  Down   s syndrome, but it had birth injuries or something. She went up to  help take care of that child. She and Fred had lived in the home place  until he died. But he died of cancer, too. Back then, I guess they didn   t  have a whole lot to treat it with. Sometimes they don   t make it nowadays  either.  Well how has Tipton changed over the years?  It hasn   t dried up and blown away, but it   s smaller than it used to be. I   m  not over there very much. I really couldn   t tell you. It has a post office. I  don   t know whether they even have a drug store anymore or not. They  used to have two. They probably have one grocery store, I don   t know.  Because Frederick used to have a Penney   s and an Anthony   s and a  Perkins and a Norwood and Julia   s    All that many ready to wear stores.  There were several caf  s. There was Curtis Caf   and, I don   t know, there  was two or three cafes.  In Frederick?  24  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Yes. And two banks. The National Bank and First National. During war  time, it was a pretty busy little town. Of course, the courthouse. It still  has a lot of churches. We had a combination service this year and I think  I counted about   seemed like about sixteen churches here in this town.  Counting the black ones and all, you know. Quite a few churches here.  Well, we   re down to one grocery store, now.  What   s that called?  United. I guess we still have two banks, National Bank and I use the  First National. I forgot whether the National Bank still operates or not. It  may not, I   ve forgotten. But anyway, I use the other one.  What about Manitou?  It used to have a bank. When I was in high school, it had a grocery store  and a hardware, but a storm came along and blew the roof off the  hardware store, so Mr. Henricks sold it. He was old enough to retire,  anyway. Anyway, it didn   t have a bank. Years ago, Manitou had a bank.  It had a place where you could sell your wheat and a grocery store when  I was in high school. We could go down and get a candy bar, you know,  or something. There   s not much there anymore.  Where was the cotton gin that you would use?  Right up the crossroads there in Manitou. On the northwest corner.  Walter took some stuff down south of us to a gin down kind of out in the  country. I forgot the name of it. We used it some down around Hollister.  There was one down there. There was a place to sell grain. I don   t know  about cotton, we didn   t raise a lot of cotton. But Manitou had a cotton  gin. During wheat harvest, when we   d have big harvests and the  combines would come in, you   d see trucks lined down the street of  Manitou waiting to get waited on. These drivers would get hot and  they   d get out and get under the trees. They hadn   t heard about chiggers.  (Laughs) They would crash under the  trees and get chiggers and  scratch .  Oh, no. (Laughs)  So they would be scratching quite a bit. But I remember some years that  we had a real big harvest and they   d pile wheat in the fields because they  just couldn   t get it unloaded fast enough. They   d go pick it up later and  haul it in.  So you don   t see that anymore.  25  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  No. I would like to. We haven   t had a very good harvest in several years,  but it   s looking good this year. The guy that runs my land told me the  other day, he came by and had a paper for me to sign. He said,    We   ve  got about two inches several times, good rain,    and he said it   s looking  great. It   s heading out already.  Wow, hopefully.  Yeah, if we don   t have a hailstorm or something. It doesn   t take a whole  lot to finish it out. It just doesn   t rain at the right times, you know.  (Laughs) We   ve been having some bad storms around Dallas and some  areas. We just hope we don   t have a storm. We   re about due one, so I  kind of believe we   ll make a good crop this year.  Well, what does Oklahoma mean to you?  It   s home. It   s where I   ve always lived. Doesn   t matter to me that that  means    Home of the Red Man.    I   m not very racially prejudiced at all.  Since you   re so close to Texas, do you go to Texas, much?  My son lives in Wichita Falls and that   s where I took Pam whenever  they  didn   t want me  to take care of her. There is a University Park  down there that had a nursing home that was qualified for Down   s  Syndrome, so we put her there. Bruce could run by and see. In the last  two weeks, he was with her every day until she passed away. After he  got out of college (his major was journalism) he went to work. He wrote  weddings and funerals for the Wichita Falls Record News for a while  when started to work. He worked up until he was the managing editor  for quite a while until it combined with the Times. He didn   t like what  they called yellow journalism. Do you know what that means? Where  you have to talk about the politics of the guy that owned the paper. He  didn   t believe in that, so he got into something else. He works for IESI,  now. They mostly haul garbage. It   s an environmental company. He  works out of his pickup with his laptop and does a lot of things. Hires  and fires and teaches safety classes and trains them to do the routes and  all that. He   s been really good to me and Pam. He puts family first.  So you had two children?  Living, yes. I had a nineteen year old son that was in an industrial  accident and got killed when he was nineteen. I have a daughter that  lives here. Of course, Pamela passed away and Bruce lives in Wichita  Falls. She was the oldest and he was born eighteen months later, but he  said they were partners in crime together. (Laughs) So he   s kind of been  26  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  her protector and playmaker when they were little. Grant came along  and he was one of these that liked to tease, so the girls got their teasing  from him. He loved them, too, but he was just kind of ornery. He was  the middle child and they   re always a little bit unpredictable, I think.   Laurie Beth   s  my youngest and she was kind of Pamela   s manager.  They had shared a bedroom. She kind of planned her stuff and I  remember she used to make her go in the bathroom when she took a  shower and sit there, stay with her. I   d go in there and Pamela would be  sitting there on the  stool  and just be red as a beet. She   d be hot.  (Laughter) Laurie Beth told her to come in there with her, so she did.  Pamela had all those different types to teach her different things, you  know. She painted by numbers a lot. Did real well. She was  Down   s  Syndrome . (Shows artwork) Did this on velvet.  Oh, yeah.  She did one of them and chose all the colors herself. But most were paint  by numbers. She did a lot of those. You could go to the five and dime,  then and buy these things. The paint by numbers.  Oh, wow.  She did real good and everybody bought her a lot of them. She didn   t  mind. I   ve got another one of birds, too. I   ve got landscapes back there  and see, she did a good job.  Well, is there anything else we should talk about?  Well, there   s my great-grandchildren up there. (Laughs)  Yes, how many do you have?  Oh, I don   t know if I   ve counted them lately or not. How many do I  have? Let   s see    About ten? (Laughs) I have one that   s adopted,  Laurie   s youngest and his wife didn   t have any children, so they were  going to adopt one. But they were going to get one, that couple.  Anyway, they backed out about two weeks before. They were so  disappointed. But later on, I told Dustin, I said,    Don   t worry, something  will work out.    He called me one night and said,    Grandma, we   ve got a  little two week old boy.    I said,    Well, I   m not too surprised Dustin, I   ve  been praying for that.    He said,    Thank you grandma.    He is so cute.  He   s good looking and they   re just so proud of him. Then I have one,  Bruce   s second wife has a daughter that married an Italian pilot. So we  have one that lives in Italy. Sophia, and she   s bilingual. She speaks  Italian. She   s just cute as a bug. Get one of her pictures up there and  show her. Yeah, that one.  27  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Wilson  Fisher  Oh, how cute. How old is she now?  She   ll be probably three, don   t you think, Lexi? On her next birthday.  She   s about two and a half, I think. Or three. I can   t keep track of all  their birthdays. I have to look at my book.  Well, when history is written about you, what would you like for it to  say?  Oh, I don   t know. I   ve had a good life and I   ve enjoyed my family and  my church and I can   t complain. I   ve had some problems, but who  doesn   t?  I really appreciate you visiting with me today.  Well, I didn   t mind it. I didn   t know why you were coming. I knew she  said she was going to ask yesterday, and I thought, well, maybe  something about Pam because they didn   t have anybody like her that  lived as long. I thought maybe somebody was going to talk to me about  her. I didn   t know what it was going to be about. Before there was  television, you know, people would get together and parties and all more  than they seem to now. Of course, certain groups do now, I guess. I   ve  seen a lot of changes in my lifetime.  What would you say is one of the most important inventions?  Inventions? Oh, I don   t know.  There have been a lot.  I don   t know. Which ones do you think?  I think the Internet and computers. But all the kitchen appliances and     I just don   t know. There have been a lot. There   s good things and bad  things about most of them, you know. There   s a lot of things good about  the Internet, but a lot of criminals got in on it, too. But they always find  out something.  Do you remember when you got electricity in your home?  Yes, when I lived south of Tipton, we had some neighbors that were  more well off than we were and they got their own big line and they let  us get on it. So we got used to it and then we moved over to Manitou  and we didn   t have electricity out there. So Daddy got together with a  28  man from the Southwest REA and they went around and got a petition to  get electricity. It took a little while, but that was after the war and you  had to sign up for everything. Get in line, you know. We had a generator  for a while and you know, the lights would kind of flicker and all. But  we had all that and we had electricity. I remember, we got a refrigerator  that didn   t run on electricity, it ran on gas or something. Electrolux. I  know something else that was in it    We were real glad of that. We  didn   t have to fool with that old ice box anymore. So I   ve seen a lot of  changes in my lifetime. Some good and some bad. After the TV came in,  people stopped being as neighborly as they used to be. They could stay  home and watch TV. But television has done a lot. We can see pictures  of what   s happening all over the world, now. I used to wonder, in the  Bible, how it would say the whole world would watch those two dead  men, you know. Now we know why because with television, we can  watch whatever is going on, good or bad. I also wondered in the latter  days, they said we   d have a  huge  army of men. Well, where   d they get  all those from? In Russia and some places or other    China, probably.  They can only have one or two children and so they have boys mostly.  That   s where that army is going to come from. I can see that now.  There   s been a lot of things happening in my lifetime.  -------  -------  
