 Larson  Today is July 16, 2011. My name is Mary Larson. I am with the  Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at Oklahoma State   University Library , and I   m here today at the Oklahoma City Museum  of Art with Mrs. Emma Lee Bennett, who will be talking about her  memories of the 1930s.  We are also joined by her granddaughter Kelly  Roberts.  Thank you so much for being here with us today. We really  appreciate it. To start out with, could you tell me a little bit about when  and where you were born?  I was born at Tuttle, Oklahoma, a mile east and a half north of Tuttle.  Okay, and for the section roads, that was probably     Yes.  Now, were you born at home?  Yes, yes. In 1922.  Did you have brothers and sisters?  Yes, there were eight of us. Four boys and four girls.  And where were you in the lineup?  There were four older, and then I was the oldest of the next four.  So, you worked in shifts.  I guess so. (Laughter)  As far as the girls went, were you the youngest or oldest or somewhere  5  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  in the middle?  No, there were two boys and a girl and then a boy. And let   s see, three  girls and then a boy.  How much older were your oldest siblings and how much younger were  your   ?  My oldest brother was nine years older than me. And then my youngest  brother was born in    34, so I was about twelve years older than he.  So, you had a good range in there.  Yes.  What did your folks do for a living?  Well, my daddy went to barber school. Well, and that was not very  profitable because people didn   t have money to go to the barber shop, so  they cut their own hair. And then earlier, though, he went to business  school and he kept books for his dad. He was county assessor over at  Fairview, Oklahoma. Then he kept books for my grandparents in their  store and he was a Rawleigh man. He sold Rawleigh goods. He tried  farming and that was about what he did.  And how about your mom, did she work in the home?  She went to college and was wanting to be a missionary but she got  married instead. And she worked in her dad   s store. And then after she  got married, she didn   t work. She just took care of the kids.  Where did she go to school?  She went to Lahoma, up by Enid, and then she went to Phillips  University in Enid.  Do you know where your family was from, originally?  Well, Papa came from Illinois. He was born in Illinois and Momma was  born in Kansas. And then they moved down by Enid and Lahoma, in that  area.  Do you know what brought them to that part of Oklahoma, and then  what brought them down to the Tuttle area?  Well, my granddaddy was in the Run, and that was where he   down by  6  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Kingfisher and that area where he was in the Run. Momma and  Grandma lived in a dugout, and Grandpa was on the Run most of the  time trying to find what they wanted to do.  Did your mom ever tell stories about that growing up?  Oh, yes. She   d tell about snakes coming in at the top of the dugout and  getting a drink out of the water bucket. (Laughs) And Grandma used to  tell about what she   d call Desperados would come in front, and run by  with their horses in front of their dugout, and she and just my mother  were there by themselves. I guess it was quite frightening just to be  alone in that place.  Have you ever been back to that area where the dugout was?  No, I never did.  Did they build a house on that property later?  No. When they moved to Lahoma, they built their house.  Could you describe the home that you grew up in, if there was one  particular one or   ?  Well, we never had a very nice home. The one I remember, well, it   s  where I was born. In fact, a few years ago, I don   t know whether they  tore it down or what, the people that bought that land, but we lived   it  was on a farm. And we had trees for fruit and berries and all stuff like  that. And then we moved to Bethany. And there, Papa ran a feed store  and an ice dock and filling station, and we were just there about a year.  Then we moved to Waukomis, and that   s where he sold Rawleigh goods.  The houses were just little four-room houses, nothing special. And then  when we moved to Tuttle, we moved in a little two-room house by my  grandparents. A house across the road came empty, and we moved into  it, and that   s where we lived until I got married.  Who lived there with you? Was it just your parents and your siblings?  Yes.  Although, I guess there were enough of them that would have been a full  house.  Oh, yes. My granddaddy used to come and stay with us for a while and  help with the farming and the milking and all that.  7  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Was that on your mom or your dad   s side?  My dad   s, yes.  When you got to Tuttle, were there other buildings besides the house on  the lot?  Yes, it was barns because it was a farm place.  About how many acres?  There was ninety in the place where we lived, and it belonged to my  granddaddy. Granddaddy Crouch, my mother   s dad.  So, you had your grandparents nearby, too.  Oh, yes.  Any other relatives?  No, just my grandparents.  What were some of your chores when you were growing up?  Well, oh my  We hoed corn, and we hoed the berries, and Momma  would work in the garden, and we would fix the meals. We   d go out  with a wire catcher and catch a chicken and wring its neck off, and we   d  fry chicken and so    (Laughs)  For people who don   t know, with that little catcher, can you describe  that?  Yes, it was just a long, heavy wire that had a hook on the end of it. And  you   d go around in the yard and hunt for a rooster, and catch it by the  leg and... (Laughs)     sort of hook it.  Yes.  Okay. So, did your chores change over time as you were getting older?  I helped milk some. And Papa had sheep, and I   d help herd sheep. And  every year we   d change the straw and the ticks for the beds. And every  time   when they   d thrash, they   d have a straw stack, and we   d dump the  old straw and put in new straw.  8  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Oh, and I bet that smelled good.  Oh, yes. (Laughs) Then when I got older, I went to Oklahoma City and  worked for a doctor   s family, and they had three children. They paid me  three dollars a week, room and board, and they were expecting another  one when I got there. And so, when he was born, they increased my  salary to four dollars a week.  And how old were you when you   ?  I was fifteen. I worked for them three years and one Christmas vacation.  But I always saved up my money and bought school clothes whenever.  So, you were going to high school at the same time?  Yes, I worked through the summer and then I   d come back home and go  to school. I remember the first year I made thirty-six dollars all summer  long, and I bought a new coat and a dress and a pair of shoes, and I  thought I was really dressed up. (Laughs)  You mentioned before that on the farm your dad had sheep.  Yes.  Do you remember how many head of sheep?  No, I don   t remember how many.  Did you have some cows, too?  Yes. And we had chickens and pigs. (Laughs)  And as far as the farm itself, you mentioned having corn and berries.  Was it mostly in corn?  Well, we had some wheat and, of course, ninety acres. And there   s  pasture on some of it too, and that   s where the cows ran through the day.  Now, how did you work the land? Did you have   ?  We had horses. And in later years, my granddaddy gave my dad  500,  and he bought an old secondhand John Deere tractor, Poppin    Johnny we  called it because that was the way they sounded. The thing was always  getting out of time, and Papa had the hardest time keeping that tractor  running.  9  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  What year do you think that might have been?  Let me see, that was probably in about 1937,   38, somewhere along  there.  What kind of draft horses did you have? Well, you mentioned having  horses for the   do you remember what   ?  I don   t know. They were just horses. I think we had a couple of mules,  too, that we used for farming.  Did they have an attitude?  Well, I don   t remember about that. (Laughter)  Okay. Sometimes some of the memorable ones     Yes. (Laughter)  Now, you mentioned that your family had a garden.  Oh, yes.  What types of things?  We had a very good garden. Momma spent so much time after they got  it planted and these things were ready, she   d go pick that. All of us  helped prepare, and she canned so much. She would send us to the cellar  to get a jar of something and oh, it was just beautiful  She took so much  pride in her canning, and she   d line them all up on the shelves, just  perfect. And I said it was so much fun to go down there and get the  things off the shelf. We didn   t have much money, but we had good food.  (Laughs)  I was going to say, were you helping your mom with the canning at that  point?  Oh, yes. We would go pick the stuff and then bring it in and help  prepare. If it needed shelled or snapped or whatever, why, that   s what  we did.  Did you tend to do those in big batches, so you   d have a couple of days  in a row where you were doing nothing but canning, essentially?  Yes.  10  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Now, since we   re on food, let   s talk a little bit about that. Did you have a  favorite meal when you were growing up?  Yes, my favorite meal was fried chicken, corn on the cob, black-eyed  peas, and sliced tomatoes and onions. (Laughter)  That sounds really good.  Yes.  Do you remember if there were any foods that were hard to get during  the Depression?  Well, we never bought very much. I know Papa, if he had money, he  would get several sacks of flour and stack them in the bedroom and  cover them over with a sheet. And I remember by the time Momma  would get the flour used up, there would be weevils in it, and she would  just sift and sift and get those weevils out. We didn   t throw anything  away.  You just made sure you got them out.  We had sugar and flour and corn meal and things to cook with. Of  course, we always had milk. And we had a separator to separate the  cream from the milk. I remember there was a poor family that lived  across the field from us. The mother had died, and there was three little  kids, and the dad was raising those little kids. They would walk across  the field and carry a bucket to get separated milk, so they would have  milk. I said we didn   t have much, but Momma always shared with others  that had less.  Now, were there some foods that were just for special occasions that you  remember growing up?  Well, yes. I remember Momma would always want to know what I  wanted for my birthday. I didn   t care much for sweets, but I   d tell her I  wanted beef steak. Well, we didn   t butcher beef back then. We always  had the hogs that we butchered and chickens, but she would have to go  to the store and get some steaks, so I could have steaks for my birthday.  (Laughs)  And that was always a special treat.  That was special, there.  11  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Now, were there any types of recipes that were really important to your  family, either for cultural reasons or because it was someone   s favorite  recipe, Aunt Tilly   s favorite recipe or something like that?  Momma used to make a coconut cake, and it was a layer cake. She  always took pride in her baking and everything. And she made Waldorf  salad, and that was so good. Anything she made, it was very good. She  was a good cook.  That   s always good. So, you had someone to learn from.  Yes, yes.  Now, when did you start helping your mom in the kitchen, for example?  Well, I wasn   t very old. I imagine I was eleven or twelve, somewhere  along there. And my sister and brother and I were along about the same  age. My older sister, she was not much on cooking, but she would clean  house, and she would sew. My sister was just a few   well, not quite two  years younger than me, we would cook meals. My brother, I remember  one time went out, was hoeing in the blackberries, and he came in. Oh,  he was so hot and tired and he said,    Em, would you change jobs with  me?    So, I did. I went and hoed in the blackberries, and he came in and  helped my sister with cooking. And I remember there was a snake out  there, and that scared me so. And I chopped the ground all to pieces  trying to get rid of that snake. (Laughs)  Do you remember what kind it was?  No, it was probably just a plain ol    bull   s nose snake, but any kind of  snake scared me anyway.  Are there recipes from childhood that you remember, like your mother   s  coconut cake or something like that that you still make?  No, I don   t.  Are there any recipes from childhood that you never want to see again?  (Laughter)  No, no.  It sounds like your mom was a good cook. (Laughs)  Yes, she was.  12  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Did your family have a smokehouse?  No, they didn   t.  How did you   and then   ?  My grandparents did, and we always took the meat there. I remember  one time it had to be a certain temperature, so it could cool out just right.  One year, it wasn   t as cold as it should have been, and they went ahead  and cured the meat. And then they would put it in a box and keep it. I  remember one time Momma went to cut into a ham, and it hadn   t cured  out, and it was spoiled. And oh, we were so disappointed because we  was looking forward to that cured ham. But we had to throw all that  away because it wasn   t any good.  Speaking of keeping things cool, did you have an ice box or a spring  house?  No. I said I don   t know how   I know to keep the milk, they would put it  in the window and keep the cloth wet all the time around it so that if  there was any wind, it would cool that. I remember a lot of times from  morning to night it would get kind of, they   d say blinky, not quite sour  but it wasn   t very good to drink. But it was very hard to keep anything  from spoiling. Nowadays, they say don   t keep things out. We   d cook  dinner and what was leftover was what we had for supper. I said it   s a  wonder we didn   t all die, but we didn   t. (Laughs)  Talking about the different things both your parents were doing, what  would you say and average day in the 1930s would have been like for  your mom?  Oh, she would get up early every morning. I remember sometimes she  wouldn   t have anything to fix for breakfast, and she   d go out and catch a  chicken and fry chicken and make gravy and biscuits before we went to  school. And then she always told people that she lived at the house  where there was washing hanging on the line. She   d wash nearly every  day and have something hanging on the line. So, she was busy all day  long with eight kids. That was   I don   t. People would give us hand-me-down  clothes, and she   d work them over so we   d have clothes to wear.  Was she a good seamstress?  Yes, she was. Momma liked to read and study more than she liked to  sew, but she always managed to get those things done anyway.  Did you grow up in a house with books around or at least   ?  13  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Not too much, but anything Momma could get a hold of, she would read  it. And I remember my grandparents lived across the road and we got  our mail in the same mailbox, and when the mail carrier came, she  would go down and read the paper, stand there at the mailbox and read  the paper before Grandma and Grandpa got their mail. (Laughs)  Now, what about your dad? What would an average day be like for him?  Oh, he was busy all day, too, trying to have feed for the cows and feed  for the pigs and whatever.  So, would he get up in the morning and do chores before he went in if he  was in town?  I know one time there wasn   t much to do on the farm and the money was  very scarce, and so he went up to Meno, up near Enid, and worked on a  farm with some people, so he could send money back home. But I  remember we charged groceries for a year because we just didn   t have  money to buy things. And my sister didn   t mind going to the store and  we   d, of course, ride the school bus, and she   d go to the store and charge  it, and I wouldn   t. I didn   t want to charge the groceries. (Laughs) She  would always charge the groceries. But at the end of the year, Papa  would pay his bill. And how the store keepers can manage to make it, I  guess. Not all people were like we were, but anyway.  Speaking of school, you mentioned taking the school bus. Where did you  go to school, in Tuttle?  In Tuttle, yes. We lived two miles from the school, and we could either  walk a mile and ride the bus a mile, or we could ride clear around the  route. (Laughs) Most of the time we went clear around the route, but we  sold milk to a neighbor and she lived half a mile west of us. And we  would walk up there with a quart of milk, sold it to her for a nickel.  She   d go by I don   t know how many times a day, but we   d still have to  go take that milk, walk up there and take that milk to her.  What do you remember about the school in Tuttle? What was it like?  Well, it was a good school and we, of course, had favorite teachers. And  the ones that were the most strict were the ones I liked best because I  could learn. But the ones that seemed indifferent, we got by with more.  But we had a good school, I felt like.  Were there any of the teachers that you remember that had grown up in  that area, too, that were local or   ?  14  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Oh, yes, there   s several now that graduated from Tuttle schools. I feel  like they   re real caring teachers. They   re interested in the kids there at  Tuttle.  What was the school building itself like?  Well, the year we moved back from Waukomis in 1930, they built a new  high school. And it was brick, and it was a real good school. And the  grade school was a brick school.  How many students were in your class? Do you know a number?  The year I graduated there were forty. And I graduated in 1940. So, that  was easy to remember. (Laughs)  That was a good-sized class for     Yes, it was.  When you were younger and had recess and so on, what games would  you play?  We played jacks. We sat on the sidewalk and played jacks. (Laughs)  And we   d, of course, play Red Rover and London Bridges and all those  things.  All the same things kids have played forever.  For years, yes.  Now, did you take your lunch to school, usually?  Yes, we did.  Leftovers?  Yes. (Laughter) We didn   t have sacks, and I remember Momma  wrapping them up, our lunch, in newspaper. (Laughs) That   s the way  we   d take our lunch. She   d always try to have something good for lunch.  And she made bread all the time, and I got so tired of having homemade  bread. And when we could have bought bread, why, I really liked to  have bought bread. (Laughs) The homemade bread crumbled too easy.  But I remember if Momma didn   t have anything to fix for a sandwich, if  she had beans leftover, she   d mash those up and put pickles and boiled  eggs, and we had bean sandwiches that we took to school.  15  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Sounds pretty good the way you described it. (Laughter)  Yes.  When you were in high school, were there were particular activities at  school that you were involved with?  Well, yes, I was involved in nearly all of them. I was in FHO, Future  Homemakers of Oklahoma, and I remember I was the secretary of that.  And I remember going to contests at Norman and Oklahoma City. I  remember one year, the teacher wanted me to dress for school, and so I  had made a dress. It was just kind of a plain dress, and she said,    Well,  we need to dress that up a little.    So, I made a bolero and a sash to go  with it, and I had a hat and a pair of shoes that I   d bought. And my  friend, her mother took her and she bought everything new, and I won  first. (Laughs) And I was so proud because I   d made all that, and her  mother had taken her, and she was really dressed up. But anyway, I tried  to play in the band. I played clarinet, and I was football queen the year  of    39, in the fall of    39. And, oh, I don   t know. I was just like the rest of  them. Even though I was poor, I had good    (Laughs)  Well, and was there that much difference between your family and any of  the other families at that point?  No, we were all about the same. And when we have our class   we did  have class reunions, they   re all gone but three of us now   we were, of  course, real amazed at the professions people got into. But we were all  just poor country people, and the war came along after we graduated,  and so many of them went to the service. There were two or three of  them didn   t come back. But anyway, they all turned out real good. Even  though we were poor, the girls that I ran around with that lived in town  seemed like they had a little more than we did because their parents had  a regular job. But the farmers had a hard time making it.  Yes, in that environment with everything that was going on.  And it was so dry and hot. And when the Dust Bowl came, you know,  those things   that wind would come in from the west just rolling. And  Momma   d have to get wet sheets to put over the windows to keep the  dust from getting in the house. But you   d take those down, and it just  drifted in. The dust drifted in.  Are there any particular dust storms that you remember growing up?  Yes. The ones where it would roll in and just look like a cloud, that was  16  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  the ones that impressed me a lot. But I remember the wind blew so  much, and we had to walk everywhere we went. When we moved from  Waukomis, we had a    29 Dodge, and I think I was about ten. A neighbor  borrowed it to go to his brother   s birthday. The next morning   well,  early the next morning, Papa turned over and the sky and everything was  just red. He woke up and said that the barn was on fire, and our car was  honking. It burned the car up and, of course, we didn   t have a car for  several years. Then when we did get one, it was an old    29 Dodge. That  thing shimmied all over the road, you couldn   t hardly drive it. (Laughs)  Anyway, I remember my sister, oldest sister, went to Weatherford to  business school. She lived with a preacher and his wife and their kids.  She took care of their kids, did the ironing and everything. That was  when I was working in Oklahoma City, and I remember riding the  interurban over to El Reno to catch my parents, and we all went over to  Weatherford in that old    29 Dodge. We stayed until after dark, and Papa  could hardly see the road, the lights were so dim on it. (Laughs) He was  having my sister and I watch the road for him, and I said we never did  have much    One time, I drove it to church, and I was pulling into the  curb and the brake didn   t have any brake on it. I told Momma to grab the  emergency brake, and by the time she got it grabbed, I had already run  into the curb, knocked the bumper down, and had to get some wire to  wire the bumper. (Laughter) So, we had some good experiences back  then.  That sounds like it was quite a car. (Laughter)  Yes, yes it was.  Was that the one your dad used to use when he sold Rawleigh goods?  No, he had kind of a little truck, and he had a little case of a thing on the  back of it. He would go around the route, and he always took gum for  the little kids. Every once in a while, he would take just one of us, and  Momma would fix us lunch, and we   d go with Papa. And we   d get to eat  lunch with Papa, and the kids were all thrilled to see him because he  gave them a stick of gum. And my brother worked for a thrashing crew.  I don   t know, he was probably twelve or thirteen, and he borrowed the  truck to go get his money. He was going west of our house and hit some  sand, and it turned upside down in a culvert, and it messed all that up.  And it didn   t hurt him and my brother was with him. It didn   t hurt either  one of the boys, but it messed up the truck. I remember he gave it to my  two older brothers to work on to make a strip-down of it. (Laughs) So,  that was the end of the Rawleigh truck, but it got to where he couldn   t  sell Rawleigh goods. People didn   t have the money to pay for the  Rawleigh goods, and they would give him chickens, anything that they  17  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  could pay for. I remember one time they gave Papa a gasoline cook  stove. Well, Momma wouldn   t use it. She was afraid it would blow up  with that gasoline, and so we just had things given to him for the  Rawleigh goods, which was money we needed for it, but.  Because you had the chickens.  We had chickens.  Now, you talked a little bit about being able to go into town for school  and doing things when you were in town for that. But when you were  growing up, would your family do anything special on Saturdays or  Sundays?  Nothing. No, we didn   t have anything special. I know on Fourth of July,  Papa would maybe get some sparklers or something like that for us.  We   d go to our uncle   s and aunt   s in Lahoma. They lived on a farm, and  we lived in town. They had about as many kids as Momma and Papa  did. The girls would build them a playhouse and a silo, and the boys  would ride horses. I remember my aunt, she would have fried chicken,  homemade ice cream, and they had a cistern. They had this well over the  cistern, and it came up through the kitchen, and they had it on a cabinet.  And boy, we thought that was really something, pump water in the  house. (Laughs)  That would have been something. (Laughs)  That was one thing we did special was going to our kinfolks and visiting  with our cousins.  Well, in terms of going into town, how often would you do that besides  for school?  We didn   t go in very often. We lived a mile and a half from town, and  after our car burned, we   d have to walk to town and carry the cream and  eggs so that we could buy a few groceries. And we   d always hope a  neighbor would come along, so we could ride into town. (Laughs)  School activities, why, we   d catch a ride with somebody, but we had to  walk nearly everywhere we went until Papa got this old  1929 Dodge . I  think it was 1938, somewhere along there. I know I was working in  Oklahoma City in the summer when he bought that.  You mentioned the milk and cream and eggs and so on. Do you  remember what specific things cost back then? How much you   d get  paid for that and how much it would cost?  18  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  I think a dozen eggs was about a nickel. And I remember one time Papa  raised watermelons and, oh, they were really nice watermelons  And he  had my brother just older than me take them to town to sell them and put  them in a wagon with the team pulling the wagon. And he   d come home  with about as many as they had. People didn   t have the nickel to pay for  a watermelon. That was something they could do without, and so that  wasn   t very profitable. (Laughs)  What was Tuttle like when you were younger, I mean town-wise?  Well, it   s just about like how it is now. (Laughter)  How many churches? And was there a town square?  We had a lot of churches. Still do. Yes, we have   I haven   t counted  them, but there   s one just not very far away. They   re all pretty close.  What did most people in that area do for a living when you were  growing up?  Well, most of them were farmers.  Was your family musical? Did you have a lot of music in your family?  One of my brothers played by ear, and we did have a piano. And  Momma had taken music lessons, and she taught my oldest sister to  play. And she tried to teach me, but I couldn   t figure out what she was  trying to tell me. When I was in about the fifth grade, we had a music  teacher that taught us how to read notes. I   d go home and write the notes  in the book and on the piano, and I learned to play that way. So, now,  I   ve been practicing quite a bit, and I   m getting a little bit better.  (Laughter) Not like Kelly, though, she   s a good musician.  Well, what kind of music did you like when you were younger?  I always played the hymns. Still do. (Laughs)  Any particular favorites?  Well, not really. I just go through the song book and play them all.  Now, did you have community get-togethers when you were younger,  either church potlucks or dinners?  Yes. I don   t remember them having a potluck, but I remember the youth  group would have weenie roasts and things like that. I remember the first  19  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  pair of pants I had. My aunt had to talk Momma into letting me have     she wouldn   t let me wear pants. It was just a dress. And I said,    Well,  the others are going to wear pants,    and she did let me make a pair of  slacks to wear to the weenie roast. (Laughs)  If this was youth group, you were probably in high school?  Yes, I was in high school. Yes.  Did you folks have a radio at your home?  Yes.  Did you all sit around and listen?  I remember when we lived in Waukomis, especially, it run by battery,  and Papa would drive the car up to the window and hook the car battery  up to the radio, so we could listen to it.  Do you remember hearing any of Roosevelt   s Fireside Chats?  I don   t remember. I remember listening to Amos and Andy and some of  those.  Do you remember your parents talking about politics at all?  Well, they didn   t talk politics much because Papa was Republican and  Momma was Democrat. Her dad was county commissioner, and he ran  on the Democrat ticket. He was county commissioner of Grady County.  Then Papa   s dad was county commissioner in Major County, and so he  ran on the Republican ticket. They discussed problems about the country  and all that, but as far as politics, they didn   t talk much about it.  Do you remember hearing what they thought about President Roosevelt?  Well, I think they thought he was doing a pretty good job.  Okay.  Yes.  Do you remember hearing about the WPA  Works Progress  Administration  and the CCC  Civilian Conservation Corps ?  Oh, yes. Papa was time keeper on WPA. (Laughs)  20  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Okay. So, there must have been some WPA projects in the area.  There was. And I remember going with Grandpa. The county  commissioner had to look after that, and he was the one that got Papa the  job as timekeeper. I remember going down by Amber, and they were  working on a bridge, and it was the WPA people working there. I  remember my daddy was, of course, keeping the time for the workers  there.  Do you remember, were there any CCC camps?  Yes, I remember in Yukon there was one there. And I remember one of  the boys that was in my class, his daddy belonged to CCC camp. They  set out trees and things.  Do you remember anybody that you might have grown up with, any  younger folks that were involved with the CCC?  No, I don   t remember that.  Mostly older, okay. Now, growing up in farming areas, we   ve talked to  other people who   ve said,    Well, we knew, technically, there was a  Depression, but it didn   t affect us much.    But other people said,    Well,  where we were, it was horrible.    So, what   ?  It didn   t bother me. My sister that was older, it embarrassed her. But we  had   I don   t know, she was just different, and she didn   t associate and  play like we younger ones did. We made our own play. We   d play  house, and she was just more of a    stay-in-the-house    person, read and  keep house. She wanted things cleaned up, and she was just a different  type person. She didn   t associate much with people because she was  embarrassed. But my sister and I, why, we just went on with life and  accepted it like it was. We knew we didn   t have money, but my parents  had taught us moral values and love, and I just didn   t lack anything, I  didn   t feel like.  What did you understand about the Depression when you were younger?  That was just something that I accepted because that   s the way life was,  and so I didn   t     Do you remember anybody coming through on trains or people traveling  through your town when you were younger?  When we lived at Waukomis, I don   t know that these hobos would tell  each other, but we always got the hobos off the train because Momma  21  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  would fix them a good meal. (Laughs) I remember her fixing a meal, and  they   d sit out on the porch and eat their food. Every few days it would  be somebody wanted something to eat, so Momma would prepare for it.  Do you know where folks were coming from and going to? I mean, were  they on their way to some place in particular or were they just looking  for work?  Just going, I guess.  Did they stop and do odd jobs for your mom?  Well, they would   ve I guess. I don   t know. But I just remember them  coming and Momma would fix them something to eat.  Earlier, you said you remembered seeing gypsies when you were  younger.  Yes. There   s one particular time, it was when we lived at Bethany and I  was probably four years old, and we were out there in the yard, my sister  and I, and she said that they were gypsies. They came to get some gas.  Well, I went a running in the house and looked out the door. I didn   t  know what gypsies were, but I thought it was something bad, so it scared  me anyway. (Laughs)  So, was it a group of folks going through?  Yes, it was a family.  Did they have the wagon or did they have     They were in some kind of a vehicle. I remember after I married my first  husband, we lived south of town, and a gypsy family lived   well, they  had a wagon, and they had a goat and some dogs, and they stayed down  by our mailbox for quite some time. They decided to leave, and they  stopped by our house and wanted to know if I had anything left from  breakfast that they could have. And I said,    Well, we just had cereal,     but I did have a hambone in the ice box that I would let them have. And  oh, this woman was so grateful to have that hambone. (Laughs)  During the Dust Bowl, I mean, the Depression was going on, you had  the Dust Bowl. You talked a little bit about the storms blowing through.  How do you think the Dust Bowl affected your family particularly?  Well, they couldn   t grow crops whenever it was so dry and hot, and so  that was when Papa had to get out and go find work somewhere else  22  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  because we still stayed there on the farm. And Momma would milk the  cows, and we   d help her, of course, with that. I don   t remember that it  lasted too many years, but I know in the summer I worked in the city  because we all had to do our part to make ends meet. Grandpa owned the  farm, and we just lived on this place and so     You mentioned you had corn and some berries and so on. Did you have  any cotton out there?  We had some cotton. And I remember when I was little, we lived on  another farm where I was born, and I remember Momma picking cotton.  My brother and I went to the field with her, and my little sister, we had a  tub that we carried her in. We   d ride on the sack with Momma picking  cotton. I thought,    How cruel of us     She   s pulling that cotton and     (Laughs) But, of course, I was little and didn   t think anything about it  until later years and I thought,    She had enough to pull without us being  on there.    But she said she didn   t mind because we were there with her.  Sounds like you had a good mother.  I did have, yes.  Did anybody have any health issues during the Dust Bowl?  My sister just younger than me, she had asthma. And anything like that,  I know when we   d have to fill up the ticks for the mattresses, she  couldn   t get around much dust because of that.  At one point you mentioned that your brother had scarlet fever?  Yes.  Can you talk a little bit about that?  Well, I remember I was just small. I was probably six, something like  that, and my daddy, of course, that was when he was selling Rawleigh  goods. We had a garage, and he moved out to the garage so he could go  on with his work. But they wouldn   t let anyone in our house, and we had  this red sign on the front,    Quarantined.    Of course, we kids would go  out and play, but no one was allowed to come in other than the family.  Were you selling the eggs and milk and so on at that point?  No, no.  That wasn   t that same farm.  23  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  No, we just lived in town then.  Do you remember how long the quarantine lasted?  No, I don   t. Probably a week or so.  Now, I understand during the Dust Bowl, a lot of places had issues with  grasshoppers and rabbits and so on. Did you ever experience any of that  around Tuttle?  Oh, yes. I was out to my place, I moved to town recently, and the  grasshoppers are thick out there, now. And I thought that was back way  back in the    30s that they were so thick. They just ate up everything. Just  ate all the leaves off.  I understand that the government required people to slaughter their  cattle at one point during the Depression and the Dust Bowl. Do you  remember that?  I remember that, and I just couldn   t figure that out, why they   I don   t  know why they did that, whether there was too many to feed or what.  (Laughs) Didn   t have feed for them.  Did that affect your family at all?  We didn   t have that many, so it didn   t.  Did you ever have trouble feeding the horses and the cows at that point?  No, no. We always had enough feed, and we had a pasture that they   d  run in. There was a creek ran through it, and where there was a creek,  there was usually enough grass along the creek that they could     It would keep them happy.  Yes.  Did you know any families that left for California or Oregon?  No, I didn   t know any, but     Following right after the Dust Bowl and the Depression, you had World  War II. You mentioned that a little bit earlier.  Yes.  24  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  What affect did that have on the community?  Well, so many of the young men had to go. I remember it was 1940  when I graduated. Of course, that was before Pearl Harbor, but so many  of the boys in my class had to go, and then the classes following that. I  know my husband went. He belonged to the National Guard. Well, when  he graduated from high school, which was in 1937, his mother lived in  Missouri, and so he went up to work in the fields up there. And he got a  discharge from the National Guard, but then he came to see me graduate,  and we decided to get married. And then when the war came along, we  had Kenny. Kenny was already born. And then he got his questionnaire  to fill out for the draft, and he went in for his physical, and they he said  he had allergic rhinitis. I guess he was allergic to things. And then my  second son was born, and he never did go to the service, even though he  did belong to the National Guard at one time. We farmed and then it was  just ninety acres, and so he had to get a job to do something else.  And what did he do during that time?  I know before our second son was born, he drove a gas and oil truck.  And then later, he got a substitute mail carrier job, and then he got a job  in the post office as clerk. He transferred to Amber, which is just about  ten miles south of Tuttle, and he got a rural route. He carried mail nine  months when he died. So, that was what we did. He was a mail carrier at  Amber and carried it for nine months, and he had a brain hemorrhage  and didn   t survive. So, I carried the mail three months until they got a  regular carrier, and then the boys and I moved to town. And the farm  belonged to his mother, and so she said I could live there as long as I  wanted to. But my older son was working in the drugstore. The druggist  gave him a job. And my younger son was just thirteen, and so it was just  handier for him to go to school and Kenny working. And why, I didn   t  know how to do anything but clean houses for people, so in the fall I  started to college down at Chickasha. And I went   well, the job opened  up at the post office as the clerk and in November, I started working in  the afternoon. And the one that was filling in worked of a morning. I  finished my semester, and then I started working five hours a day at the  post office. I was able to get my kids through college, and I continued to  work there almost twenty-five years.  That must have been quite a shock, though, because your husband would  have been really young at the time.  Oh, yes. No indication of anything wrong, except the evening before, he  had a headache. The next morning, I asked him how he was and he said,     Oh, I   m okay.    He said,    My head hurts a little, but       and he made  25  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  the route okay. He stopped at the mailbox and visited with our mail  carrier, Tuttle mail carrier. He was coming up the hill, he noticed our  cows were out, and the neighbor saw him stop. And he met him just  about as he got there, and he stooped over to pick up a rock and when he  did, he almost fell and the neighbor caught him. And he sent his wife up  to my house, and so I came down there, and he had him over to the road.  He   d come to enough that    And so, we took him to the hospital at  Chickasha, but he was unconscious when we got there, and they tried  different things, but he was just too near gone. So, if we   d have known  what was wrong even before, when he had the headache, it may not have  happened. But I asked the doctor and he said,    Well, it was just a  weakness, kind of like in an inner tube. If there   s too much pressure on  it, it bursts.    Well, I guess when he stooped over, I guess that   s what  happened. The pressure from stooping over burst that weak spot.  There   s just no telling sometimes.  Kenny was fifteen and Terry thirteen when he died.  And how old were you?  I was thirty-four. He was thirty-seven, almost.  It sounds like you pulled things together and had a good run with the  post office.  Yes. I married three years after Quentin died. Frank, that   s who I  married, we used to ride the school bus together. He never married, and  he told everybody if he couldn   t have me, he wouldn   t take anybody.  (Laughter) So, we were married almost   well, it was a little over forty-nine  years, and he was a farmer. He was a good farmer.  Mostly wheat or corn?  Wheat, every so often, maybe, he   d plant cotton. Then he would plant  stuff for cows, hay graze or something like that, and we had cows. One  year, we had a 100-acre place over on the highway, and we had a dentist  appointment, and he didn   t show up. I called the dentist and told him, I  said,    Something   s happened because he isn   t coming. It was time we  need to be at the dentist.    So, when he came in, I said,    We   ve already  missed our dentist appointment.    He said,    You can   t imagine what  happened,    and I couldn   t. And he said,    Somebody stole every one of  our cows over there.    And they took them to Missouri to sell them at an  auction. For some reason, somebody found out about it, and they found  the man that did it. He was supposed to pay us back in five years. He  paid about half of it, and after five years was up, well, he quit.  26  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Did you ever get any of those cows back?  No. He   d sold them to a butcher to have them butchered.  Well, how many head did you have at that time?  I can   t remember how many was over there.  About what year would this have been?  I can   t remember what year that was.  Just to kind of get back to some bigger questions, overall. What world  events do you think had the biggest effect on your growing up? You  mentioned the Depression and the Dust Bowl and World War II. Was  there anything else that you can   ?  No, I can   t think of anything. I just went along with life and didn   t     You talked about what you ended up doing with the post office. When  you were growing up, what did you think you wanted to be?  Oh, I just wanted to be a wife and a mother.  So, that was the plan?  That was the plan, yes.  Of the different options that were out there, were there certain things  that seemed opened or closed? Was there anything that you wanted to  do that you didn   t think you could have?  Not really. When I was in high school, on Saturday, I went to help a lady  at the beauty shop, and I thought I would like to fix hair, but I never did  pursue that. I just fixed my own. (Laughter)  We talked a little bit earlier about some of the things like youth group  and some of the community events. Are there community traditions in  Tuttle, things that they still do today that they used to do when you were  growing up?  Yes, they go to church camp. And I remember when I guess I was a  teenager, we went to Duncan to a group, and we stayed in a home with a  lady. I remember she fixed waffles with strawberries on top. I   d never  eaten that, and I thought that was the best breakfast. (Laughs)  27  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Well, that sounds like a good combo. (Laughter) What traditions or  customs from your growing up have you made an effort to preserve? Are  there things within the family or the community that     Well, no, I don   t think so.  In the same vein, are there any particular stories that your grandparents  or your parents told you that you pass on to the grandkids?  Well, just telling about when they lived in the dugout. I had an uncle that  he and his wife were school teachers, and they were quite storytellers.  And when they would come to my grandparents   , we always were  interested in the stories they had to tell. They could tell something  simple to make a really a good story out of it. But my grandparents  would tell about living in the dugout, and I just thought that was such a  terrible life to live or such a hard way to live.  Do you remember any stories about your grandfather coming over in the  Land Run?  Well, yes. It was told that maybe he might have been one of the Sooners,  but I   m not sure that he was. (Laughter) They came from Kentucky.  Back in my mind, it seems like I remember that his sister was taken by  the Indians. I didn   t hear much about that, but it   s just back in my mind  that I remember that they said that she was. And none of them came to  Oklahoma, and so I wasn   t too familiar with any of his relatives.  So, that would have been back in Kentucky.  Yes, back in Kentucky.  What kind of values do you think your parents and your grandparents  instilled in you when you were growing up?  Moral values was very important to them. That was just   well, they  wanted us to be morally good people.  Looking back on things, throughout the course of your life, what do you  think has given you the most satisfaction, or what are you the most  proud of?  Well, I grew up in church, and I think that was very important in my life.  Which church? Were you at the same one in Tuttle that you grew up in?  28  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Roberts  Larson  Christian church, yes. And that was the one my grandparents went to  and we did, and so it was just a natural thing. Momma loved to study the  Bible, and she taught a class, and she loved to teach Bible.  You mentioned that she wanted to be a missionary. Did you hear a lot of  the stories when you were growing up, too, a lot of Bible stories?  Oh, yes.  Did you help teach Sunday school when you were younger, some of the  younger kids?  I did. I taught Sunday school back when my kids and kids later on  were     It   s a good way of knowing who   s in the community. You meet a lot of  folks that way.  Yes.  With the exception of about four years, it sounds like you   ve been in  Tuttle most of your life. What is it about that area that you really like?  Well, of course, knowing people. You know who belongs to who. It   s  changing, though. You go someplace and you think,    Am I at Tuttle?     There   s so many new people, and all the older ones are leaving. They   re  gone. And in the church where I go, there   s one lady that   s 102 and  another one that   s ninety-three, I think, and then I   m at eighty-nine.  We   re the three oldest people in the church. Used to, there was several  older ones, but they   re all gone now.  How big was Tuttle when you were in high school, say?  Well, there was forty in my graduating class, and now they have over a  hundred. So, that I guess would be comparison to what    You remember  how many was in your class, Kelly?  Yes, there was a hundred, and one person died right before graduation,  so we had ninety-nine. But it was about a 2-A-sized school. Busing in  the    60s was what really beefed up the Tuttle area, which it   s about  thirty miles away from Oklahoma City. So, that   s kind of when our size  doubled. It was probably 2,000 or 3,000 when I was born in the    60s. It   s  about 5,000 to 7,000 now, I think. So, it could have been 1,200 to 1,500.  Well, having lived in Oklahoma your entire life, what does Oklahoma,  itself, mean to you?  29  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Well, it   s a good state. (Laughter)  What   s the one thing, if you had a chance to pick something that you  want people to really remember about you, what would that be?  Well, that I tried to do right.  Is there anything that we haven   t covered, anything that you wanted to  talk about that we didn   t touch on?  This opera house that was at Waukomis, and I don   t know how the story  got started, but they said there was a little old man that lived under there,  kind of like an elf or something. I don   t know, it was just a story that got  started. And if we went by this opera house at night, we were very  frightened, and we would watch to see that he didn   t come out, and no  one ever saw him. But anyway, they said that there was a little old man  lived under there, and that was the story that was told to the kids. One  time, my sister and brother, we   d gone to a Methodist revival, and there  was snow on the ground, and it was slick. My sister was walking along  in front of me, and I was looking over toward that building to see if the  little man was coming out. And she fell, and I didn   t know she fell, and I  fell over her and broke my collar bone. (Laughs) And my folks heard me  crying, and they were at the door to meet me by the time I got there. And  I remember I had to be out of school for a long time because I couldn   t  raise my arm to put my coat on, and it was, of course, in the winter time.  All because of the little man under the opera house.  Yes, the little man under the opera house. (Laughter) One time, we were  walking down the road, my brothers and sisters, and there was a bull  over in the pasture. Of course, we were afraid he was going to jump the  fence and come after us, and we told Momma about it and she got onto  us because we said,    Bull.    She said,    That   s an animal.    And of course,  now people use that. Animal was the right word to call the bull.  So, you couldn   t be too precise. (Laughter)  We had some old buggy wheels that we   d take over to the pasture and  ride down, and we   d guide it with our feet. I guess one of the stories I  remember back when I was little, I was probably maybe three years old,  and we were going to Grandpa and Grandma   s. We were in the buggy  and Momma was driving the horse. Well, there was a bridge we had to  cross, and the horse would not go across that bridge. I remember I was  really frightened, and I think the reason I was frightened was because the  horse balked. I don   t know why, being that young, I would remember  30  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  Larson  Bennett  that story, but I did. And I guess we finally got on to Grandma and  Grandpa   s but I remember, it didn   t want to go across that bridge.  Well, and that was someplace the horse had been before, too, and all of  a sudden it just decided not to     Yes, just decided it didn   t want to cross that bridge. I   ve lived in way  back there, from horse and buggy to airplane and astronauts and all that.  (Laughs)  What do you think the most impressive change you   ve seen from when  you were growing up to now is?  Just going to the moon and those things, I just can   t fathom it. And it   s  so fast they have to go to get up there.  It just seems unbelievable, doesn   t it?  It does, really.  Well, I want to thank you so much for sharing your time and your  stories. We really appreciate it.  Well, I hope it   s okay.  Oh, you did a wonderful job. Thank you so very much.  Well, thank you.  -------  -------  
