 Little Thunder. Today is Tuesday, January 26,  2016. I   m interviewing Bunky Echo-Hawk for the Oklahoma Native  Artist Project sponsored by the Oklahoma Oral History Research  Program at Oklahoma State University. We   re at Pawnee, Oklahoma.  Bunky, you   re Pawnee and Yakama. Your paintings, often done live,  can be whimsical and fun, but they also pack a powerful political  punch. You   re known for working with youth, doing live painting.  You   ve landed a contract with Nike, among others. Thank you for taking  the time to talk with me.  Echo-Hawk Thank you.  Little Thunder Where were you born and where did you grow up?  Echo-Hawk I was born in Toppenish, Washington, on the Yakama Reservation  where my mom   s people are from. Didn   t spend a lot of time there but  grew up in Colorado and Oklahoma. Think we lived here in Pawnee  until I was in the second grade and then I grew up in Colorado at the  Lyons/Boulder area. My dad was on staff at the Native American  Rights Fund there, at their headquarters. I kind of grew up at the halls of  their law firm there.  Little Thunder Fun places.  Echo-Hawk Yeah.  Little Thunder The Echo-Hawk family is well known. Can you start us off by telling us  just a bit about your father and his influence on you growing up?  Echo-Hawk Yeah, my dad is really well known in the legal community and the  academic community. He was one of the first Indian attorneys to  graduate through the federal Indian Law program at the University of  5  New Mexico. Was instrumental in the beginning stages of the Native  American Rights Fund, kind of at the peak of our civil rights movement  in the 1970s. Some of my earliest memories are being up in Colorado  and spending the night in his law firm. It was actually an old, converted  frat ernity  house on the University of Colorado campus, and they  changed it. It actually had bathrooms and showers and bathtubs and  stuff and it was a fun place to grow up. But also grew up seeing, I  guess, his caliber of friends up there as tribal leaders that came through,  civil rights leaders that came through and they   d stay at our house. And  members of the Native American community in the Denver metro area.  I was just enamored with my dad   s lifestyle. He seemed like the coolest  guy in the world. People would gravitate toward him. I didn   t know  what he did professionally as a little kid because when he was at home,  he was an artist. He did oil painting. He used to tell stories to me. He   d  ask if I wanted an Indian story or a war story, and he   d use the pages of  the newspaper when he got done and he   d get a sharpie out. He would  tell me these stories. They were always family stories or something  relevant to our family and our culture. As he was telling me the story,  he was live-illustrating on the pages of the newspapers and he   d make  sound effects. Made it come alive for me. When he got done, I   d take  the newspaper to my room and try to relive it and stuff. So yeah, I grew  up and he always made a point to bring us back to Oklahoma for our  various ceremonial dances and funerals.  It always struck me that my dad, to me, seemed like an artist and just a  good Pawnee Citizen first. Once I got older, I found out all the stuff he  was doing legally, in the world of law, and it just made me even more  proud of him. When you see people out, away from the Native  Community and they   re successful, oftentimes, they   re disconnected to  their roots and their heritage. It always made me feel proud that my dad  made it a point to keep us connected. Same thing with my mom. Living  in Colorado, we   d go back and forth from Washington to Oklahoma. It  really shaped me, seeing the work that my dad did artistically because  his focus in his paintings were early reservation times for the Pawnee  Nation. He always said it was a time that wasn   t talked about enough  and wasn   t written about enough. It was something he felt compelled to  share. I think he was inspired by that time of transition. I learned a lot  from him and I   d bug him when he was trying to paint. I remember he  took a six-month sabbatical at one point and he just spent the whole  time painting. It was in our sunroom. It was a sliding glass window,  and he   d keep it shut. When it was shut, we couldn   t come in there. But  I   d stand at the glass and watch him paint. He   d sit there for hours. As  soon as it was all right, I   d come in and I   d ask him about it and he   d  tell me. It made me realize that the image on the canvas might be   I   m  trying to think   one of them was a cow, laying on the ground,  butchered. There was an Indian woman, sitting on the ground with a  6  butcher knife and there was a little kid. He actually had me pose for the  kid in the painting. I got to stand there and I felt really cool, being a  model.  But when he told me what the painting was about, that it was in the  early reservation era, when we made the transition from hunting buffalo  to being dependent on government rations. When they   d distribute the  rations for meat, they   d deliver a live cow. It was up to the families to  kill the cow and butcher it themselves. That   s what the painting was  about. It really just blew me away and made me realize how different  things are today, as opposed to what our ancestors went through. Once I  got older, he really pushed me toward law school. I was a nerd, a  student athlete all the way through high school and actually graduated  from high school early. My dad was always trying to encourage me to  go to law school. He said,    I   ll help you out the best I can, as long as  you focus on political science and then go to law school. Other than  that, you can go to the army.    So the first thing I did was made an  appointment with the Army recruiter because I was dead set against  going to law school. The funny thing about that is my dad and I have  the same name, the same exact name. I   m actually Bunky, or Walter  Echo-Hawk the Third. My apat, my grandpa, passed away before I was  born. On paper, they said I couldn   t be the Third, so I was almost a Jr. I  attended my appointment with the Army recruiter and I sat in there  about forty-five seconds and realized that wasn   t for me, and I left. The  Army recruiter, though, kept calling the house and when I   d answer the  phone, he   d say,    Let me speak to Walter Echo-Hawk,    and I was like     Okay,    because everyone knew me as Bunky.  Little Thunder That was a good prank.  Echo-Hawk I was,    Dad, you got a phone call.    My dad got mad. He   s,    What do  you want with me? I   m too old for the Army.     Little Thunder Before we go too much further, let   s backtrack a little. How about your  mom   s influence on you and possible artistic influence as well?  Echo-Hawk Yeah, my mom. She was also a huge influence on me. The art that she  creates is traditional art, everything from beadwork to cradle boards and  stuff like that. I learned a lot from watching her work. I learned, if  anything, to appreciate the amount of knowledge and patience it takes  to do those projects. It was a good balancing, that traditional creation of  art in our home, mixed with my dad   s oil painting and his professional  role. I felt like it was a strong balance. It   s something I wanted to  maintain throughout my life is that strong sense of tradition but also a  strong sense of professionalism and a strong sense of the contemporary  art forms. Just seeing the work that my mom would do, blew me away.  7  She made a belt buckle for Alex English, who played with the Denver  Nuggets. He was at a fundraising event for the Native American Rights  Fund. He was one of my mom   s favorite players. She was able to  present him with that belt buckle. It had the Denver Nuggets Logo on it  and it had his initials and his number on it. It blew me away because it  was the first time that I had ever seen our traditional art forms with a  contemporary image on it.  It opened that door for me. To me, that was an important way of  preserving our traditional art form, but being able to tell our story today.  Because, a hundred and fifty years from now, if that belt buckle ends up  in a museum, it   ll truly tell the story of our lives today. It was really  cool seeing that. The best part about it was, that I was so envious the  whole time when she was making a belt buckle because I was a Nuggets  fan. I was a little guy and I was into basketball. After she had presented  it to him, she surprised me and she made one for me as well. It had my  initials on it. That made me happy. It was cool. There was always that  balance of not just the art forms, I guess, but also the different tribal  cultures. There   s a lot of similarities between my mom   s tribe and my  dad   s tribe and there are a lot of differences. It was cool, learning both  sides of where I come from and seeing that duality play out in my daily  life. I think it was pretty cool. I felt really fortunate in that they found  each other. I think they complement each other really well on a lot of  different levels. It was good.  Little Thunder How about your first memories of doing art?  Echo-Hawk I think my first memories are   my dad was gone on a trip and I found  his sharpies and took the newspaper and I started drawing, trying to do  what he did for me, for myself. I started drawing   I was really into the  Dukes of Hazzard back then   so I was drawing an episode where the  Dukes of Hazzard came in their orange car, the General Lee. They came  to Pawnee, Oklahoma and were getting chased by the BIA  Bureau of  Indian Affairs  cops, (Laughter) eluding them and stuff. I used to try to  write. I don   t remember that as much, but my dad   s brother, Roger  Echo-Hawk, my Uncle Roger, kept some of that and published it in  some publication. I was, I think five or six, and he   d published it with  some of my drawings, my story. When I look at it now, it   s  embarrassing because it looks like a bunch of tallies.  Little Thunder And like a cartoon?  Echo-Hawk Yeah. So that   s, I think, my first experience with that. I was wanting to  do that.  8  Little Thunder What about primary school or elementary school? What were your art  experiences?  Echo-Hawk I had an art class when I was in public school and it was just real basic.  It didn   t get into anything meaty.  Little Thunder Was it in Boulder?  Echo-Hawk It was in Lyons; it was Lyons High School. I was actually playing  basketball and ended up walking off the team on my junior year,  because I wanted to focus more on my academics. I started feeling  pressures of college at that point. There was an interest in getting an  athletic scholarship at a few different colleges, and I didn   t want to hang  my future on hopes of a basketball scholarship. I ended up walking off  the team and everything kind of unraveled there. It   s a small school. I  ended up transferring to alternative private school in Boulder. That was  an amazing experience. It was a school that was based on the arts.  When I went there, it really unlocked a lot of doors. The art classes got  really amplified. I took a couple of semesters of illustration, which  really taught me a lot. The professor, my teacher there, the art teacher,  was an amazing guy. I was trying to draw   I was really into punk rock  and skateboarding and all that   but he would always try to tell me,     Bring this back to your culture, because that   s who you are.    He  wasn   t Native at all, but he understood. I really owe a lot to him for  that.  He was always saying,    You can do your skulls and all your punk stuff,  but make it Indian because that   s who you are. You   re Indian and  you   re doing that.    The very first painting I did is on a leather jacket,  and I actually have it, too. It   s a punk rock jacket. It   s all painted up, but  I did a portrait on the back of it of one of our Pawnee Scouts named  Whitehorse. He was encouraging. He actually gave me a longhorn steer  skull, as an art project, to paint traditionally. When I was graduating, he  gave me an eagle feather. He said,    I   m not supposed to have this. I   m a  white guy. It came to me a long time ago and I wanted to pass it on to  you.    It meant a lot to me because I grew up since I could walk, dancing  in our arena and at our ceremonies. I took it to heart and I still have that  feather. It   s a prominent fixture in my life. Yes, pretty much that was  the schooling I had as far as art was concerned. I had some really  amazing English Comp osition  classes in that school as well that really  inspired me to write poetry and write plays. It was just an amazing end  to my high school education.  Little Thunder You hadn   t really been too super focused on art. It was just part of self-expression  and then that experience in school really set it up?  9  Echo-Hawk Yeah, it was a dark period in my life. A lot of it was teenage angst, and  I don   t know, it was a couple of other issues. I was in a dark place, and  then, a major transition going from the basketball or the athletic world  in high school, and having to transfer schools and losing a lot of friends.  But when that world opened to me, that world of expression, I feel like  it really saved my life. It put me on the direction that I   m still on today.  It was good.  Little Thunder You explained that at one point you were going to sign up for the Army,  but you quickly decided that wasn   t for you. How did you end up at the  Institute of American Indian Art? Or what happened after that when  you were not wanting to go to law school, but not wanting to go to the  Army?  Echo-Hawk I was lucky enough that my dad and mom knew that college was  coming up. I think, even as early as my sophomore year, we   d go on  road trips and we   d check out different places. We checked out Haskell  Indian College, Haskell Nations Indian University up in Lawrence,  Kansas and then Fort Lewis College in Durango. When I was filling out  my applications, I decided against Haskell. I mean I got accepted, but I  didn   t want to go there. Didn   t really care for Durango as much. The  Institute just seemed like the best choice for me because it would help  me with the passion that I had at the time, which was writing and  painting. I graduated from high school early, so I had eight months to  kill before I went to college. I had a construction job. I can   t remember  how it worked out, but I ended up taking a job at the American Indian  Science and Engineering Society in Boulder and worked as an  illustrator. I thought it was going to be a real easy job, drawing pictures  for a living. They handed me a stack of files. They wanted me to  illustrate these educational brochures and pamphlets on fetal alcohol  syndrome and fetal alcohol effect.  I had to study all these gruesome cases, and then I had to illustrate it  and try and convince people, or teach people what it was about, and  hopefully, steer them clear of that. It kind of helped me. I think that  planted a seed that I could use my art as a way to try to empower our  people or help our people. Because before that, I was doing historic  paintings or kind of romanticized art like beads and feathers and buffalo  skulls, stuff like that. That kind of helped, I think, unlock that door.  When I got to Santa Fe, I had an idea of the direction that I wanted that  to go. I was an English major, creative writing major there and did  painting on my   I couldn   t major, double major because they blocked  the classes at the same exact time, which was a bummer to me. But I  had my own studio space there and the professors there still gave me  guidance and critiques. Some of them, I didn   t like the critiques that I  got, but yeah, it was an amazing experience.  10  Little Thunder Who were some of the outstanding professors and maybe even students  that were sort of influential?  Echo-Hawk Man, there were quite a few. As far as poetry, Jon Davis was a real  standout professor. Arthur Sze. Then, the theatre aspect which I was  primarily focused on, William Yellow Robe was a strong professor and  ally and friend. Bruce King was another one I learned a lot from, as far  as, he was teaching acting. Got to learn a lot from him. There   s a lot of  people, fellow students that really stand out from that time period. Some  of them are still continuing on in their craft and some went different  directions. That   s really cool to see them     Little Thunder Is that when you experimented with playwriting too?  Echo-Hawk Yeah.  Little Thunder That   s how I first heard your name, actually.  Echo-Hawk Oh, right.  Little Thunder Was in theater     Echo-Hawk The Institute was amazing because they   d focus on student  development. The classes were really small, a handful of students,  maybe a dozen at the most. They would not only teach you how to write  and how to edit your own work, but they also looked for opportunities  outside of the school. Like in my poetry classes, we   d learn writing and  editing, and then the performance of it. They also taught us how to  submit our work for publications and that process as part of the  classwork because we   d actually have to submit our work for  publication. But they also hooked up poetry readings for us, so we went  to the Santa Fe Indian School and read for the high school kids and then  on the radio stations, different places like that. In the playwriting  classes, we developed our plays and the higher-tiered classes, we  submitted them to different theatres. A handful of us got selected to go  out to New York City and work out there and develop our plays. We  had some cold staged greetings of our scripts to develop them. We were  trying to get them picked up for production out there. It was an amazing  experience. We got to go out there and do long distance learning.  Little Thunder Was this with the American Indian  Community  House in New York  or     Echo-Hawk There was a production company called Chuka Lokale and they did  stuff at the  American Indian  Community house there. But where we  were set up was at Joseph Papp   s Public Theatre where they do the  11  Shakespeare Festival out of. Irene Bedard was, actually, played the lead  in my play.  Little Thunder Oh, wow.  Echo-Hawk Yeah, it was a lot of fun. It was cool because when I flew out there,  somebody had left a People magazine on the plane. It was like    Fifty  Most Beautiful People.    I looking through it and Irene Bedard was in  there. I was,    Oh my goodness. That   s really cool. There   s a Native  woman in here.    When we got established and set up, and then met the  cast of who was going to be helping us develop our work, she was  there. I was just blown away. I was starstruck, so I had her sign it for  me. (Laughter) It was really great experience out there. I had some  competitive submissions. I   m trying to remember, like the New York  Ensemble Studio Theatre. I got beat out by Steve Martin.  Little Thunder He   s not a bad person to get     Echo-Hawk His play got selected over mine. After that experience, shopped my play  around. It got picked up, I think, actually, in Durango. There was a  production of the play that I developed out there. It was a play called  The Essence. It was about a half Pawnee, half white teenage girl that  didn   t know her father, her Pawnee father, and ended up getting mixed  up with these New Agers. She was trying to find bits and pieces of her  roots, or what she thought was her heritage. It was kind of a  drama/comedy, I guess. We actually did a staged reading in Santa Fe,  and you know, in Santa Fe there   s a New Age community there. At the  opening night, it was kind of mixed feelings from the audience. It was a  fun experience, for sure.  Little Thunder What was a landmark, I guess, event that pointed you more in the  direction of your painting?  Echo-Hawk I think right toward the end of my second year at IAIA, I had uncovered  (and I don   t know if this is too personal or not) but I had uncovered  memories from when I was a little kid and I was sexually abused by an  older cousin of mine. I had flooded those memories, buried them. They  came out right before I was set to graduate. I struggled with that. I  barely graduated. I was on the President   s List, Honors List the whole  time till last semester. I think that those feelings, all those memories and  the feelings that came up with that, I associated them with writing,  those emotions, and trying to write. I took a break from writing and  went on to the University of Colorado and was trying to take care of  prerequisite stuff that I didn   t do at the Institute. Then I turned twenty-one  and I ended up not doing anything for like a couple of years, which  is embarrassing to admit. But I was at the bars a lot, had a manual labor  12  job and something about still having these unresolved feelings, I started  painting, kind of abstract expressionist, I guess. I was really influenced  by Mirac Creepingbear   s work and how he brought the spirituality of  his people into his work. It was seamless and it made sense to me. At  the same time, I was really into Wassily Kandinsky, his color theory  and his work. I started experimenting with telling my story. I was also,  at that time, not ready to talk about my experiences as a kid. I did it  through hidden messages in my art. I did a whole series of them. A lot  of my friends really loved it. I   d give those paintings away to my  friends. It felt like a way to heal at some level.  Little Thunder That may have been one of your first series, I guess. You do a lot of  your work in series.  Echo-Hawk Yeah, it definitely was. The very last painting I did in that series, I  worked on it for eight months. It was called, We Got the Vibe. It was  this piece, it was really vibrant colors   I think I was hiding my  emotions with the bright, warm colors   it was this painting that had  like a hundred faces in it, kind of mixed, and salmon. It was trying to  connect with my spiritual health, I guess. At that same time, too, I was  really getting into singing a lot more. Traveled with my dad quite a bit,  and starting to transition away from powwow singing which is really  commercialized to learning our traditional ceremonial songs. I think  that last painting helped me transition out of that dark space I was in  and to heal. At the same time, in that eight month period on that last  piece, I   d done a painting that was like twelve feet wide and that was  maybe a foot high. It was called Under the Bed. It was about my  experiences as a child, and it had my face in there, twice, had the left  side of my face and the right side of my face and everything that  happened in between. I felt like that was my way of closing the door on  that and moving on.  But I realize, still, that was (what is it, fifteen years later?) I   m still  exploring what that means to me. That means something different to me  now than it did back then. I guess it   s still a healing from those things.  But yeah, that painting, that series was huge in helping me to move  away from there. Or at least start on that journey of healing and finding  my identity again, I guess. I took a break from painting and from  writing and stuff for a couple of years. Then I actually had a back  injury   it was like 2000. And herniated two disks in my lower back. It  was a horrible experience. It was physical therapy three times a week  and learning to walk and deal with the pain. It   s a permanent condition.  But in those first eight, nine months, I couldn   t leave the house or  anything. So once I could finally sit up, I started painting again. But I  started doing it from a different perspective. Instead of it being a  primarily emotional outlet, I started doing research. The first series that  13  came out of that was my Gas Mask as Medicine series. I was studying  environmental injustice in Indian country, environmental racism. Did a  lot of research and sketches and came up with twenty-five paintings that  I wanted to do and then laid it out and did them. I started exhibiting it as  a body of work because I thought one painting here or there, wouldn   t  tell the story. I was really drawn to working in a body of work.  Little Thunder Right. It really amplifies the power of it. Where did you, what was one  of the most important venues that you showed that series in?  Echo-Hawk That series was my first legitimate   I had stuff in a coffee house., They  had actually made me take down my work because it was too  controversial because of some people that got into a fight about it,  sparked from a conversation about it.  Little Thunder That   s a compliment     Echo-Hawk I thought so. They thought it was too much of a liability. The first show  I had was a solo exhibition at the Ellen Katherine Gallery in Boulder.  She was, I think, pretty young, not too far out of college, and somehow  I had a prime gallery spot like in downtown Boulder. It really inspired  me to have these paintings altogether. It was a beautiful spot and it was  pretty well received. Sold a few paintings. It really inspired me to  continue on. I didn   t want that to be the highlight of my career. Made  me automatically think of what to do next. Also, at that same time, I  started the website and started showing my work online. Then donated a  couple pieces to non-profits. Slowly, my work started getting out there  and getting known. Those paintings started getting picked up in  publications as illustrations. I think one of them that I   m really proud of  still today, is the Native American Rights Fund used that series to  illustrate their annual report which went out to all their funders and  supporters and all that. The story that sticks with me out of that is, I  think it was my dad, had went up to Montana to visit a tribal judge up  there and went to their home. On his coffee table, he had taken apart  that Annual Report, and made a collage and then put glass over it. He  said it was a visual reminder these are the issues.  This is why we   re fighting the good fight. He said that anybody he  invites up, they sit across from that table and they   re forced to see those  images. It really bolstered my ambition and made me realize art could  be used in a powerful way to make a statement. It built like that. Started  getting some book covers and stuff and doors started opening. I  remember I made a couple of trips before that time and, I think, right  after that time, brought my portfolio down to Santa Fe and visited like  thirty galleries in Santa Fe. Got turned down by every single one of  them. They said, there were two sentiments: one was my artwork was  14  not Indian enough. The other sentiment is that it was too Indian. There  was no in between. I guess the in-between would be like Kokopellis and  coyotes or pastels. So I decided early on that Santa Fe wasn   t for me.  That traditional Indian art market wasn   t for me. I jaded a bit. I wanted  to circumvent that and do my own thing and blaze my own trail. I had a  chip on my shoulder, you know, and I made it work for me.  Little Thunder Real quick for fun, do you mind tell me what the image was in the coffee  house that earned so much controversy?  Echo-Hawk To this day, I   m not sure which one it was. It might have been a  combination of the imagery, but what I was told was that it was a  conflict between a younger liberal college student   they said he was a  young hippy college student   and a rural Vietnam vet.  Little Thunder Oh.  Echo-Hawk They were in the coffee shop and they were talking about the paintings,  I guess. I don   t know if it was one in particular or what, but they butted  heads on it. Because some of the paintings were about the militarization  of Indian Country, the painting I   d guess that it would have been     there   s a large painting I did called Natural Resource Management. It  featured a big grasshopper oil pump and Indians wearing suits and war  bonnets but with gas masks and holding briefcases. On one of the  skyscrapers in the background, George Bush   s face was on there. I   m  thinking it was that one because it was kind of a stab at the conservative  party.  Little Thunder Right. At one point, you got pretty involved with some different youth  organizations. How did your art and that kind of work come together?  Echo-Hawk I think after my first solo exhibit, I was really trying to get, I was trying  to figure out how much my paintings would be worth, what to charge.  An agent that I had at the time suggested donating work and then seeing  what the paintings go for in auction, see what people will pay for it and  basing it on that. I selected Native organizations in the area and even  some non-Native organizations. I think from that introduction to  philanthropy, I started realizing the work that they   re doing. Also, my  work I did with the AISES  American Indian Science and Engineering  Society . Then seeing first hand from traveling as a singer to different  communities for powwows, seeing the issues that our youth were  facing. All that really started getting to me a bit more. I was asked to  serve on the Board of Directors at the Denver Indian Center. I think that  was 2004. I served on their board for my term. Really got introduced to  the world of non-profit work and the challenges they face and the need  for those programs. I got to see first-hand the impact those programs  15  would have and the challenges that they face and the consequences if  the funding wasn   t met, if those programs weren   t there, what that  would mean. It really opened my eyes, so at that point I shifted gears. I  was still doing manual   I was working as a screen printer and serving  on this board, and I realized that I wanted to change and actually work  in non-profit.  I got a job in the American Indian College Fund and started working  with them while still serving on the board. I got a leadership role being  on the board, so working within the non-profit. Felt like I had a good  foundation. My cousin, Crystal Echo-Hawk, and I were talking quite a  bit about the needs that our youth have and how they   re not being met,  so we cofounded Envision in 2006, focused on bringing multimedia art  platforms to Native youth. Working in terms of suicide prevention, and  substance abuse prevention, and stuff like that. That just kind of went  from there. Envision grew pretty quickly and found a foundation just  working with a few specific tribes. But I wanted to continue working  with more tribes and more youth. So I shifted management   at one  point I was the Executive Director of Envision. That was all a hundred  percent unpaid, so it was funny having a title. I guess that was the one  perk out of it. That just meant I was doing most of the work. But we  shifted it over, and gave the leadership over to a couple of other artists  in the collective. I continued doing my own thing on my own path,  focused on the art therapy aspect of workshops.  Little Thunder Began doing live painting, right? That was part of it.  Echo-Hawk Yeah.  Little Thunder How did you find that?  Echo-Hawk It came from conversations with some of my family members. I had  heard, growing up, about our winter months, when we   d be in our earth  lodges and how they   d pass the time. They   d have hand games and all  these social events, but they   d also have times when they   d have an  artist there and people would gather and the artist would serve as the  entertainment and tell stories or even jokes and stuff. Then, the artist  would talk to the assembled audience and determine some significant  events that happened the previous year. The artist would talk to each  person, and by doing that, would get the complete picture of that piece  of history. Then they   d record it on a stretched hide, like a buffalo hide  or deer hide. They   d have a young woman, she would have a stretched  buckskin that was white, but it would be stretched tight, and she   d  reflect the light of the fire onto the artist   s working space. What   s cool  about that is that my cousin, Crystal, that became her Indian name  because they said that   s what she does, is she reflects light onto other  16  people and helps them to accomplish their work. I thought it was cool.  Anyway, we did a fundraising event for Pawnee Nation College which  then was in its infancy and Comanche Nation College down in  Oklahoma City. I promised to donate some work for the silent auction  and I didn   t have it with me. Then I had the idea,    What if I do a live  painting on the spot with the entertainment?    We had some DJs and  stuff like that.    Then, we   ll auction the painting.    It was a complete  rush for me, just spur of the moment. I had no idea if I could do it or  not. I didn   t know how quick I could work. It ended up working pretty  well, and people were really receptive to it. I had the DJ wear a  gasmask, I   d bought a few gasmasks at a surplus store, and then I put  war paint on it, painted it up, so I had the DJ put it on during a break.  He put that on and I put my roach and eagle feathers on him and I said,     All right, when I come out and take the stage, you come out next.     Anyway, I went and put my easel up there. I want to say it was like  forty-eight inches by forty-eight inches, pretty good sized canvas up on  stage. Then, he came out and he started   the speakers were up and he  started scratching and the music dropped. People started coming up. It  was cool, looking over my shoulder and seeing everybody. Their minds  just were blown, seeing this Indian DJ, up there with the gasmask on  and war paint. Just saw the wave of phones coming out and people  taking pictures. I fell in love with it instantly. The feeling that you can  only get if you   re there in the audience to witness the art happen. It was  a big rush for me and made me feel like a rock star, even though I   m not  musically inclined. It just went from there, and I was looking for  opportunities to paint. At first, it was kind of a staged piece with some  of these guys, these DJs and MCs. I did it for fun because I had a  paying job. But eventually, I started perfecting it and realizing that I  could do more with it. So I looked back to those conversations about  our ancestors and wondered if I   d be able to do that the way they did it.  I can   t remember the first time, it was, I think, at a youth conference up  in Spokane, Washington. I   m trying to remember the name of their  group, but I think it was called the Native Project. Area tribes sent their  youth and there were like 300, 377 kids in the audience.  I was,    If I   m going to do it, I   m going to do it now.    I had them ask  questions and had them raise their hands. Then, I had them go  through   the question that really sticks out in my mind is I asked them,     How many of you have somebody in your family that has diabetes?     and a lot of hands went up. Then asked,    How many of you are fluent in  your language?    Only a handful of hands went up. Then I asked,    How  many of you have somebody in your family that is an alcoholic?    and  every single hand went up in the audience. It was heart-wrenching. At  that point I turned around and said,    I   m going to start painting and  want you guys to go through and introduce yourself to me and inspire  17  me to paint.    The very first kid that took the mic said    I   m twelve years  old, and I already have a problem with alcohol.    He said,    My parents  are both alcoholics and my older siblings are alcoholics and I   ve already  started drinking and I   m only twelve.    And he just went on, but it was  really brave of him. It set the tone. When he passed the microphone, all  these other kids just opened up. It made me realize that these kids from  different tribes and different communities saw some synergy there.  They saw they weren   t the only ones facing these problems. In that  sense, I saw some doors opening, the healing begin. When I was  painting it, I was trying not to cry because these kids were being so raw  and so honest and open. They talked about sexual abuse and the full  gamut. There were no filters at all. You know, Indian kids are typically  really shy, especially in a public setting. These kids   it was a safe  place.  So I painted this toddler, Indian toddler, kind of floating and holding up  a bottle of whiskey, and then on that bottle of whiskey, there was a  nipple on it and that baby was about to drink it. Then toward the end, I  said    What words do you want on this painting?    They said,    Put FAS  on there, Fetal Alcohol Syndrome.    I put FAS. Then I said,    But instead  of Fetal Alcohol Syndrome, make it stand for futures are stolen.    It was  really intense and powerful. I think from that experience helped me to  refine what I could do with the audience. Now it   s more natural for me,  I can contain my emotions more when I   m up here. But what   s sad or  sobering is that a lot of these communities that I visit have those same  issues from community to community. Now I try to focus on having the  audience brainstorm tactics to overcome those obstacles. Then try to  focus on that, try to make a visual action plan for them. It   s been  really     Little Thunder They   ll carry on?  Echo-Hawk Yeah. It   s been pretty good experience. It   s given me a lot so when I  come home and I   m in the studio, and I don   t have the audience there, I  still have their sentiments and their experiences with me, and I still  carry those prayers for them. When I do my studio work and I can  spend several months on a canvas, I still have that with me. It   s pretty  intense at times, but it   s rewarding.  Little Thunder Powerful stuff. Have you done any murals at all?  Echo-Hawk Yeah, I have done a few. Done one in Citizen Band Potawatomi at their  youth center. Jasha, my wife, actually helped me with those. We did it  in three days, I think. It was just kind of a fun piece. It actually relied on  my original series of work with that style and created this mural, so it  was more fluid. A spiritual mural that featured this big, giant face and  18  this ribbon-like hair and stars woven throughout it. I   ve done murals in  private residences up in Shakopee, up in Minnesota, and then a mural at  the Yakama Nation Tribal School. That was a fun one because it was  interactive with the students there, so they were around while I was  working on the mural. I   ve done quite a few. Then I did   and I   ll never  do it again because it was   well, I don   t want to say that because it was  fun, but it was really difficult. I had a show at Widen and Kennedy.  Their headquarters are in Portland, Oregon. They   re advertising moguls.  They came up with    Just Do It,    the Nike slogan and all that. But they  gave me a solo exhibition in their headquarters, and they   re asking,     What do you want for the opening reception?    I was kind of being a  smartass, and I said,    I want a full scale tipi because it was a big space,  you know.    I said,    I want a full scale tipi with blank canvas and I want  a satellite dish on the top. For the opening reception I   ll paint, do live  art, all around the tipi, paint the tipi.    Anyway, they made it happen, so  I had to do it.  Little Thunder Wow, that   s a major job, painting a tipi.  Echo-Hawk Yeah. It was pretty cool. But it was just the image of seeing that  satellite dish up there because I think I   d painted it before, but seeing it  there physically, it was so odd. It was a poetic image. They took it a  step further and they put a rug inside the tipi and a TV that just had  static on, and a toaster oven. It was pretty cool. It was a challenge to do  live art. It was like murals, mural-size all the way around that tipi.  Little Thunder Tell us about your contract with Nike because now you   ve been working  with them for quite a while.  Echo-Hawk Yeah. They actually contacted me in, I want to say 2009, and invited  me to come up to their world headquarters in Beaverton, Oregon, just to  do live art for their Native American Heritage Month. I was invited by  the GM of Native Business, Sam McCracken, and then also on behalf of  the Native American employee network at Nike. When I went up there,  they gave me a tour, and I, at that point. I hadn   t heard much about the  Nike N-Seven Line, which is a line inspired by Native American culture  to benefit native American communities. They gave me the tour and  introduced me to the line and I really fell in love with it.  I was always into Nikes and Jordans back in high school and I   d  actually screen printed a Nike Logo on leather and made a drum stick  out of it. So I had a Nike, the swoosh, and then, instead of    Just Do It,     I changed it and it said,    Just Be.    At that time, I was actually working  a lot in the skateboarding community and designing decks with a  company called Native Skates out of Adrienne, Michigan. They had  partnered with Vans  shoes  and they were doing Pendleton, Pendleton  Vans and they   d asked for some prototypes of my art and custom shoes.  19  So I was actually doing that when Nike called. I was,    What   s up with  this and these different shoe companies?     Little Thunder Wow, corporate.  Echo-Hawk Yeah, anyways they introduced me to the line up there and then they  requested that when I do my live painting, to do a portrait of Mark  Parker, the Nike CEO and President. They were appreciative of Mark   s  engagement with the Nike N7 Line and they just wanted to honor him  so I did a portrait of him with a headdress. Then I wrote in graffiti  writing,    agent of change.    After that performance, they said that their  motivating reason for bringing me up there was actually to talk to me  about coming on to possibly help design some of the stuff. I guess they  had researched at one point, broke into a couple of research teams after  they decided they wanted to work with the Native artists. I was  fortunate enough that when they reconvened, my name was on the top  of the list. It just kind of fell onto my lap. I had my reservations, at first,  because I had heard of Nike and their questionable sweatshop labor  practices. When I was there, I realized that they had changed those  practices by then, but their commitment to the Native American  community was legitimate. I was pleased to see that the staff within that  line was a Native staff, Native-managed. It spoke volumes that they  wanted to work with a Native artist. They didn   t want to hire me as an  employee, they just wanted to contract with me. I thought that was  awesome that they respected that. Just seeing the impact that the line  had already. Their philosophies were adopted into the corporation of  Nike, like the Native philosophy of only using what you need translated  into their manufacturing. Before they would cut two feet of material and  they only needed fifteen inches of material.  By doing that, only using what they needed, they were able to reduce  their annual waste, manufacturing waste, by several hundreds of tons.  They said it was enough, what they had cut out from their waste, if you  filled dump trucks completely up, they would run bumper to bumper  from Portland, Oregon, to Seattle, Washington. By changing their  manufacturing practices to our Native philosophy, it cut out all that  waste. Some of the materials that they were using for some of the early  windbreakers were made from 98 percent recycled water bottles. They  were looking at reducing their footprint, honoring our Native  philosophies and it really appealed to me. But what appealed to me  most is that the proceeds from the line go into the N7 Fund which, in  turn, distributes that money back into Indian County to fund youth  programs, giving them access to sport and combating type 2 diabetes  and youth obesity. It really appealed to me as a way to   spoke to may  philanthropic heart. I   ll be able to honor our culture. I   ll be able to make  some art. As an artist, it was a huge opportunity. Then, just knowing  20  that it was bringing our community up in a number of ways, it really  spoke to me. I signed with them, I think, in 2010 and started  immediately designing with them. Once the designs are complete and  everything, it usually takes ten to twelve months for it to actually hit the  shelves. Wrapped up my designs. in 2010. Right before my line  launched   my first line launched in 2011   Nike officially bought the  N7 Line. It became an official line of Nike. They started putting their  resources into the line to help it develop and grow. It was really cool.  We actually, I think, did a really amazing job at the first launch parties.  They were sold out within the day at different sights.  Since then, we   ve been able to partner with Kevin Durant from  Oklahoma City Thunder, and also with the Jordan, brand Jordan, in  releasing some Nike N7 Jordan shoes and apparel. Every year, every  season, we   re able to continue to grow and get bigger. As a result of  that, we   ve been able to put over three million dollars back into Indian  country in the last couple of years. It   s been really amazing to see that.  Also, as part of that, we   re highlighting our Native professional athletes  and giving them extra exposure, which is huge because now we   re  starting to see these high school students. I identify with that myself. I  look back to that critical time where I made that decision. A huge part  of me making that decision to drop out of basketball was because then, I  didn   t see any possibilities beyond college. I   m Indian, and I   ll only go  so far, so I   m going to go this other way. Now, we   re starting to see that  there are possibilities beyond that. There   s Native WNBA players out  there that are on the all-star team and Native football players that are  starting quarterbacks on professional NFL teams. Just starting to grow.  That list is getting bigger and bigger. It   s cool seeing that. Some of the  communities that the N7 fund has partnered with, they   re starting to see  marked improvements. Reduction of youth obesity, reduction of type 2  diabetes, improvements on school attendance and grades. Suicide rates  dropping. It   s not a cure all by any means, but it   s cool being able to see  that influence, knowing that that line has that kind of potential. It   s cool  that it   s growing, just for that reason alone for me. It   s been exciting to  see.  Little Thunder That   s wonderful. Switching to your process and techniques, you mostly  use acrylic. Is that right? Mostly acrylic on canvas for your studio  work?  Echo-Hawk Yeah.  Little Thunder How important is sketching to you, when you   re in the studio, not live  painting?  21  Echo-Hawk It   s really important to me. I   m always kind of a nerd about it. I  research as much as I can about it, before I even sketch, and I   ll read as  much as much as I can about whatever idea I have. Then I   ll start  compiling information. Once I feel like I   m able to talk intelligently  about whatever I   m going to paint, then I feel like I   m able to start  sketching. I   ll do traditional sketches in a sketch book. Lately, I   ve been  coupling that with doing digital sketching, digital compositions, playing  with the imagery on the computer and manipulating it and doing  sketches based off that. Sometimes I   ll do smaller proof paintings on  paper or I   ll use watercolor and inks.  Little Thunder Preliminaries?  Echo-Hawk Yeah. Once I feel comfortable with it, I   ll translate it up onto canvas  and go from there. When it   s part of a series, the way I look at it     I think it   s my creative writing background   but I look at them as  chapters to a book. I   ll actually draft my narrative, my artist statement,  about the series before I even start the series because I   ll always look  back on it. Every painting I   m about to do, I compare it to that  statement and if it doesn   t match up, I   ll back burner it. I want the body  to be cohesive, and tell as much of the story as possible. I do a lot of  writing and a lot of introspection. Then, my sketches, I have fun with it.  I   ll do, sometimes, collage work, just trying to frame the idea in  different ways before I actually do it. Sometimes it results in me  working on music as well on my computer, digital or electronic dance  music. Just trying to harness that creativity. It doesn   t always go to  canvas. Sometimes it   s another project or it   s a sound or a song or  something that   ll inspire me and I   ll play that when I actually do get on  canvas.  Little Thunder While you   re working?  Echo-Hawk Yeah. Yeah     Little Thunder I know you travel quite a bit, but when you   re at home, what   s your  creative routine?  Echo-Hawk A lot of times I tend to veg out quite a bit. I   ll ice my back when I  return from a trip. It   s usually a couple days before I can do anything  creatively. I get really drained from those trips. Because it   s not just the  time where I   m actually painting, but it   s the whole experience of  visiting a community and tapping into what they   re doing in their  communities, meeting people and networking and the actual traveling  itself. I   ll go through periods where when I   m home, I   m home. But  when I get this overwhelming feeling that I need to create, although I  tend to work at night, I   ll be regular guy and dad in the daytime, and  22  then at night once the kids are tucked in and asleep, I   ll get into my  paint, sometimes all through the night until the sun comes up. At the  same time, Jasha and I always have these amazing conversations where  I   m, sometimes she   ll be taking notes, but I   m always taking it in.  We   re really active in our community and working on trying to get  Indigenous Peoples Day recognized in Oklahoma City and participating  in our community. So there   s always these areas that pop up where I am  thinking,    How could I paint that? How could I turn that into  something?    Usually, even though I might not be creating, I   m  absorbing or sponging it in, and I   ll have to find the time to squeeze  myself and let it come out.  Little Thunder Right. Well, looking back on your career so far, what has been a high  point for you?  Echo-Hawk I think, the N7 stuff is real cool. But I think my solo exhibit at the Field  Museum in Chicago has been my biggest exhibit to date. It was  amazing. I worked with a big staff there and developed a show and it  was supposed to be up for, I think, one year, and they ended up  extending by a second year. It received a lot of visits. I can   t remember  the final estimation on how many people saw it, but over a million  people saw the exhibit.  Little Thunder That   s fantastic.  Echo-Hawk It was really cool, that whole opportunity.  Little Thunder Modern Day Warrior, was that the subtitle?  Echo-Hawk Right, yeah.  Little Thunder Twenty thirteen. How many pieces did you do total?  Echo-Hawk I want to say we had twenty-two pieces all together for the exhibit. The  premise of it was they had me come in and select objects from their  archives to exhibit. I basically co-curated the exhibit with the curator of  North American Anthropology. I got to go in and select objects from  my ancestors on both sides, which was cool on my mom   s side and my  dad   s side. I selected probably sixty objects and we had to pare it down.  Then, they wanted me to create original art work, based on my work  with those objects from their collection. So I created a handful of  paintings specifically for that exhibit. They wanted my drum stick that I  mentioned earlier with the Nike on it, some of my Nike N7 stuff. Then,  like my painter   s pants, actually accessioned a pair of my pants, a pair  of my shoes, and a t-shirt into their permanent collection. It   s pretty  neat     23  Little Thunder That is neat.  Echo-Hawk    seeing them working. The museum staff had the white gloves on and  they   re delicately straightening my pants up to photograph it and  catalog it and I   m sitting there thinking,    Man, did I wash those before I  gave it you?    (Laughter) It was really cool being able to bridge the gap  between how our ancestors lived then, how we are today as a people,  and what things, what aspects of that life have adapted, what aspects  have been forgotten and been put away. It was really a fun exhibit to be  a part of. It actually recently came down and moved over to Trickster  Gallery in Schaumburg, Illinois. It   s been up there for a couple of  months. I   m not sure what   s happening with it after that, but a lot of  paintings that were in there from various collections, private  collections   I   m sure those people are chomping at the bit to get their  work back.  Little Thunder Have their work back?  Echo-Hawk Yeah.  Little Thunder What   s been a low point for you in your career so far?  Echo-Hawk There   s low points. That   s a good question. I don   t know, it   s  challenging at times financially to make it because it   s not a steady  paycheck every two weeks. There   s definitely challenges there. It   s  feast or famine sometimes. I think a low part, for me, is and it goes even  back to my creative writing days, when you send out stuff for  publication and you get those rejection letters. At this point in my  career, it   s like getting rejection letters for grants, or for fellowship  awards. I keep thinking, I could be doing so much more if I had those  resources to do so. Those are definitely the low points, I think. So far,  I   ve been trying to   the way I view it is spiraling up. There   s times  from where I started, it   ll spiral around and you might be a little bit  higher than where you started, but you   re still up a little bit further.  There   s definitely some times   I   m grateful my low points aren   t super  low. Aside from what I mentioned earlier, the things that happened to  me as a kid, I think that laid a foundation to who I am today. I think if  there was the lowest point is the time after I had remembered that stuff  and became consciously aware of what had happened to me where I  stopped completely. I think as far as my writing goes, that   s been on  hold for quite a while. I talk with Jasha quite a bit about wanting to get  back into writing. I feel like I still identify myself as a writer, even  though I   m not writing. That   s been a continual low point for me as far  as that aspect of my creative career. It   s definitely something that I want  to break out of that, fly on out of there.  24  Little Thunder We   ll look forward to seeing some more writing, too. We   ll pause for a  minute and take a look at a couple of your pictures.  Echo-Hawk Okay. Good.  Little Thunder Okay. All right, Bunky, would you like to talk about this painting?  Echo-Hawk Yeah, this is a portrait that I   d made of John Trudell. He was an  amazing     Little Thunder Oh, my gosh.  Echo-Hawk    leader, civil rights leader that we recently lost. He was a guy that I  met quite a bit as a young person. He came through at the Institute of  American Indian Arts, but I   d been working with him in recent years on  some activist  work : Save Hickory Ground, protecting a sacred site   with  my Creek friends. Anyways, his family notified us that he was  25  about to make his journey. Some of my friends here were driving out to  California to see him, but I was up in Minnesota performing and  couldn   t make the trip with them. When I got home, I painted this.  Actually, I asked his family to select some images to do a portrait of  him and this is one of the images. It   s one of his characters from a  movie, Thunderheart. Anyways, I painted it all night and I sent it on to  him at dawn and posted it and he got to see it. He got to see the video I  made of the time while I did painting. It really blew up that day. There  were seventy thousand views of it and a lot of people sharing it and  reposting it. Then, of course, he passed away that night, I guess, or early  that next morning. Anyways, it was real special to me, getting to see,  just know he got to see it. He got to know that I was thinking of him at  that time. That   s what this one is. It   s kind of paying homage to him.  Little Thunder That   s wonderful. How about this piece?  Echo-Hawk This one is Maria Tallchief. She was, of course, a famed prima ballerina  from Osage people. I painted it because I wanted to help share her story  26  and the inspiration that she continues to impart upon young dancers.  The image I based it off of was from a publication in Life magazine.  They   d photographed her. It was kind of a candid shot, I guess. But  she   d come back to Oklahoma after traveling around and making a  name for herself. Made it back to Osage Country and the mayor and the  tribal leadership were there. I believe the Governor of Oklahoma was  there and they declared it Maria Tallchief Day and during that  welcoming ceremony, they placed a war bonnet on her. I think she   s  fidgeting with that.  Little Thunder Right.  Echo-Hawk And snapped a candid black and white photo that was beautiful. I just  wanted to preserve her legacy, I guess. It was paying homage to her as  she passed, helping make sure, we remembered her life and her  contributions.  Little Thunder Right. Okay, so we   re looking at some shoes.  Echo-Hawk Yeah, these are the Nike N7 Airmax Destinys that came out in 2011.  These are the first shoes from my first line that I collaborated on with  Nike N7. What blows me away about it is the colors.  I  selected the  27  colors and in my mind, it was going to be like that, but at the last  minute, it was a surprise, they put this tag on here.  Little Thunder That is a great touch.  Echo-Hawk It blew me away because it has the image of my painting and the image  that was on the t-shirt, embroidered here, and little stars and stuff. But I  have my artist signature on it.  Little Thunder Oh, I just now saw it.  Echo-Hawk Yeah, it   s nuts.  Little Thunder I   ll get a little closer here.  Echo-Hawk Michael Jordan has his own shoes, and Kobe has his own, KD, and  Bunky Echo-Hawk.  Little Thunder That   s right. You made it to the pros after all.  Echo-Hawk Yeah. (Laughs)  Little Thunder Do you have a lot of shoes?  Echo-Hawk I have way too many shoes. I actually had to get rid of some of them. I  think half the closet is my shoes.  Little Thunder Was that part of your contract with Nike?  Echo-Hawk It was in the beginning. There   s half of my contract was paid out in  lump sum of cash, and then the other half was put in as a credit line, so I  could go to these Nike stores and basically shop and give them that  number and head out. It was a shopping spree. It was like that for the  first couple years, but then they got switched around. Now, basically,  Nike is my client now. I   m a vendor, I guess, but I have to pay full price  for everything now.  Little Thunder Oh. Not so many presents for people now.  Echo-Hawk My family stopped getting Nike stuff.  Little Thunder Well, thank you very much for your time today, Bunky.  Echo-Hawk Yeah. Thank you. It was fun.  -------  -------   
