 Larson  Today is July 16, 2011. My name is Mary Larson and I   m with the  Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at Oklahoma State. We   re  here today with John Gable who is being kind enough to talk about his  memories of the 1930s.  Joining us also is John   s granddaughter Amy  Powell.  We   re here at the Oklahoma City Museum of Art. Thanks so  much for joining us today. We really appreciate your participating in  this.  I appreciate you asking me.  To start out with, could you tell us a little bit about when and where you  were born?  I was born here in Oklahoma City. That   s all I know. Oklahoma City.  Okay, were you born at the hospital or at home?  I don   t know that. I don   t know that.  What year were you born?  January 23, 1921.  Okay, so you   re ninety this year.  Ninety. In January, I was nintey.  Congratulations. How many brothers and sisters did you have?  I have a half-brother and that   s all I have.  Okay, so a small family.  5  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Yes.  Where in line did you fall? Were you older or younger?  I was the oldest. My dad and mother didn   t raise me. A relative raised  me. There was a divorce and so forth. I guess, people understand now,  that happens.  So what did your family do for a living when you were growing up?  Well, my folks just did odd jobs, I guess. Mostly, and I know that they  worked for the railroad some. And then they did farm work. A lot of the  farm work.  Was there a family farm?  No, we just    We were not     So did you grow up in Oklahoma City?  No, we kind of had to    The family that raised me felt like the grass is  greener on the other side of the fence. Every time that he heard that,     Oh, they   re paying good money to do this in Texas,    we   d load up and  go and then come back broke. (Laughs)  So you spent a lot of time on the road chasing job opportunities?  Changing back and forth, yes.  Do you know where your family was from originally?  I think Missouri. Is that about right? Yes.  Do you know when they came to Oklahoma? How they chose to come  here?  Well, I don   t know the years, but I know they came by train and landed  up in Harrah. My dad remembers that. He was four years old and he said  that he got a cinder from the smoke of the engine. Got a cinder in his  eyes, so he remembers Oklahoma. And they came in a boxcar, I don   t  understand that. I never did    I found this out later after my dad is gone,  but they came to Oklahoma in a boxcar, in boxes. They weren   t nailed  shut, but    (Laughs)  So that was how they traveled into Oklahoma.  6  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Powell  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  That   s my understanding.  Do you know what year your dad was born? I   m just trying to figure out  about when they might have come in.  I don   t know.  That   s all right. Could you describe some of the places you lived  growing up? It sounds like you moved around a lot. Was there one  place?  Mostly around the Oklahoma City area like Jones, Wheatland     Did you ever live in Harrah?  No, I didn   t live in Harrah.  Because that   s where your great-grandfather is buried, isn   t he?  Yes.  Okay, so your family was in Harrah, but by the time you were growing  up, you were more in the city?  Yes.  Okay, you were talking a little bit about some of the places that you  grew up, in Jones     Mostly around Oklahoma City in this area.  Were you mainly in town or were you on farms?  Country most of the time, yeah. We were always mostly in the country.  So were you working farms?  My uncle that raised me, my uncle and aunt raised me, he did a lot of  farm work. I did some of that when I grew up to be a teenager. Worked  in the wheat fields, worked in the cotton fields. All of that.  What did you like the least out of all of those jobs?  I think I liked the least picking cotton because it did work on your hands,  made sore hands. The little sharp spurs on the cotton boll, they   re very  7  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  sharp.  What were some of your chores growing up? I mean, it sounds like you  were out working on the farms, but did you have chores around the  house?  Oh, you bet. I had to milk the cow, feed the cow, pump the water for the  cattle, feed the pigs, feed the chickens, gather up the eggs. Those  common farm things that a person would do.  Did your chores change over time as you got older? Did you have more  or different chores?  No, it was about the same.  Pretty much the same. When did you get your first job outside of your  chores at the house?  I got a job one summer with some folks and I stayed in their house and I  had to help at the dairy and had to milk cows. Like two or three barns  full. The milk machines, but in those days, the machines were not as  good as they are today. We always had what they call stripping  afterwards and we had to clean up the barn. After that, we   d go in for  breakfast. Table spread with everything that you could imagine.  Biscuits, ham, bacon, gravy, eggs, jelly, butter, milk. Lavish. This cook  put it on the table.  Sounds like quite a spread.  It was. Every meal was that.  How old were you when you were working there?  I was fifteen or sixteen, something like that.  So that was probably quite a     Fifty cents a day. And they got you up at four o   clock in the morning.  So you got up and did all the milking and the stripping and the cleaning  and everything and then you had breakfast?  Had breakfast and then go back out and help pick up bales of hay and  put them in the barn. Things of that nature.  Getting back to your family, over the years, you mentioned you had  8  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  cotton and wheat at different points in time. Did you have corn or any  other crops that you remember?  No.  When you were helping out on the farms, did you have tractors at that  point? Or were you still using draft horses?  There were tractors, but also horses and horses pulled the wagons. The  wagons would go through the wheat fields and the men would put the  shocks of wheat on the wagon, carry it to the thrashing machine and it  would get thrashed.  What was the first tractor you remember seeing when you were growing  up?  I don   t remember. I don   t remember.  Did your family have a garden at all?  Oh, yes. We always had a garden. Plenty of garden stuff. During the  summer, we   d harvest that and my aunt would can, put it up in cans and  put it in the cellar.  I was going to say, did you have a root cellar for all that?  Oh, yes. We had a root cellar.  Talking about food, did you have a favorite meal when you were  growing up?  That   s hard to decide. I don   t think there was any favorite.  Do you remember if there were any foods or ingredients that were  particularly hard to get when you were growing up? Either because of  the Depression or where you were living?  Well, no. On the farm, you see, we had cows and chickens, we had all  we needed to eat. I know we would take the chickens in and sell them  and take the eggs in and sell them, take the cream in and sell the cream  and then take that money and go buy grocery store products.  Were there any foods you remember being just for special occasions?  No.  9  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Maybe for birthdays or holidays?  Not really.  Any recipes that were really important for your family? Anything special  your aunt used to make?  I do remember butterscotch walnut pie. Loved it.  Sounds good.  I would pick out the walnuts so that my auntie would prepare the pie. It  was very good.  Did you have walnut trees around the house?  Out in the country, yes.  Did you have any other fruit trees where you were?  Not that belonged to us.  But in the neighborhood.  In the neighborhood, true.  What did you tend to have in your garden? What were your favorite  things out there?  We had potatoes and peas and beans, green beans, beets    People don   t  like beets, but I do.  Did you do parsnips and turnips, or don   t those do well   ?  Turnips.  Are there any recipes from childhood that you really liked that you still  make or still like to have every now and then?  Well, I was hooked on chocolate milk. I like that.  Are there any foods from your growing up that you never want to see  again?  Yes. Oatmeal.  10  Larson  Gable  Powell  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Oatmeal? That was not a favorite? (Laughs)  Oh, I hated oatmeal. We had oatmeal during the Depression and  sometimes only, you were lucky to have a spoon of sugar to put on there  and sometimes you used canned milk. You didn   t have milk. I guess  that   s why I don   t like oatmeal.  Weren   t there times that that was all you had?  Sometimes that   s all we had, yeah.  Did you have a smokehouse at all?  We didn   t have that.  How did you keep things cool? You were talking about the milk earlier,  did you have a springhouse or an ice box?  No, we just had the back porch. Put the stuff on and she would put damp  cloths over the milk.  Because when there was a breeze blowing through, it would cool things  down. When you were growing up, what would an average day for your  uncle have been like?  Average day for my uncle? He would get up early and have his hot  water with a little milk in it and sugar. He never did drink coffee, but  then he would sit after breakfast and wait for it to become daylight so he  could go to work. He would call that drumming. I think what he meant  was he was thinking about things he was going to do that day.  Get everything straight in his mind before he went out to do it.  Most likely.  Yeah, do a little planning. How about for your aunt?  She was always busy in the kitchen, and when she got through in the  kitchen, she   d come out in the field and work with us.  Did she sew or quilt at all? Did she make your clothes?  She didn   t have time to make quilts.  Were there any other things she did along those lines? Like sewing  clothes for the family or did you get those in town?  11  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Powell  Larson  Gable  Well, she did the buttons that we broke off and doing cuffs and little  things of that nature.  What would an average day have been like for you in the thirties?  Well, are we talking about school days or   ?  Start maybe with your school days I guess.  We   d get up and get ready for school. One place where we lived, we  lived in a small square house with a bed, kitchen, everything and one  huge room. The water, I had to go down the hill to a spring and dip the  bucket in the spring water, carry it up the hill, two or three trips like that  which started the day off. Of course, for baths, up and down that hill.  That   s why people only did baths once a week.  (Laughs) Yeah.  And then you   d end up going to school, and after that?  I   d go to school I think    There was always a good distance to walk.  Sometimes a half a mile to the bus stop where the bus picked us up. We  took our lunch in a metal bucket that lard had probably come in or some  other ingredient. We didn   t have lunch pails. You   d end up with a fried  egg on a biscuit. Now, can you imagine, we go to McDonalds and pay  them for that. We ate what we had at home.  You talked about going to school. Were you at one particular school  most of the time?  I   m surprised that I received an education because we moved so much.  We moved quite often.  Was it hard to keep up with classes and make friends, too?  I was awfully shy. You can   t imagine seeing me now that at one time I  was shy.  It   s hard to imagine.  What do you remember most about school, generally?  I think I enjoyed the books that were there. The library books that you  could get and read. I was an avid reader. I read everything.  12  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Powell  Gable  Powell  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Did you go to the library a lot when you were younger?  Yes.  Do you remember what games you used to play when you   d have recess  at school when you were younger?  Mostly, I would go to the swing or the merry-go-round. Some of the  guys played baseball, but I didn   t know how, so they wouldn   t choose  me to be on their team.  That   s sort of self-fulfilling after a while.  Yes.  Do you remember, did students get time off during harvest season at all?  Not any time that I can recall, no.  When you were in high school, how did your schedule change?  I rode a bicycle from way out in the country out by the airport into  Capitol Hill High School.  How far was that?  Quite a ways.  Would you say it was about twenty miles?  About twenty miles, fifteen or twenty miles.  I was going to say, I   m tempted to drive out there once I   m done just to  see what the distance is.  I rode a bicycle to school every day. Rain or snow or whatever.  School bus didn   t come out?  No, I would have had to go to Blanchard if I caught the bus and still, I   d  have to walk a mile to do that, so I just rode in on the bicycle.  That makes sense. Were there things you were involved in in high school  besides your classes?  13  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Not really.  Probably didn   t have time for a whole lot.  Not too much. But I did like the time, when gym came along, I could  swim all I wanted to. I enjoyed that very much.  What did you do when you graduated from school?  That   s a great question. The first job I had was delivering goods for a  drug store. Then I gradually worked in behind the soda fountain and  from there I took a job downtown at Katz Drugstore. Did you ever hear  of Katz? I worked at Katz Drugstore before the war. During that time, I  went out to California and went to work in the shipyards.  Out around which area of California?  That   s near Vallejo.  Okay, so the Bay Area.  Yes.  And how long were you out there?  Just a few months and I received a draft card. I came by train back to  Oklahoma City to go in the Army. I could have gone out there, but I  wanted to come back home to go in with maybe people that I knew.  How did you end up at the shipyards in California? What about that  drew you?  My father worked there and said come on out, they   re employing a lot of  people. So I worked on the ship building    We were building ships for  Britain at that time.  Right, because we weren   t in the war yet.  Yes. And I remember one day being out on deck on one of the ships we  were working on and I see, over the causeway, an open vehicle coming.  A convertible. I look and I see the President of the United States at that  time. Was his name, Roosevelt?  Yes. Was he coming out to visit the shipyards?  Apparently so. I don   t know.  14  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Did you get to see him up close?  No, just in the distance. It was all hush. Very secret. Nothing in the  newspapers about it or anything.  So is this the facility that was out near, I think its Mare Island?  Yes, Mare Island, that   s right. The ship I was working on was very near  the causeway, one of them, the entrance     That would have been interesting work.  I didn   t know that I learned anything in mechanical drawing, but  apparently so. I learned how to read a blueprint, and so they sent me  down to help another fellow that    We read the blueprint where we   d  place the engine, the bulkheads, machine gun placements, whatever     We marked them on the deck and they would come in and set it right  there. Good job.  So you got your draft notice and came back to Oklahoma and what  happened from there?  Yes. I went back to California for training.  Where were you stationed when you went out there for basic?  We went to Camp Cook was one of them, but prior to that, I went to  Texas. I can   t remember the name of the place in Texas. Camp Hulen in  Texas for basic training, and then they sent us to California. From there,  we went overseas.  What was your position? What was your job?  Mainly I was telephone/radio operator. I would take care of the radio,  took care of the telephone. We   d relay the information to the gun crew  and the gun crew knew how to set the guns so they   d be on target. As  soon as the searchlight came on on that aircraft that was coming over,  our gun would be right on and they could start firing. This all came  through the central area command.  What unit were you with?  202nd Antiaircraft Automatic Battalion. We had the 40 millimeter gun  and we had the Quad machine guns. That   s a four barrel. Those are  powerful things.  15  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson-  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Powell  Gable  I   ve seen some footage and they   re impressive. So where did you end up  going?  In the Pacific. We went to New Guinea. We missed Australia. We  thought we were going there, but didn   t make it. Went to New Guinea.  Mostly just went up the coastline from spot to spot. As the war  progressed, our unit would be moved because we were aircraft,  antiaircraft coverage. You could hear those Japanese planes. They had a  peculiar sound on the engine that you knew the engine even in the dark.  That   s a Japanese plane.  Was it something different from our rotor engines?  The timing. The way they   re set up and after a while you begin to learn  that that   s not our craft.  So you could hear them before they got there.  Oh, yeah.  So even if you hadn   t gotten any reports, you could tell.  Yes.  Did you see a lot of direct action?  Well, yes. We were always under, you know     I guess they don   t put the antiaircraft guns where there   s nothing going  on.  (Laughs) That   s right. Yes.  Tell her about when they bombed your ship.  Okay. The Japanese had a peculiar tactic that when they would be shot  down, they would aim for a certain ship to crash dive in. One of them  crash dived into the LST that I was on and everybody abandoned ship. I  was in the water until way after dark and the ships don   t stop for you.  It   s too dangerous. But they let down nets on the side and you could  swim to them. If you could get close enough and get a hold of the net,  you could climb on up. But I didn   t make it to any of the ships. Ended  up with a life raft with about thirty people holding on to one another  around this life raft. A small boat from the Navy picked us up in the dark  and took us to their ship. So after we got to where we were going to  16  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  dock, everybody that was picked up got off and they located their  different units, found out where they were. Mine was easy because I  could just find one of our antiaircraft gun pits and say,    Where is our  section?    And they     So how long were you in the water before   ?  Oh, maybe two or three hours.  So, were you in the Pacific your whole time?  Yes. Right.  With the same unit?  Yes, same unit.  Where were you when the war ended?  In the Philippines. We went to the Philippines. From New Guinea, went  to the Philippines. We got that news over our short wave radios and  everybody was happy about it. Firing guns into the air and making a lot  of noise.  I bet that was a celebration.  Yes. Good one.  How long before you were able to go home after that?  Well, they began to rotate us out fairly quick.  Did you come back to Oklahoma then when you got out?  Yes. Oklahoma City.  What was that like trying to get readjusted after the war?  See, I had an attack of appendicitis on the ship. Even before I got on the  ship and they burst on the ship and when I came off of the ship, they  took me to the hospital and operated on me and I was in the hospital for  weeks with that stuff draining out.  I was going to say, even now, that   s not a simple procedure.  No. The priest came in and administered last rites and I woke up and  17  Larson  Powell  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  said,    What are you doing?    He says,    I   m administering last rites,  you   re going to die.    I said,    Get out of here, I   m not going to die.     (Laughter)  And you didn   t.  And you   re not Catholic   No, I wasn   t Catholic. That didn   t matter to them.  Since we   ve talked a little bit about World War II, let   s go back to the  1930s a little bit and when you were growing up, what formed you for  all of this. When you were younger, did your family do anything special  on Saturdays or Sundays? What was that?  Saturdays was the days that we took the eggs and the chickens and the  cream into town and sold it at the creamery. I always got a nickel and I  would go down the street to the bakery. I would look at the bakery and I  would pick out the biggest sweet roll that I could see for a nickel and  that   s how I spent my nickel.  Was there a favorite bakery of yours, do you remember? Or just  whatever was there?  Just, that   s all I knew. It was a bakery.  What about Sundays?  As a general rule, we went to church on Sunday. My grandmother lived  in Oklahoma City. Most of the time, all the children, all of her children  and grandchildren, would come in on Sunday and go to church with her.  I remember that. It was a Baptist church that we went to and the Gable  tribe sat over by themselves in one section and we filled up like ten or  twelve benches of the church.  You were a good chunk of the congregation.  We were. I mean to tell you.  Do you remember which Baptist church it was?  Yes, there on Central Avenue in Oklahoma City. 1905 South Central.  That   s a good memory.  The reason I remember that, when I see this commercial on TV where  18  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Powell  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  they say,    Have you borrowed money and couldn   t pay it back?    their  number is 1905 something, and I remember that   s how I tied that in.  Did everybody have Sunday dinner with your grandmother after that?  All the children would bring in stuff and grandmother would cook stuff  and everybody would eat together. Big families eat together.  How many did the tribe constitute at that point?  I don   t know. The men ate first, then the children, then the ladies last.  There would be like eight, ten, twelve around the table. Big round tables.  Put a lot of tables together to make a big table.  So you had a lot of cousins to get together with.  Yes.  How far away was it most of the time from where you were living to your  grandmother   s place? Did that vary?  Like for example Jones, we lived in the Jones area, and Wheatland, you  know where Wheatland is, so it was always not too far.  Did you have a truck or a car at the time?  A vehicle, yes. My uncle was always a good mechanic and he would  always buy these Buicks and work them over. He could take the engine  out and work on it. Or take the pistons out, rather.  Take it apart, put it back together and make it behave itself. (Laughs)  Work on it, make it work.  Would he sell it after that or just use it until it broke down?  No, he would use it.  Do you have any particular vehicle that you remember out of the range  that went through?  Not really.  Sometimes a family has a particularly memorable vehicle either because  it had an attitude or something like that. (Laughs)  19  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Powell  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Powell  Gable  Oh, no. No.  What was Oklahoma City like when you were younger? How do you  remember it?  Well, mostly when I came into town, I was interested in going to the  movies. On Saturday, you   d see these Buck Rogers series, so you go  back next week to see what   s happening.  How much did the movies cost at the time?  Very little. I don   t remember how much. Very little.  Was Buck Rogers your favorite?  No, not necessarily. I think my favorite movie was Wuthering Heights.  Good old classic. I saw that many, many times.  Is that the version with Sir Laurence Olivier and Merle Oberon?  Yes. I really liked it.  Now, what else did you do for entertainment in the family?  Well, the kids, when we got together we   d play hide and seek, I guess.  Played a lot of music.  I was just going to ask, was there a lot of music in the family?  Yes, all of the men played some instrument. Guitar, banjo or fiddle, and  they   d get together and sit out in the yard in chairs under a tree and work  their music.  Was there a particular type of music that they   d play? Was it old timey?  Yes. It wasn   t classical. I was trying to think of the word     Was it like country or bluegrass or   ?  Country I would say.  And was there very much gospel?  No. Maybe they did some, but not much.  20  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  What kind of music did you like the best when you were growing up?  When I was growing up? I liked to hear the piano.  Did you play an instrument yourself?  I play the accordion.  Do you still?  Yes. I still play it. For me.  Not out for crowds? Did you have any favorite songs or musicians?  Gospel. I have a difficult time playing anything else except gospel. I  don   t know why.  Is that what you heard a lot of growing up? I mean, between church and  radio     Of course, I heard that all my life.  Being a minister particularly. (Laughs)  Right.  Did a lot of the folks in the family sing as well?  Yes. Yes. Yes. My uncles all sang and one time I think they had a little  radio work. Not much, but some. When my family grew up, when I got  married, my wife and I sang and my two children sang. We would sing  together sometimes.  That   s a nice thing to do as a family. Did you ever have community get-togethers  that you remember when you were younger? Like either  church potlucks, church suppers, picnics?  Not too much of that. I don   t recall too much of that.  How about special holidays?  Halloween, the schools would always have rooms where they would  play games or have the ghosts and so forth.  Were there any particular birthdays or Christmases that you remember  as notable?  21  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  I remember one Christmas, that   s the one I wanted to talk about, this was  in that house I was telling you about where I would go down the hill to  get spring water. We went out in the woods and cut down a tree about  three or four feet tall, a blackjack. We   d pop popcorn and string it on a  thread and put it around the tree. Then I made the little paper chains and  different colors, colored them, put them around the tree. In fact, in those  days, cigarettes came with tin foil around them. I would pick up empty  packages and take the tin foil and wrap it around the branches of the  tree, especially out on the ends. That was a Christmas that I remember.  That must have been a magnificent tree.  Because we did so much work on it.  And stringing popcorn is nothing to sneeze at. That can be time  consuming. You don   t realize how much it takes.  Right.  When you were growing up, did you listen to the radio?  Yes, I had a little earphone set that you put on your ears, and I forget  what they call that     Oh, a little crystal set?  Crystal set  Yeah, a crystal set. I remember that I had a long copper wire  way out from the hen house to my bedroom window and it would be  hooked up to the crystal set and I could get KOMA-Oklahoma City.  (Laughter)  What kind of music did you tend to hear on there?  Whatever they had. (Laughs)  Just a little bit of everything.  Yes.  Do you remember listening to any of Roosevelt   s Fireside Chats?  I remember those, but I didn   t pay too much attention to it.  Did you remember hearing about the WPA and the CCC when you were  growing up?  22  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Yes. At one time, I did some work at the school under the CCC, I think  it is. That meant sweeping the floors, taking out the trash, cleaning chalk  off the boards and so forth. Whatever the teachers said do, just do it.  How old were you at that time?  I don   t know.  Do you know of any particular projects in either WPA or CCC projects  around Oklahoma City that you remember?  There was one in the park on South Robinson and there was a project  there. I wasn   t involved in it, but they built buildings there, or built a  building, swimming pool and that   s about the extent of it.  Did you know anybody else that was working for either the WPA or the  CCC?  No, I don   t remember.  Now, growing up, at what point as you were getting older did you  realize there was a Depression going on?  We never did think too much about it. We always had plenty to eat.  Well, except when we had oatmeal only. (Laughs) Just took it in stride.  That   s life.  Do you remember noticing people coming through town on trains or  traveling?  No, but I do remember the soup lines. Seeing the people in line out at  that little park I was telling you about, seeing them with their buckets  getting soup in the soup lines. I think the Salvation Army set up the soup  lines and gave out soup.  Do you know if there were a lot of travelers generally coming through  Oklahoma City? Did you remember seeing folks hopping trains or  anything like that?  Well, in Wheatland, we lived near the railroad track. I would see people  on the train there, yes.  Were there ever folks that came up to your aunt and uncle   s place trying  to get an odd job for a meal that you remember or anything like that?  23  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Powell  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  No.  There were a lot of other things going on at the same time as the  Depression. You had the Dust Bowl at the same time     I remember that.  What kind of recollections do you have of those years?  I remember when it would hit, you would see a dark cloud coming, just  fully dust, and it would just roll in on you and you   d have to wear a  handkerchief over your nose to help breathe.  What would you do in the houses to try to keep the dust out?  Stuff rags wherever there was a crack.  So along the windows and the doors?  Yes.  When you set the table you had to put the plates upside down?  Sometimes, yeah.  Yeah, when you were setting the table just to make sure it didn   t get  dusty. How bad was it in Oklahoma City?  Like I say, see, I was always out a ways in the country. We could see  this dust coming up from quite a distance away.  How did the Dust Bowl affect your family, do you think?  I think economically they suffered. But again, there   s your root cellar  with potatoes and turnips. Fried potatoes and gravy tastes pretty good,  especially when you   re hungry.  I understand some places had a lot of grasshoppers and rabbits. Did you  ever have any trouble with those?  I don   t remember that.  Do you remember the government program where they had to slaughter  the cattle? Did you have to do any of that with your farm?  No, we didn   t have anything to do with that.  24  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  So you weren   t in an area where     No.  Were you having any trouble keeping the cows or the horses fed at all?  No, there was plenty of grass.  Did you know any families when you were growing up that headed out  West during those years?  No, I didn   t. I didn   t. Looking back, I don   t think we ever talked about it  even.  Following right after the Dust Bowl and the Depression, you had World  War II. We talked about that a little bit. Coming back, what did you do  after you came home?  I went back to work for Katz Drugstore, behind the soda fountain for a  while. Then I got a job in a furniture factory. Did spring-up. Where I put  springs in the chairs and the couches and put the covering on. Got it  ready for the upholster man and he would come in with the cloth. We  did everything else but the cloth.  Wow. What was the name of that company, do you remember?  It was a famous name at one time, but I can   t remember it at the  moment.  So how long did you work there?  Just a few months, and then I went into the Salvation Army work.  When along the line in your life did you meet your wife?  Well, I met her at Katz.  Okay, why don   t you tell us a little bit about that?  She came in and we had a thing at the counter. Any blonde that came in,  I get to wait on her. So the girls,    Johnny       So she came in and sat  down with a full Salvation Army uniform, bonnet and everything on. I  went down to wait on her and she ordered a malt. We had big mirrors at  Katz Drug at that time and I was looking at her in the mirror while I was  making the malt and I winked at her and she kept coming back. (Laughs)  25  Larson  Gable  Powell  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Now is that how you got involved in the Salvation Army?  Yes, that   s right. She invited me to come to the Salvation Army. I went  and later I became a Salvation Army officer and went into the Salvation  Army. Went to Atlanta, Georgia for training. Came back and my wife  and I took West Tulsa first, that was our first charge, went to McAlester,  then from there to Chickasha and then from Chickasha to Enid and from  Enid to someplace in Texas.  Victoria.  Victoria. Then Sherman. And at Sherman, our family split up and my  career with the Salvation Army was over.  What year did you get out of the Salvation Army?  I don   t remember.  How long did your training last?  Nine months.  Nine months. And was this after you came back from the war?  From the military, yes.  Okay. So, that   s how you got into the field that you   re in?  Yes.  What did you do after the Salvation Army?  Well, I had a Salvation Army post at Clinton, Oklahoma. If you know  the Bible, it tells about a new pharaoh came into power. That   s what  happened in the Salvation Army. A new pharaoh came into power that  didn   t    We crossed hairs and I was told that I was going to be replaced.  So I called the Methodist Church and they said that you   ll have a church  in one week. I said give me two weeks and then I went into the  Methodist church from the Salvation Army. Doctrinally, it   s just about  the same.  And do you remember about how old you were maybe?  No.  26  Larson  Powell  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Just trying to get a sense, you know.  It was probably in the late    50s, wasn   t it?  I don   t know what year it was.  Okay, well you   ve been with the Methodist church for some time     Oh, yes. Quite a number of years.  Tell us a little bit about your career since you joined up with the  Methodists.  The Methodist church? My first church was Beggs, Oklahoma. The  chairperson met me at the fire station, shook my hand and said,     Welcome to Beggs. In a year, you   ll be known as a Beggs reject. We  only keep pastors one year, then they   re moved on. You go somewhere  else.    But I stayed three years. I was ready to stay the fourth year and the  Bishop moved me to Catoosa. They had a problem there that I could  handle. I   ve been very happy with the Methodist connection.  And are you still   ?  I   m still, yes. I have two churches. Bridgeport and Lookeba. I drive out.  I live in Moore with my daughter. I drive out every Sunday. Or to  weddings, funerals and specials, I drive out.  So you   re still keeping plenty busy.  I write a sermon every week.  It keeps you sharp.  I do a lot of research.  Well and it sounds, from what you were talking about earlier, that you  like to read. You know, when you were younger and I think I could see  how that would be a perfect match for what you do.  I can get lost in research. I can look at the time,    Oh, it   s time to eat  lunch?    I can get lost in that. Time flies.  Just to do some big picture questions, I guess. We talked a little bit  about the Dust Bowl and the Depression and World War II, are there  any other world events that you think had a big effect on your life?  27  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  I don   t think so.  Anything local, then? Besides the new pharaoh. (Laughs)  I don   t believe anything.  When you were younger, going back to those days when you were going  to school and doing all that reading, what did you think you wanted to  be when you grew up?  I wanted to be a pearl diver. Go out in the ocean and dive down for  pearls. I was going to get pearls and get rich.  Did you read about that in one of those books? (Laughter)  Oh yes, read about it. Read about it.  So you didn   t see any obstacle to becoming a     Oh, it looked romantic to me. Looked very daring.  Did you have a plan for how you were going to     No.  Well, at least you got closer to the water when you went to the shipyard.  (Laughs) Yes, I did.  Are there events that you remember from your youth? Community  traditions, maybe, that are still celebrated today? Things like class  reunions or big Fourth of July celebrations?  I remember, in Wheatland, the Halloween celebration. In Wheatland,  they had a community building. The community, all the kids came in for  that and they had little booths, they had scary things and fished for stuff,  you know.  Little carnival kind of     Yeah, a carnival kind of thing. I was going to tell you about where I  lived at Wheatland. We lived in a train car, and it sat right by the  railroad tracks. Up the rails about half a mile was a house and the  railroad workers usually lived in those, but they were empty, and so we  lived, at one time for a while, in one of those railroad cars. It was  a   you can imagine a train car. It had a bedroom on one end, bedroom  28  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  on the other and in the center was the kitchen and living room and  everything. Where you took part in family activities and ate.  Were your aunt and uncle working for the railroad at this point?  No, they weren   t. It just     Just happened to be there.  Just happened to be there. That was empty and they moved in.  So it   s kind of like a regular mobile home or trailer today, just a  different set of wheels.  Yeah, it wasn   t on wheels. It was taken off and sitting on the ground,  right by the railroad tracks. Trains going by, at first, would keep you  awake, but after a while, you didn   t pay too much attention to it. In the  wintertime, as trains were on that slick part going up the hill, you could  hear them throwing sand on the rails and grinding and slipping off the  wheels on the rails.  So, they used sand for the traction?  Yeah, and you   d hear a steady puff, puff, puff of the engine as it started  gradually going up again. Going up that hill, they come down to a stop,  almost, when it was bad weather. Rails were slick. Iced over.  It was tough to get enough steam going to get started up again.  Yeah, and they   re pulling a lot of cars behind them.  Did they tend to have a couple of engines at that point?  Sometimes, yeah, sometimes.  Was there a depot in Wheatland right there?  There was a depot, but it   s seldom anyone ever caught a train there.  Because after all, Oklahoma City was a hoot and a holler away.  Right. We talked about the Halloween events in Wheatland, too. Were  there any other things like that that you can remember that places are  still doing today, or do you go back for any class reunions?  No.  29  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Powell  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Powell  Of the things you did with your family growing up or the things that you  learned, are there any traditions that you try to keep up?  I think I grew up with the strong feeling for family. Obviously have had  that feeling, family matters to me. Who else have you got? Who is going  to be there when the chips are down? Family has always been important  to me. I guess, too, one of the reasons is I was insecure growing up as to  am I going to have a place to stay much longer? And so forth.  So family means security.  Yes, it did. And love, of course.  How do you try to pass that on?  I don   t know. I think you   ve seen that, haven   t you?  Yes.  But now, see, my family is married. They   ve got their own lives to live.  They   re creating their own circle and one of these days, I will be outside  the circle completely. I   ll be gone, you know. They   ll have their family,  even though I   m not around.  But you were the start of it all.  Probably, yeah.  Along the same lines, what sorts of stories or traditions do you  remember hearing from your aunt and uncle or other people in your  family?  Traditions?  Well, were there any traditions you had growing up or any stories you  used to hear about family history that you try to pass on?  No, I don   t recall any.  What about some of the lessons or values you learned from them  growing up?  I knew I better not lie and I better tell the truth.  I think education was always important. They   d tell you to study.  30  Gable  Powell  Gable  Powell  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Yes. My uncle would always say,    Get an education or you end up out  here picking cotton the rest of your life.    Of course, machines do it now.  (Laughs) But he was right. Education is important. If you don   t have it,  you   re going to have to end up washing dishes and sweeping floors and  mopping floors and stuff like that.  I think that   s the thing you   ve definitely passed on to everybody in our  family.  Is what?  Education, an emphasis on reading and education     Yes.  And it sounds like something that people have been able to model after  you, too, all of your life. It sounds like you   ve always been a reader and  a scholar and trying to find new information.  I think I   ve been there when they need me. And they know that I   m there  with phone, you know, call grandpa. (Laughter) But I   m getting to the  age that I can   t jump every time they want me to do something.  It sounds like one of the things in life that has given you a lot of  satisfaction is your family.  Children, grandchildren, yes.  What other things have given you a sense of fulfillment?  The ministry. The ministry is something that is fulfilling to me. In the  Salvation Army, the act of helping people with groceries and feeding  them, things like that. That was self-fulfilling, too. I liked that, I enjoyed  that. The Salvation Army is still in my blood.  Well, you spent quite a while with them, it sounds like.  Yes. Quite a number of years.  Looking back over your life, are there things you think you would have  done differently if you had a second chance?  Probably in some cases I would have played my cards differently, but  who really knows? You don   t know until you   ve gone through it. Yeah,  there   s regrets along the way, but what can you do about them? It   s like  Will Carlton. He wrote in a poem,    Boys flying kites, pull in their white  31  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  tail birds. But you can   t do that when you   re flying words.    Like things  that you   ve said or things that you   ve done. I wish I hadn   t have done  that. I wish I hadn   t have said that. Those are things that you look back  over on regrets. Probably without that background experience, you do it  over again. Same thing. Same thing.  What would you do again the same way?  (Laughs)  Everything else, you know. (Laughs) Even though you moved around a  lot growing up, you   ve been in the same general area.  Yes.  What about this area draws you? What keeps you here?  Well, mainly family. Family, yes. I might go to Texas or Mexico to live,  but family. Family is here.  That makes all the difference.  That does make the difference.  You   ve lived in Oklahoma most of your life. What does living here mean  to you?  What does it mean to me? It   s back to the roots, I think. Because even  when I worked in California, most of my family was back here, except  for my dad. That   s the only time I ever lived with my dad was that short  time when I worked out in California. Actually, my dad didn   t raise me,  so I didn   t know him too well.  Was that a little awkward trying to get to know him at that point when  you were already older?  No, I don   t think so. I   d seen him off and on my whole life and I knew  that he was my dad, but it wasn   t difficult.  To sort of sum things up, if you could pick one thing that you wanted  people to remember you for or to remember about you, what would that  be?  That requires a lot of thought. I hope that it would be that I have a caring  attitude most of the time about people, things, situations and so forth.  32  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Larson  Gable  Are there any things that we didn   t talk about that you want to touch on?  I think we   ve covered the field pretty well. You   re a good interviewer.  Oh, thank you. You   re a very easy person to talk to.  Thank you.  Well, we thank you very much for your time and for participating in this.  We really do appreciate it.  Glad to. Thank you. I appreciate your doing it.  -------  -------  
