 Higgins Today is Thursday July 24, 2014. My name is Jason Higgins, and I   m an  intern with the Oklahoma Oral Research History Program at the OSU  Library. I   m in Stillwater to interview Harold Sanders and discuss his  life experiences, including his service in the United States military. This  is part of the Spotlighting Oklahoma oral history project. Mr. Sanders,  thank you for joining us today.  Sanders Thank you.  Higgins Let   s begin with where you were born, when, and what it was like  growing up there.  Sanders I was born March 8, 1927, in St. Joseph, Missouri. What was it like? Hot  and cold. (Laughs) My father always planted a garden that was two city  lots wide, and one of his lots was always a potato patch. I had the pleasure  of planting a lot and picking up a lot. Most of the time, it was very, I had  a very pleasant life and enjoyable.  Higgins You grew up during the Great Depression. Tell me what that was like.  Sanders Well, I was fortunate in that my father always had a job that paid fairly  well. Many people were living on a dollar a day. My dad was making  thirty-five, forty dollars a week. We weren   t rich, but we weren   t poor.  Higgins Do you have many siblings?  Sanders Yeah. I have a sibling, a sister.  Higgins One sister?  Sanders One sister, older than I am. She   s ninety-one years old now.  5  Higgins Did you do the majority of the work on the farm?  Sanders It wasn   t a farm.  Higgins I mean, on the garden.  Sanders The garden? Oh no. My dad did most of it.  Higgins What was it like going to school during that time?  Sanders It was very, very pleasant. I don   t know how to explain it.  Higgins Did you walk to school?  Sanders Oh yes. I only had about a mile and a half to walk, over a hill. (Laughter)  Higgins Was that a one-room schoolhouse?  Sanders Oh no. My elementary was a two-story brick building. My high school, I  went one year in an old school on top of the hill, and then, they built a  new one down below. I finished my high school there.  Higgins Would you say that you grew up in a town life or a country life?  Sanders Oh, definitely a town life, city life.  Higgins Did you work your way through high school?  Sanders Yeah. At age thirteen, I took a job as soda jerk/delivery boy at a drugstore,  and at fifteen, during the war, I took a job as a butcher in a slaughterhouse  cutting up pork chops.  Higgins Were you involved in activities like the Boy Scouts or anything like that?  Sanders I was definitely in the Boy Scouts for about five years, and Sons of the  American Legion, I was very active in it. Basically, that   s it.  Higgins Do you have a family history of military service?  Sanders My dad was in the first World War.  Higgins Do you recall December 7, 1941? Do you remember that day at all, or  were you too young? I guess you would   ve been about thirteen.  6  Sanders I definitely remember. We just came home from church, and I went over  to this drugstore I worked at and was standing there reading comic books  (laughs) when the radio announced about Pearl Harbor.  Higgins That gives me an interesting question. Well, first, were you into a lot of  comic books during that time? Did you read a lot of comics?  Sanders I read a lot of comic books.  Higgins How did the comics change throughout the course of the war? Did you  notice anything, Captain America or anything like that?  Sanders Well, you got your Superman and Wonder Woman, and those came in. I  didn   t really notice.  Higgins Going to high school, were you considering going to World War II after  high school? What were your plans?  Sanders December of     Higgins       41?  Sanders No,   44. December    44, I needed a quarter of a credit to graduate. I went  in the Navy, and because I went in the service during the war, they gave  me my quarter credit. My girlfriend got my annual and took it around to  everybody to sign it, and I think my parents went across the stage for  me.  Higgins Were you seventeen whenever you enlisted?  Sanders I was seventeen.  Higgins Where did you go to basic training?  Sanders Great Lakes Naval Station.  Higgins Tell me a little bit about the training.  Sanders (Laughs) Well, it wasn   t all pleasant. Basically, we had a company  commander, a chief petty officer, as an alcoholic. To punish him, we  got all kinds of work weeks, and a lot of our training went by the  wayside. I always ended up getting a    good job    on it. (Laughs) That  was basically my problems with basic.  Higgins Did you make any friends with the people in basic training that you   ve  kept up with?  7  Sanders Not that I kept up with.  Higgins You mentioned a girlfriend in high school. Did you maintain  communication with her?  Sanders No. I had broke up with her, but she still went and did these things for  me.  Higgins That was nice of her. (Laughter) Tell me about how you stayed in  contact with your family.  Sanders Just sent them letters. That   s all I could, all there was. (Laughter)  Higgins After your basic training, where did you go from there?  Sanders I went to San Diego. We transferred out to the Pacific and put on a  troop ship. It was five thousand, Army, Navy, Marines. After we got  over there to a big island called Mogmog, we were, I was set off at the  transport into a repair ship, middle of the night. Everything happened  middle of the night. There, the captain, first thing, wanted to show his  authority. In the Navy, you have seamen, and you have firemen. The  firemen basically work below deck. The seamen work above deck. He  said,    I want all you seamen over here on portside, all you firemen over  here on the starboard side. You firemen are now seamen. You seamen  are now firemen.    It didn   t make any difference what our active troops  was, what the Navy decided we should be. He showed his authority.  Higgins Which side did you end up on?  Sanders I ended up as a seaman. Had a very rough job. They put me in  communications as their radioman. I knew nothing about radios, still  don   t. They put me in the emergency radio shack. First thing, second  class petty officer asked me if I knew how to make coffee. Well, I don   t  want to show my ignorance. I   d never made a pot of coffee in my life,  but I remembered somewhere having heard Paul Harvey on the radio  say that you make a pot of coffee one spoonful of grounds per cup and  one for the pot. Well, I didn   t know if that was one for each cup for the  pot, so that ten-cup pot got twenty spoons (laughs) of coffee ground.  Well, if you   ve never been in the military, enlisted men never saw a  teaspoon. All we ever had was tablespoons, so the spoonfuls of coffee  were tablespoons. Well, when I got finished, I was elected the official  coffeemaker, and I had the pleasure of going to commissary and picking  up two pounds of coffee every day, because that   s how much I made.  Higgins Everyone was all hyped up on caffeine. (Laughs)  8  Sanders Oh yeah. Yeah, yeah. You could say, you know, you could pour it  almost. (Laughs)  Higgins What other food and drink did you have while you were in the Navy on  the ships?  Sanders Well, this ship (it was a repair ship) stayed back away from most of the  combat. Every day, since my work schedule was all-around nothing, I  got to go over on the beach, as long as it was at anchorage, have two  cans of beer and swim and just play around.  Higgins Hot beer, I   m sure.  Sanders Yeah, pretty warm    (Laughter)    but the food was good.  Higgins You got to try some of the local food?  Sanders Oh no. No. This last year, there was a typhoon hit a little town in the  Philippines called Tacloban. Well, according to the pictures, it has  grown considerably, because when I was there, there was a little, one  house and a school. The rest of the village, I don   t know where it was. I  never saw it. According to the news, it had grown considerably. The  name of the town I was at was Tacloban.  Higgins Did you ever interact with civilians?  Sanders Not there. Never saw any. My job, besides making coffee, was I was  supposed to proofread the mimeograph sheets that the second class  petty officer typed of the news for the day and put on mimeograph  paper. Then, I had the job of running a mimeograph machine, and it was  generally four or five pages, maybe six pages long, a lot of hand  turning. Then, I had the pleasure of delivering it. I   d go into the  officers    boardroom (of course, they was all in bed. This was middle of  the night) and fill my shirt up with the fruit they had left on the table.  Then, I   d go down to warrant officer   s boardroom. It was the same  thing. Chief petty officer, and do the same thing. I always took the  baker a paper too. I always got a pie. Go to the butcher shop, I   d  generally get a ham sandwich. I had a lot of fun. Then, I took all this  food down to where I worked and put it in a drawer, and everybody ate  it. (Laughs)  Higgins You didn   t try to make any money off of it?  Sanders No.  9  Higgins I hear a lot of stories about gambling in the Navy during World War II.  Did you guys play cards or anything?  Sanders I don   t believe I played a game of cards while I was there.  Higgins How do you guys pass the time whenever you weren   t busy?  Sanders Well   writing letters. (Laughter)  Higgins How long would it usually take to get a letter back?  Sanders I never stopped to think about that, but it wasn   t very fast.  Higgins To back up a little bit, how did you prepare yourself before you  deployed to the Pacific theater? Did you talk with family, friends? How  did you prepare yourself mentally for going to war?  Sanders Oh, I never really thought about it. When I joined, I joined.  Higgins You volunteered because you were seventeen. What led you to  volunteer?  Sanders Well, I didn   t want to be in the Army. I didn   t like the idea of sleeping  in the mud, so I thought I   d take the Navy.  Higgins Tell me about some of the locations that you went to. You mentioned the  Marshall Islands.  Sanders Mogmog Island. Then, I went to the Leyte Gulf and spent several  months there. Then, we went to Okinawa, to Buckner Bay, and stayed  there for, well, besides going out for a typhoon, we stayed there for  probably three months.  Higgins At your time on Leyte, did you go on the island?  Sanders Went on the island. I had my beer. Couldn   t drink on the ship, not  supposedly.  Higgins Were there visible signs of combat still   .  Sanders Well, in that particular area, it hadn   t been torn up, but there was a  Catalina bomber that had crashed. It was on the beach. It   d been there, I  don   t know, who knows how long. (Laughs)  Higgins What about Okinawa?  10  Sanders On Oki, I had the pleasure of going on and having my beer. Then, I   d  go wandering, sometimes by myself and sometimes with two or three or  four other guys. We always got into things. (Laughter) One day, I found  a crate that looked like a lettuce crate. Young kid, so I opened it up and  started looking at it. There was tubes that was wrapped up in paper and  had pictures on it, so I just took it apart. They were a type of a mortar, I  think. It had a spike came down, you stick it in the ground. Take a  match head that was in the bottom disc of it, and scratch this silver tip  that was sticking out. And pew   Higgins It was a Japanese mortar round?  Sanders Yeah, and some of them exploded. Some of them didn   t. Some of them  let out smoke.  Higgins You fired them off.  Sanders I fired them off. Oh yeah. Last time, I set five of them up and then left.  (Laughter) Oh yes, then we, one time, we found caves the Japanese had  used, and one of them was ammunition. We found a case of black  powder, so we had to take some of that out and see what happened. Put  it on a rock. This one guy said,    I   ll strike a match to it.    Well, he was  on the wrong side. He got black, because when the black powder  ignited, it went all over him. (Laughter)  Higgins Did you keep any souvenirs that you may have discovered on these  journeys?  Sanders Yeah. I found a Japanese twenty-millimeter shell that had never been  fired. One of the times in our walking around, we found an anvil dump,  and there   s four of us. Just happened to be four pineapple hand grenades  laying on the ground. We each took one, and going, walking down the  road, I said,    I wonder. What if I unscrewed the top, poured the powder  out, put it back together, and pulled the pin through it?    Pop  You  know, just a little pop. I saved it, and I had fun with it. I would walk up  to somebody and say,    Hey, have you met my new friend?   , pull the  pin, and hand it to them. I was an ornery cuss. (Laughter)  One day, chief warrant officer walked in on me, and I had it sitting on a  table. He stepped back out the door, and I had to report to him. I was  informed I would get writ up, if I didn   t. Anyway, I had them here for a  long time, at the house for a long time. When they made me a munitions  person, there had been discussion about people stealing munitions, and I  decided it was better just to get rid of them, in case. There shouldn   t  have been any problem, but anyway, I didn   t know, so I trashed them.  (Laughs)  11  Higgins At Okinawa, were there civilians left on the island?  Sanders There were, but I couldn   t find any villages where we was walking.  Except, one time, there was three of us walking down this road  following an ox cart. We wanted to see a village, and I   d happened to  look up ahead and saw a guard post up ahead. I said,    I think we need to  go the other way.    We turned around and go the other way and heard  somebody holler,    Halt     We didn   t. I heard some bolts click. I said,    I  think we better stop.    If we hadn   t, they would   ve shot us, and it was  open season on anybody walking around out there. Turns out that the  village we was going to go into was a leper colony, and if we had gotten  in, they   d put us there. (Laughs)  Higgins You never went to the village, but did you see people walking across the  island?  Sanders No. I never saw any of the islanders except this one with that ox cart. I  did find a house that had been pretty well destroyed one day and picked  up a sake cup, and I brought it home. I got transferred after the war was  completely over and everything. I was transferred off of that repair ship  onto a merchant ship that took me to Osaka, Japan. No, Yokosuka,  Japan. At Yokosuka, they put me on destroyer escort.  Funny thing, we talked about drinking a while ago. New Year   s Eve of     46, there was a bunch of drunks (best way I can describe it) found out  that every lifeboat and life raft on that ship didn   t have a drop of water  on it. Had nothing but raisin jack  moonshine , and they decided they  was going to celebrate. The captain and everybody got involved in a big  party, and coming back from Japan, the captain decided we needed  some recreation. He stopped the destroyer escort in the middle of the  Pacific.    Just go swimming.    We all went swimming, and some of the  guys started climbing the masts. Going to jump off the (iron arms???).  He stopped that. That was a little dangerous. Of course, we had a boat  out there going back and forth with a rifle gun on it to shoot any sharks,  but I never saw any.  Higgins Where were you when the war ended?  Sanders I was in the Philippines.  Higgins Doolittle had left from the Philippines. I believe so. No?  Sanders No, Doolittle went off of an aircraft carrier, and he and his other pilots  took, they had special training to take a B-24 off of an aircraft carrier.  12  Higgins Oh yeah, I   m thinking the wrong guy. I   m sorry. Whenever they  dropped atomic bombs, they left from that area.  Sanders No. The atomic bomb, if I remember right, was flown out of Saipan.  Higgins What were your impressions   first, when did you hear of the use of the  atomic bomb?  Sanders Well, that day.  Higgins What were your impressions initially?  Sanders You know, I don   t think I thought about it. One time, we received a  note, not a note, on the radio from Tokyo Rose while we was in the  Philippines telling us what anchorage we were at and all about it and  that they were going to come visit us that night. They tried, but the  Marine Corps Air Force stopped them, and they didn   t get to us.  Higgins Was there ever a fear of kamikazes?  Sanders I never saw anything like that, no. That would   ve been out where the  major fighting was.  Higgins Whenever you went on the mainland of Japan, what did you think about  it? What did you think about the culture of Japan?  Sanders I enjoyed it. It was different. New Year   s day, I was ashore at Osaka,  and I almost went into a movie house that they were showing Gone with  the Wind. I had never seen it. Then, I got thinking about it.    We just  beat these people, and you   re going into a dark movie house with a  bunch of them? I think you better think about it.    So, I didn   t.  I had wanted to get my picture painted on a silk handkerchief for my  mother, and I stopped at this place to do it. They had two Marines there  that was getting theirs done. They didn   t have any use for those  Marines. When the Marines left, I told them what I wanted.    Okay. Sit  down here.    They got a hibachi and sat it between my legs for my hands  to hold out over it, to keep my hands warm. It was quite cool, and I had  a cute little girl hold my hands, too. (Laughter) It was entirely different  with me as a Navy as they were treating the Marines. (Laughs)  Higgins Did you ever feel any tension between yourself and the locals?  Sanders No. That was the only time I was ashore in Japan.  13  Higgins After you left Japan and you were going home, where did you go from  that? Take us back to the States.  Sanders Back to San Diego.  Higgins What was the atmosphere like in San Diego after the war?  Sanders Well, I went to a church there and got with the youth group, and it was  very pleasant. They were very cordial, and the people accepted military  people. Someplace I was at (there were different times), there was a  little bit   they wouldn   t have anything to do with us. (Laughs)  Higgins During the World War II era?  Sanders Yeah, yeah. It   s like they   ve told me at, in Kansas, Fort Riley, at the  town right next to it. I can   t think of the name of it. Anyway, they used  to have signs in their front yard:    Dogs and soldiers, keep out.    Ticked  off the soldiers because they put the dogs first. People wouldn   t have  anything to do with them.  Higgins Now, what was the cause of that, do you think? Was it the reputation  that the Navy had for going   .  Sanders Well, this was the Army. That had been Army people. The people just  didn   t have any use for them. They didn   t want to associate with them.  Higgins What were your plans after the war?  Sanders Well, I just went home, went to work in the slaughterhouse, and decided  I wanted to go into the railroad business. I went to business school to  learn telegraphy, and six months later, I was what they call    on the extra  board.    You go here for a day or a week or a month, and you go here for  who knows how long, back and forth. That   s how I met my wife  because they had sent me to her hometown. I worked from midnight  until eight in the morning as a railroad telegrapher and station agent. In  the mornings I   d go up to the local pool hall, after I got off work. There  was always one or two or four or five high school boys there. We   d go  hunting. It was very pleasant.  Higgins How   d you propose to your wife?  Sanders I first saw her when one of her classmates and I had been hunting and  went to a greasy spoon for lunch. Her and her girlfriend was in there. I  told this boy,    That   s the prettiest girl in school.    We all got through  about the same time, so he caught up with them and told her. I   d went to  basketball games and stuff, and she played basketball. After the game  14  she was in, she came and sat down in front of me. Happened to have a  seat. We got to talking, and I dated her then. It was a long drive after  that. How did I propose to her? We was out one night. I simply said,  told her that I belonged to the Episcopal church, and if she expected to  marry me, she   d have to join the church.  Higgins (Laughs) Very romantic.  Sanders Very romantic, and she did. (Laughter)  Higgins Talk about a little bit after your marriage. You were still involved in the  military during that time?  Sanders Well, I was in the Active Reserves. I went to meeting every, I think it  was every Monday night. Anyway, then I got recalled. Korea had  started. We got married in March of    50. In June of    50, Korea started,  and I happened to be on their Reserve crews. I went back home, which I  didn   t expect to do. I got orders sending me out to San Diego. There, I  spent thirteen months in San Diego recommissioning a bunch of ships  that I had to help decommission in    46. Our first child was born out  there.  Higgins Did she live on base with you?  Sanders Off. I didn   t live on base. Only officers could live on base in the Navy.  We lived in Chula Vista, which was south of San Diego, and   oh, I  don   t where to go. (Laughs)  Higgins During this time, the Cold War era, Korean War, can you talk a little  bit about what it was like during the Cold War, some of the tensions,  some of the fears?  Sanders Well, see, I didn   t see any of them. I never felt any of it. During the  second World War, we had rationing, which didn   t bother me any.  Gasoline, I could   I had a farmer give me his ration cards, so I had all  the gasoline I needed. There just wasn   t any pressure. To me, I didn   t  feel any pressure anywhere.  Higgins You remained in the Reserves up until the Vietnam War era. Is that  correct?  Sanders No, no. After I got out in    51, I was out, and I worked for Aurora  Aircraft Corporation. They wanted me to go into Bakersfield,  California, as supervisor of this section. I talked to too many retired  military working there, and I decided that I was going to go back in the  military. I thought I would go into the Air Force, because they   re land  15  based. I figured I would be home most of the time, but that wasn   t true.  I was still gone half the time. (Laughs)  Higgins Now, while you were talking to these other veterans, was that in hopes  of economic prosperity or patriotic duty? What were some of the  reasons?  Sanders No, I was just seeing how they was feeling about things. They were  mostly retired, and they recommended highly that I go back in the  military and retire, which I did.  Higgins Talk a little bit about training with the Air Force.  Sanders (Laughs) Since I   d been in the Navy, they didn   t think I needed any  training, so they sent me right to active duty at Omaha, Nebraska, SAC   Strategic Air Command  headquarters, as an electrician.  Higgins What were some of your duties during that time?  Sanders Well, changing light bulbs, hooking up different circuits, electrical  circuits and stuff up at headquarters. Then, I got transferred to England  in    54 and    55, and I was one of three sergeants that was sent up to this  base called East Kirkby up in Lincolnshire  United Kingdom . We were  sent up there as the advanced party, make sure everything was ready for  when they come up there from down at Bargate down in Kent  United  Kingdom . I happened to hear that they were taking this mansion and  turning it into apartments. I jumped on the bandwagon and went out  there and talked to them, and I got the first apartment, which happened  to be the quarters of the title lady that had lived in.  It was an interesting stay. My wife and I both thoroughly enjoyed it  when she got over there, and I associated with the English. The English  people are lofty. That   s the best way I can say it. If you walk up to an  Englishman and try to strike a conversation, chances are you won   t get  a reply or any answer to the question you answered. I saw it happen too  many times, but I was accepted by them, as I didn   t tear them down.  Too many GIs get up there, particularly, and excoriate the English  systems. I found them very enjoyable.  I was given a job which nobody knew anything about, and I was given  five Englishmen to rebuild the base, preventative maintenance. I had no  idea what to do or anything else. That   s the reason I got it, because  nobody knew. I happened to be talking to this lieutenant. One night, I  noticed on his desk, he had some manuals. One of them was a ROTC  manual on preventative maintenance, so I borrowed the book. I set the  whole system up, and it worked wonderfully. I had no idea how to log  16  some things in. You have a door that   s half off. You had to reattach the  hinges. How do you write that up? I put down    re-hang door.     In thirty days, we did three thousand jobs. Those jobs like that. I could  go to the Air Ministry and order anything I needed instead of going  through the military. I ordered a case of glass, window glass, and my  order went in. It went to London. It went south of London. Then, it  went north in England, and here came my glass in three days. I could  depend on it. I had a wonderful setup. Anyway, it turns out that it was  an experiment to see if an American sergeant could work five  Englishmen. I didn   t mistreat them. I didn   t stop them from having their  tea breaks and stuff. Every once in a while, we went to the local pubs.  Higgins What do you think about pub food?  Sanders Pub food? I never had any food in a pub. No, I always had drinks,  always drinks.  Higgins Did you drink a lot of ale during that time?  Sanders Oh no. I was a scotch drinker. The title lady had maintained the right to  hold dances in the ballroom downstairs. I was at one of those dances  and went upstairs to check on the fireplaces, and while I was getting  wood the chauffer for the title lady was up in my hall and asked me if I  minded if the title lady   s daughter and son came up and saw what they  had done to the area.    Welcome     They came up, and that was around  ten o   clock. Three o   clock in the morning, they finally leave. We had a  very enjoyable conversation. She was the wife of a doctor in London.  Her brother, Michael, had been a big game hunter in Africa for the  government. That was very interesting because I was then accepted by  the well-to-do in the area, and we always went to formal dances. We  was invited to all sorts of affairs, and it was fun.  Higgins I bet.  Sanders I always have to tell the story that the title lady was the main character  in a book that was written by D.H. Lawrence, oh    Lady Chatterley   s  Lover. (Laughs) It was banned for quite a few years in the United  States. She was quite a young lady. She was wonderful to talk with, and  I just, I thoroughly enjoyed chatting with her. In fact, we was at a party  one night, and she came up and says,    I understand you have an  apartment where my quarters were.    I says,    Yes, I do.    She said,     Well, have you been out in the park?    I said,    Yeah.       Have you been  out in any of the summerhouses?    I said,    Yeah.    She says,    Oh, I have  had so much fun out there. Didn   t we, Sid?    Sid was one of the farmers  on her property, and his face turned just bright red. (Laughter)  17  Higgins That   s funny.  Sanders It was a wonderful time, and it   s changed a lot. The title lady died that  year. We left there in    55, and she died later, late in the year. Her  daughter, that was up in our apartment, took over for about three years.  Then, she died. Now, the estate house is no longer open for anything.  There   s a lot of change over there.  Higgins Where did you go after Kent?  Sanders After we left England there? Went to Holyoke, Massachusetts, better-known  Springfield area, and to an Air Force base. Can   t remember the  name of it offhand, but from there, I went to Thule, Greenland. Left my  family there. Spent a year up in Greenland, came back. Working there  for a while, and then, they sent me and another sergeant up to Maine on  a special project of strobe lighting for their airfield. Then, they was  bringing in planes from all different branches of the service, to come in  on that. One Marine pilot dropped in and flashed, hit him. He went right  back up, and he wasn   t coming back into that. (Laughter)  After that, then, I went back to Springfield, and from there, then, I went  to Whiteman Air Force Base, Missouri, at Knob Nobster. Most people  called it Sedalia, which is fifty miles away. Stayed there for several  years, and then they put me into a tech school at Shepherd Air Force  Base, to be an instructor on electricity. I did that for a couple of years.  Then, they needed munitions experts, so they sent me to Lowry Air  Force Base in Denver, to tech school. I had taught basic electricity for a  while, and then, they had sent me up there to learn munitions. From  there, then, I went to, as an instructor. I taught there for a while. Then,  they sent me to Vietnam.  Higgins What year did you go to Vietnam?  Sanders Oh,    66,    67.  Higgins Early on.  Sanders Our only problem we had was our trucks going to the flight line, they  had to go past a village, and there was an expert marksman. He was so  good, he never hit anybody. They shot at our trucks, and bullets came  close enough. They knew they   d been shot at. Back to camp to the  munitions dump, and that stopped all the flow of munitions to the flight  line.  18  Higgins To back up a little bit, do you remember whenever Kennedy was  assassinated?  Sanders Yes. I was in Burkburnett, Texas.  Higgins What were your thoughts?  Sanders Well, I thought    being as I went to church, we had special services and  stuff for him, heard prayers and healing of the family and stuff. We  were in a small mission there in Burkburnett. We had a building built a  hundred by sixty feet. Myself and another sergeant did all the electrical  wiring in it. It was a real pleasant place to be. Burkburnett was very  pleasant.  Higgins During this time, throughout your military career, you witnessed some  great changes to the military service, such as the integration of troops.  The integration of the military, do you care to comment on that at all  and the experiences with that?  Sanders I didn   t have any trouble with it, really. I will say I am partial about  things. At Whiteman Air Force Base, I had ten young airmen working  for me. Every Wednesday afternoon, we   d have class for a couple  hours, and we had one black boy in it. I knew, from talking with him  and stuff, he did not understand a negative question. I   d make sure   I  had a ten-question test I gave them after each session and always put a  negative question in it just so he would miss one. (Laughs) That   s not  nice, but that   s what I did. I have had some very good friends that were  black in the service, and race actually doesn   t bother me.  Higgins I   m going to pause this for a minute. Mr. Sanders, we   re picking back  up, and we were talking about your past at Vietnam. When did you  become aware that you would be deployed to Vietnam?  Sanders Well, in early    66.  Higgins Did you and your family talk before your deployment?  Sanders Not much. They just accepted things.  Higgins Tell me where you went from   I   m assuming you left from California.  Sanders No. I left from Denver and went to Miami, Florida, and joined a group.  From Florida, we flew to Alaska, Alaska to Japan, Japan to Vietnam.  Higgins Was it a commercial airliner?  19  Sanders Commercial airliner.  Higgins What were your impressions as soon as you got off the plane in  Vietnam?  Sanders (Laughs) I don   t know how to say that.  Higgins Do you remember your first day there at all?  Sanders Not really. Lived in the tent, four of us sergeants in a tent, and prepared  bombs to load on airplanes. My first night there, we had the Army  bringing dump trucks with three pallets of bombs, several thousand  pounds of bombs on a pallet. Had no way to get the third pallet up, so I  had them, I cleared the revetment and had forklift driver come up  behind the dump truck with his forks down about a foot below the back  of the truck and had the driver dump it. It slid down on the forklift.  That   s the only way. The next day, they had chains to help pull those  up. These Army guys, I don   t know how far they   d drive these dump  trucks, with these thousands of pounds of bombs on them, (laughs) to  get over the hills and get to us.  We were at a wonderful base. It was right on the ocean. In fact, our  runway took out over the ocean, and in the summertime, you couldn   t  ask for a more beautiful place to be. Wintertime, you didn   t get near  that ocean. It was rough. Sometimes, our planes taking off had to get up  before the waves got them, but it worked.  When I got my orders, I told people I was going to    Toy Hoy.    I found  out that wasn   t what I should tell people. Anyway,    Toy Hoy    is not the  name of it: Tuy Hoa. It was a nice, overall base. What can I say?  Higgins What did you guys do to pass the time while you weren   t working on  base?  Sanders I played cards, mostly not gambling, but just cribbage and stuff like  that.  Higgins How did the food compare? (Laughs)  Sanders Well, we got over there in November, just before Thanksgiving, and I  believe I had the best Thanksgiving dinner I had ever had in the  military. It was all cooked on ranges outside. Delicious   Yeah, you had trouble getting salt out of a shaker, and your sugar had  bugs in it. (Laughs) You just had to be careful how you ate. Pick those  20  bugs out. Well, if you picked too many of them out, you didn   t have any  sugar left. It was interesting.  Higgins Was there ever any danger of the base being infiltrated?  Sanders We had ROK  Republic of Korea  troops. I don   t know who all ROK is,  but it   s the Republic of Korea troops on our perimeter of our base with  machine guns. Then, out away from the base, for thirty days, we   d have  the 101 Division out there moving around, trying to find the enemy.  Then, the next thirty days, we   d have the 176 Division, and they   d trade  off. Other than snipers shooting at our truck drivers, we didn   t have any  problems. In fact, my last day there, I went to Supply to shake hands  with my rifle because I hadn   t seen it for a year. I wished I hadn   t. They  hadn   t even taken them out of the packaging. If we   d ever been  attacked, it just wouldn   t have, people wouldn   t have had guns, but we  weren   t.  Higgins Well, the 101 was a fairly elite division.  Sanders That   s the 101 Airborne, you know.  Higgins Then, the South Koreans, they were battle-hardened veterans as well.  Did you ever interact with any of those guys?  Sanders Well, no. Actually, we never saw the 101 or 176. We just knew they  was there. I got ready to go on R R  rest and recuperation  to Hong  Kong from there and was waiting for my airplane. There was a six-by  truck came up, had a bunch of Vietnamese on it, and they were all  blindfolded and their arms tied behind their backs. When I got to Hong  Kong, I read in the newspaper they had been a bunch that had been  discovered in some caves and tunnels. These were the survivors. They  had brought them there to take them off to someplace to, I guess, find  out what they knew. These were the survivors of that, and that had been  the 101 that had got them. Other than that, nothing.  Higgins Was there ever any interaction with civilian populations during your  time in Vietnam?  Sanders Well, some. We could go into town anytime we had a day off, and I had  two work for me. They put me, for a while, into Safety, and I had a man  and a woman work for me there. Then, had my maid that   after I was  there for a little while, we   d have these B-52s flying by and dropping  bombs on the hills around us and knock us out of bed. Anyway, they  moved me, as a tech sergeant, into a building that had been used by the  civilian contractors. There was two of us to a room and nice quarters.  There, we had a maid.  21  Higgins What were your impressions of the standard of living for the  Vietnamese?  Sanders Well, to them, it was good, but to me, it definitely wasn   t. There   s  really no sanitation. Their bathroom was a slit in the floor. They always  had pigs and stuff pinned up underneath their houses. They was on  stilts, most of them. There was a beetle that was about six, eight inches  long. I forget what they were called. They would catch them, and they   d  smell them. If they smelled right, they ate them. You could sell all those  you could catch, you could sell them for a nickel apiece. Their  standards of living just was so low.  Higgins Was there ever any lack of trust between, what you experienced with,  the military and the civilians?  Sanders No. No, we didn   t have any problems with them.  Higgins Well, you mentioned the beetles. Did you ever try any of the local  cuisine at all?  Sanders Not in Vietnam. Primarily, you didn   t there. For instance, if you bought  a Coca-Cola in town, you might not live through it. They had a habit of  putting acid in it. Many times, you   d get these bottles of Coke and stuff,  and the lids was rusting off because they had acid in them. You just  never knew. No, I didn   t partake. I went in town two or three times is  all.  Higgins You mentioned the R R in Hong Kong. Did your wife meet with you?  Sanders Oh no. It was only three days, so she stayed in Ponca City  Oklahoma .  Higgins What did you do during your time in Hong Kong?  Sanders Bought clothes. Bought clothes, and another guy and I took a taxi ride  all around that area, spent a whole day out. Went over to the China  border and the gateway between China, Hong Kong area. Very pleasant.  I enjoyed Hong Kong. Their standards are considerably higher than the  Vietnamese.  Higgins How long were you in Vietnam?  Sanders One year.  Higgins During that time, were you exposed to Agent Orange?  22  Sanders Yeah. Now, I didn   t know it because all the trees in that area had leaves,  and Agent Orange was supposed to get rid of them. I didn   t find out I  was contaminated until I got here.  Higgins What effects have you had due to your exposure?  Sanders Well, my diabetes, of course, and the, a lot of my instability in my legs,  my heart problem.  Higgins Do you receive benefits for those?  Sanders Yes. They say I   m 70 percent disabled, but because I am unable to  work, I   m receiving 100 percent benefits.  Higgins How did you go about the process of getting those benefits? How long  did it take?  Sanders It was extremely easy. In fact, I fell into it. That   s the only way I can  say it. I went down to   at the time, there was the VA  Veteran   s  Affairs  representative for the state of Oklahoma. Every Tuesday, he  came into the American Legion post here. I went in and talked to him  one Tuesday, and they gave me a form to fill out. I took it home, and  next Tuesday, I took it back to him. He looked at it and said,    Oh  You  were in Vietnam.    I said,    Yeah.       Well, here. We got another form to  fill out.    I went in there basically to see about hearing aids. He filled out  the other form. Only government employee I know that loved to fill out  forms. (Laughter)  Next thing I knew, I got a call from the VA. They wanted me to go over  the following Thursday to Tulsa and see three doctors. That went on for  five weeks, and they would check with me and how I was treated and  everything, respectful and this. I had to tell them one, that the doctor  wasn   t very respectful at all, so they sent me down to Edmond to a  doctor. Well, next thing I knew, I got a letter. Because of my hearing, I  was 30 percent disabled. A few months later, I got another letter saying  that I had been raised to sixty. A month later, I got another one saying I  was raised to seventy. Got a letter from the state of Oklahoma saying I  was 100 percent. Everything just fell in place.  Higgins What timeframe was this?  Sanders In the overall picture, I don   t think it was six months.  Higgins I meant as far as a year. What time of your life was this, the year?  23  Sanders Oh  You know, to be honest with you, I don   t really remember. It had to  be in the    80s.  Higgins Was your hearing, was that damaged from your military service?  Sanders I think so.  Higgins You said you were in Vietnam for a year. Whenever you got home, take  us through your reintegration into the States.  Sanders Well, when I came back to the States, family lived in Ponca City. Being  as I was in munitions, which I knew I was going to go right back over,  so I didn   t take my family up to South Dakota, Rapid City, South  Dakota, with me. I didn   t see any sense in moving them all the way up  there and then whatever. They stayed in Ponca, and I versed back and  forth. Then, I got orders for Thailand, and I went over in Thailand in  January of    69. Came back in January of    70 and reported to Vance Air  Force Base for retirement. Master sergeant started telling me what I was  going to be doing, and I said,    No, sergeant. I   m here to retire. I   m not  here to work.       Oh.    (Laughter) I said,    When you get all the  paperwork done, give me a call, and I   ll come over and take care of  things.    February first I went over and got my papers.  Higgins What were your impressions of some of the anti-war demonstrations  during that time?  Sanders Well, I can see a lot of the people   s thinking. Being as I was on active  duty and everything, I still couldn   t fault them. That was their ideas. In  my idea, I was doing my job, and that makes a difference.  Higgins Did you ever experience any events in which you experienced these  anti-war demonstrations personally?  Sanders No. I had a captain friend that was here for a number of years and was  in the American Legion. When he came back, he got off the airplane in  California, and he got spit on, which, that kind of bothered me.  Higgins Throughout your twenty-five years of service in the military, what was  difficult, as far as family life or social life?  Sanders My social life was never, never difficult. I   m not really a    go-outer    and  do things and never have been. I don   t know. I just go with the flow.  (Laughs)  Higgins Were you involved in military related organizations afterwards?  24  Sanders No, excepting for American Legion, yeah, and past commander, Post  127, 129. I belong to Perkins VFW  Veterans of Foreign Wars , and I   m  a member of the Disabled American Veterans.  Higgins You had five children, right?  Sanders Yes. Well, I have four now.  Higgins Did your military service ever, was it hard being away from your  children during this time?  Sanders Yeah   Higgins Of course, right? (Laughs)  Sanders Yeah. They did good, though. Somehow, they managed. (Laughs) Of  course, my wife was one of these from a poor family, farmers and six  kids, and she was able to cook and prepare meals for them at a nominal  cost, on a military pay, stretched.  Higgins You provided for your family while you were in there. Talk a little bit  about Oklahoma. You   ve been in Oklahoma for going on forty years.  Sanders We moved here in April of    72, and we have thoroughly enjoyed living  here. It   s the only house we   ve had since we came to Oklahoma, to this  part. We   ve always been able to, oh, we used to shoot skeet out over  this field north of us. Boys and I, we did a lot of hunting, and we   d go  around locally different places and hunt and fish. Back in the late    60s  and    70, we lived in Ponca City, or they did. We   d go fishing when I  was home, all sorts of things like that. Just had a lot of fun.  Higgins Did any of your children go to Stillwater High or OSU?  Sanders None of them went to OSU. My oldest daughter and oldest son were out  of high school. My youngest daughter was out of high school. My two  youngest sons went to Pleasant View, which was up here. Then, they  went to the high school.  Higgins Did any of your children follow in your footsteps to the military?  Sanders One, my oldest son, retired tech sergeant, and he was a black box  changer. Stationed primarily at Edwards Air Force Base in California  and was involved with making modifications on a B-1 or B-2 bomber  and working with the engineers. He had a pretty good job, interesting  one, but he   s the only one. Then, my youngest son got electrocuted. He  was an electrician, and he got ahold of the wrong thing. High voltage  25  and he shouldn   t have got ahold of it, but it looked to him like it was  dead. It wasn   t.  Higgins That   s terrible.  Sanders Hanging from the wrong direction. Then, his next older brother has  Sanders Electric here in town, and he   s gotten real good as an  electrician. A lot of time, people need something done, they   ll give him  a call. He may have to put them off for two or three weeks. (Laughs)  Higgins Stays busy.  Sanders He   s busy, and they   ll wait for him. They know the quality of work he  does. Then, my youngest daughter has an accounting firm in Austin,  Texas, and my oldest daughter is retired. She was working, when she  retired, with the Veterans Administration Hospital in Lake City,  Florida.  Higgins Well, Mr. Sanders, you   ve experienced a great deal of change  throughout your life. You   re part of what   s been described as the  greatest generation. What are some of the greatest changes that you   ve  experienced in your life?  Sanders (Laughs) Everything. Television, cell phones   oh jeez, it   s unlimited.  Changes that we   ve gone through and changes that are coming in, and  we   re in the very beginning of them. Question is, where will they end?  Higgins You   re a veteran of three foreign wars. What role does government and  society need to take when it   s concerned with its veterans, for the  current veterans of the Iraq wars and Afghanistan?  Sanders Well, the Veterans Administration needs to be more oriented to treating  their problems. Like I said a while ago, I   m very fortunate. I fell into  everything for me. I   ve taken ten gentlemen now down to Midwest City  to the Disabled American Veterans, and nine of them have received  benefits by going down there. I haven   t talked to the last one whether or  not   he didn   t have his papers, so they had to send to Kansas City and  get them. I haven   t heard from him if he   s heard anything from them.  He needs to get   well, he was in Vietnam, so he needs to get Agent  Orange.  Higgins Throughout your twenty years of service, how has your military service  shaped your philosophical views or your political views on life and  society in general?  26  Sanders The military, since I went in in    45, has completely changed. In the     60s, it had gotten to a point where there was a lot of play on words.  You had to watch, if you   re supervisor, had to watch what you said. I  understand now it has gone way past that. If you tell an enlisted man to  do something, he don   t have to do it. They can get away with it. It  wasn   t that way when I was in, but I understand that   s the way it   s  going now. When I was in there, I had situations where I was giving  people special training, and they call it punishment. I never once said it  was punishment because it wasn   t. It was special training. I said I  couldn   t give them punishment. (Laughs) I stood on my two feet.  Had a young man that needed some special training, and he went in to  see a super sergeant that he thought it was punishment, so the super  sergeant called me in. We had a talk. He informed me that that man  didn   t have to do what I said, so my return was,    Sergeant, are you in  charge of that man?    He said,    No, you are.    I said,    Okay. Keep out of  it.    The subject was dropped, and the man got his special training.  (Laughs) Again, you just had to watch what you said and how you said  it. As long as you berated somebody in a nice manner, you could get  away with it. (Laughter)  Higgins Mr. Sanders, throughout this interview, has there been anything that  you wanted to discuss throughout your life that I haven   t asked or  hasn   t came up yet?  Sanders I don   t think so.  Higgins Well, I have one final question. What would you like to be remembered  for?  Sanders Being a good father. That   s about it  (Laughs)  Higgins I   d like to thank you for your dedication and your service to your  country, and I   d like to thank you for sharing your story.  Sanders Yeah, I hope it fills some certain spaces. Wasn   t a bunch of glory, but it  was interesting.  Higgins Thank you.  -------  -------  
