 Nykolaiszyn, also with me is Tanya Finchum. Today  is May 3, 2013 and we   re in Okeene, Oklahoma, interviewing Anthony  Felder and Virgil Pugh. We   re here in Okeene today to learn more  about the Okeene Rattlesnake Roundup, and we   re going to start by  learning a little bit more about the history. Anthony, could you kind of  talk to us a little bit about that?  Well, I   ll start off by saying it is the first of the rattlesnake hunts, and it  started in 1939, and here we go with the Okeene Mill again. It was  started by an advertising director at Okeene Mill, and what used to  happen   there   s always been snake hunts, but what they   d do is go out  with guns and shoot them and bring them in on the side of a wagon or  pick-up, small truck, and you know, look at this big old dead  rattlesnakes. Orville Von Gulker worked down there and he was the one  then that would go out and look at what they had, and he got to thinking,     Wouldn   t it be neat, if instead of killing these snakes, we   d bring them  in live,    and so he promoted the first hunt in    39.  They tried to keep them   this is what   s hard to believe today   they  tried to keep the number down. The first year they tried to keep in under  100, and then they went on up to, well they were having, you know,  about a thousand people, and then they decided,    Hey, this is a hell of an  idea and we   re going to run with it,    and they did run with it. The other  day I was asked,    Well, was you around at the first hunt?    And the  answer   s,    Yeah, I was around, but I was out in the country.    I didn   t  know, you know, I was about six or eight years old, but my dad was  there, and I think we   ve still got some pictures of him messing with  snakes, which isn   t the mark of intelligence. And it grew as it went  along, until there was crowds near 100,000 and that happened for quite a  few years.  5  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  What time span?  When the crowds was that?  Yes.  Well, I would say it ran all the way from about 1955 or    56, along in  there, until about, oh, probably twenty years ago. Then fell, or started  falling and fell down to where an average crowd now is estimated  between five and fifteen  thousand . You don   t have fifteen thousand  people all at once, but you   ll have a Saturday crowd and a Sunday  crowd, and normally we have a Friday afternoon crowd. It   s not  developing today, probably because of the weather. It may be  developing now, but it wasn   t this morning, was it? And when it was  originated, we were real stand-offish with the carnival, and now the  carnival is a major part of the attraction.  So in the early days, what would take place during the weekend? What  events would take place?  During the hunt the main thing was   the snake pit   s always been the  major attraction. That didn   t happen the first year, but it happened like  the second or third year.  Could you describe what that is for us?  Well, all the snakes they bring in, they dump them in a pit and this pit  used to be ten-foot by ten-foot, so sometimes it got   you know, you get  five or six hundred pounds of snakes in a ten-by-ten pit and put a man in  there, and there isn   t much room for him. And we had terrific snake  handlers. We had a guy named Arthur Jones, either one of you know  who Arthur Jones was? Well, you   ve heard of the Nautilus Exerciser.  Arthur Jones invented the Nautilus Exerciser, and can I talk about  Arthur? Arthur, his daddy was a doctor at Guthrie, Oklahoma, and the  doctor had two kids. The one thing he required of those kids was that  they go to medical school and graduate, and so the girl went and got her  master   s degree in nursing, and Arthur got his M.D. and never practiced  a day and never became, you know, never even licensed. Then he was a  major exporter of wild game out of Africa for quite a while.  Arthur Jones, I believe was a millionaire like two or three times, and  went broke every time with things like, he brought in a ship-load of  monkeys one time and they quarantined them, and lost everything he  had in that. He had some other things like that, and then come along the  Nautilus. Arthur, later, took a snake, a female, down on the Washita  River, and she had ten young. He raised them all, and two of those ten  6  Nykolaiszyn  Pugh  got to where they were over ten feet long, and when somebody tells you  they   ve seen a ten-foot rattlesnake, the only thing I   m going to say to  you is,    Ask them if it belonged to Arthur Jones,    and if it didn   t, get the  hell away from that old boy, because he   s not telling you the truth. You  know, we hear, around here somebody will come by and say,    We   ve  got a seven-footer.    Well, I want to measure him, don   t you? And  normally, he   ll not measure five and a half. A seven-footer is a monster  snake. Now, west and south Texas has got some seven-footers, but I   ve  never seen an eight-footer come out of down there.  Well, Virgil, how did you first hear about the roundup?  It was kind of a real spoof. I   m a speech pathologist by profession, so I  had just taken a position at the local school district where I now live, and  have for years, in Colwich and Andale, Kansas. Well, one of my duties  as a new teacher, as most do get extra little duties, was to chaperone the  junior-senior prom. Well, the football coach challenged me that evening  to, or he dared me, to go with him to the snake hunt the next day down  in Okeene, Oklahoma. I said,    Well, I   ve tried skydiving, why don   t I try  something like that.    So I said,    Okay, I   ll go with you but if I do catch  something, I want somebody to teach me how to pick it up.    I just want  to say that I   ve done it.  One day we went down. I had no equipment whatsoever. I just had me,  like this, and a pocket knife, I did have that. He had on rubber gloves up  to here (gestures) when he gets out of the car. He   s getting ready to go  hunt. He had on hip boots up to here (gestures), and I   m thinking,     Mercy, mercy, what have I gotten myself into?    Anyway, I   m over  against this tree cutting off a limb, and this guy comes up to me and he  says,    Pardon me, but what are you doing?    Well, I   m fixing to go snake  hunting, and I   m cutting me off a snake fork, a stick, you know, with a  fork in it. He said,    Well, let me tell you something.    He says,    What  you   re getting ready to do can be dangerous.    He said,    I would  recommend you get some equipment,    and he says,    I   ve got some  snake forks for sale.    He said,    If you don   t buy something for me, for  God   s sake, buy it from somebody else.    He said,    You   re going to need  it.    I said,    Well, how much are they?    He said   now, this is a  phenomenal price back then compared to now   it was eight dollars for  this snake hook, which was a nice piece. I could still use it. I don   t, but I  could. I said,    Well, all I   ve got is a check.    Well, he said,    I   ll take it.     He was from Hutchinson, Kansas down here selling snake forks. I   m  only about thirty miles from where Hutchinson is so he took my check,  and I went out and caught a snake. I actually caught a whopper, about  oh, that long maybe (gestures about three feet). I come bringing this  snake back and the coach saw me, and he run all the way to the truck  7  Nykolaiszyn  Pugh  Felder  Pugh  Felder  Pugh  Felder  Pugh  and hid on the other side of it. This guy was so terrified of snakes. Why  he dared me I   ll never know, but anyway, I had a guy out there show me  how to pick it up, a snake. He showed me how to pin it so I did, and I  showed everybody that I had picked it. I had witnesses, and I put it in a  bag, and then put it in a thirty-gallon can. Tied the bag and put it in a  thirty-gallon can with a lid on it. Well the coach, all the way back, about  every fifteen miles we   d have to stop and he   d make me check to see if  that snake was still in there. He was that scared. He never went again,  and I never quit going again.  What year?  That was in 1963. This is my fiftieth year. I   ve grown old down here. I  was thirty years old, and I   m eighty now. It   s been a fun run but it   s just  something, and Anthony said this before. It   s not necessarily the snakes  that you come for. It   s all the people you meet, and you, over the years  you just, every year you get together here and renew old acquaintances  but also you get into more active roles, other than hunt. As you meet  people, you ease into this cycle of,    Maybe I   d like to do that job, the  butcher shop,    and that   s where I started. They let me get in the butcher  shop and I worked. I learned how to butcher snakes and all that, and I  did that for, oh, x number of years. Then I got to looking, got to playing  with snakes in the butcher shop, and got to thinking,    Maybe I could  work in the snake pit.    So they let me go migrate up to the snake pit, and  that was probably, lord, how long ago was it Anthony?  Quite a while.  Let   s see, it was     Probably thirty years.  Yeah, probably. It   s probably been thirty years since I worked with  snakes, actually hands-on snakes. We put on shows in the snake pit, and  some of the things we do are kind of bizarre.  Mostly stupid.  Actually, yeah, and sooner or later, the rule is, a rule of accidental or  things that will happen or whatever, is that if you put your hands on a  snake, sooner or later you   re going to get bit. It, honest to God, is the  truth. It took me thirty-eight years before I got a really bad bite. I had  nicks and cuts, but no venom. Well, I got bit really bad in 2001, and I  should have quit then. Then, I got back into it a little bit, and I got bit  again in 2009. I now no longer handle snakes. I   ll use equipment on  them, but I don   t, we don   t put on shows with them anymore. Put them  8  Felder  Pugh  Felder  Pugh  Felder  on your hands and pick them up, let them crawl on your arms and that  sort of thing.  On top of your head.  Yep. We   d get in the sleeping bag, all sorts of things we   ve done out  here. In fact, I   ve got the first sleeping bag trick here.  I   d like to insert something here. When we talk about bites, 85 percent of  the time that you   re bit by a rattlesnake, he will not inject venom. It   s up  to that snake whether he thinks that you   re harming him or not. If he  wants to scare the hell out of you, he   ll give you a good scratch and let  you go and you won   t, no swelling, no nothing. Well, see after about  three of them and you get to thinking (grunts) and then when you get bit,  you jack around instead of going to the hospital. Now I   ve never gotten  that way. Every time I   ve ever got scratched   they don   t charge you  nothing for you go to a hospital and sit in the emergency room   and if  you start to swell, then you   re going to need more than help for the bite.  You   re going to have shock as well as the bite.  I can tell you, a lot of people want to know what it feels like to be bitten.  Well, I   ve had a lot of guys tell me it really hurts. That   s really   I mean  it really hurts. Well, I had no idea how bad it hurt. I said,    Yeah, I   ll bet  it does.    Well, when you get bit, you tell somebody it really hurts,  you   re telling them something totally out of the proportion to what you  felt before. I mean, it hurts. I got bit on the foot through the boot. I had a  cheap pair of boots on. They looked good, but they weren   t good.  (Laughs) And he went through that boot like a Singer sewing machine,  and it felt like somebody took a match, put it in my foot, lit it, and left it  there. That   s exactly the best way I know how to describe it. Oh, it was  like fire, and it just hurt, and then instantly you begin to get this swelling  sensation.  I took my boot off because I knew what was coming, because when  we   d get to  the hospital they would  have to cut it off otherwise,  because of the swelling. And it turns black and it throbs. And I had an  additional problem. I was allergic to the anti-venom. So, they gave me  the anti-venom and I just about died. It really was bad. In fact, your  brother  Dave Felder  come down here, he says,    I came home because I  didn   t want to see him die.    It was bad. I don   t remember. I was out of it  by then.  We went to the hospital to see him, and he thought he was all right. My  brother Dave said,    Let   s get the hell out of here. He   s going to die and I  don   t want to be here when he dies.     9  Pugh  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  It was bad. It was something that you don   t think it   s going to happen to  you. Like I told you before, the rule is, you will, sooner or later. It may  not be your fault. Maybe somebody else leads a snake around and hits  you on the leg or something, or some way or another something  happens. But it will happen. It   s like a car wreck. You drive a car long  enough you   re going to have a wreck. It may not be your fault but you  still have a wreck. The last one was a copperhead. I had this  copperhead   we   ve got pictures up at the pit. If you come up there  you   ll see this. It won   t take you long to see it, we   ve got a lot of  pictures up there. I let him crawl around on my hand, which I had done  many, many times, and so is the sign of age, you begin to,    Well, I   d  done this a lot of times.    You just lower your guard, and the snake didn   t  behave like the other snakes I   d let crawl around on my hands.  A copperhead, he come around my hand, he come up, and got right  about here, and he stopped. I should have known right then,    This is not  the snake you need to have on your hand.    I should have dropped him,  but he backed up a little bit and he looked at my hand again and he  (makes sound). I mean, he got me twice, just like that before I got him  off of me, but yeah it wasn   t as bad as the rattlesnake, but it was bad. It  hurt, and it took about four days for that thing to get all the way up to  my   it   s a slower moving venom for some reason, not as toxic, but  nevertheless, it hurt like blazes, too. It took about four days for that to  get to my shoulder before it began to finally arrest itself and start back.  So, my experiences with bites are not good, and mine haven   t been as  bad as a lot of guys get. You   re going to see if you go up there, what  happens when you get a delayed treatment. In other words, you   re out in  the field and to take   like Anthony. He was lucky. I   ll let him tell you  about his bite, but if you delay long enough and it   s a severe enough  envenomation, you could lose your arm or you could lose part of your  arm or  whatever . You   ll see some of that up there  to the pit .  Tell us about your bite.  My bite was in field, and we were in the Gyp hills, west of Hitchcock  and south. We were probably a half mile from the car, and I had caught  about a three-footer. I had it in the sack. We went by where we had a  five-gallon bucket with a screw-top lid on it, which is a lot better way to  carry them. I was going to dump this snake out of the sack into the  bucket. Opened the bucket, and as the snake went by, he reached over  and got me by the finger. My first thought   and see, my deal is opposite  of his. I had no pain when that snake bit me, it was just a scratch.  There was about five guys standing around, you know, saying,    My  God, there   s blood. Do you want us to head for the car?    and I was  10  Finchum  Felder  Pugh  Felder  Pugh  saying,    No. It   ll be all right.    We went on hunting about another 100  yards south, further from the car, and I decided it was time to go. I was  lucky in this respect. There was two old kids that were football coaches  with us. They were son-in-laws to the old Earl Bierig, who I run around  with a lot and hunted a lot with, and they actually carried me, you know,  hand type under, and carried me quite a ways, and that was the early  day. I don   t know who had one but it was the early part of the cellphone  deal. Somebody had a phone with them, and they called an ambulance  that met us when got back to the road.  And yet you go back?  Well, I never see   I promised God that night   this arm, they mark your  arm, you know, if the swelling is going up     That always helps. (Laughter)  And they   ll mark your arm and put a time on it. Well, they   ll come back  thirty minutes later and mark it again. The first time, this thirty minute  deal is about like that (gestures below elbow), and then the longer it  goes, the narrower it gets. When I went to sleep that night, this happened  about three in the afternoon, and just before I went to sleep that night, I  looked and it was right about here, and they marked it (gestures above  elbow), and the gap was like this. The next morning when I woke up, I  looked at my hand, and I   d looked at it the night before also, and you  could not see any lines of any kind on my hand the night before, you  know, I looked at my hand and I could see a faint, the major two lines, I  could see them faintly. That   s when I promised God that I will not get  back in the pit. I didn   t say I wouldn   t go snake hunting anymore.  And we had worked together in the pit for years watching each other.  We   ve all, we get scratches, and like he said, a big part of the time you  don   t get any venom. I had a scratch that run from my shoulder blade to  here. I was cutting a snake   s head off, and I got mixed up. He come this  way and I went this way. Well, the snake swung around and he got one  fang right here, and went all the way down my arm to here, and the  blood just flew. I hadn   t been doing this very long, that was in the  butcher shop, and I thought,    I   m dead.    (Laughs) I went running for the  guy, Alan Karbs, he was one of the head handlers back in those days,  and about ten minutes later I found him. I told him what had happened,  and he said,    How long ago was it?    and I told him. He says,    Well, I  think what you got is a real bad scratch. I don   t think you       (exhales) I  could breathe again.  I went back home, and I had a hernia operation when I got back. I put  off operations and everything to come down here so, you know, that   s  11  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  Pugh  Felder  Pugh  Felder  Pugh  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  important but, anyway, they didn   t care about checking my hernia  operation after that. Every doctor in that Saint Francis Hospital in  Wichita was coming to see the snake scratch. Everybody in the hospital  would come in to see the scratch but, you know, that gives you an  example of what happens.  Can we go into some real wild stuff that   s happened?  Sure.  One evening, just before we closed the Snake Hunt, on a Saturday night,  Virg came over to me and said,    See this gal over here?    See, at that  time we wouldn   t let anybody but the handlers in the pit. He said,    See  that gal over there? She asked me if she could get in the pit. Do you  care?     Barefoot.  Yep. And I said,    Well, I really don   t care.    Except you said,    Well she  said she   d be back tomorrow,    and generally, they   ve got sense enough  not to come back when they ask, but I said no, you know, it   d be his  show. The next day, here Sunday about one, here comes Virg and said,     She   s out here and she wants to get in. Is it all right with you?    I said,     Yeah, sure.    He said,    Will you help me?    and I said,    Hell no. I   m  going to get a camera.    (Laughter)  He went, he got a camera. But that started it. Since then, we let people in  the pit.  Which is dumb.  We just leave it up to the individual. They like to get in and get their  picture taken, and some of them are hesitant as all get-out. You have to  talk them in, if it   s somebody you really want in yourself, and somebody  that   s really spooked out and you want to really play games with them.  It   s a lot of fun, and nobody   s going to get bit, really. You might get bit  but they   re not going to get bit.  So could you tell me about the rules of the Snake Hunt? Are there rules?  There are very few rules, very few. You   ve got to have an Oklahoma  Fishing and Hunting License, you know that.  Okay.  And that is the major rule, and     12  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  Finchum  Felder  Finchum  Felder  Is there a length rule?  A what?  A length. Do the snakes have to be a certain length?  We don   t, and I hate to say this on camera, but we don   t pick up a little  snake anymore. The one that we talked about the other day that we got,  we never brought him to town. We left him out there but no, there isn   t  any, and you   re going to see one, if you go with us we   ll show you on  that. The total length   s about that long  gestures about eighteen inches   and it   s a Massasaugas.  Do you have to catch snakes in Oklahoma or within a certain radius of  Okeene?  No. No it   s the International Association of Rattlesnake Hunters so if  you were from South America and wanted to bring one up, it would be  absolutely all right. Now, in the   they   ve a local deal, and that snake   s  got to be caught within thirty-five miles to be local, and the other,  wherever they come from, they come from.  Do they have to be living when they   re brought in?  Yes, and they   ve got to still be living when we get them. When the club  gets them in their hands they   ve still got to be alive. In other words,  we   re not going to take one that somebody   s beat the tar out of.  So it   s the Jaycees that organize?  It was then, it is not now. A town this size has a hard time meeting what  was the minimum requirement for Jaycee members. They wanted you to  have twenty-five members in a club, and twenty-five members of men.  Now you can have, women are there too, but earlier it was all men, and  you had to have twenty-five members under thirty-nine years old. A  town like this has a hard time producing twenty members under thirty-nine  years. We had no problem having twenty, but we, filling that other  five was almost impossible.  Was there a registration fee?  Now? No. You can register and it   ll cost you five dollars. If you   re  going to, you know if you   re going to hunt and sell your snakes and  enter into the contest, then you need to pay the five dollars, but other  than that. How long has it been since your registered?  13  Pugh  Felder  Pugh  Felder  Pugh  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  Pugh  Me?  Yeah.  I don   t register. I just come up and I   m a worker now. I don   t hunt, but if  I hunted I   d have to have a  license . I   d have to go down, go out to the  field, because I   m out-of-state for one thing. I wouldn   t have an  Oklahoma license, and you can, what is it, go to certain areas that are  designated now, with your permit here allows you to hunt?  I think that   s went by the wayside in the last five years.  Sometimes you could do that and that would take place of your  Oklahoma permit.  They used to, the game wardens overlooked the license requirement, you  know. Mainly the game wardens stayed out of the hunting areas because  they, you know, as a courtesy to everybody. That day has came and  went.  So what are some of the award categories if you are entering the  contest?  Largest snake, and that goes one, two and three, both locally and  international category, both, and it used to be that we had a prize for the  smallest snake. We got rid of that, and then also most snakes caught.  Well, see that got to be a deal and Fish and Game was, that was one of  their problems. They were saying you need to get rid of that, and for  several years we haven   t bought snakes under twenty-four inches long.  Now, that   s a two-bladed sword, because your rancher does not want  that snake back, and if you hunt out there, you know that you don   t leave  any snakes, you know, on those people because they don   t want them.  That   s the reason they   re letting you hunt, because they want them out of  there, and you know the trespass deal, it used to be you go on anybody  you want to any time really, and hunt anything. Now it   s not that way  for two reasons. One of the reasons is they can sell it, and another  reason, for some reason, people that are just out wandering around get in  mischief, and can do quite a little bit of damage.  Well, let   s talk a little bit about hunting snakes. How do you find them?  Well, den sites, and snakes begin to come   snakes don   t truly hibernate,  they just go kind of like into a torpor type state. They go down below the  freeze line, but if it   s a warm winter day and they might want to come up  for   if the ground temperature might be seventy degrees or so, they  14  Felder  Pugh  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  Pugh  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  might come up to the entrance of it just to absorb some sun rays, just to  kind of get their body juices going . As soon as it starts getting cold, they  go back down. Well, as the days get longer and the temperature gets  warmer, they begin to get closer to the surface for longer periods of  time. At the right period of time, where it   s warm enough that they could  come out, they bask, what they call    bask in the sun    and that   s usually  somewhere around their den site, which is usually on a south-facing  slope of some sort of a rock formation or like here. What do you call  that?  Gypsum formation.  Gyp formations, where they get the stuff for wall-boards and that sort of  thing, and those are cavernous. Well, the sun warmth   which the ideal  warmth for a snake is about eighty to eighty-five degrees   so they   re  going to go out, come out and bask, and they get their body juices  flowing, because they   re cold-blooded animals. They can   t regulate their  temperature so they have to do it thermally. So in those areas, when  they   re in that kind of a situation, in the spring time, they   re leaving the  dens, and that   s when you want to go out and try, because they   re closer  to the dens. They   re collected and easier to hunt, and that   s what, usually  it   s a long rim-rock or some sort of a formation where they can have  shelter for over the winter, and then they   ll leave that and go down into  the areas, their hunting areas for the season. They   re also going to be  looking for mates so they   ll be prowling away from the dens there.  They   ll mate in the spring and have their young late summer, early fall,  and then they matriculate back to that den.  Also, the, you deal with this. All that gyp rock is under-laid with  caverns. It   s hollow underneath so it   s also a good hibernation point, or  where rats like to live. That gives them their food supply in the winter,  they go back to a rat   s nests.  What types of tools do you use to catch a snake?  We don   t have our snake  catchers with us . Well, you   ll see that out  there but they   re just like grabbers, some people might call them  grabbers. You   ve seen people use a little thing where they reach up and  get a can out. It   s off that line, only it   s stronger and made longer, or  whatever you prefer. It might even reach over to you, it might only be  half that length, and you just mechanically grab the snake, pull them out,  get them out here and put them in something else.  If you go with us, we   ll show you the evolution of the snake catcher.  Beautiful.  15  Pugh  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  Pugh  Finchum  Pugh  Felder  Pugh  Nykolaiszyn  Pugh  Nykolaiszyn  Pugh  You   ll get to see all that. We   ll let you get in the pit and get your picture  taken. I guarantee you won   t get hurt.  (Laughs)  I won   t.  I will even take you in.  Well, how did you two meet?  Oh, that   s, you know, I met his brother first. There used to be a place  that was, it   s still here but it   s not near as popular as it used to be, The  Galvanized Palace, which is a beer joint up here. That was the focal  point of everything going on. Of course, back in those days we both had  to have our beer every now and then so after hunting and carrying on we  would end up there and have a few more beers and     And lie to each other. (Laughs)  And I met his brother up there because I hunt deer in Eastern Kansas and  the guy I hunted on   s son said,    Well, I   ve got a buddy that lives in  Okeene, Oklahoma. His name is Dave Felder.    Okay,    I   m going to try  to look him up when the snake hunt starts.    I figured,    Well, the starting  point would be in The Galvanized Palace,    beer joint. I go in there and I  ask around and I asked somebody and I said,    Anybody in here know a  Dave Felder?    and this guy standing over there with the pool cue in his  hand says,    Who wants to know?    I mean like,    Ooh, I don   t know,  maybe I asked the wrong guy.    Well, that was his brother and he was  playing games with me. He knew my buddy   s son, and all this and that,  so I was introduced to Anthony, and that was probably forty-five years  ago so ever since then we   ve been friends. We   ve got a bunch of kids  each. He   s a prosperous business man and I   m an old defunct teacher so  you know how that goes. Now we   re both defunct. (Laughter)  Well, you were talking about the different jobs during the snake hunt,  you know, working in the snake pit and the butcher shop. Tell me what  goes on in the butcher shop.  Well, I have butchered a lot of snakes. That was my job for a number of  years.  Is it hard? How do you butcher a snake?  Well, first thing you ought to do is, of course, chop the head off. Now,  16  Felder  Pugh  Felder  Pugh  Felder  Pugh  Felder  Pugh  Felder  Pugh  after you chop the head off you get him over a   you should pick him up  with a catcher. They   ve got a chopping block and you chop the head off,  and then you take the snake and you hang him up by the tail and this  apparatus that allows you to come down the snake   s belly and gut the  snake and then peel the hide off. Then they take the skin, the hide of the  carcass, and put it in a washing tank and then the skin is kept because  that   s a valuable item. The rattle is kept, that   s a valuable item. Those  are all sellable, and the carcass, what was the price last year, Anthony?  Eleven dollars?  More than that because they were paying ten for the snake.  So the price of the meat itself is probably fifteen, twenty dollars a pound.  Now. See it used to be you could buy all you wanted for about a dollar  or seventy-five cents.  But it   s expensive. It   s very expensive but like Anthony said they   re  paying. I know they   re paying ten dollars a pound for live snakes to put  in the pit.  Also, are you through with the gallbladder thing? Are you going on?  I haven   t told that. You tell it.  You tell it. You   re the butcher shop person.  Well, years ago we used to, the entrails, the guts, we used to chunk that,  throw it, but now the Asian people are very much into snake  gallbladders or other animals    gallbladders, bear gallbladders. Gall is  something these people put in drinks we save the gallbladders now.  That   s a seller, an item to sell, and it   s, you know, I don   t know exactly  what they charge now. I don   t work there.  It   s a high-dollar item.  But they do. They sell that, and we had a lady come in, so help me God.  They do strange things. They take that gallbladder, or the blood, I   ve  seen them do it with blood too, and they   ll put that in like, 100 proof  vodka, and mix it up and then they   ll drink it. It   s for, sometimes,  medicinal, as they say. Sometimes they say it   s an aphrodisiac but  nevertheless that   s what they tell you. And this lady came in one day  while we were in the pit, now this is in the pit itself. She had a gallon jug  of what looked like, well it was alcohol. It was 100 proof vodka, about  almost half-full, and she wanted a snake put in there.  17  Felder  Pugh  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  Finchum  Felder  Finchum  Felder  Alive.  Alive. So, we got one and put it down in there and screwed it in. That  snake went nuts of course, because that alcohol came up. He filled it up  and it flooded over its head and it drowned, literally in his   well, he also  evacuated his bowels and all this. There was this mess in this jar. We  said,    What are you going to do with it?    and she says,    It   s for the  men.       The men?       Yeah, it   s for the men. After two years they drink  this,    and some guy come and drug her out of there real quick, but that   s  what she told us. I know that   s what that woman said but it   s just things  like that. Those are some of the things that go on, you might say, behind  the scenes. You never know. People want snakes for different reasons.  The butcher shop is one section of it. Old Smokey was another part of  what goes on as far as for the Jaycees, now it   s the Diamondback Club,  may generate their money, and the snake pit itself. Then, of course, they  sell the meat. They cook it and they sell that on the street up here. Sell  frozen meat, fresh meat, what else?  The meat hasn   t passed on to the new generation yet. This year they   re  moving to the football field. He and I think that it   s a big mistake but  then, you know, what are we to know?  Well, where has the event taken place through the years?  On Main Street.  So it   s     They blocked off two blocks of Main Street.  Okay. And it   s been like that from the very beginning?  Yeah.  Up till now.  This year.  Have you ever missed one?  Have I ever what?  Missed.  A snake hunt? Oh, sure. I worked away from here for a while. I missed  18  Pugh  Finchum  Pugh  Finchum  Pugh  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  four or five. That   s about all because I got back here to work. I was in  the Soil Conservation Service and finally got back home and stayed  there.  Mine have been consecutive. This is my fiftieth year.  Have you been to others besides this one?  Yeah, I have. We had one in Kansas for about thirteen years. I was one  of the founders of it, in western Kansas, and some way or another they  couldn   t get enough help. And the town of Sharon, Kansas, Sharon  Springs, didn   t really want it. The town   s business people didn   t want it  so consequently there wasn   t enough people to keep it going so it died,  but I had a lot of fun out there. We have prairie rattlesnakes. We don   t  have diamondbacks.  Well, after your first one did you go back and do some research to learn  more about snakes?  I have. I read everything I can find about rattlesnakes. I   ve got a library  of books on rattlesnakes, and if somebody asks me a question about  snakes, I want to be able to, to the best of my ability, tell them what   s  what about the snake, written down or whatever. There   s not a lot of  written books. People don   t like snakes, so there   s not too many authors  that write. There   s a lot, but not as many as you would find in other  fields.  Can I take you on a circle about the rattlesnake? And there   s nothing that  you can prove on this. A guy named Mattison wrote a book  Rattler : A  Natural History of Rattlesnakes , and so help me God I   ve lost the book.  But I researched, like him, I read most of the stuff I could find. This guy  wrote a book, and I   m a believer in his book. He talked about that he  believed that the rattlesnake is a viper, and that he came in through Asia  across the land bridge, which probably existed between Alaska and  Russia, and came down from the north. And that he probably never  developed rattles until he met the herd animals, the buffalo, the deer and  the elk, and then he developed the rattle to give them a warning so they  didn   t tromp him to death. Then he spread out and he   s pretty well  spread out over the entire United States, you know. There   s rattlesnakes  coast-to-coast, and about fifteen years ago they started showing up in  South America. One of the South American rattlesnakes is no longer a  heavy snake. He   s a slender snake. He eats birds instead of rodents, and  guess what he   s lost? He   s lost his rattle. So you got a rattlesnake  without a rattle.  What   s the biggest snake you   ve ever seen here in these parts?  19  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  Pugh  Felder  Pugh  Nykolaiszyn  Pugh  Felder  Pugh  Felder  Pugh  Felder  Can I include Arthur Jones   s ten-footer.  No.  Okay. (Laughter)  That was a tame snake. It was pen-raised. It was that big around.  (Gestures)  The biggest one I   ve ever seen was about eighty-eight inches long,  maybe eighty-nine.  Yeah, I haven   t seen   what would, eighty-two is seven-foot isn   t it?  Eighty-four is seven foot. I   ve seen eight or seven-foot maybe, not much  over that. That   s a big snake.  What   s the biggest snake you   ve ever caught?  I   ve never caught a big one. (Laughter) Probably the biggest snake I ever  caught was no longer than that. (Gestures about eighteen inches) I   ve  really never caught a big snake. We   ve sat beside guys that did but I  never caught them.  Well, he and I, I   ll tell a story on us. One time, this was wrote up in the  Wall Street Journal. We took, what was his name, Michael Pearce?  Yeah.  Michael Pearce snake hunting, and he wrote an article in the Wall Street  Journal. We take him down where we hunt and couldn   t snake hunt, and  it was a fairly cool day. We came down and walked around this rim, and  there was a ridge running out from it up to the north, and Pearce said,     Aren   t you going to hunt that?    and we said,    Nah,    you know, it   s  cold and the wind is blowing down those sides. So we hunted on around  and we caught two or three great big snakes about that long (gestures),  and we get back around and here come two kids down this ridge that we  hadn   t hunted. They had about a sixty-incher they   d picked up down on  that ridge. Pearce kind of pierced us with   (Laughter)  This guy is a writer for the Wichita Eagle, freelance writer. He was  freelancing and he sold that article to Wall Street. I   ve got   we   ve both,  I don   t know whether you got yours framed     I   ve got one somewhere.  20  Pugh  Felder  Pugh  Finchum  Pugh  Felder  Pugh  Felder  Pugh  Felder  Mine   s framed, because that   s the only way I   ll ever get in the Wall  Street Journal. (Laughs) Hell, we made the Wall Street Journal after  that.  Full page ad   Claim to fame. No money in it but we were there.  Along those same lines, how many have you hunted or caught during  one hunt?  I was involved in my own personal hunt one time. I had one other guy  with me who had never hunted snakes before. He was from up yonder  where I live, and I actually got into a grassy area at the base of a bluff  but it was all grass, and before we   and it wasn   t much bigger than half  of this room here, and I kept catching snakes in there. You couldn   t see  them, and I think I ended up with six or seven snakes. But, now I was  talking with Aaron this morning, and they caught forty-two snakes in a  three-hour period, I think it was last year? Last year.  And we were back out there. That   s one of the places that we went when  we went out the other day, is back out and revisited some of his favorite  places. He showed us the place where he said he walked around this, you  know, walked around the edge and they were out of the wind. He said  snakes were everywhere  And how many did he say they got out of that?  Well, I   m serious. I think he got forty or I think it was forty-two, but  that   s the most they   ve ever caught, too. That   s an unusual thing. That  just hardly ever happens.  Don Cravens brought a brand new wife down here. How long ago has  that been?  Thirty, no, twenty-five years.  And she was different. We take her hunting, and we went down on  Adams which is west of Hitchcock and then north, in there a little, and a  two-car load of us. We break up in groups, you know. We   ll break up in  groups of two, because the more area you cover the more snakes you   re  going to catch   if you can see them. If you can   t see them, it doesn   t  matter how much area you cover. But wind up I   ve got her, you know.  Everybody had paired off and gone so she and I went.  We didn   t go   these guys have walked right over where we went, too     and looked down in a hole that wasn   t any bigger around than this  (gestures), and I could see snakes down there. Not one snake, but  21  Pugh  Nykolaiszyn  Pugh  snakes. Now out of a deal like that, you   re normally going to get one  snake, you know. You   re going to reach in and get that snake and that   s  going to be it. The first one you get and they   re gone but I get this one  and I took him out and went back. Heck, they   re still there. I got another  and I took it out and I told her, I said,    Herd these until I get back.     So I went back and grabbed a third snake, took him over, she   s gone.  Snakes are still there. I went back and that was all there was, the three.  The others were gone. Somebody hollered and raised Cain until  somebody came and brought a sack and we sacked them. Went back  over and she was up in the back of the pick-up hyperventilating, and all  the way down there she was telling me    No, boy, I   m just going to go  out there and I   m going to grab them and get them.     I saw her hyperventilating. I didn   t see the others. (Laughter)  I see snake hunting brings out the best in people.  We have a lot of fun. To handle snakes, you   ve got to have this attitude  of    I   m going to outwit him. I   m going to be ahead of him.    After  you   ve studied snakes, you handle a lot of them different ways, and then  you begin to watch somebody do a trick over here and then you try that  yourself. One of the best ways to handle a big snake is by the tail  because that gives you time to move away, whatever. If he starts  swinging this way, well you know to turn him and push him the other  way, and if you let him touch the floor, well that   ll sometimes calm  them.  You can do different things with a snake. You might slide your hand up  under his belly when he   s calm enough. You don   t do this with every  snake, and you learn that. Not all snakes are as docile as other snakes so  you   ve got to be able to single out which one   s which, and if you don   t,  you pay the price. Then you work your hand up and you just hold him  here. I   ve had my hand right up under their chin, if they   re a calm snake,  and I walk around the pit to let him see people. He   s not thinking of me  then, he   s watching other things. That   s how you do those things, you  slip into them.  You put them, what we call    pancaking.    Snakes have a natural coil.  You   ve seen them, they just coil up. Well, if you can get that head down  in under a coil or by a coil, you can come down and touch him, keep him  on the floor, and he   s calm. You get your hand here on this side and you  slide this one under and you cup him up like this and you   ve got him in  your hands. Those are just things that you learn to do but you learn over  a long period of time, watching other people do it. Also, you learn a lot  about snakes. Some are wild. They   re like people. Some are more tame  22  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  Pugh  Felder  Pugh  Felder  Pugh  Nykolaiszyn  Pugh  than others but every one of them will bite you, and the tame ones  sometimes are the most dangerous of all because you never know when  they   re going to get un-tame.  See, my main trick that I like to do, I did six-packs. What I would do is  take the crowd, pick up snakes and hand them to people and say,    Hold  him by the tail and if the head starts coming up, well drop him.    I   d get  ten people or twelve people with these snakes and then go by and just  take them all away from them and hold them in my hand. I normally did  the six-pack and it   d be six snakes in one hand walking around. Pretty  thrilling, you know. You   ve got a lot of things to watch there, and I  always enjoyed that.  Well, you mentioned pancakes and six-packing. What are some other  terms that we may not know that y   all use all the time?  Well, he talked about getting in the sleeping bag. That to me, I never  could figure out what the hell they were thinking about when they do  that. Open the sleeping bag, slide in there and then let somebody put  twenty-five or thirty snakes in there with you, and then you crawl out.  Yeah, you slide out.  Not very bright.  We have different   there   s different things. The    Crown of Thorns    is  where you put a snake on your head, coiled up. You take him from that  coil and then you just   well, I can   t show you. You just   you get him  on somebody   s head, and you hold your hand there a little bit to see if  he   s going to be calm. If he   s not, you   ve got to kick him off the guy   s  head. We had, and I have pictures of this, I have a movie of it, what we  called    The Crucifix    where you lay out. Your legs are crossed like this  on the floor and your head   s here and your arms are outstretched like  you   re on a cross.  While you   re in the pit.  And then they start putting snakes up your body, one in each hand, and  then the last one goes on your face, and that   s a thrill.  Have you done that?  Yes, I have pictures. I have a movie of it. I have a real movie of it, of     The Crucifix,    and we quit that. I only did that, probably, twice. Now  I   ve had them on me otherwise but not on the face. All the guys that I  worked with, they   ve all quit it because one guy got bit. The face is not  23  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  Pugh  flat so it   s hard to maintain that surface there where that snake is going  to feel, he   s not going to feel some area there that   s less than another. He  can put his head there and maybe bite or whatever. They quit doing that.  I haven   t done it in a long time because I don   t have the crew people that  I used to work with. They, most of them were from Sharon Springs,  Kansas, and they would bring up Oklahoma snakes to do some of these  tricks with.  The bigger the snake, they   re easier to handle to a point, but then there   s  a point where they can be too big so you   ve got to have decent size  snakes. Yeah, that   s where a lot of that went on, and it   s just one thing  migrates to another but that   s a couple of the things. A big thing is     pancaking,    and everything kind of works off that pancake. You  transfer from your hand to another person   s hand or to another person   s  body, that sort of thing, and of course you do a lot of milking. Pen the  snake, get the fangs out and put a glass or if nothing else just drip them  out on the floor. Squeeze the back of the head and drain the venom  glands, and let people see how the venom flows out of the fangs. We do  a lot of that in the pit.  And how much of it there is.  Is it a lot?  Well, yeah. A big snake   s got a lot of venom.  I think a big rattler, a diamond back, is like, in milligrams, six to eight  hundred milligrams of venom, and you probably couldn   t get it all out  because they   re not going to let you have it all. A smaller snake like a  copperhead, I think he goes up to like forty-five milligrams. The prairie  rattlesnake, smaller one, is somewhere in the vicinity of three to four  hundred. An appropriate dose, and I just read this, of venom is like, I  think six milligrams per kilogram of weight now, and that translates out  to about three milligrams per pound constitutes a lethal dose. So if  you   re a small person and you get a big person   s dose, like you   re a  child and you get bit with the amount of venom that would kill a grown  person, well that child has to have way more anti-venom than you do  because they don   t have the body mass to absorb the venom.  A horse can take a whole lot more venom. It   s pretty hard for a snake to  really kill a horse without a really massive, massive vein bite or  something like that. A lot of them get bit on the nose. Horses will munch  around, or a cow, and they get bit. They swell up and they can   t eat and  drink, that sort of thing. That   s what kills a lot of livestock, a face-bite,  and not so much a leg bite. Just things like that that you really don   t  comprehend, but they   ve figured it out dosage wise. They use mice, the  24  Felder  Nykolaizyn  Felder  Pugh  Felder  Pugh  Felder  Pugh  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  amount of mice that a certain amount of venom kills, and they calculate  that. I don   t know how they do all that stuff, but anyway.  Also, a hog is almost immune. A hog will eat a rattlesnake.  Does the town do anything special to prepare for people who may get  bit?  Our doctors are probably the best informed of the country.  I   d have to agree with that. They sent me back to Wichita after I got  treated here, and they don   t know near, up there in Wichita, what they  know here. I didn   t feel near as comfortable in the Wichita as I did when  I was in the hospital down here.  Well, it   s because they get more bites.  Yep.  And a heck-of-a-lot of the bites are attributable to the hunt.  Most of them.  With the snake pit, do you pre-stock the pit?  What do you mean by pre-stock?  Well, when the snake hunt starts, is the pit empty and then does it start to  fill up?  Well, let us go back and tell you that the hunting starts in February.  Okay.  There   s people that will stockpile them, you know, before the hunt. This  year we didn   t stockpile any because it was too cold to hunt.  How would you stockpile dangerous snakes?  Well, you put them in a tank with a cover over it, and make sure they got  water.  Okay.  And maybe supplement their feed, you do supplement their feed.  25  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  Pugh  Nykolaiszyn  Pugh  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  Pugh  Okay. And so     You don   t mistreat the snake because he   s cash.  So when it   s time for the snake hunt, how does the pit get full?  The pit was built last night.  Okay.  So, you know, the pit thing, they don   t go in the pit until   they went in  the pit a while ago. There   s snakes in the pit now but we don   t put the pit  together  at the first . The pit now, as you will see, is bigger than this  room, or almost as big as this room and round. We   ve got Lexan on the  sides of it, and the reason we have that is because parents will stand over  a pit with a baby on their arms, you know, and hell, there   s nothing  under them but rattlesnakes. This Lexan helps them, helps the kid be  able to get down and see the snake without the chance of it falling in,  because if you fell in that pit, you   re probably dead. So, that tells you     the closest thing to somebody falling in the pit was your OSU Cowboy   Pistol Pete . We took him in, Tony took him in, and he tripped over the  gate coming in, and you know he don   t talk, right? He talked. (Laughs)  Well, another way to answer that is, this is the Roundup, Okeene  Rattlesnake Roundup. This is rounding up, like if you take your cattle to  market. People bring their snakes in here, they sell them to the  Diamondback Club, and they keep them in boxes. Then when they open  the pit they just all     Okay.  Put them in the pit, and when they butcher snakes, they just come to the  pit, take snakes out, take them back to butcher them. We use this for  show, and then take out of the show, snakes, to the butcher shop to  butcher. That   s kind of a round robin way of getting there.  And we   ll pull some out of the non-poisonous and put them over in  cages so if somebody wants   if you want to handle a snake, we   ll get  you one out and let you handle him, you know, but it won   t be one out  of the pit.  Okay. Virgil, what do you friends say about you doing this type of thing?  Oh, mercy. Well, a lot of people, I think people, like a teacher wouldn   t  get involved in this kind of activity, you know. My people don   t  understand me. I   ve had more people say they were going to come down  26  Nykolaiszyn  Pugh  Nykolaiszyn  Pugh  Nykolaizyn  Pugh  Nykolaiszyn  Pugh  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  here and hunt with me but they never have. They call me Snake Man in  town. Most people don   t know my name but they know I   m Snake Man.  So, even when I was teaching, when I went to work for United Cerebral  Palsy, I fundraised all over the state of Kansas, and people would  remember me as Snake Man but they didn   t remember my name. They  think it   s a crazy thing to do, and it probably is, but there   s levels of  experience and excitement that everybody has to reach, and this took  care of me. We don   t have rhinoceros or elephants or lions or tigers and  all that. This is pretty close to it, and it   s dangerous but it   s doable, and  it   s certainly thrilling. It keeps your blood going.  What do your kids think?  Well, they don   t mess with them.  They don   t?  They don   t.  They ever want to come?  Nope.  No?  Nope, they really haven   t.  See, I   ve got five girls and a boy, and all five of those girls have been in  the snake pit. My wife has not been in the snake pit and would not get in  there under any condition.  Has she ever gone hunting with you?  My wife?  Yes.  The only time she went hunting was when Bill Jones, who   s with us here  now, came back after the hunt and we went out. Well the wives went  with us, and the lucky part was we caught a snake right out in the middle  of the road with no snake-catching equipment. He was crawling across  the road so we found a junk pile and got a jar and chased him in the jar  with a broom weed and loaded him up and brought him back to town  with us. I think Bill took him home with him. Took him back to Chicago  where he   d be among his, you know, things of his own kind.  27  Pugh  Felder  Pugh  Nykolaiszyn  Pugh  Felder  Pugh  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  I was going to tell about, what was the old boy you brought down here  from the Wichita station that had I   ll do Anything Once? Steve Dennis?  Steve Dennis, that   s right.  He brings this guy down here, he   ll do anything once. We take him out,  unload on Goforth Ranch and go down to where there was a snake den.  And he   s just standing there on a rock saying,    Where would you look  for them at?    We said,    Well, until we get the one out between your  legs, we wouldn   t look anywhere else,    and he said he wouldn   t be back.  Well, I watched his broadcast because he was in the Wichita KSN, I  think it was, anyway, TV station, and that was his thing, he   d do  anything once. He said,    I would do anything.    He was talking about all  the things he had done, he says,    Now, I would do anything once but  now that I   ve done this, I would not do that once.    (Laughter) But he  was, yeah, it scared the gizzard out of him. He had a kind of, not a good  experience.  Well, fifty years you   ve been coming to this snake hunt. What keeps you  coming back?  Guys like him. I live here when I come down here. We   re, he comes up,  well he doesn   t come up very often but he should, to our house. Well,  I   ve come to all his weddings, his kids, and that sort of thing, and it   s a  camaraderie thing. All these guys that you   ll see out here, we   re all  friends, and when you get into the pit out here     And you know half the town, to speak to each other.  I   m going to be the town parade marshal tomorrow, one of them. People  know me, and I know half the people in town. I live to come down here.  It   s more than snakes. It   s a camaraderie thing.  Anthony, is this special for the town of Okeene to continually host this  event for what, the seventy-fourth year right now?  Well let me tell you this, I would say that it   s a fifty-fifty deal. Fifty  percent of the people in Okeene love it, mainly they love it because of  the people that show up year after year, and you know like, we go out to  drink coffee thing morning. Well, four of us go out there, and everybody  in there is shaking hands with the four guys because they   ve all been  there before, and them people love it, and the other 50 percent leave  town this weekend.  Really?  28  Felder  Finchum  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  Pugh  Finchum  Felder  Pugh  Felder  Pugh  Felder  Finchum  Felder  That   s all right, you know, as far as I   m concerned that   s the way it  should be.  But it started as a money-making event for the town?  It started, truthfully it did not start out as a money-making thing. It  started out as a deal to show off these snakes, a catch-them-alive thing.  The old boy that started this, money was not a problem with him and it  definitely wasn   t an intention of his.  What was his name?  Orville Von Gulker. I think I   ve got a picture of him out there.  Yeah, you do.  But is it a fundraising thing today?  Sure  Sure, you bet. It totally reversed.  The thing about it, Okeene was the very first organized hunt. Am I  correct Anthony? But since they organized and they taught people how  to use this as a money-making kind of thing for your community,  whatever you used it for, they do it all over. How many hunts are in  Oklahoma now?  I think there   s five or six. We helped Waynoka start about fourteen years  after our first one. We helped Mangum start, I helped Mangum start so it  was, you know, quite a ways in, probably twenty-five, thirty years. I  don   t know how long they   ve been going. I helped Mangum start.  Waurika came by and talked to us and got a lot of suggestions. It   s never  been a   you know, it   s competitive, you bet it   s competitive, but it isn   t  in an anger type competitive.  Texas has hunts, too.  Oh, Texas now, Sweetwater, Texas, there   s no question that   s the  biggest hunt now. Of course they   ve got a large town support and they  have super facilities.  Are there more snakes caught now, or less and less?  Well let me tell you, that is the hurky-jerkiest thing you   ll ever see. Our  snakes went along, until 1957, running along catching three to five  29  Finchum  Felder  Finchum  Felder  Finchum  Felder  Finchum  Felder  hundred pounds. In 1957, we shipped five ton to Earl Brocovey in South  Dakota, and Waynoka shipped him three ton. Now, he was not happy  because he had researched it and he knew we were getting about five  hundred, and in the day we were getting three or four hundred. He was  thinking he was going to have a giant publicity stunt by buying all these  snakes, and he had a giant publicity stunt but it cost him a lot of money.  He gave a dollar a pound for those snakes, and he told the guys that took  them up, hauled them up there, said,    If you had called me, I would have  sent you the check and you could have kept the snakes,    because he  already had all that   Waynoka   s hunt was ahead of ours so he already  had more snakes than he knew what to do with.  Has the ever been an issue with animal rights?  Oh, you bet, and we   ve had more fun with them. Actually, let   s be  honest, we like to see them come because normally they would come,  form a line and have their signs, and we   d always make sure they had  plenty of pop and cold water and everything. They normally don   t come  back after you treat them real nice, and heck, they   re good people too.  We   ve all got a right to our opinion.  Have some of the events changed through the years?  Yeah, massively.  How so? Like what?  Well like, this year come almost being the last year of Old Smokey.  They decided to drop it.  And what is Old Smokey?  Well, it   s a history of the hunt. It   s what I, when I quit the pit I went to  Old Smokey. Of course, I   ve been at Old Smokey before. Can I tell  another story that   s an off-the-wall story? When my, this brother that he  knew, who was probably second year in college, we put together a new  snake box, break apart thing, had it in a bank building which is now a  parking lot for a grocery store. That year David, my brother, and his  college friend (and also his up-the-street-one-block kid), you know,  same age, they went to school together, hell, they went to the military  together, too, they helped.  Jim Nusz and I ran Old Smokey and in comes a guy with a dog, and he  was telling us about this dog. This dog is a snake-killing dog. This dog  would just wreck them snakes, and you could see the big smiles  everywhere. We take him back there and this box breaks apart, you  30  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  Pugh  Nykolaiszyn  Pugh  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  know. You   re standing there and we   re telling you that this is a nursery,  that we   re raising these snakes down in this box, and get you to look  down in there. Then the box breaks apart and there   s a mounted one  sitting there and it rattles and everything, and most people will tear up.  It   s a wonder we haven   t been sued for some of these things, but when  that thing broke apart that dog broke and ran and the old boy was  running after him,    Here, Shep,    out the front door and down the street.  And we   re all standing in the door looking and laughing, at him trying to  catch his snake-killing dog. (Laughter)  All right, craziest thing you   ve ever seen. Craziest.  That probably was among the top, was the snake-killing dog. It didn   t  stay hooked.  Well, I can tell you one about his son. Now, this is, to me it   s pretty  scary. He hadn   t been working snakes very long, and we work off a  table, sometimes, in the center of the pit. Well Tony, he was pretty green  at it, and that   s one of the things I   ll tell you, kind of ease into these  things. You don   t just become a handler overnight and be good at it  without getting hurt and all that. Anyway, he   s over there and he   s  messing with these snakes. This snake, he had it on table and he   s  standing pretty close to the table, and the snake struck out and hung up  in his crotch, and I mean, he   s running around and trying to get this  snake off of him, and honest to God that happened. He finally got the  snake off him and he jumped out of   we have a ladder, he went up over  the ladder and into the corner and the crowd   s all around over here all  looking like this. He   s over there dropping his pants to see if he   d been  bit. That was the craziest thing I ever saw. That   s scary. That actually  happened, and he   ll tell you that it happened.  Any encounters with snakes that you regret?  I   ve got two.  When you did what?  That you regret, any snake encounters you regret. You knew it was  stupid...  Yeah, yeah.     but you did it anyway.  Well no, this didn   t go that way. Four of us went to Wichita Falls and  put on a television show, and we get down there, and just as soon as we  31  unload    We drove down there. In 1959, I just bought a brand new car,  and I was president that year. So we took that car and went down there.  We drove all the way down there, you know, straight through. We never  stopped and we pulled up in front of the station, and hell, the guy meets  us out there.    The manager of the station, he   s from Burlington,  Oklahoma. He knows you   re Okies, he wants to talk to you.    We go into  his office and he says,    Where   s the snakes?    We said,    They   re out in  the car.       Go get them     We brought them in there, he says,    Pour them  out on the floor,    so we did. We sat around there and visited with snakes  going everywhere, and finally, I think Jack Roberts picked one up and  opened his mouth and that guy seen fangs and he went right up on his  desk, and he said,    You mean those snakes are not de-fanged?    We said,     No. They   re not de-fanged.    He said,    Crazy bastards, get them back in  the sack and get out of here.     We were sacking them up and he goes and calls a friend named Alan  Cline who works for the newspaper. Then he said,    Take them and go  down to      he drawed up a map of where we were supposed to go in  Wichita Falls. We said,    Well, you know, it   s about one o   clock. We   re  supposed to go on at two.    He said,    Oh, don   t worry about it. You   ve  got to do. This guy ain   t going to be there after the show, he   s going  somewhere.    So we go down there and we go in the door, and when we  went in the door a lady met us. She said,    I   m the telephone operator.  I   ve heard this and I   d like to see those snakes.    We said,    Well, we   re  in a hurry, and we know we   ve got to go upstairs but if we get down,  you know, get this guy taken care of and we   ve got time.    We know  now it   s going to take five minutes or six to get back to the station so we  go upstairs and unboxed them and took pictures for the paper. Come  back down, and she   s waiting for us, and wants to see the snakes. I had  the sack with snakes in it so I showed her the sack, these in the sack.  The next guy was Jack Roberts. He had a box, you know, with a glass  front on it with the biggest snake we had in it, which we always did, and  he showed her that. The next guy along was Ed Lamle, and he had what  we called the Mongoose, which is a box with a little tail sticking out of  it. You get them to looking and telling about how a mongoose kills a  rattlesnake, press this button and it   ll throw a squirrel skin out on top of  you. This thing, it came out and landed right here on her. There she was  on her back, shoes flew off, and there was about forty desks around in  there, you know, people that were writing their articles and whatever.  They   re all dying laughing, and we   re trying to find the water faucet so  we can soak up our handkerchief to get her back.  That is the most scared I ever was, and probably turned out to be the  most fun. Then Ed had to take her out to supper that night. We planned  being on at two, off by two thirty and back on the road home, and here  32  Pugh  Felder  Pugh  we have to wait until she gets off work and go through all that and take  her out to supper.  I   ll tell you something about how times have changed, what we could do  with the public. There   s thing you don   t do now. There   s such things as  lawsuits, and people, you don   t know whether they   re receptive to a joke  or whatever. They used to have a station that was still a functioning  station up here on the corner right across from that filling station, and it  was a     It   s still up there. The station   s still there but it   s not a filling station  anymore.  Well, this guy had a big box of snakes in his big plate glass window, and  in that box was a bunch, a bunch of snakes. The bell ringer you used to  go over to let the attendant know that you were on the lot, who come out  to check your oil and all whatever, well, that went all the way across two  lanes of tanks. People would gather all around that window to look at the  snakes, and he   d wait until he got a pretty good crowd out there, and he  would throw a lever and an air compressor  would shoot a  burst of air  down through that hose out into the parking  area . Well, it   s like a huge  hose.  There   s no water, just air  so it   s flopping, and you   re beating  people and people are stampeding and screaming. It would be madness.  Well, when those got finished, they   d go across the street and they  would wait until the next bunch come around, and he would do the same  thing to them. That   s some of the things that used to be able to occur  here, but now you wouldn   t want to do that because somebody   s liable  to get hurt. It   s just not like it used to be in a sense but that   s probably  good, too. Those are the things that were always fun   to get somebody.  I   ll tell you about a little old lady. I was working in the pit and she kept  following me around the pit asking me questions. Nobody could talk to  me except her, and I tried to hand her a snake with the tail, and oh, she   d  run but she   d be right back. So finally, now, this is a little lady, I mean  she   s probably my age or older, but anyway, finally I   d had enough. So  I   m looking over here to this guy and I said,    Here,    and I   m talking to  this guy and she,    Ahhhhhhh     (laughs) She had that snake by the tail.  (Laughter) Down went the snake, out she went, and that was the end of  her. She, honest to God, took that snake. She was totally distracted by  what I was doing and she just automatically  took it . You   ll do that.  Well, she did it. Cured yourself  Those are the things that keep us going.  Now there used to be another thing, I don   t know whether I should tell  this or not. Well, in the butcher shop you get pretty bored killing snakes,  but now they wrap the tail. The snake has two jets. It   s a musk gland in  the back of the anal section of the snake, and it   ll shoot a jet of some  33  Nykolaiszyn  Felder  Finchum  Felder  really, like a skunk, it smells pretty bad, and it   s pretty hard to see it  unless the light   s just right. Well, we used to get pretty bored, and we   d  wait until we   d get somebody lined up in the audience out there that was  pretty close. When you started going up that snake   s stomach and  getting the skin off and you get up to that area there, it would trip a  reflex and that snake would   you could put out a shot of juice and  there   d be somebody there and pretty soon they started going,    Oh, ah,  what?     (laughter) It was rotten. It wouldn   t last long but it didn   t smell  good, and we   d say,    What happened? What happened?    You   ve got to  turn that snake   s tail just right to get somebody. They don   t do that  anymore. They tape the tail so times have changed. (Laughs) Maybe  shouldn   t have told that.  Well, it   s interesting how times change, and we all find different ways to  kill time. As we start winding down, what are a couple of things that  people need to know about the Okeene roundup?  Well, probably that if you   re going to hunt that you don   t want to just  limit your hunt time to the weekend of the hunt, because weather, you  know, is critical on when you   re going to catch snakes. You can go out  some morning when it   s probably a damp, real warm morning, and there  will be snakes everywhere, and you go back for the next two weeks to  the same group of spots and there won   t be any snakes, you know. The  guy that comes and hunts one day has no idea what a snake hunt is. Now  the guy that comes and hunts one day for the camaraderie, that   s great,  but if you   re going to hunt, you   re going to have to take a lot more time  than a one day deal. And, probably, if you   re going to do that, and it   s  not hard to do, a stranger comes into town and says,    Let   s go snake  hunting,    probably the second guy he asked will go with him. Therefore,  he   ll find some places that you   re likely to find snakes.  Do you have places that you go back and look first?  Sure, and you remember, you know, places where you caught big  snakes. You can   t go by them if you   re snake hunting. You   ve got to  stop, and the funny thing is, you   ll say,    This is my den.    You   re lucky  if there isn   t thirty other guys that know where, you know, that they   re  hunting the same den. There   s probably no such thing as a private place  to hunt because everybody knows where the good spots are. What we   re  hunting is that US gypsum area where they mine, and so there   s different  gypsum layers, and the furtherest up on top. All that stuff is undermined  and those are natural dens, and the only way that   s going to cease is for  that habitat to be destroyed, which when they mine it, it does destroy it  but there   s still a lot more of it there yet that hasn   t been mined.  We hunt, the club is allowed to hunt Boeckman Ranch, and the old boy  34  Finchum  Felder  Nykolaiszyn  Pugh  that owns it now, and his daddy was the same way, they encourage the  hunting because they   re after the reduction in the snakes, and they enjoy  people, too. You know, if you go out there and camp, he doesn   t mind  you going out there and camping, but I guarantee if you stayed more  than two days, he   ll come by and visit, you know. It   ll be a friendly visit  because he just enjoys having you. He leases the ground out for, you  know. If you go out there and want to hunt deer, you can   t because it   s  leased out, but if you   re snake hunting, that happens to be in the lease  that people can hunt snakes any time they want to.  Let me go into something else that we haven   t talked about. There   s as  good a time to hunt snakes in the fall as there is in the spring but nobody  hunts them in the fall. The reason, that   s too long to keep them over to  the spring, and therefore just no market for them. If you read Oklahoma  Fish and Game rules, you   re only allowed to hunt them in the spring,  and that goes back to something you talked about a while ago, is the  environmental groups come in, and was talking, you know, we need to  do more limits. I probably shouldn   t even say this, but the Fish and  Game Department, our biologist used to live a block south. He still lives  there but he   s retired now, they invited a group from Okeene to come  down and we helped write the rules on snake hunting, and it only talks  about spring. You   re legally not supposed to hunt snakes in Oklahoma  except in spring. You probably didn   t know that.  No, but if they   re hunting them and killing them at the same time, instead  of saving them for the roundup, does that make a difference?  It wouldn   t to the farmers, I   ll tell you for sure, and the game warden is  going to back what that farmer wants because you know this, if you tee  him off, he may not let you hunt anything on there. Doug Boeckman,  who   s the one that owns it now, when I was president and in the officer  line, if we went somewhere to talk where we were going to have some  environmentalists there, I always took Doug along. We got about like,  like Virg and I, we   re good friends, you know. We would drink some  beer after it   s over, but you let the one get down to    Well, you shouldn   t  do this and you shouldn   t do that,    Doug would get up and say,    Well, if  one of my seven kids runs out on the front porch and there   s a snake out  there,    a rattlesnake out there, which there is almost every morning,     What would you do then?    That person   s not near as argumentative at  that point as he was.  Virgil, what are some things we need to know about the Okeene  roundup?  I think people have a misconception about destroying and eliminating  snakes. We get a lot of publicity, some of it bad, and it   s by, I think, by  35  Nykolaiszyn  Pugh  Felder  Finchum  Pugh  Nykolaiszyn  people who really don   t understand the way they   re hunted. There   s a  season on them. It   s a renewable resource. It takes time. If they can  reproduce they will so if they have a habitat, they   re going to reproduce.  If you don   t overhunt them, they   ll reproduce so there   s a happy balance  here, and I think that occurs here. This is the seventy-fourth hunt?  Seventy-fourth hunt and you still catch snakes out here. They are  destroying habitats through the mining system out here. That can   t be  used by snakes anymore so it   s not so much people depleting the snake  population as it is the environmental situation that man creates  artificially. We build parking lots, we build roads, we build Wal-Marts  in areas where there were snakes. They can   t exist there anymore, that  sort of thing. It   s little bitty bits and pieces occur. It   s not the hunt itself,  I think, that should have the bad publicity. If I thought that I was really  eliminating a natural resource, I   m enough of an environmentalist that I  would cease and desist and I would probably join the other forces, but I  don   t believe that.  I had a herpetologist explain this one time in a meeting, and he said that  a red-tailed hawk, like a snake, is valuable to the environment. He eats  enough snakes, rodents or prey, whatever it   s going to eat, that would  equal the contents of a coyote   s stomach in one day   s feeding. That   s  about what a snake does so that   s a value there. If they figured what one  mouse will reproduce in a year, it   s an astronomical number, so if he  eats 500 rodents in a year   s time, that   s a great thing. A red-tailed hawk  will eat like four or five mice a day so he   s even more valuable, for  example, than the snake is, if you wanted to look at it from what the  balance of nature is, but they do have a point. You could eliminate the  snakes, I suppose to a degree, in an area but overall, I think we   ve still  got a lot of snakes. I think the way they   re controlled now, I think it   s a  good thing.  Well, is there anything else you two would like to tell us today that we  haven   t asked about? Anything we missed?  I want you to get in the pit. I can tell you   re weak. I don   t think she will  but I think you might. (Laughter) You   ve got your camera, take her  picture, and then we   ll get you in there and get your picture. You   re not  going to get bit, I promise.  And if you do, we   ll rush you to the hospital.  I   ll just have a heart attack instead.  I wouldn   t think of doing anything to get you hurt.  If you   re going to be anywhere and get bit in Oklahoma, Okeene would  36  Pugh  Nykolaiszyn  probably be a good place.  It   s the best place. I can attest to the service. The nurses are great.  (Laughter)  Well, we appreciate your time today and shedding a little light on the  snake hunt for us.  -------  -------  
