 Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Today is Saturday, July 16, 2011. My name is Juliana Nykolaiszyn with  the Oklahoma State University Library. I am in the Oklahoma City  Museum of Art. Joining me today is Betty Hall, who I will be talking  with about her memories about the 1930   s. Thank you for joining me  today.  You   re welcome.  Let   s start out by having you tell me where and when you were born.  Well, I was born in Caddo County, which is a good five or six miles  south of I-40 south of Hydro. I was born at home, of course I don   t  remember anything about it, but I had an aunt. Every time I saw her (she  is gone now) she would always tell me about it. I came before the doctor  came, because he was stuck in a mud hole. It was raining. It was in the  winter. We had a big rain and there was a mud hole about half a mile  from the house and he was down there. I was born. She always said that  my mother said,    Well do something with that baby. Pick her up and  clean her up.    So that was when I was born. It was out in the country  and I was number eight of nine children that lived. Now I don   t know if  she lost any or not, but what a life.  What year was that?     29. November 1929. We lived in a little old four bedroom, four room  house, just a little old frame house out on the farm. At that time, on  every quarter section, there was a house, a barn, and a well, and people  lived out there in all them. You go out there now, the houses are all  gone. I hope the wells are filled up, not just covered over where  somebody could fall in them. I lived there in that house until I was  eighteen years old and when I graduated from high school. Insofar about  what I remember, of course it would be from    29 until    39 or    40, we had  5  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  a hard life. We raised all of our food. They had a big garden and we all  worked in it. We raised chickens we raised pigs and cattle.  When I was, oh, I don   t know how old, finally they had lockers that  came to town so we could kill meat and put it in there before that. The  only way they had of saving their meat was salting it down. They would  kill pigs after it got cold enough that they could save part of it, but they  would salt it down. Then it would be so salty we could hardly eat it all  winter, but that   s what we lived on. When it came time for me to start  school, I really do not remember much before I started school. I don   t  think most people do. There are a few things I remember, like maybe  how the sunshine came in and played on the floor, and I would be  playing around that and so forth. Other than that, I don   t remember  much. When I started to school, we had to walk. On pretty days it was  about half a mile, about a mile. All the neighborhood kids would walk  together. It was a one-room school with one teacher and first grade  (there was no kindergarten) first grade through eighth grade. As a result,  I didn   t learn much, but I went there two years.  What was the name of your country school?  Oh gosh. Lone Star. Some of the people ended up getting a brick from  there and this and that, but I wasn   t that lucky. But then, in the second  grade, we went to Hydro and we had an old car. I don   t know what, it  was an old Ford, of course, an old black Ford. My sister drove and she  picked up, there was Opal, Esther, Ruth and I, four of us and her. There  was a girl that lived across the street. We took her and a high school kid  that lived about half a mile away and his little sister. Now how we all  got in that old car I don   t know, but she drove us to school every day.  We had a good time.  Going to school did you ever get stuck on those roads?  Oh yeah, yeah.  What would you do?  We would all pile out and push the car out, mud and all. (Laughter) And  go on to school, but everybody was that way. And I can remember we  all wore dresses. That was the thing, we wore dresses. Some of the high  school kids, girls, would wear high heel shoes. I can remember seeing  them with anklets on and high heeled shoes. I would think, how in the  world can they get around? I was always such a tomboy. I never wanted  those high heeled shoes because it would slow me down.  Would your mom make your clothes?  6  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Absolutely, every one of them. How she did all that, I don   t know.  Would she buy fabric?  Yes. We would go to Hydro and there was a fabric store there. She  would go pick out several pieces because all of us were girls. The next to  the oldest one was a boy but the rest of us were all girls. I maybe got one  or two new dresses a year. The rest of them were hand-me-downs that  my older sisters would outgrow. She would work those old ones, so  forth and so on. I didn   t get a new coat of my own until I was in high  school. Yeah, she did. Then she would bring them home. There would  be a big fight over them, which one would get each piece of fabric. As a  result, though, I learned to sew and I made my own clothing for a  number of years, probably until, well, when my daughter was born I  made all of her clothes. So I had learned to sew, but I never do it  anymore.  Growing up with all those girls, tell me about the sleeping arrangements  in the house.  We had one room that had two beds in it. Then there was another one  that we had one in there. It was kind of a daybed, and that   s where I  slept with one of my sisters. I don   t remember the older ones being  home. There was one, two, three, four of them were gone by the time  that I could remember. Part of them were married, part of them were  working somewhere and living elsewhere. It was interesting how we  slept and who slept with who because some of us couldn   t get along.  (Laughs) So Mom would pair us up, the ones that could get along best  together. It was, let   s see, Opal and I, and then Esther slept with my  older sister, so that   s the way that worked out.  It was interesting how things worked. Then I remember as a real young  girl, I was with my dad far more then I was my mother, because my  sister that was just older than I, she was very vocal. I   ll put it that way,  and she and Dad would get into it. So to have peace in the family (and  that was very important with that many people in that little house) I was  usually out in the barn with him helping him take animals or out in the  field. I never learned to cook, as a result. I still don   t cook much.  (Laughs) It was hard times but we didn   t know we were poor. Everyone  else was, too. We always knew when we got home from school Mom  was going to be there and Dad would be there, too, so we never had to  think about going home to an empty home like so many kids do today.  We knew we were loved and that made a big, big difference.  Was your father a farmer?  7  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Yes, strictly a farmer.  So he never had a job outside of that?  No.  And your mom was a homemaker?  Homemaker, and I mean, she worked. She made clothes for all us,  cooked, raised a garden. I don   t know how she did it. She lived to be  nearly eighty years old, and Dad lived to be ninety-four.  Growing up on the farm, did you have chores you would have to do?  Yes, yes. We didn   t have any electricity, we didn   t have gas, we cooked  with coal oil and we heated with coal. Somebody had to make sure that  the coal oil was brought in for the stove and for the lamps. We had coal  oil lamps, and that was one chore. Another one, we had a big jug, a  crock. We had to fill that full of water in the evening, so somebody had  to do that. In the wintertime she had a wood stove and there was always  kindling. We had chips of wood and so forth that we had to bring in for  that. Plus, we had so many cows to milk, and we had to milk the cows.  My job mainly was to helping milk the cows in the evening, and I had to  milk them in the morning before I went to school.  Makes for a pretty full day.  It sure did. It   s funny the memories you have. I can remember getting on  that school bus. We   d have to walk. We lived not on a road, a cross road  and all the country was measured out in miles. Well, we were right in  the center, our house was right in the center of the mile so we had to  walk down half a mile to get on the bus. I had a lot of headaches when I  was a kid and finally I outgrew them, thank goodness. But get on that  bus, and if I wasn   t feeling good you would smell bologna sandwiches,  you would smell bananas, apples, there were always apples, and then  there were always some kids in there that came fresh out of the cow lot.  You would smell all of that. What a combination. (Laughs) This is my  memory of riding that school bus. There were always older kids. Maybe  they would pick on you or something, but it wasn   t bad. Nothing like  what you would hear today. We would have to ride all the way around to  go to school. One time, when I was a little kid, there was a creek that we  had to cross over to get to school. Many times in the spring when the  rains would come, the bus couldn   t get out to go pick up the kids or get  us back there and the creek was up, we couldn   t cross over and he would  have to take us back home for the day. It was all very interesting  growing up, very different from what kids go through today.  8  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  What was bath time like?  Oh boy. (Laughs) That was Saturday. We   d get a bath every Saturday  whether we needed it or not, and we would also get our hair washed. We  had a washtub. It was a round tub, and we would bring that in the  kitchen. If it was cold weather, we would get the fire going and we  would heat the water. We would take turns getting in the tub, so we all  bathed in the same water. When we were through with it we would have  to carry it out and dump it, but that   s the way everyone bathed then.  Was there a pecking order about who got to go first?  Usually it was the ones, unless Mom interfered, usually it was my older  sisters and I was toward the last. It was me and then Esther. I had real  straight hair and the older ones would take care of our hair, cut it and  curl it. They never would curl mine because they couldn   t. It was so  straight, thick and heavy. It wouldn   t work, so I always felt slighted  there because I wanted curly hair. I am thankful I had a lot of hair  because I   ve still got it today   How would you keep warm at night?  We would snuggle up to each other. I always tried to get my sister to go  to bed first, but she wouldn   t always do it. (Laughs) We had bricks that  we would get by the fire, get them warmed up and then wrap them up in  a towel and put them in there to put our feet against. We would have so  much cover on, of course we didn   t have any heat in the house at night  until someone got up and built a fire in the morning. We would have so  much cover on, quilts, that we could hardly turn over. That was another  thing in the summertime. In the wintertime I can remember Mom sitting  there with a bag of scraps piecing quilts, and in the summertime, she had  a quilting frame and she put a quilt in there, always had one going and  she would teach us how to quilt. I am sure they were beautiful. Stitches  so big you would catch your toenail on them. Anyway, she would save  cotton from the cotton in the fall, and I can remember her putting the  bottom layer on them, the lining, and she would pull this cotton out and  smooth it down and then put the top on them. I remember seeing her  standing there and doing that by the hour. I don   t know how she did all  the work she did. I guess when you have a family and you love them,  you do it.  Tell me about meal time.  Well we had very simple food. We always had chickens so we always  had eggs to eat. For breakfast Mom would get up and make a big pan of  9  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  biscuits, she would have oatmeal and scrambled eggs and a lot of times  bacon, salt bacon, but I am sure she cooked that so she would have the  grease to cook. She baked her own bread, and I don   t know how she did  it but I can remember she would save a piece of that dough and let it get  hard. Then, the next week when she got ready to bake the bread, she  would take that starter and put it in a glass of water, bowl of water and  let it get soft. It would come back to life and raise the bread. Now, I  don   t know if I could do that or not, but of course we would take our  lunch to school. But, there again, a lot times when we would be working  in the fields in the summertime, we would come in and she would have,  for instance, black eyed peas in the late summer. If you have ever had to  gather those and haul them out for enough for five or six people to eat,  that is work. I don   t know how she did it. She would always have that or  some kind of vegetables. In the summertime, maybe we would have  fried chicken, maybe not. A lot of the times we wouldn   t even have any  meat. We had a lot of pasta with tomatoes. I can remember also we  would can a lot of fruit and vegetables in the summer, so we would eat  off that all winter.  Did you have fruit trees on your property?  We some had peach trees and then there was always neighbors that  would have like apples, cherries and grapes. They were always   I don   t  know if Dad would buy them or just go over there and they would just  give them to him. I have no idea. I have no idea about the finances,  either. I know we never seemed to want for anything, of course, we  didn   t know what that was.  When you got sick what happened?  We got well. (Laughs)  Did you ever see a doctor?  Yes, there was a doctor.  Home remedies?  Doctor Hinkie. He would come out and see us. I don   t know what kind  of medicine he would give us. He always had some kind of liquid. Oh,  yeah, there are plenty of home remedies I can remember. Having a cold  and having Vicks rubbed all over you, rags tied around your neck, put  you to bed and rest. We always had aspirin if we had a fever, we would  take that. They also would keep a bottle of liquor. I don   t know exactly  what that was for. Dad didn   t drink; none of us drank, but they always  had a bottle of whiskey. I think Mom would mix something with  10  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  whiskey and honey for a real bad cough. How she did it, I don   t know.  Well tell me a little bit about holidays. What were holidays like?  Well, many of them passed and there really wasn   t much to be done  about it. I don   t really remember much about Christmas because there  were so many of us we never got much of a gift. If it was, it was new  underwear or new socks. Those sorts of things, as far as toys. There was  just not money to buy toys. As the older ones left home and they came  back, many times we would have Thanksgiving dinner and all of them  would be there. There wasn   t a lot really to do over holidays.  Did the country school every have a program?  I don   t remember. No, they didn   t. They only had one teacher when I  was there. One teacher, and she was old. (Laughs) I say that, because I  laugh. One time I was working at John Marshall and some of the kids  went to England on exchange and we started back the next year. They  were talking and one of their questions was,    How old were the  teachers?       Oh they were old.       What   s old?       Oh, at least thirty.    So, I  don   t know how old this teacher was. (Laughs) But she looked like to  me she was old. We would have programs at church that we would take  part in. Our social life was built more around the church. We would have  to go to town for that. It wasn   t like it was real close.  Would you make your own games, make your own toys?  Oh yeah. We would almost fight over the paper dolls that would come  out in the Sunday paper. We would get that because my older brother  had a paper route and he always saw to it that we got a Sunday paper.  That, and with girls, that was mainly what we would play. I would like  to get out and play ball but my sisters wouldn   t play with me. We always  had a ball or two that we could play catch and so forth. We had trees we  would climb and play around with them. My sister said she used to   and  I don   t believe it, I don   t. It   s funny. She was only two years older than  I. We will get together and she will tell me all these things. I don   t  remember. Is there anything wrong with my memory? (Laughter) She  used to tell me, and this I do not believe, during the Depression there  were always bums, hobos that traveled the rails. Well there was a  railroad that went through Hydro. Hydro was a little bitty spot in the  road. There was no work there except farm work, and most people that  were farming, their families would provide all the help. She said she  could remember tents being set up all along that railroad track where  these hobos lived. I don   t believe it because why would they come? I  mean, if they got on the train, they could go on that train to a bigger  place where they could get work. That   s her story and I just listen to it.  11  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Do you ever remember them coming to your farm?  No. I remember salesmen coming. Now, the Watkins man, he would  always come. He would bring vanilla and stuff like that. Other than that,  I guess some salesmen that were selling insurance would come by, too. I  know Dad bought an insurance policy for me. He gave it to me and it  was for  250. Finally I went to cash that in and the company wasn   t  even there anymore. I had to call over to the insurance commission to  find out where they were at before I could cash that in. It was hard times.  Everybody was poor but nobody knew it. I don   t know what would  happen today. There are not the farms out there, people wouldn   t even  know how to raise a garden, or raise cattle, or chickens or anything.  That is probably good because y   all had sustenance.  We did.  Now if you were going to go town, you would go to Hydro?  Yes, and once or twice a year there was a county seat at Anadarko, and  we might go down there. I don   t know what kind of business my dad had  with the county seat, but he always felt like he had to go every once in  awhile, but we would go to Hydro. At that time there were grocery  stores there, usually more than one, one or two. There was a dry goods  store and a drug store, even a theater. It was a real prosperous little town.  And gas stations.  Would you ever go to town with your father?  Not too often. Sometimes we would go, and now I don   t ever remember  not having an old car of some kind. But I remember some of the  neighbors had a horse and wagon that they would go to town and do  their business with. When I first remember him farming, he had four  horses, and he would harness those up and he would pull equipment  back and forth. We raised cotton, and then feed for the cattle was mainly   what we farmed . As time went by, peanut farming became pretty  prominent, so he started raising peanuts. That was a lot of work to  harvest them because they grow underground, and they would have to  plow them up, and then go in the there and pull the plants out and get the  dirt off of them before the thrash machine would come by and thrash  them. But I don   t even think they raise peanuts out there anymore.  Would you have help when it came time for harvest for cotton and  peanuts? Who would come to the farm to help harvest?  12  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Yes. There was usually some farmer that had the equipment that would  come help us. As far as the other, farmers helped each other, too. And  when we got through with ours we would go help. I can remember going  to other farms and helping chop cotton. I hated that job. It was hot.  It was hard work.  Yes, it was. Our school would let out some in the fall so the kids could  go home and help on the farm and pick cotton. I can remember one time,  our class at school, they all came out there to pick cotton to make money  for something. I don   t know what it was. That was when I was in high  school.  Where was the nearest cotton gin?  At Hydro. There was one there then.  Do you have any recollection of how much things cost back then?  You could get a loaf of bread for a dime. Of course, I never did any of  the grocery shopping to know what that was. To get an ice cream cone  was a nickel or a bottle of pop was a nickel. Until I started buying food  for my own family, many years later, I never had any idea what food  cost.  Were there certain staples your mom would have to get from the grocery  store?  Yes, flour, sugar, coffee, salt. Of course, we had an outdoor john. She  never bought toilet paper. We always had a Sears   Roebuck Catalog.  (Laughter) I don   t know what people do now that Sears doesn   t put out a  catalog anymore.  Even when you were in high school, was Hydro still a pretty prosperous  town?  Yes, it was. We rode the school bus to town to high school. I don   t know  when it really started going down like all the other. Probably when Wal-  Mart came in. That did away with a lot of those little communities, mom  and pop stores.  Did you ever have a radio growing up?  Well, during the war we got one. We had a wind charger for the battery.  It was special. They wanted to listen to the news about the war. That was  about it. Maybe in the evening we would listen to Lum and Abner. We  13  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  weren   t allowed to play with it like kids are today.  Would you gather as a family and listen?  Oh yes, and we would play checkers and dominoes. That was about the  extent of that.  What about music?  I hate to say, I regret saying this, but there wasn   t much music in our  home. I didn   t really learn to appreciate music like I would have liked to.  Did your parents ever talk much about politics and what was  happening?  I can remember there was an old man that lived across the road. In the  winter time, when it was really cold, he would walk down half a mile to  get the mail and come back. He would come in there and sit down. He  and Dad would get into it about politics. Both of them loved to argue,  both of them knew they were right. And about religion. I just never  would sit and listened to them. I remember during the war, I had a sister-in-  law that would argue with Dad. Dad loved these lively discussions.  She was telling that she had read in a paper or something where they  were building a plane that could carry all these little planes on its back,  and Dad was saying you are wrong. It was a ship, the carriers. I can  remember those two arguing over that. Both of them knew they were  right. (Laughs) But, there wasn   t much discussion about politics.  Do you have strong feelings about Roosevelt?  Oh yeah. Everyone in that time respected, the farmers, Roosevelt,  because things were so hard. I can remember them making fun of  Hoover. Talking about Hoover   s badges, and they would pull out their  pockets because they had no money. Then when Roosevelt came in with  the New Deal and the war came along, things improved and people got  jobs. Everyone that I was around thought he was okay.  Do you remember any WPA  Works Progress Administration  Projects  in your area?  None of my family went off to work because we didn   t have boys. We  were all girls. Some of them that I remember, they built outdoor toilets  that were really well built with concrete and all. I think there was a  building, like a civic center, there in Hydro. Later they had a skating rink  in it that the WPA built, and I am quite sure they built the swimming  pool too, that they built those. I vaguely remember when they put  14  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Highway 66 through. I don   t remember much of it, but it was a big thing  when it went through. I can remember all the talk about it. Of course,  that went west right where I   it paralleled I-40. Part of it is still there, a  good portion of it is.  Would you see families leaving at all or hear tales?  Not during the Depression. Most of them were settled on farms. When  the war came along, a lot of the younger people moved to California to  work in shipyards, or else to Oklahoma City to work at Tinker where  they were building planes. That was the main exit. I don   t remember  them going out there because of the storms and all. They lost their farm,  but my dad had a farm north of Hydro. When the Depression came, he  lost it. So we moved onto an Indian lease and that is where we lived all  that time. I don   t know how much he had to pay a year. It seemed to me  like I could remember him saying something like he had to have  350 a  year to rent that from the Indians. That is why he had to go to Anadarko  to the Indian Bureau. They   d tell him not to pay it except to the Bureau,  and then they would give it to the Indians. I can remember the Indians  coming up to our house a few times, and how different they looked. I  was just a kid. I didn   t know whether to be afraid of them from all they  tales you heard or not, but they were nice people.  Did they just come to check things out?  Yes or maybe, I don   t know, if they could get anything out of us they  would take it.  Well, during the Depression do you recall your father having to lose  some of his cattle?  No. What he had was down pretty much to milk cows, and he took care  of them.  Do you recall an abundance of grasshoppers or rabbits?  No. I do know that we had those. We called them jack rabbits and they  are not like these little cottontails you see now. They were these great  big things. I can remember after I was grown, I was at my brother   s farm  up by Miami, one time we saw one. Honestly, it stood up with the ears  sticking up, it was probably that high. They were big things. They were  pretty well all killed out. I don   t know if there are any of them out there  anymore. I don   t remember. Right now there is a lot of coyotes out  through there, I don   t remember them either. People live so close  together all of these wild animals were killed. Right now, there is a lot of  a wild hogs out through there. We didn   t have any of those when I was  15  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  growing up. Some people say a lot of the famers, their pigs get out and  they just let them go. That   s where that really got started. So I don   t  know. But they are back out there now.  You mentioned the war a little bit, how did the war impact the  community from your standpoint?  The rationing, mainly. I know we were limited in sugar and coffee. I had  some ration books at one time. I don   t know what happened to them. We  could only buy one pair of shoes a year. They were real scarce, too.  Then they would come through and they were wanting any aluminum  that we had and we were saving that, or anything. If we had any old pots  or pans that we weren   t using, we would turn those in and they would  take them. I suppose they were using them to melt them down and reuse  them. What happened to them, I don   t know. We really didn   t have  much of an impact. Nearly every family had someone in the service, of  course with women, girls, none of us went. Only one of my brother-in-laws  did. The others were farming or else working out in the shipyards  out in California. A lot of the families had young men that went. A lot of  them lost them, too. There was hardly a family that wasn   t affected by  someone in the war.  Do you remember when your house got electricity?  No. I don   t think they ever did get it there.  Really?  Because, when I graduated high school, they stayed there another year or  two and then my folks moved to town. I don   t think anyone ever lived in  that house again.  So your eighteen years, no electricity?  No electricity, no water in the house.  Wow.  Yes. I can remember after we   d have a rainstorm sometimes a frog  would get in a well. They would have to get somebody out there to pull  it. Whatever that meant. Get it cleaned out and get the water tested  before we could use it again. It was a lot of hard work living out there  like that.  During your high school years did you enjoy school?  16  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Oh yes. It was always fun to go to school, to get with my friends and not  have to work all day long. (Laughs) I really enjoyed it.  Did you go to the movies?  Very seldom. When I was in high school, if we went to the ball games,  my grandma lived in town. We would spend the night with her so we  could go to the ballgames.  As you are growing up, what are you thinking you want to be when you  get older?  I never thought too much about that. I knew what I didn   t want to be,  and that was a farmer   s wife. After years went by I thought that really  wouldn   t have been too bad of a life. Probably wouldn   t have. That is  one reason why I wanted to go on and learn to do something. I have  often wondered how we lived out in the country there. We had a  telephone but it was a party line. I can   t remember any of my  boyfriends   I don   t know how I ever met the guys that I went with. I  really don   t. One of them lived south of us a ways and I dated him for  quite awhile. They never called because they knew everybody along the  line would be listening in. (Laughs)  Do you remember how many rings was your ring?  Two shorts, a long and a short. (Laughter) And now I can   t hardly  remember my zip code. (Laughter)  Eventually would you drive at all? Did your family say,    Here are the  keys to the car?     Absolutely not. (Laughter)  Dad wouldn   t let you take it out?  No. I did halfway learn to dive because he would have the car out in the  field and if he needed it taken out, well he would have me drive it out.  Of course, I was the one who was out there with him. My sisters didn   t  like that because they never got to drive, but I didn   t learn to drive until I  was married.  Wow.  Then my husband taught me how to drive.  Did you ever drive a tractor?  17  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Very little, only just to and from to the field for Dad. That was it. He  never, I don   t know, he didn   t trust us out there to learn to drive, to plow  up the plants he had planted. Anyway.  Would you get to ride the horses at all?  No. We never had a horse to ride. The ones he had to work in the field  with, he didn   t want us on them, because by the time he worked them all  day they needed to rest to they could work the next day. I can remember,  we had a big strip of land that was pasture, having to walk down there to  bring the cows in. Sometimes they would come because the water was  up close to the house. They would come up there for that. If they didn   t  come in we would have to go down and get them to bring them in to  milk.  That must have been fun.  Oh yeah. (Laughter)  Did you have a technique?  Well, we would just sit down on a stool and do that.  Would you ever have to slaughter a chicken, or was that your mom?  Well, I used to try. She could wring their necks off. She would catch  them and do like this with them and their necks would pop off. I thought  oh, that looks so easy, and I   d try that. Them old chickens, I would let it  down and the old chicken would shake itself and get up and run off. I  certainly have butchered several of them. Picked their feathers off or  else skinned them and then cut them up. Gut them and cut them up.  Did you have any role in the hogs?  No, they always kept us away from hogs. Hogs can be very dangerous to  little kids because they would never let us go around them much or even  feed them. Dad always did the feeding and watering because if you get  an old sow that had babies she can get really mean. She can take an arm,  leg off you in a hurry.  Would you ever get into any mischief, surely? (Laughter)  You talk to my sisters? (Laughter) Oh Yeah.  What would you do?  18  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Well, I can remember Ruth, she always had boyfriends. She was about  four years older than I. They brought her letters. I would sneak her  letters out and read them. That would really make her mad. One time she  was laying there asleep and my sister and I, younger than her, went out  and found a feather and then her hand was out like this. We put some  butter in her hand. We tickled her face and she rubbed that all over her  face. We thought that was so funny. (Laughter) There were all kinds of  things we did.  A little sisterly fun?  Yes.  Would they ever do anything to you?  Probably.  Tell me what happened after high school. What did you go on to do?  Well after I graduated high school, I had a sister living out in California.  So, I got a ride out there with one of the neighbors that was going, and I  stayed out there for a year. I worked in a five and ten cent store for a  while. There was a place that was offering LPN training, so I went up  there and got enrolled in that, stayed there about six months, and I  decided that I would rather get into school where I can become an RN.  So I left there and went back to the five and ten and worked until that  summer. Then, when I decided to come back to Oklahoma, rode the bus  back and then the next day I got cleaned up and got on the bus and went  to Oklahoma City. I walked down to St. Anthony   s Hospital and I told  them,    Here I am. I am ready to start nursing school.    That was in  August. They said,    Well we are filled up, but I think you could  probably get in at Mercy.    I had never heard of Mercy Hospital. So, they  told me to walk over there. I don   t know whether you know where the  old Mercy was down on Thirteenth and Walker. So I walked over there  and went in and talked to them. They enrolled me, told me to be back on  a certain day and I started school. So, when I got in there I decided I  really liked it. I stayed the three years until I graduated and took the state  board exam and passed. I went to work and was making all of  1.75 an  hour. Can you imagine? (Laughs)  But back then, you could get by.  Yes. Then I married right after that. Graduated one summer and got  married next January. He was going to school when he graduated, he got  a job teaching and he wasn   t even making  3,000 a year. So, we lived on  19  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  that and what I was making. First thing you know, I got pregnant and so  we had a pretty rough time with it for a number of years.  And you continued in a nursing career?  Worked some in the hospital, mainly I worked in doctor   s offices so I  could have better hours. Never went on and got any other education.  Later I kind wish I had it, but I did okay.  What year did you retire?  I am still working. (Laughter)  Are you really?  Well let   s see, I worked for a doctor, Paul McCroy, until he retired and  that was about    80. No it was    82. I decided that was it. I wasn   t going to  go back to work. After I married Wendell about five years later, he died.  So Dr. Pascall, William Pascall, needed someone to come work for him,  and he was getting old, too. I went to work from and worked for him  until he retired. That was    89, I guess. No, I don   t know, early    90s.  Then after a while Dr. Gilliland asked me to come work for him one day  a week. I thought, I don   t want to do it, but I did. I am still working  there. I have been there for ten years.  Well that   s good. It keeps you busy.  Yes.  What are some lessons or values that you remember growing up that you  still hold with you today?  Tell the truth. I knew if I didn   t tell the truth to my parents I would really  get in big trouble. Then as I got older out in the work field, I realized  there the value of being truthful. Also, looking back, we were poor  people, but one thing I learned was how to work. Good work ethics. If I  had a job I was willing to put in a full day   s work and doing the best I  could. Those two things. Treat your neighbors like you want to be  treated and your co-workers too. And respect your boss whether you like  them or not, but you need to respect them.  Looking back, would you have done anything differently?  Probably not. If I could look back and do anything different, it would  probably turn out worse than it did. (Laughs) I have had a good life. I  really have. I can   t complain. I really respect my parents now and hope  20  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  Nykolaiszyn  Hall  to see them one day again. They taught us to work and be honest and to  treat people right. I never remember hearing Mom and Dad fuss. I am  sure they had disagreements. You can   t live with anyone and not have  disagreements. Maybe one of them wouldn   t fuss, I don   t know. I doubt  if my kids remember us ever fussing. Because really, I would get angry  but my husband wouldn   t fuss with me. That was a good thing. (Laughs)  You left Oklahoma for a real short span but you came back. What does  Oklahoma mean to you?  Well it   s home. It is where my friends are at. I am not such a person that  I would never consider moving. In 1960, we went up to Topeka and then  from there on Ft. Leavenworth, and we were up there for fifteen years.  After the kid   s dad died, I brought the kids back to Oklahoma City  because I had family here. I have been here ever since. I am not such an  Okie that I would not have refused to move if the opportunity would  come up where I could have bettered myself or whatever. Oklahoma is a  good place to live. I love the climate. I love the seasons. I wouldn   t want  to live any further north and have longer winters. I sure wouldn   t want to  go south where it gets hotter.  Are your parents resting in Hydro or near Hydro?  Yes, out at Hydro Cemetery. Most of Momma   s family is out there, too.  Dad, I don   t know where his are buried. His one brother is in Shawnee  and his mother died when he was really young. I have no idea where she  was buried because they were living in Mississippi at the time. The  reason why he came to Oklahoma City was because he had a job  working on the railroad.  Is there anything else we haven   t covered today that you would like to  share with us?  I can   t think of anything.  Betty, we really appreciate your time today. Thank you so much.  Well you are welcome.  -------  -------  
