 Little Thunder My name is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is Thursday,  September 11, 2014. I   m in Stillwater interviewing Yatika Starr Fields  for the Oklahoma Native Artist Project sponsored by Oklahoma Oral  History Research Program at Oklahoma State University. Yatika,  you   ve lived numerous places, but I think Stillwater claims you as a  native son because you spent most of your school years here. You come  from a family of artists, but your medium is painting: live painting,  studio painting, and mural work. You   ve enjoyed professional success  almost since your teen years. Thank you for taking time to talk with me.  Starr Fields You   re welcome. Thank you.  Little Thunder Where were you born, and where did you grow up?  Starr Fields I was born in Tulsa, Oklahoma, and I grew up a few places in  Oklahoma. Let   s see. Hominy was the very first place I lived, then  Tahlequah and Stillwater, so those three places were all in Oklahoma  where I grew up.  Little Thunder You   re one of three siblings. Where do you fit in the sequence?  Starr Fields Right in the middle.  Little Thunder Okay, (Laughs) the middle child. I   ve interviewed both your mother,  who   s a potter, and your father, who   s a photographer. Can you  describe what it was like growing up in a creativity-centered  household?  Starr Fields I think it was great. There was a lot of creativity. There was a lot of  understanding of what goes behind it and seeing it happen, and learning  the process of making things, whether it   s through photographs or if it   s  in clay, and kind of the freedom to express yourself behind that. I think  5  seeing that as a younger person opened the door for me to feel  comfortable to do that. As you know, all kids and all children do that  anyways, but it let me just kind of keep a hold of that and explore it  more.  Little Thunder What about the name Starr, which is a last name, but you   ve got it as a  middle name, I guess, or part of your name.  Starr Fields Yeah, my middle name is Starr, Yatika Starr Fields with two Rs. The  story behind that is when my mom was having me on the way to Tulsa  from home, there was a big shooting star that went across the sky. They  decided to name me with the middle name Starr because of that. I think  that   s a pretty cool story.  Little Thunder What is your first memory of seeing either Native art or any kind of art  that deeply impressed you?  Starr Fields I think there   s a lot of moments. As I   m older, it   s kind of hard to go  back to those memories, but there   s glimpses of them. I think growing  up in Tahlequah, even at the Cherokee Heritage Center, seeing  sculptures made an impact on me. I can still see some of that, even  going to Red Earth when I was a young kid. My mom would be  showing there, and even I entered art pieces in the youth category.  Those are probably the earliest memories of Native art for me and  seeing it as other artists, a glimpse of Native art   .  Little Thunder Aside from your mom and dad, do you have artists in your extended  family?  Starr Fields Yes, we do. There are a few artists here and there that are doing stuff,  painting and whatnot. I think it   s a creative field. I think in any Native  family there   s going to be an artist somewhere. It   s just how it goes.  (Laughter)  Little Thunder Right. What is your first memory of making art?  Starr Fields Making art? That would probably be working with clay with my mom,  or making drawings, going back to when I was in grade school. Just  really drawing a lot. I remember students would be really enthralled,  and they   d be like,    Can you draw me this? Can you draw me that?    I   d  be like,    Yeah, definitely.    And poster contests and whatnot, the  teachers seeing it as something that I really enjoy, so letting me do it. I  think that would probably be that.  6  Little Thunder You   re Cherokee, Creek, and Osage. Sometimes when you   re multiple  tribes, people will go one way more than another. How do your  different tribal influences play out?  Starr Fields You   re right. I think you   re going to go towards one of them more than  any, but my parents, my mom, decided that I should grow up, I guess,  the Osage way because that   s what   s happened. I   ve been involved in  that, predominantly mostly that, which has been nice. It   s been good.  There   s a structure there, a big community. The dances happen every  June. There   s a Native American church where I was named at, also,  when I was one. I   ve really gravitated, not gravitated but revolved  around that structure. I   m thankful that there is a structure that I had the  opportunity to be a part of to round me out a little bit as a person, as an  artist.  Little Thunder You described one formative experience in elementary school when, I  think, it was a Filipino illustrator came in and did a cartoon in your  classroom. I   m wondering if you have any other memorable art  encounters that stand out from early school?  Starr Fields I think that that was really it. That one really took me back and was just  amazing to see what he could so quickly with his hands and with a  marker or pen. I   d never seen anything like that prior, and that he was  professional, there was a book out, that was really cool to see. It put it  into perspective what a professional is, I guess.  Little Thunder Oh, because he had a book of his work?  Starr Fields Yeah,    This is what I do,    and at that point I was like,    I can do that,  too. That   s what I want to do.     Little Thunder You had a studio, I guess, when you were in high school, and that   s  highly unusual. I wondered if you could tell us how that came about,  where it was.  Starr Fields I had a studio in high school. Junior high, I really was painting a lot just  in my room. I was already taking initiative to learn art and art history on  my own, on my own time, reading every book I could get my hands  onto, and giving myself knowledge about painting and every  movement. I was well versed in the arts even in high school, going into  Humanities class. I knew every artist; I could look at every painting. I  knew I wanted to go to another level with it, so I got a studio downtown  by DaddyO   s  Music Co. . I would also stay there at night and go to  school in the morning.  Little Thunder How did you pay for it?  7  Starr Fields I worked at Red Lobster. I was doing that, that and painting. I was  making Masters at that point, paintings  the Old  Masters    works and  using oils, so I was learning in that studio and training myself to paint.  Once I figured out, I think, how to paint like this, then I can kind of  move on from that, and then formulate, find my own voice, find my  style, I really had to learn the process of patience in painting.  Little Thunder When you were duplicating the Old Masters, were you trying to refine  your drawing skills, or were you looking at shadow and color or what?  Starr Fields Yeah, all of that, all of that: shadow, light and darks, color  compositions, compositions and figuring that out. I was doing  photographs, too, at the time, and that really helped the composition. I  think I have a natural eye for composition. That really comes in handy  for me. That worked for me. At the same time, I was also taking courses  that weren   t credited, just taking them for the experience at OSU, taking  senior figure drawing classes.  Little Thunder While you were in high school?  Starr Fields While I was in high school.  Little Thunder Were there any OSU professors that you     Starr Fields Yeah, there was one: Marty Avrett. He was like a mentor at that time,  taking me in there and just working my drawings out. Of course, I   m  not getting any points or credits or anything, but it wasn   t about that. It  was about learning something that I wanted to learn about at an  advanced stage in college, and I was in high school. I learned a lot, and  really helped me out. After that, we went to Italy and landscape painted,  too. Learned about color through him and how to look into the distance  on a horizon and see color change throughout the hour.  Little Thunder So you went to Siena, Italy. When you did your study in Siena,  landscape painting, you went with Marty Avrett and the class?  Starr Fields Yeah   with some of the students up there.  Little Thunder Oh, cool. Okay. What was kind of a real revelatory moment for you on  that trip?  Starr Fields All of it. Like I said, I had already studied. At nineteen or eighteen, I   d  already read books about Italian artists, so going out there when I was  nineteen, it was pretty awesome to know that you   re kind of retracing  steps of these painters. You   re seeing things where these guys have  8  worked. That was really cool to see that and to know that you   re in the  same place where these artists created paintings that you were doing in  the studio in Stillwater. I think that helped. That opened my eyes. It was  one of those moments of,    Wow      Little Thunder And these landscape paintings, they were on-site?  Starr Fields Yeah, they were on-site out in Tuscany. Wherever you go out, walk out  and find a spot that you want to paint, and sit there all day and paint it.  At the end of it, we had a show over at the villa where we were staying  at.  Little Thunder How did that impact your own sense of landscape when you came  home?  Starr Fields It influenced more than just landscape. It influenced my painting, how  to see color, use color. I think that was a big change for me. When I got  back, I went straight to Boston to go to school.  Little Thunder And how   d you decide on that place?  Starr Fields I decided Boston because I   d never been to Boston. I knew I wanted to  get to New York eventually. I had to make steps to that, and I felt like  Boston would be perfect. It was either going to be San Francisco, I  think, if not Boston. I   d already been to San Francisco, and I had no  desire to go there yet. I   d already seen it. I like the adventure of not  knowing something. I was close to New York, so that   s why I chose  that. At that time, I feel like I was getting reverted back to freshman  class for students that didn   t take art seriously or just learning the  basics, and it really bothered me.  Little Thunder Because this is the Boston Institute of Art?  Starr Fields Yes.  Little Thunder But you felt like your peers weren   t serious about their art?  Starr Fields No, most of them weren   t. I think you   re going to find that in any  college. Some people are serious about their studies, and some aren   t.  When it comes to art, that   s a very personal thing. It   s a very self-challenging,  expressive thing that you can only do. I feel like some  people really gravitate and connect what they can learn from school,  and some aren   t meant for it. It was a big conflict for me, I think,  coming from where I was coming from and going to school, and having  to go back through the basics of two-color compositions. I felt like I  was going back like five years, so it was really difficult for me. Plus, I  9  was doing a lot of traveling, and some big opportunities that came up  that even blew me away further.  Little Thunder What were those?  Starr Fields One was going to Malaysia, working with the Asia-Pacific Economic  Conference in Borneo and working with twenty-one Indigenous artists  from around the Pacific Rim. That just blew me away and opened my  eyes to see what was going on at a global level of younger artists, and  what they were creating, and where I am in this world, and where I need  to go. That really opened my eyes. I traveled, and then I came back to  school   . It was kind of a mess, but it was all meant to be. I was also  diving into graffiti at the time a lot, so that kind of pushed   I was  rebelling, too, against what painting is, and figuring out a new way of  expressing myself as an artist in painting. Graffiti did that for me, or  that was my vehicle.  Little Thunder Was it still pretty underground, or was it gaining more acceptance  when you started getting into graffiti art?  Starr Fields It was still pretty underground, yeah. I think it   s now more accepted, but  at that point it was still pretty underground. That was the fun of it. It  was still highly illegal. We did get in trouble a few times. It was  something for us when you   re twenty-two or you   re younger. It was  pretty fun. I learned a lot from it, though, movements and line work and  just being on the street, being adventurous. It was interesting, to say the  least.  Little Thunder I think I remember your mom saying   did you invite her along on one  expedition?  Starr Fields I think so. (Laughter)  Little Thunder Why was that important for you to have her understand better what you  were doing?  Starr Fields I just wanted her see, to let her know what   s going on. At that point I  didn   t care what she was going to say or not.    This is what I do.    I  guess it   s better for them to see what I   m doing.  Little Thunder I read that you won the national American Vision Award for painting at  the JFK Center. What   s the purpose of that award, and what did it  mean to you?  Starr Fields That was for scholastics. In the United States, every state has their own  competition, every city. Then you move up, you move up, and you   re  10  being recognized, I guess. You win a merit for your excellence in the  arts.  Little Thunder So this happened   was it out of high school? I wasn   t sure     Starr Fields Yeah, it was right out of high school. It was during high school. You  won an award in Oklahoma. Then after state, I went to nationals. You  won nationals, and then you go to the Corcoran Gallery where the  paintings hung. That was pretty cool to see work hanging up in the  Corcoran Gallery.  Little Thunder Yeah, one of your paintings.  Starr Fields There was, like, a Roy Lichtenstein show below.  Little Thunder Wow.  Starr Fields That was pretty fun. There was a lot of awesome artists there that had  work up. It was   that   s another experience. There   s a lot of little  experiences like that that happened when I was younger that really   .  You don   t think,    Oh, I may be doing something right.    You   re just  like,    I   m having fun. This is what I like to do,    and obviously, you   re  getting some recognition for it.  Little Thunder What award or honor are most proud of so far? I   m sure you have  many more coming up.  Starr Fields The most recent, I think the mural here at the museum was a pretty big  honor for me, to have something like that that   s permanent and in a  place where you grew up and in a museum but as an educational tool, as  well. I think that   s important   . Out of all the awards that have  happened, those are awards or merits, but this is pretty cool because it   s  an honor.  Little Thunder And you did it during that collaborative live painting project at OSU in  2012.  Starr Fields Yes.  Little Thunder Is that what you   re talking about?.  Starr Fields Yes.  Little Thunder And then one of the results was the students    work went up in the   Seretean Center for the Performing Arts , and your piece went into the  OSU museum at the Postal Plaza. I thought that was a great event, and  11  the OSU ensemble, one of the ensembles, created special music for that  live painting. I wondered if you thought the artwork would   ve turned  out differently if the music had been different. I don   t know if you   d  done that before.  Starr Fields I don   t think anyone   s ever done anything like that. I think that was the  first of its kind anywhere. I think any change in music or change in  dynamic of atmosphere would   ve totally changed that, but that   s the  point of that piece because it   s live, it   s on-site, it   s on-spot, it   s  working with what   s happening at that moment. That   s what it was  meant to convey: this moment in time and letting the music do its thing,  as well. I   ve done live paintings when there   s DJs and Hip Hop, and  yeah, it   s very lively, splashes, and whatnot, but it   s how you move,  too. You   re moving with it, so that   s going to change your brushstroke.  Little Thunder What other kinds of skills does live painting require that studio painting  doesn   t?  Starr Fields To not be shy. People can get out there and get nervous, really nervous,  and not create, or they   re hesitant, and they don   t know what to do. It  takes this confidence, which is great. I think it   s a confidence builder to  live paint. There   s nothing to be afraid of.  Little Thunder You   ve done it in Santa Fe before, which I would think would be really  intimidating because, you know, you have a lot of artists in the  audience, too.  Starr Fields Yeah, yeah, that   s the fun thing because it   s your time to shine. A  majority of those artists couldn   t do it. I   ve done it a lot of places, but  that was one of the fun places, yeah, you   re right, in the Gala against  other artists.  Little Thunder With live painting, are you consciously thinking about the path that the  eye is going to take to when the viewer   s looking at it, or are you just  trusting the movement to set up the right path?  Starr Fields Both, trusting myself and   first you   ve got to let yourself enjoy it and  feel confident with it. You can get to moments where you   re like,     What am I doing? I   ve got to fix this. I   ve got to pull this back my  direction,    and then find it and move with it. You do want something  that   s going to give the viewer, let their eyes set easily on it and let it  move freely with it to where there is enjoyment to it because it   s easy to  get away from that, and lose it, and just kind of make it look like a  mess. There are about three points in the process of it where you   ve got  to step back and analyze it real quick and then go back and stop and  analyze it and go back. You work fast, but I think from that process you  12  can go into the studio, and obviously you   re going to work quicker as a  painter.  Little Thunder So studio skills, you need another set of skills for that?  Starr Fields For the studio? No, I don   t think. Just allow yourself a lot of time. Give  yourself time and patience. Patience, that   s the skill. You don   t have  that or the want to get in there and paint, it might not work out so well.  Every artist has their own process of studio, studio time, and how they  work.  Little Thunder What was your first mural commission, and what were some of those  challenges?  Starr Fields The very first big mural commission I had was at the Sand Springs  Osage Casino. That was 2005, I believe. That was super; that was really  big. I can   t remember the square footage, but it was about eleven,  twelve feet high, maybe     Little Thunder Wow.  Starr Fields    and eighty feet. I don   t know. It wrapped around, pretty much, this  whole building. That was interior. The artists had to put up a bid. I think  mine was the lowest at the time because I was still young and it was my  first one, so I got it. You had to do like a mock-up, and the challenges  of that were just the scale. I got it done in like two weeks. You   re  constantly working. I would sleep in the car in the parking lot at night  and wake up. It was hot out, and you pour water on yourself and then  get to work. (Laughter) Murals are tough. They take a lot of time, and  they take a lot of stamina. They take a lot of strength, physically,  mentally, everything. I like that as a challenge, but, yeah, it posed a lot  just from scale and painting that.  Little Thunder What were your materials?  Starr Fields It was all acrylic, so it was all brush. It was all brush. That was fun to  work in that scale, and that was the beginning of more murals to come.  Little Thunder Because did you do one in Australia? Am I right? Did I read that?  Starr Fields Yeah, I did a few in Australia. I don   t know if any of them are up  because murals, they change pretty often if they   re on the street.  Little Thunder How did the first invitation come about?  13  Starr Fields I have a friend out there who   s an artist in Melbourne, and we worked  together in New York before. I was out in LA and was like,    Hey, I  think I might come out. What are you up to?    He was like,    I want to do  this big wall coming out. You   re welcome to work on it, and you get  paid.    The city pays artists to do murals. That   s unheard of here in the  United States, really, the amount that they do there. The city really  works with the artists, and they   re all about the arts and bringing in  tours of what the arts   . There   s a structure there that   s unheard of here.  I went out there to work with them through that and got paid doing  some murals, and pretty much made my money back on the ticket spent  going out there. I kept staying longer and longer, and I talked to this  gallery about having a solo show for, like, one night only. I was using  their studios to make these   I made, like, twelve paintings while I was  there.  Little Thunder That   s great.  Starr Fields Had a show there. It was fun.  Little Thunder Did you explore indigenous Australian culture over there?  Starr Fields Not this trip, but I want to go back and definitely work more with the  indigenous Aboriginal artists. It   s hard doing it in the cities. It   s hard to  really find that. There   s galleries that hold their work, but I think I   d  probably go out more to the interior and work with artists. My friend  who I worked with out there has done projects with them, like at Alice  Springs. I   ll definitely be going back. I   m looking forward to that, too.  Little Thunder How long have you been represented by Chiaroscuro Gallery?  Starr Fields Since 2004, yeah, 2004 I   ve been out there.  Little Thunder How has it impacted your development as an artist?  Starr Fields I   d say it   s impacted my work quite a bit. It   s allowed me to create and,  I think, to express what I want to express. It   s always been like okay,  you know that you   re going to be showing your work, regardless, but  you have your own standards, so you want to make it look somewhat  nice, too. It always got good feedback. I guess I got more and more  confident with my work and what I was doing that was different. I mean  different in showing Santa Fe, like, not painting an Indian man or  feathers or whatever, any of that stuff. I have no desire to paint that,  never will, but yet to challenge yourself and paint just how you want to  paint, to be an artist, to create a new landscape, a dreamlike landscape  where anything and everything is right. It kind of opened the doors for  myself, but trying to open up something newer than what Native art is  14  or in that whole area of Native arts in the Southwest. It   s given me time  to explore and know that it   s going to be out there, it   s going to be  shown. I really have fun just painting.  Little Thunder Did you in Santa Fe go to the IFAM  Indigenous Fine Art Market  show  this year?  Starr Fields I did. I checked it out. Yeah, I went down there and walked around.  Little Thunder You had your own gallery show going on     Starr Fields Yeah, my gallery show.  Little Thunder    Chiaroscuro.  Starr Fields I   ve never showed in a booth. I   ve always just shown with Chiaroscuro.  Little Thunder What   d you think of the IFAM show?  Starr Fields I thought there was a lot of positive things that are happening with  IFAM. I think it allows artists to platform, to show their work, Native  indigenous artists to show their work in a market where it   s hard to get  in and have their work seen. You have a lot of artists that aren   t  accepted into SWAIA  Southwestern Association for Indian Arts  Santa  Fe Indian Market, but yet they can show their work here. I think that   s  great for them, to give them an outlet for them to show their work so  people can see it, and sell it if they want to.  Little Thunder Do you think, in general, the Native art scene works effectively for  artists of your generation?  Starr Fields No, I think it   s hard. I think it   s tough to be an artist these days. It  always has been. I think the economy change, and what art is, and how  it   s viewed and looked makes it a little tougher. I think it does exist and  it does work out for some artists that have made a niche for their style  of Native art, but that only exists in Santa Fe. If you take you that out of  context or take it anywhere else, it   s going to be a little more difficult  for them to sell their work, but that   s a choice that they make as an  artist, as a business for them. I think it   s really tough for artists to get  their work out there, to be taken seriously, maybe. It takes a long time. I  think people want to see gratification instantly. It takes a long time. I  would say the word    patience    because I feel like that   s a true word to  use when it comes to art and making art. You   re on this ride for a long  time. You   ve got to keep challenging yourself and putting yourself out  there and putting your work out there.  15  Little Thunder In terms of the business side of art, how do you deal with that?  Starr Fields I try to get my work as many places as I can. I need to be in more  galleries. The more you   re in, that you like, that you feel like you can  work with, (and you   ve got to have good relations) almost like a family.  You want it to work well. That   s one good way of getting your work out  there, and making a living off of it, and self-promoting yourself. I think  social media is any platform now for artists to use, even myself, to get  their work out there on a global level. As for me, I was talking about the  Southwest. It   s a hub, but for me, I was showing elsewhere. In this time  in my career I know I need to get out more so and go to both coasts and  even beyond to make a living that I want to see for myself and for my  art to be out and be viewable and be shared. I think that   s a big part of  why I create and what art is about, to let people see with their own eyes  and let your visuals speak.  Little Thunder You talked in one interview about the fact that you   re planning this  move to LA and told me that you had to get a temporary studio while  you   re here to be able to do some work. It   s kind of a different deal,  isn   t it, when you   re painting larger canvases, from being, say, a  jeweler that can work in a small space, maybe?  Starr Fields Yeah, yeah. You got to get a good space, or else you   re not going to  make good work. I know that for a fact. It   s going to show, so you got  to treat yourself right. You got to give your art that love, I guess, and  that space, or else you   re not going create anything, and you   re going to  be kind of repressed. (Laughter) It   ll show in your work. Even in New  York it   s hard, unless you   re making a lot of money and you have a lot  of money. I can honestly say that, looking back at New York, unless  you have a lot of money and a good studio space, it   s tough to make art  there.  Little Thunder Space is expensive.  Starr Fields Yeah, it   s expensive because you   re pretty much renting two places to  live, so you got  6,000 a month. I know.     You   re sharing a studio  usually, too. That   s even worse because I like to have privacy when I  paint, to be able to walk in any moment and play your music or podcast.  It   s like that meditation, place of meditation. The temporary studio here  is nice. It   s allowed me to have that, at least, find what I needed to paint  here. The body of work recently was about Oklahoma, so it was good,  too, to be here and kind of reminisce about that time in my life and  recreate it in painting. It was good. When I go out to California, I  understand what I   ll be against, but I   ll make it happen just like I made  New York happen. I think I learned lessons and things in New York  that I   ll take with me to LA, even from here, and go on out.  16  Little Thunder You   ve talked about the painting process as a way of releasing, like,  childhood memories and also thoughts and feelings and how it kind of  helps you. You   re getting this self-knowledge through the process of  painting. You   ve also talked about leaving room in your paintings for  the viewer to kind of interpret as they need to. I noticed you use the  word    mystery    a lot when you talk about painting, and there   s an  element of mystery that you liked, and I wondered if you could talk  about that a little.  Starr Fields Yeah, I think in life there   s mystery. Every day we wake up, and I think  about how we   re alive or how this universe works. It might not be for  less than a minute, but think about our death, everything. That   s part of  the mystery. When you paint, you   re creating something that you   re  turning it into something that   s viewable, that   s visual. Yes, it   s a  reflection of something, but what? What is that? That   s a mystery right  there. You   re just kind of going about this universe. Again, the reason  you   re alive is because of molecules and everything and gravity, so it   s  a part of that, a continuation of that. What that is, is a mystery. I mean,  we can try and solve it through science, but I think some things are just  best to be left as is. That   s kind of the beauty of life. That   s what a  painting is: the beauty of life. That would be that. There   s only so much  you can understand in a painting. The rest, you let it visually speak to  you. Don   t try to pluck all its feathers out.  Little Thunder I know Nature   s an important source of inspiration for you, both in past  memories and also in the present. At the same time, you   re very  technologically savvy and of that generation that is using a lot of digital  media. Is there a pull for you between spending time outdoors and  being present and also being digital or virtual? Is there a pull between  those two things?  Starr Fields I think they   re both great. It   s always nice to get out and do things and  be amongst Nature. Or if you   re on your phone too much or on the  computer, it   s good to go work outside. It   s like a 50/50 thing, I think.  The evolution of social media is still being looked into for me. You  have to manage your time, I guess. I love being outside when I can, and  traveling and going to new locations or spots in the mountains and  finding beautiful areas without your phone or anything on you. That   s  always nice to do when I can do that.  Little Thunder What kinds of work did you do, research or memory work, for your  Oklahoma landscapes?  Starr Fields That was pretty much   all these painting took place in northeastern  Oklahoma or about that time when I was growing up out on the river  17  and those memories of the water, learning how to swim, or what   s  under the water. You can take a day and break it up into twelve  paintings. It   s always kind of an awesome place for me to go to and  look in the water, what   s underneath there and how it   s clear and how  there are so many flint rocks. The Osages used to hunt there.     They  call it Medicine Stone River Creek. There   s a lot of historical, not  historical, but ties, I think, that bring me to that place. I don   t know  what that really means and what that is. All I know is there   s something  that   s special about that place and there always has been. A lot of it was  memories and me seeing it and then painting it, not really photos or  anything or sketches, just what   s in your mind already, what   s there.  Little Thunder I would like to talk about your creative process and techniques in a  little more detail. I know your primary medium, I think, in the studio is  oil on canvas, but you mentioned you started working with palette  knives a few years ago. Can you explain why you started to use those?  Starr Fields I only started using palette knives these last few months with this new  body of work for Santa Fe. We discussed northeastern Oklahoma,  Illinois River. Maybe because there   s so much texture, I wanted to  paint, paint, paint without the brush. I used a lot of brush, though, too,  but mostly I used a lot of palette knife. You can do a lot of blending and  a lot of texture. In nature up there, you   ve got a lot of texture, and the  water over the rocks, the trees, and the bark and the depth of the leaves.  Let it build up, just kind of pasting, sculpting with paint a little bit,  giving it depth and dimension, trying something new.  Little Thunder And there   s movement.  Starr Fields Yeah..  Little Thunder You move in different ways.  Starr Fields    there   s movement. That   s kind of new for me. I enjoy it, so you   ll  probably see it in other works down the line in the future, kind of a mix  of half paint, half brush, half palette. It   s like an inventory for me in my  studio process. I can go and pull out this from over here and that from  over there and then combine it.  Little Thunder What other painting materials do you work with that we might not  normally associate with oil and canvas?  Starr Fields I use a lot of spray paint. I have, and in the past works on canvas.  Mostly spray paint would be that medium, but it   s more prevalent these  days with a lot of artists as more and more spray paint is being made  specifically made for artists in studio, and colors and companies. Then  18  going to murals and walls, I use pretty much all spray paint when it  comes to that.  Little Thunder I noticed on your Postal Plaza piece there   s kind of this gold foil-looking     Starr Fields Oh, yeah.  Little Thunder Is that     Starr Fields For that, it   s gold leaf.  Little Thunder Okay.  Starr Fields I   m spray painting that. That one   s all mixed media. I wanted to give  that   some of the color you get with spray paint is so vibrant and so  certain. It   s just flat, so it   s nice, and I like that. It looks like a graphic  piece or something. It gives it a new dimension, something new, which  is what we   re discussing and wanting to create, and talked about for this  particular piece, giving it that next level look, I guess.  Little Thunder And there   s a history to the spray painting, you said.  Starr Fields Oh, yeah. There   s a big history with spray paint, how it was created,  and for the paint, and how artists took it to use as a medium to express  themselves at any time, and how it   s carried on to now, and how a lot of  artists are taking it to their own court and making it their own.  Little Thunder How has your painting style changed, just like within the last five years,  do you think?  Starr Fields I think there   s more movement in it. I think there   s a lot more color.  Probably movement, movement and color. I   ve always had movement,  but there   s older works that have a lot of negative space in it. That was  fine at the time. I was just kind of, I like negative space, but in this one  I   m using different negative space as far as depth goes and making  more scenes in a painting. I think color and movement would probably  be how I   ve changed a bit, using more of it to obtain a signature almost  for myself.  Little Thunder How do you do your signature?  Starr Fields Visual signature, like the style, the whole thing.  Little Thunder Is it the same each time, or does it change with the painting?  19  Starr Fields I think it changes with the painting.  Little Thunder Stories seems to be pretty important in your work, even if it   s not  necessarily a linear story. You talk quite a bit about the importance of  creation myths and the Osage creation myth as a source of imagery and  ideas. What do you think makes those such rich resources?  Starr Fields I think they   re rich resources because it   s a part of who we are. It   s kind  of what you know. You   re given something to work with at a young  age. As an artist, we paint what we know. As a poet, you speak what  you know. This is what I know about myself and my makeup, who I  am. You have these, and it   s kind of what you work with. It   s what I  work with. I   ve dealt with it. I   ve painted in some paintings about that  and kind of reconstruct it into your own dialogue, your own abstraction.  Other paintings, I add little bits of elements to it. I think it   s something  that   s always with you   . You figure it out as you go along, but it   s an  interesting story, creation stories. I always think they give artist a lot of  information to create.  Little Thunder What is your creative process from the time that you get an idea?  Starr Fields I   ll think about it for a while, probably maybe make a few sketches in a  book, kind of see how it would look like, and put a note down on my  phone. Then get a canvas, and if I feel like it   s going to work, then I   ll  paint it. I   ll work on that until it comes out. Usually, I really don   t paint-paint.  Sometimes I   ll do live paintings, and then those are the paintings.  I can go for months now without really doing a big body of work. When  I do get into the studio, then it   s on. It   s like nine paintings, ten  paintings, and that   s really nice. Usually by then I   ll have a big idea of a  body of work.  I think now I like to work more as in bodies of pieces than one singular  piece. They all kind of relate to each other so you   re kind of not  cheating yourself to one thing but letting it have others to speak with it.  It gives you more time to paint, and it gives me more time to think now  about what it is I   m going to paint. Now I want these paintings to be  something more than just a painting but to have a story or a meaning  behind it, I think. As in the past where I was making a painting to paint,  now I want a timeline of all these, what these paintings are going to be  about.    what I would call that, but I think that   s kind of the new  process that I want to go for in painting and how I want to operate with  the painting.  Little Thunder So when you   re doing that body of work, are you finishing one out  completely and then starting another, or are you working  simultaneously?  20  Starr Fields Yeah, it   s simultaneously working them out and going from one  painting to another painting and kind of figuring out because one  painting   s speaking to the other across the room. You   re like,    I like  this, and I think this is what needs to go on this one over here.    They all  share this same thing about them, which works when you   re showing  them, as well, because they all have relevance to each other.  Little Thunder You sort of explained that your creative routine is not necessarily  working every day, but when you are in there working, what   s your  creative routine or ritual?  Starr Fields When you   re in there working, then you   re working every day probably  for a month. I like to work at night so I   ll get in there, like, at five p.m.  and then leave at seven a.m. You   re in there all night. You   re listening  to music, and then you   re painting, then maybe an hour, just looking at  them.  Little Thunder A lot of artists like to paint at night.  Starr Fields Yeah, I think the night   s good because everyone   s asleep and it   s just  you. It   s quiet, and it   s not bright outside. It   s lit in your studio, but  there   s nothing you can look at to distract you. (Laughs) For me, like I  said, it   s artists and their studio process and how they paint. It   s up to  them. For me, I like the solitude of it and the quietness of the night.  Little Thunder You   re still pretty young from my standpoint, but looking backwards  from this moment in your life, what was this kind of fork-in-the-road  time when you could   ve gone one way and you just chose to go  another?  Starr Fields In Boston, at the Art Institute of Boston. I think about that, too, but  there   s not much to think about. That would be the fork, and I   m sure  there   ll be a few more probably coming up.  Little Thunder Just deciding to go out on your own rather than get a degree?  Starr Fields Yes.  Little Thunder Going for it.  Starr Fields Yeah. Who knows.     They shouldn   t have turned me in; I shouldn   t  dwell on that. Just going to keep working. There   s so much opportunity  out there, and how you can operate as an artist and be a business person,  to be a professional, to make your work stand out. There   s a lot of them.  There   s room for you.  21  Little Thunder What   s been one of the high points?  Starr Fields In working, in painting, being able to travel and work with artists and  being free to do that. Everywhere I   ve traveled   Miami is always great,  working with artists out there and showing out there. I think the  highlight is there   s a lot of highlights. That   s all this traveling to  different places all around the world and working with artists and being  able to show your work. I   ve been all over the place, and to look back at  it, it   s all been through art and painting. Never once traveled somewhere  to vacation or whatever. It   s always been, you   re going to show or make  art.  Little Thunder What   s been one of the low points?  Starr Fields The low points was, actually it was that time in Boston. That was  traveling, coming back, having to make a decision, and getting involved  in graffiti. The being away from home, and you   re kind of really  looking at yourself, analyzing yourself. I feel like everyone kind of goes  through that at some point in their life when they   re that young. Who  you are.    Who am I? What am I doing? Where am I at? Where am I  going?    You have to overcome it. (Laughter) You have to climb that  hill. I guess that was probably it, but at the same time you   re a poor  student. Probably that.  Little Thunder Is there anything else we should talk about that we forgot to cover  before we look at your artwork?  Starr Fields I feel good. We covered a lot.  Little Thunder Okay, Yatika, we   re looking at one of your live paintings. You want to  tell us a little bit about it?  Starr Fields Yeah, so this piece I painted in Phoenix this March with about four  other painters. It wasn   t a battle, but it was a live painting deal. I think  we had an hour. When I   m live painting, I   m kind of rocking, moving  with the music that   s playing, doing movement for the audience to see,  not just sitting at the brush, really moving my whole body and really  getting these marks, expressing these marks a lot with the brush. I   m  coming up with forms and things right off the top of my head and  getting them in there and painting. A lot of this is really spontaneous,  but then again you   re trying to keep this composition happening.  Little Thunder Right.  22  Starr Fields I think you have like one, two, three, like this diamond composition  happening, balancing things, where greens and yellow are, pinks.  Little Thunder I think the pinks and the turquoise are getting to be part of your  signature colors.  Starr Fields Yeah, yeah, I definitely like using those colors. I would say so.  Little Thunder Just real quickly, can you explain art battles?  Starr Fields Yeah, art battles, it   s a competition, and I think it   s happening more so  all over the place now. It   s gained a lot of popularity. It started in New  York City about six years ago, maybe further out, seven. I got involved  with it a while back and did pretty well with it and became one of the  top painters, live painters, in New York City and got to be part of a  team up there.  Little Thunder Are there actually awards, cash awards?  Starr Fields Yeah, there   s cash awards. There   s cash awards, but then you   re also  getting street cred, notoriety, like,    Wow, you   re an amazing painter.  You can do this,    and then the work sells. It   s recognition, really, for  your work. Usually the piece sells, too, so I think it   s like a street cred,  overall. We   ve traveled to other countries. Went to Barcelona, battled a  team out in Barcelona. That was a pretty amazing time. It still goes on.  Little Thunder How about these two paintings?  Starr Fields These two paintings are paying homage to the late painter Harry  Fonseca. There   s a third piece to this, and the museum has it, actually,  OSU museum.  Little Thunder The OSU museum, okay. That   s the piece you donated?  Starr Fields Yes. These two pieces are kind of the other pieces of them. Harry  Fonseca painted these pieces called Four Seasons.     He did his  paintings almost like in  Jackson  Pollock   s style, his drip paintings of  cherry blossoms. I wanted to recreate that but in my style, so every  blossom is   painted to the point to where if you stand back, it almost  mimics a drip painting. How I started it was a background of blue and  then went into where I thought the limbs should be and fall. Then I went  and blossomed each of them out, so that   s how the composition worked  on them. It was becoming the tree almost, the bloom. It was funny,  when I was painting this, not funny but really ironic about this. Outside  of my studio in Brooklyn, we had a cherry blossom tree blossoming out  there, as well.  23  Little Thunder Wow.  Starr Fields It was pretty cool to see that happening at the same time. I really  admired his work, and I really wanted to do something with it for his  work and recreate, so I did these paintings.  Little Thunder Do you normally title your paintings?  Starr Fields Yeah, I title my works. Sometimes I don   t. Most of the times I do.  Little Thunder And do you put the title in the painting, as well?  Starr Fields No. Usually the title will go behind the painting on the other side, but if  it   s hanging up in an exhibition, the title will go up with it. Titles really  do a lot for paintings. They   ll set the pace for what you   re going to  think about   .  Little Thunder Okay, this is an earlier painting, also.  Starr Fields Yes, this is an early painting from 2005. This is called The Sting of Life,  and this was painted in Boston? New York? New York, yeah, in  Brooklyn. It was wintertime, and I was sick, pretty broke, so I wanted to  kind of paint about that and what that felt like.  Little Thunder And you mentioned that your signature sometimes changes with the  painting. It   s different in this piece.  Starr Fields Yeah, these I was kind of playing these allegorical things, like these  little weird signature boxes. (Laughter) I think I was just having fun  with those. I mean, it   s lit up by candles. (Laughter)  Little Thunder The darker mood really comes through on this. (Laughter) Oh my  goodness, yeah, okay. I   m going to try to zoom on those little candles.  That   s great. Well, thank you for your time today, Yatika.  Starr Fields Thank you for having me and interviewing me. Appreciate it.  -------  -------   
