 L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  Today is April 21, 2011. My name is Latasha Wilson, and I am with the  Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at the Oklahoma State  University Library. I am here in Dill City, Oklahoma, at the home of  U.L. Smith. I will be interviewing U.L. as part of the Spotlighting  Oklahoma Oral History Series.  We are also joined by his wife, Ladonia  Smith, and Randy Wilson.  Thank you for having me in your home. Let   s  start out by having you tell me a little bit about when and where you  were born.  Well, I was born five miles north of Hollis in 1920. We lived there seven  years after I was born and moved to Dill City, two miles south of town.  Were you born at home?  I imagine. (Laughter) Yes.  How many siblings did you have?  There was five sisters and six boys.  Wow. And where were you in the order of kids?  I was sixth kid, I think.  So growing up, did you have a lot of chores?  Yes ma   am. I had cattle to feed, cows to milk, hogs to slop, and just  regular farm work.  So your father was a farmer?  Yes.  5  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  And your mother tended to the children and the household.  Yes.  What crops did your father farm?  Cotton mostly. Back in that day they had to have feed for the horses and  bundles, they   re called bundles. That is feed for the horses. We used to  have maize to feed to the horses. We did that in the field, cut them off  there, and throwed them in the wagon. That was fast work. Then every  year we had a little crop of cane that we made sorghum syrup out of.  Did you make that at your home?  No, there was a man back over northwest of here that had a syrup mill.  We took it over there and he was the one who did the cooking.  And then would you sell it, or was it just for your family?  No, just for the family.  Was that a sweet treat, like dessert?  Oh yes, yes. This sorghum mill, it mashed the stalk   the juice out of the  stalk. The horses pulled around and around, and you fed the stalks into a  press. The press would juice out into a bucket, and then they poured it  into a cooker. This cooker had divisions in it, and they would stir it this  way. When it got down to the end, well it was syrup and went into a  gallon bucket.  Was it a plastic or a metal bucket?  Metal bucket. There wasn   t any plastic in those days  (Laughter)  That   s true. Would you just keep it with the lid on it?  Oh yes.  And spoon it out?  Yes. Or poor it out into a pitcher of what mother wanted is how we used  it.  Did you have a big garden growing up?  6  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  R. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  Pretty good garden. Tomatoes, potatoes, watermelons, and every what,  you know.  What are some dishes you remember your mother making?  Fried chicken. (Laughter) And mashed potatoes. And usually what we  have today, about it.  Did you raise a lot of chickens?  Yes.  And who was in charge of killing the chickens for dinner?  Who do you think? (Laughter) Well, we didn   t have it every day, you  know. Just once in a while, mostly on Sunday. We just had chickens  enough to supply the house, home, eggs, and what have you.  But with eleven kids, that   s quite a few eggs needed  Did you have a  smokehouse on your property or did you     Not where we lived, but a lot of people did have a smokehouse. They  probably smoked   I guess back in the real early days, they smoked meat  in it, I don   t know. That   s the reason they call it a smokehouse, I guess.  Did you work in the cotton fields, too?  Oh yes, barefooted most of the time.  In the heat?  Yes. We   d jump from one plant to the other where the sand was cool  because we worked. Not like the kids today. If they had to do work they  would gripe about it or their parents would say,    You   re working them  too hard.    That wasn   t a problem back in those days. We just know guys  work.  Did you all chop cotton, too?  Yes. That   s what I say when we were chopping cotton we   d   if it was a  big weed up the ways, we   d step in the shade to keep from burning our  feet.  What else do you remember about working in the cotton fields?  Well, we pulled it by hand and drug a sack behind us. When we got a  7  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  sack full or what have you, we weighed it and put it up in the wagon,  emptied it and went back to pulling some more.  How much did each sack weigh? Like what were you     It depends on how long of a sack you had. Some of them had twelve foot  sacks and you could put a hundred pounds in it, easy. But mostly fifty or  sixty pounds, generally.  Where was the nearest cotton gin?  Here at Dill.  So when you were seven you moved to Dill and kept farming     Yes.  Then did you go to school in Dill City?  Yes.  How old were you when you started to school?  Oh, probably six   about seven. I went to school at Bitter Creek down by  Hollis   a little country school, two room school   for six months. They  called it Bitter Creek. It   s not there anymore, but we had to walk to it. It  was a couple of miles, I imagine.  And you walked with your siblings, your brothers and sisters?  Yes.  Did your family get a car eventually?  Well, we had a car.  When did you get a car?  The first car I know of is a    23 model Studebaker. I remember there was  a doctor at Hollis that had this special built. He had it a couple of years  and Dad bought it off of him then.  How many kids would that car hold?  It was a three   it was a front seat, then there was a middle seat, and two  of what they call jump seats, and then the back seats. But if you didn   t  8  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Smith  U. Smith  R. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  use that jump seat, they folded up and got out of the way. But as many  kids they had, it was always   it didn   t fold up very many times.  (Laughs)  Would your family go into town very often on Saturday nights, or for  church or anything?  We went to church all the time on Sundays, but going to town was     Saturday is about the big day to go to town. I could go over here to  Cordell and you couldn   t find a parking place. The streets had many  people on it, walking until you couldn   t hold them. Now you go over  there and there won   t be one car sitting there on a Saturday night.  So what would people do on a Saturday in town?  They   d come visit, they   d get a haircut, they   d get a Coke. It was a treat.  Groceries.  Yeah, and buy groceries. Call it a necessary thing and a pleasant thing,  too. We didn   t go to town. We were working in the field or Dad didn   t  have the money to buy gas all the time, and it was just eleven cents.  Did you get to go to the picture show any?  Yes if you had the money. If you had a dime, you could go to the picture  show.  Do you remember your first time to go to the picture show?  Yes, it was down here, in Dill. I don   t know who brought it in, but it was  a silent movie. Mother went in with me and I wanted to sit on the front  seat. I didn   t know what kind of chairs, boxes, what have you to sit on. It  was a western, and this mean guy was dressed up as a wolf. That scared  me and I went back and sat with Mother. (Laughter)  Do you remember how much it cost to go to the show?  I think that was free. I think that was put on free, best I can remember.  Of course, I was real young then. Probably just eight years old or  something like that.  Do you know how your parents came to be in this area?  Yes, they lived north of Hollis and my grandpa liked to buy land and  move around, so him and Dad got together. It was real sandy land, hard  9  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  R. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  to farm. I   m pretty sure that they knew a fellow that lived up here, so  they came up here. My father bought a quarter two miles south and my  grandpa bought across the road two miles south.  Was your grandpa born in the Oklahoma area or where did he come  from?  He was born in Kentucky.  His name was  J.J. Savage. I don   t know  what year he was born.  But he came from Kentucky to Oklahoma to the Hollis area?  He went to west Texas. He told me (we interviewed her one time) he  came as a single person to west Texas and he had a daughter. He  commenced working in fields and what have you. And I don   t know  where Grandma Savage came from, I just don   t know. I think we   ve got  it somewhere, but I don   t remember now.  And then was your father born in Oklahoma?  Born in Texas. I don   t know just what town though.  Did he meet your mom in Texas?  No, he met her down close to Hollis, down there.  So when you were growing up your grandparents lived nearby?  Yes, J.J. Savage    I never did see my Grandpa Smith. He died about  four years before I was born. Him and her both.  Would you go over to your grandparents    house very often and help  them out or would they cook a meal?  Not a whole lot. I did some of it, but I got to drive that old tractor.  (Laughter)  What kind of tractor was it?  It was an F-12 Farmall, steel wheels, and lug wheels.  Was that fun for a few days until it got to be harder?  Oh yes, yes. (Laughter)  Did your mom do much sewing?  10  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  R. Wilson  U. Smith  I guess she did it all.  Did she make your clothes?  Yes, some of it. Some of it we bought.  How would eleven kids bathe?  Just take time about in the same water. (Laughter) We just had an old,  we called them number two tubs, just round. Down here, we had to haul  water in a bucket to the house, and it was from here to across the road  over there   the well was. We heated the water, got in there, and tried to  sit down. Of course, as kids we could do that but not a grown person.  They would have trouble getting in a number two tub. (Laughs)  At mealtimes would all thirteen of you eat together around the table?  We didn   t eat until we were together, those were their rules. We eat  together.  Did you have a really long table?  Yes, and a bench on one side and chairs around the other side.  Did you always share bedrooms?  Oh yes, me and my brothers slept together all the time.  Did you have a goose down mattress? Or what was your mattress?  No, it was an old cotton mattress. Some people had a feather mattress,  but I slept in one. I didn   t like it because you bare up too much in them. I  didn   t care for them.  Do you remember when times started getting harder due to the  Depression?  Yes, in    29. That is when the stock market broke and things got pretty  bad. Just before that time, my father bought an eighty just north of us. Of  course, he borrowed money and of course the stock market broke, and  everything went to pot and he lost everything then.  He lost the eighty?  Yes, and his home place, both.  11  R. Wilson  U. Smith  R. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Smith  U. Smith  L. Smith  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  So what did he do?  Well, he just kept farming. He   d just rent land.  You probably grew your own food but couldn   t sell the produce.  No, the only thing we sold was cream.  And eggs.  Well we didn   t sell eggs, we ate them.  Your mother did sell eggs.  Maybe she did, I don   t remember now. But anyway, cream was   we   d  milk and we had a separator, which you turned by hand. There wasn   t  electricity.  When did you get electricity?  I didn   t have electricity when I went to the Army in    41.  What about indoor plumbing?  No. That didn   t start coming in until about the time the war come on,  you know. After we married and moved to the farm, we put in for  electricity, and it was about a year before we ever got it. That was on the  farm. They were so far behind. It   s rural electricity.  Well back to school days, would you go to school on a normal school  year basis, or were you off for harvest season? How did that work out?  Well, during cotton pulling they turned the school out for six weeks,  sometimes maybe longer.  What month is that?  Cotton harvest come on in maybe last of August. Most of it was in  September I think, it might   ve turned out. It was September, October, I  don   t know, when the cotton got really busy. The kids worked in those  days. They turned the school out for the kids to work, and they did.  So would you take your lunch to school?  Oh, yes.  12  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Smith  U. Smith  Did you always have the same lunch?  About the same thing, wrapped in a newspaper or a brown sack, or  something or other. I remember you would put your lunch up in the little  old closet and some shelves. I went to get mine one day, and the rats got  part of it. So the teacher gave me one of her sandwiches, and it was  bought bread. We never did have bought bread. Mother made it all, and I  thought it was the best treat I ever had, eating that sandwich   bologna  with bought bread.  Do you remember many of your teachers?  I know my first teacher. I didn   t know that one down at Bitter Creek, but  that first teacher here was Miss Spence and Miss Octave, Miss North,  and that is as far as I   m going to go. (Laughter) I didn   t finish school.  How far did you go?  Seventh grade.  In Dill City, was it several room schools?  Oh yes, it was a consolidated school here.  How many kids were in your classes, about?  Probably thirty. The first time that they started serving lunch they would  give you a bowl and would come by with what they call cream cans     about that big around, and about that tall (gesturing). It had soup in it.  You sat at your desk, you didn   t have no lunchroom. You sat at your  desk and they poured that soup in your bowl, and you would eat it right  there.  Was it warm?  The best I can remember.  Would you play games at recess?  We played marbles. Yes, there was always a game going on: Rover,  Rover Come Over or what     Red Rover.  Red Rover. It got to where they would play marbles. You couldn   t  13  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Smith  U. Smith  hardly walk on the school ground at noon because they were playing  marbles. (Laughter) And we played baseball. We   d choose up another  one and play baseball. There was a fight every day at noon about it. Not  a knife fight, it was just old knuckle fighting. They use knives and guns  nowadays. The teacher just turned their back on it and said,    Well, when  they get it over with, it   ll be all right.    And sure enough, they were.  They didn   t go out there and stop it; they just let them have it out. They  know it   s just knuckle fighting. (Laughs) So about always on lunch hour  it was a fight going on. It may not last very long, but it was a fight.  So did many of your siblings graduate from high school?  Yes, all of them did.  What did you do in seventh grade?  Tried to be the best man I could. (Laughs) I don   t remember that. What  did I do? I was supposed to be studying, I guess.  What made you quit school?  I thought I had all I needed.  So then you went     A lot of people back in those days didn   t finish school.  Did you just work more on the farm then?  Well, yes, I worked on the farm. I still stayed at home. I didn   t run off  anywhere.  How long did you stay on the farm? How old were you when you left?  I left when I was twenty-one and went into the Army, when Uncle Sam  sent me a nice letter,    Congratulations, congratulate...    (Laughs)  Did you expect that? Were you     Oh yes.  They were drafting all the boys.  I was drafted, draft Army. When we get to the Army, well, I   ll tell you  more about that when you get ready.  14  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Smith  U. Smith  L. Smith  U. Smith  L. Wilson  What would your parents do for entertainment?  They had a radio and that was it.  Would the whole family gather around the radio?  Well, sort of. We listened to the Grand Ole Opry, and that was a big  deal. Lum and Abner. Radio back in those days was mostly music. We  used to listen to The Lone Ranger, something like that. Grand Ole Opry  on Saturday night, people gather around the radios to listen to The  Grand Ole Opry.  Would they ever get together for dances or to play dominoes?  No, our family didn   t. We didn   t believe in something like that. Now,  where we lived out west of town out there, there are three houses. One  of those houses held a dance every Saturday night. They   d just take  turns. Me and my brother, we were kind of ornery. We got lye soap, and  we slipped up to the first house where they were having the dance and  we   d smear all their car windows with old lye soap. They would come  out and say,    Man, we   ve got a frost on     Oh, we were out there just  giggling. (Laughter)  So would your mom make the lye soap?  Oh yes. Yes, that was one of the big deals, lye soap.  What were some cures for ailments? Homemade medicine, or     You know, I don   t know just what they used, but black draught  syrup .  I never did use that     As a laxative.  Yes and there was   what was that they gave me for punishment?  Castor oil.  Castor oil. (Laughter) Me, my brother, and my cousin   we had a little  creek running through our place and it was winter. There was thin ice  over it. We got to daring each other to jump in that. So we pulled our  clothes off and jumped in that thing. It was so cold  (Laughter) Well, our  cousin, he had to mouth off when we got to the house. The punishment  was to take some castor oil. I cannot believe they did that to us.  And you just drank it?  15  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Smith  U. Smith  R. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  Spooned it, one spoonful.  Wow.  Wow. Did you ever take any of it?  No. (Laughs)  Well, you missed something. (Laughter)  It   s very oily. You soaked your foot in turpentine if you stepped on a  nail.  Oh yeah. I did that, and churning. See out there, that flower over there,  that is a churn that is sitting on there. That is what you call a dash churn.  I   ve still got the dash, too. You turn the butter. I thought sometime I   d  never get through churning   I thought that butter was never going to get  there.  Did you all sell the butter?  No. I   ve got a dash churn over there that you turn, too. You just lived off  the farm, you hardly bought anything. You bought flour and sugar and  stuff like that you couldn   t make yourself.  Would you keep the butter cool? Was there an ice-man?  We didn   t have anything to keep it cool with.  Did you ever get homemade ice cream?  Not until I was a big old boy. When I was small, all ice cream we had  with what we made. We   d make ice cream in the freezer in the  summertime.  Would you get the ice in town?  Yes.  What about for the holidays? Were there certain holidays that were  special to your family that you would do anything for?  Fourth of July and Christmas, that   s it.  What would you do on the Fourth of July?  16  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Smith  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  Us kids maybe went popping fire crackers, and there used to be a lake  out west. Well, it   s still there, that they   d gather together and have some  music and something to eat. It was just kind of a get together.  And then for Christmas what would you do?  Oh, nothing very exciting.  Did you have a Christmas tree?  No.  You had candy and nuts.  Yes. I still remember when we lived down at Hollis, my oldest brother,  he said,    There is a reindeer on top of the house  Do you hear it?    And  boy, we   d jump out of bed and down we   d go. There would be a big  table full of oranges, apples, and this curly candy. You know, it curls  like this.  Yes.  A little bit of candy. We always had a treat on Christmas.  Would it be just your family? Did you have a meal?  Just our family.  Did your parents talk about politics much?  The only time I heard anything about a president was when Roosevelt  went in, back in the early thirties. I remember Grandpa Savage, we were  out in the field. He came out there and said,    Well, Roosevelt is the  rooster now. (Laughs) He   s a man.     Would you ever listen to his Fireside Chats on the radio?  We didn   t have a radio. My grandpa had a radio, but we didn   t have one.  Did you experience much dust in the Dust Bowl?  Yes, I   ve seen it. You   ve seen a heavy fog. I   ve seen it so still here, and  you can hardly see across the street through the dust. It was coming out  of Colorado, they said. But there wasn   t any wind. I can remember there  wasn   t any wind. That   s the one thing I can remember about it mostly.  17  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  R. Wilson  U. Smith  R. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  You couldn   t see no ways. Just dust in the air. Like I said, just keep  falling in, but there wasn   t any wind down here.  Did it last very long?  Probably two days, maybe. You   d have high winds here and the sand  would blow. Pretty bad.  Would you keep a wet cloth over your face or     Well, we didn   t but a lot of people did.  Was your mom always cleaning?  Oh, I imagine. (Laughter) When she set the table, she   d turn the plates  bottom up because the dust might come in, until we   d get ready to eat.  Then she   d uncover everything.  So were you aware of farming practices changing after that?  Yes.  What did they do differently?  First thing, the government had tree rows planted to break the wind.  That probably helped a little bit. They were telling you to put a cover  crop on. That did it. The cover crops wouldn   t let the sand blow. You   d  still have your wind, but you wouldn   t have any sand. Of course, in the  tractors, you can get over fields faster. In sandy land, if it rains a hard  rain it slicks it off, and a little wind   oh, it   d blow terrible. You would  just have horses and a seven foot plow or whatever; you didn   t get over  land very fast. After they got the tractors, there were bigger plows and  everything.  What was a good cover crop?  Well, I   d have to think what they did.  It depends on the season, I guess.  They tried to cover it with something that grows. They put a lot of it to  grass.  Do you remember the government coming in and purchasing and killing  the cattle?  18  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Smith  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  R. Wilson  U. Smith  R. Wilson  U. Smith  Yes. We never had it done, but they did around here. I don   t know what  they did to them. Buried them, I guess. Pulled them back in the back  field somewhere and let them rot. A little old calf, you couldn   t give it  away. People didn   t want it. Now they will bring over a hundred bucks if  you get it for that.  What were some lessons you learned growing up that you have carried  with you throughout your life?  I don   t really know. I have to think about that... A lesson that I learned.  Or just a way of life that   s different from now, how things are today. For  example, the kids today versus the kids in the thirties and twenties.  Well one thing, if he done wrong, you got a whipping. Now they don   t  allow that. But they said that if a child gets a whipping now, it   ll turn  him bad when he gets older. Well, I got a whipping and I didn   t turn  bad. (Laughter) Now, you know that   s a bunch of you know what. Not  letting the parents discipline the child. I know you can beat one and  that   s wrong, but giving a good old whipping, you can remember that.  That   s a lesson, right? That   s one of the lessons that you get.  Going to church.  Yes, we never missed Sunday.  What church did your family attend?  Church of Christ. Dad was a singer. Dad wrote a song.  Really?  Yes.  In Hollis? Did you go to church there?  No, we went to Dodson. We just lived   our land came up to the Texas-  Oklahoma line. Dodson is about a mile or half a mile inside Texas, and  that is where the church was there. That is where we went. Dodson,  Texas. A little old town that is just   there is nothing down there, hardly  at all now.  Do they still use the church song?  Yes.  19  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Smith  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Smith  U. Smith  L. Smith  U. Smith  What is it?  Glory Forth is the name of it.  Do you remember many folks taking off and heading to California or  elsewhere?  Yes.  Did you know any or many of them personally?  A bunch of them went to California. My family, some of them went, but  they came back. They didn   t stay out there very long. Ladonia had a  bunch of her people out there.  Well, Denzel went there, Zona didn   t.  Yes, but not to California.  Would some of the people just leave their house?  They didn   t have anything to leave. They just didn   t have anything here.  That is the reason they went out there. There wasn   t any work here.  There was a lot of farming and stuff like that. Cotton, not a lot of. I don   t  know whether they irrigated back there in those days or not. I don   t  know. I wasn   t out there.  Were there many WPA  Work Projects Administration  or CCC   Civilian Conservation Corps  projects?  Oh, yes WPAs. That was a big deal for people. That kind of got a lot of  people over it.  Are there any projects that were worked on at that time that are still  around?  You will see a bridge, a concrete bridge, that says WPA. WPA built a lot  of them, and WPA built a lot of toilets.  They built some schools too.  Yes, and they built schools. They did a lot of work.  They built roads.  I know we lived south of town down there. Well, they built a road. I  20  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Smith  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Smith  don   t know how far they built it, but by our house. Just with people with  scoops, throwing dirt up on the road. And they had one, what they call  Fresno, that they pulled there with a team that hauled maybe to a low  place a long ways off. There was about twenty of them, I remember,  working on that road. They were all in the ditch, throwing. They just  worked. You had to have nothing, and a lot of people didn   t have  nothing in them days to get along.  Has Dill City changed much?  It   s changed a little downward. There   s nothing here. But back when I  was a kid, well, there was a bank here, and grocery stores     Movie.  A lot of things. But now it   s just nothing here much.  Would people still go to Cordell back then? Was that the next biggest  city?  Yes.  Was it much bigger than Dill City at the time?  Oh yes. Yes. That   s the county seat over there. Yes, up to old Cordell,  especially on Saturday night.  Is there train tracks that come through here?  Yes.  Did that bring many people on the train?  Not now.  But back then?  Yes.  Were there hobos or gypsies?  Yes, hobos. We would go to Dill on Saturday afternoon, and we   d go  down to the depot to watch the train come through. The hobos would be  loaded. There was women with kids on it, too.  Tell about throwing the cantaloupe.  21  U. Smith  R. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Smith  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  Me and my brother would run around with two other boys. They lived  right up to the railroad here, south of town. There was a cantaloupe  patch there. We heard the train coming way off, you know, you   d hear  the whistle. We   d see the smoke too, way off. They would come pretty  slow because they were pretty loaded. We just piled some cantaloupes  along the right-of-way, out close to the track. There was always hobos  on it, and this here train came through and there was hobos on there.  They would share coal cars, they were open on top, you know. When the  engine got by, we jumped out there and we threw the cantaloupes over.  Those old hobos would run for those things. They had a big time, oh  man  (Laughs)  You would just throw them up on the train?  Yes, out in that car, where those hobos were. Boy, they were enjoying  that. (Laughs)  That was food.  Yes, we   d throw those things in there. Where the train sits, it was kind of  a grade coming up here. It was going slow. We got a lot of cantaloupes  in there before it got by.  Did you ever have any hobos come to your home?  No. We had peddlers, like Watkins and Rawleigh. They   d take anything,  like chickens. They   d trade you their products for chickens. They would  have an old chicken coop on the back of the old car. They   d say,    Well,  I   ll give you this,    like some kind of cooking stuff, vanilla and what  have you    for so many chickens.    One chicken probably, or two. They   d  catch it and put it back there in that coop. He   d take it to town and he   d  sell it. (Laughs)  Are there many vegetables that were introduced to you later in life that  you didn   t have then? My grandma always tells about her first  experience with celery.  No, we had some celery back there because I know Dad didn   t like it, I  can remember that. But I just don   t know. We just didn   t hardly buy  anything from town.  Do you have any other stories from your time growing up around here  that you want to share?  Well, back in about    31, Dad had an old truck. I guess it wouldn   t haul a  22  L. Smith  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  whole lot more than a pickup would now, but a little more. Somebody, I  don   t know who it was, wanted to take some cattle (I think it would hold  five cows in it) to Oklahoma City. I got to go with that. We got there and  unloaded the cows in the stockyard, and then for a treat he put us on a  streetcar and we went to the Capitol. That was something. I was  probably ten years old, or something like that. That was something to  ride, and that was about the only thing on the street then, was that street  car. There weren   t any cars or anything, you would just    We went to  the Capitol, and I don   t know what we did up there, whether we went in  or not. I can   t remember that, it   s kind of vague. But I got to ride a street  car.  Your dad raised watermelons, too.  Yes, he raised watermelons. In his truck, he would load these  watermelons up and we   d peddle them. We   d go to planting and sell  watermelons.  How much would you sell them for?  I don   t know, he   s the one who would take the money. I was just a kid.  (Laughs)  On a trip to Clinton, would you empty the back of the truck? Would you  come home with an empty truck?  Well, probably, but probably not. It just depended on what kind of day it  was going to be.  Could you just set up anywhere on the road?  Oh, yes. You did what you wanted to back in those days. In this  watermelon patch I found a quail   s nest. Every day after school, I   d go  and see if they had hatched out. Well, one day I came home from school  and they were all gone. The little boogers came out of their shells and  went running, and I didn   t get to see my little quails. (Laughter) I did  farm down there on this old tractor before we ever paved I-44 down  here. We had a little patch of grass in the field and I was coming from  over   I think from her house   on a tractor. I pulled out there, and there  was a cubby of quails, little ones, a mother and a little one. I went into  this grass, jumped off the tractor and said,    I   ll see what...    You know, I  never did find one of them. It wasn   t a very big patch of grass, too. I  never found one. They would hide and that old hen, she would make  some kind of noise and then they disappeared. (Laughs)  Well let   s talk about your Army days.  23  U. Smith  L. Wilson  L. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  R. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Smith  U. Smith  R. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Smith  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  Do you want me to start when I was inducted into the Army?  Sure.  But you do know that all of the young men had to register when they  were eighteen?  Yes. Did you know a lot of people that were drafted before you?  No, not really.  I mean, would people go in left and right?  No.  Did everybody kind of go at once when Pearl Harbor happened?  I wasn   t here then.  But a lot of them did, I think.  Well, they were taking you once you became twenty-one, you were  taken.  Even before the war started, I guess?  Yes.  I think they knew what they were going to do.  Yes, kind of getting geared up for it or something.  So when you turned twenty-one, you needed to register with the U.S.  Government?  I don   t know how old I was when I registered. I just don   t remember  that.   It was twenty-one before Pearl Harbor, but it changed to eighteen after  that .  When did you first discover you were going into the Army?  When I got a letter from Uncle Sam. (Laughter) It told me to report at a  certain time over at Cordell to get my physical. As of 1941   September  24  L. Wilson  U. Smith  R. Wilson  of 1941   I went to Cordell and got my physical. He said,    Can you see  that wall over there?    He patted me on the back and said,    You   ll make  a good soldier.    Of course, he did a little more than that, but that is about  what it amounted to. I don   t know how many days after that that I was  called to leave to go to Oklahoma City, and I took another physical over  there. That is where I was sworn in, Oklahoma City, to become a soldier.  Well that night, the fair was on and it was in the east part of Oklahoma  City then. We decided we   d go to the fair. We went to the fair, and I said  I   d ride up there. You get in a seat and swing around, and I said,    I   ll  just ride that.    I think it cost a nickel or a dime or something like that. I  thought they   d never stop that thing. I was right at the edge of the  fairground, it was dark out there, and when they stopped that thing I  went out there and lost everything I had. It made me sick as a horse.  (Laughter)  So were you with friends from home, or did you meet these guys in  Oklahoma City?  They were sworn in when I was. Well, there was one I knew, but most  of them I just met them there. The next day, they put us on the train late.  We went to Fort Sill. We got in there at about eleven o   clock. They lined  us up in barracks. There was a little old Corporal that tried to throw his  chest out and said,    I   m the boss. You might   ve been the boss in civilian   life , but I   m the boss here     I would   ve liked to see him when I came  back from overseas. (Laughter) We were just recruited, and it scared us  to death, pretty near.  Now then, I   ve got two discharges. They gave you a choice back then of  where you wanted to go if you were signed up with the regular Army,  not the draftee. I was in the draftee Army. I always wanted to go to  Hawaii, so I signed up for that. They gave me a discharge, and I signed  up to go over there into the regular Army. I had to serve a year longer.  See, the draftee Army was just two years, and the regular Army was  three. When I joined the regular Army I signed up for a year longer to go  to Hawaii. Things were getting pretty hot overseas then and I said,     Shoot, if we   re out in the ocean, we won   t be bothered out there. It   s a  place where I need to go anyways.    (Laughs) Well, we got on a train and  we went down through   in those days, they converted these old boxcars  to beds. It was just an old boxcar. We got on that thing and went down  through El Paso and over to California on that thing, rocking, rolling,  and bumping. We got to Los Angeles, and they put us on a streamline  train to go on to San Frisco  San Francisco . Boy, that was a treat. We  got to eat in a dining room, and ordered anything we wanted.  On the train?  25  U. Smith  R. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  Yes, man alive.  How was that boxcar ride?  Oh man. Rough. We rode the thing when we came back from overseas.  We rode the thing back. We went to San Frisco and went to a place, a  little island called Fort McDowell. There, you had to get on a boat to go  over there. When we got there they picked us up at the train station in a  truck. We rode in the back standing up, and there wasn   t a car in San  Francisco. We would go over those hills, you know. Have you ever been  there?  Yes, I just went.  Those hills, you know? You would just go over those things, and it  would look like you were going to go out in space. There weren   t any  cars or anything in those days, and it was in the night. We got on a boat  and went to Fort McDowell, and I spent close to a month there. It was  just a place to jump off to go to Hawaii is what it was.  One day they put me on guard. They had some prisoners there. They  strapped a .45 on my hips and a rifle. Well, I didn   t even know how to  shoot the .45  (Laughter) I said something about it, and they said,    Oh,  don   t worry. They can   t escape anyway.    I thought,    My goodness     I  didn   t know anything about that old .45. Then we got ready to go. We  sailed by that there prison.  Alcatraz?  Alcatraz, by it. Of course, it was in operation then. All under the gates,  and I bought some  Hershey   s  Kisses just before we left and ate some  of them. We were sitting on the back. I was on the back and I was  saying,    Boy, this is fun.    It wasn   t quite so funny. I was queasy.  (Laughter) I looked around and I wasn   t the only one who was sick. That  was three days that I was sick as a horse. Man alive  If you   re ever  seasick, you mean you were sick. I rode a thousand miles after that and  never did get sick. It took six days to go to Hawaii on an old boat. They  were going to take it back to the States and salvage it. I don   t know how  old it was. San Mahill was the name of it.  What was the name of it?  San Mahill. I don   t know how you spell it, but that   s what it was.  How was the food on the boat?  26  U. Smith  I don   t know. When I was sick, I didn   t want any food. (Laughter) After  I got off, I reckon it was all right, I don   t remember about that. We got to  Hawaii and they put us on a bus that took us to Schofield Barracks. It  was what they call a boot camp. I was in the infantry like they did in     all you had to do was learn how to march there on campus and how to  display a full field backpack, and money for your food and for whatever  you need. I was going into communication and learned how to lay wires  and stuff like that. I told them,    I drove a truck when I was at home.    Of  course, trucks and a tractor, and they put me in the motor pool. They had  a circle around the building, a pretty good sized circle, and they put a  little old trailer behind the vehicle and said,    You make that circle, and  when you get back here, you back that trailer in this place. You pull out  and make a circle.    I did that I don   t know how many times. Oh man, I  got so tired of that  (Laughs)  Then, one day they said,    We   re going to go out, and we   re going to let  each of you drive.    There were two or three of us. So he went to the  mountains and we were going up that mountain. I was driving. That  truck came pulling down and pulling down. I never was in the mountains  before. I didn   t see anything like that. (Laughs) He just laughed. I tried  to shift down and of course I didn   t know how to shift that truck hardly.  I was going to break the gears. That Sergeant sure got a kick out of that.  I got through my training   boot camp, I   ll call it   on a Saturday. Friday  they said,    We can give you a pass Monday.    So Sunday morning     when you had breakfast on a Sunday, you just went when you got up.  Any other time you had to be there at a certain time. On Sunday you had  a treat, you know. I had gotten up and I got dressed. It was a two story  building and I was on the top story. I walked out the door, and here  comes this plane. I could see the guy in it, and he   s strafing. Here comes  another one. There was a boy running across the playground, and he  never did make it. They got him. But man, alive. I could pretty near  throw a rock and hit him. You had to be assigned to a gun. You had to  run down there, and the Sergeant had to open the ammunition storage up  and issue the guns. By that time, everything was about over with.  Late that afternoon we went to the field up in the mountains and set up,  because I was in artillery. They sat up artillery, and I was in  headquarters. Of course, we could see Pearl Harbor down there then.  The smoke was rising. It was all over with, but it was burning then.  During the night, every so often, the sirens would go off. I guess they   d  think they heard something coming in again. We never could get any  sleep, even if we wanted sleep.  I was in Hawaii eleven months all together. Most of my activity was on  Guadalcanal. They loaded us up and we were twenty-one days going to  27  L. Smith  U. Smith  R. Wilson  U. Smith  Guadalcanal on that ship. How we got our air conditioner, they had a big  round cloth I   d say that went up and out. There was a big fan that spread  out up there and brought that air down into the ship. That was our air  conditioner. Of course, there in the South Pacific, you didn   t get very  cool air conditioners. We landed on Guadalcanal. I got the discharge,  they tell you all this on the discharge, but I don   t remember now. That is  when you come off on a rope ladder. It was just a rope ladder all the way  across the ship, and you came down onto a boat when you landed.  That is where most of my activity was, over there. I didn   t have much  activity in Hawaii. They would strafe the barracks, and they hit the  airports and the ships are what they hit most, and then the barracks. They  would just strafe them with machine guns. They had an airport right  there by our Schofield Barracks and they destroyed it. When we got over  there in Guadalcanal, they were trying to run all the Japs off in that then.  Were they there waiting on you?  The Marines had already landed there. No, we didn   t get the blunt of  that. The Marines got the blunt of that first wave. What was funny, after  we cleaned the island off, we went to New Georgia, another island. We  had to work that one over. When we came back to Guadalcanal though,  there were some cattle on that island. So me and two more guys, we got  a vehicle with a wench on the front of it, and we decided we needed  some beef to eat. So one old boy, I mean, he was sharp with that rifle,  and I drove. I   d come up to those things and stop real quick, and he   d  shoot. He   d kill one and we   d drag it to a tree, tie that wench on it, and  pull that. That is where we butchered it. Pretty good meat, but the  general found it out. He said,    No more of that.    He just ruined the  whole thing. (Laughs) Of course, it wasn   t ours, it was an English island,  Guadalcanal was. But it was rain every day, and then when the raining  season was over, it got so dusty you couldn   t hardly see.  Kind of like here in a dust storm?  Yes. Well, it was on those roads where the vehicles were running. When  it was raining, I was in communication, there was always a car shot in  two or something that happened to it. I was running in one of them, and I  was in this Jeep. It had all four teams on this Jeep and I got stuck with  that. CB is a building down the road over there. I went over there, and I  said,    Hey, you guys go over there and pull me out.    It was a big old cat,  you know. We drove over there, and he got up there to that little old  Jeep, and he said,    I thought you had something for me to pull out.     (Laughter) I   d hit high center with them chains on and I was stuck. We  had a lot of fun, and a lot of scary moments. I know that after the island  was clear, there was always a Japanese plane that would come over at  28  L. Smith  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  night. We called him Washing Machine Charlie. They   d shoot at him,  shoot at him, and I don   t think they ever did hit him   not him, but he  dropped some bombs. He did a little damage, old Washing Machine  Charlie.  Just one plane?  Yes, just one plane. Then one day we were close to the airport, laying  some wires I guess, I don   t remember now, there was one that came in.  He was flying pretty low, but he didn   t get away. It was a P-38 that  dropped out of the sky, and we destroyed him really quick.  Do you remember what you thought that Sunday morning when you saw  the plane right there?  First thought was maneuvers, until I seen what was happening. I didn   t  know who it was really. It wasn   t long until I found out.  Do you think people realized the impact, how significant this event was  at the time?  I don   t know what people thought, really. I know one thing, if they  wanted to protect that island   if they   d brought enough men there on the  ship they could   ve protected it, because we weren   t ready for anything  like that. We weren   t set up to defend the island. They could   ve landed a  lot of troops there and maybe taken that island, but they didn   t. They  were just trying to destroy our planes and ships. They did a pretty good  job at it. We were there about, like I said, eleven months before we went  on to go to Guadalcanal. They assigned me to go to Honolulu to pick up  groceries and ice and deliver it to each battery. We had four batteries in  our division. I   d go down there and they   d load up a three-hundred  pound hunk of ice, a long hunk, you know, a few groceries on it and I  was supposed to deliver it to each battery. They   d get so much. I had a  pass that afternoon. I was working that morning. That is the only time I  had to pay a ticket   a cop got me in Hawaii. The road went this way and  there was what they call a can bow come in like this, a yield sign. I just  threw the door back and looked back, and I didn   t see anybody, but that  cop was back there. (Laughs) Man, that thing cost me two and a half   dollars   That was a pretty good hunk when you   re just drawing twenty-one  dollars a month. (Laughter)  Had you already picked up the ice?  Yes. Another incident: you drove at night with no lights after the Pearl  Harbor attack. I had to deliver a message, and I don   t know why but  communication wasn   t all that good back in those days. I had to deliver  29  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Smith  a message clear around the island that night. I got the message and  started out, and an MP  Military Police  stopped me. He wanted to see  my license. I said,    Well, I don   t have any license.    He said,    Well, you  can   t go any further.    I went back and told that Lieutenant,    They  stopped me and I didn   t have any license.    He said,    I   ll fix that.    He  just sat down and wrote me a license out and I went on. (Laughs)  On this island, when we came back a different way it was what we  called a piley, and I never have heard anything about the piley, but we  did. If you drive at night you will remember it. The road, being on a  mountainside, if you wanted to curve with that truck when you started,  you had to back up to make this curve, and that is at night, too. It didn   t  have a banister or anything, it was a pretty good little jump. They tell me  way back in the early days that a king marched most of his army off that  one time and killed them. That   s what the story was when I was over  there. Whether or not it   s true, I don   t know. But you didn   t have any  lights. You had little old blue lights about that long and about that wide.  That is to kind of to tell you that another one is coming. They said they  couldn   t see them from the air.  Did it seem like security was really heightened after that attack?  Security? Yes, it was pretty well watched.  And did more troops start pouring in?  Yes.  Pretty immediately?  Not just immediately, no. I know I went down and   I did one night, and  picked up some coming off the ship and took them to the place where  they were aimed to go. That was probably five or six months after the  war broke out. Then we moved down on what you call the Pearl Harbor  Peninsula, and set up camp there. And them water planes, planes that  land on water, I bet there were fifty of those things that took off every  morning. Roar right over our camp.  So that was your alarm clock? (Laughs)  Yes. (Laughs) That was on Pearl Harbor Ford Island where the activity  was. Then, when we left Guadalcanal, we went to New Zealand for a  rest. From there we went to   well, I forgot the name of the island. It just  kind of     You went to the Solomons didn   t you?  30  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  That was Guadalcanal, in the Solomon Islands.  How long were you in New Zealand?  Probably six months, or maybe a little longer. Maybe I guess a little  longer.  And you pretty much got to relax?  Yes, you got your pass, got to go to Auckland, and places around.  Were you able to enjoy Hawaii any?  No. I don   t guess I ever got a pass to go to Honolulu.  Have you been back to Hawaii since?  I have no desire to go. I took that chance one time. (Laughs) When this  island we came to (I can   t remember that, and I should) after we left  New Zealand, it was just more and more rest really. How you washed  your clothes was there was this little creek, and you got in this creek. On  a rock or something you used GI  Government Issued  soap and you  soaped your clothes, rinsed them, and wringed them out. That   s how you  washed your clothes.  From there I got to come home. I was pulling Corporal of the Day and  they draw   of course, I was in with old soldiers and new soldiers just  come over there, I didn   t get to draw. My name was in there sixteen  times, I believe. Some of those old soldiers, they were fixing to come  home when the war broke out. Their name was in there a lot more. I was  sitting there, sitting in a little old tent reading. I was the Corporal of the  Day that day, and they called my name to go home. I about fell out of  my chair. Best drawing I was ever at.  How many days later did you actually get to go home?  Oh, it was probably maybe two weeks. The boats had to come, you  know the Army   you hurry up and wait. (Laughter) You had to pack.  They said,    You can   t take a gun or anything, or a knife.    And it   s still  over there. (Gesturing) A knife, about that long, that I carried. They said,     You can send that home.    I sent it home and it got home. They said,     We   ll have an inspection.    Well, about thirty minutes before the  inspection they said,    We don   t have the inspection.    So you could tuck  that gun and everything else you had in that sack during the inspection,  and then come back and put it in there. It was the same thing when we  31  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Smith  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  got to California, when we got back to the States.    We are going to have  an inspection at a certain time.    Well, you took everything you   re not  allowed to bring out, you had your inspection, and then you put it back  in there. They gave you plenty of time, but you didn   t know that. They  kind of spooked you. (Laughter)  So what year was it when you came back?     44. I got a discharge before the war was even over.  How long was the trip back to California?  Oh, it was several days. I don   t know, maybe it was several, but it was  on a big boat and everybody pulled KP  kitchen patrol , even the  sergeants and everything.  All these people, why were they coming home?  The same way. They had been over there long enough that they got to  come home. They had my name as V.L. I thought,    That   s not my  name.    But I decided I better just go ahead. (Laughter) I didn   t want to  upset the applecart, because I was coming home, so I did my duty.  So have you always gone by U.L.?  Yes, that is my name.  That   s your given name?  Yes. I had trouble with that in the Army. They said,    Well, it stands for  something.    I said,    It stands for my name     (Laughter) They would  argue with me, and I would say,    Man, that   s my name     It was some  bookkeepers from New York, up in there   they didn   t have any initial  names up there, I guess. Yes, I had quite a time with them.  So then you came back through California?  Yes.  And did you land in San Francisco?  Yes. Sailed under the  Golden Gate  Bridge and Oakland Bridge, both.  I   ve sailed under the Oakland Bridge and the Golden  Gate  Bridge  twice and been over them two or three times.  What did you do when you got back to California?  32  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  They give us a twenty-one day pass and I came back home. Then I had  to report after twenty-one days. I had to report down at Fort Sam  Houston. I think that twenty-one days we got after the pass was given     You had about twenty-one days at home instead of traveling time.  So did you take the train from California?  Yes, an old boxcar. The old doors opened, like this, (gesturing) and there  was a bar across there. We stood at the door and watched the country.  Was your family expecting you when you returned? Did they have word?  Yes, they knew I was coming. I guess I wrote them and told them I was.  What did you end up doing then?  For my twenty-one days?  Well, after that. You reported to Sam Houston?  Then they sent me to Arkansas, a little old camp down there by Little  Rock. I don   t know what the name is now. I was getting ready to go to  Alaska. We were talking about it, and this guy in the camp with me said,     With your record, why don   t you go down there to the office   the court  clerk   and have him write out something to send to the General?    Like  where I had been and this stuff. I said,    Oh, there is no chance of that.     He said,    I bet they will.    You know the deal. They gave me a  discharge. I came down, did some working, and they came to me and  said,    You be ready to leave in the morning at a certain time.    They said,     You got a discharge.    Man. I was fixing to go to Alaska, but I wasn   t  going to go anymore. I was through. I had about all that going that I  wanted.  So what did you do instead?  Instead of what?  Instead of going to Alaska, once you got discharged?  I came home and farmed with my father a year. We got married, and I  moved to Amarillo and stayed out there two years, and moved down  here on the farm.  When did you meet your wife? Did you know her before?  33  U. Smith  L. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Smith  U. Smith  L. Smith  U. Smith  L. Smith  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Smith  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  We knew each other ever since we were kids, really.  I remembered him one time, I didn   t know him. (Laughter)  So did you meet again when you returned?  Yes.  Met at church.  She came to see my sister. That   s what she said. (Laughter) I got hooked  in somewhere though.  It couldn   t have happened to anybody better. (Laughter)  I lived at Amber then. The first year I was out of the Army, I farmed  with Dad at Amber, north of Chickasha.  I lived south of Sentinel.  And she came down there. Of course, our family has known each other a  long time. She knew my sister, and she came down there visiting.  What year did you get married?  1945, December 21.  Where?  Sentinel.  At the preacher   s house. We didn   t have a big wedding. I didn   t even  know you had big weddings.  I tell my kids now, I say,    My goodness  You have these big weddings  that cost so many dollars and all that stuff.    I say,    Well, good grief  We  went out to the preacher   s house and got married. I gave him five dollars  and we left.    It cost me five dollars. Well, the license was two and a  half. I forget about that. (Laughter)  And what did you do in Amarillo?  I worked at a smelter when we first went out there about a year. Then I  worked for the Borden Company, milk. I delivered milk, wholesale  milk, from door to door. That was quite an experience.  34  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  R. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Smith  U. Smith  L. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Smith  L. Wilson  L. Smith  U. Smith  So you were the milkman?  Yes. Some of those people   s houses you went in, you wish you hadn   t of  went in. (Laughter) They needed to be cleaned up. I was delivering in  the rich part of town, too.  So would you just go in their house and they   d have the money?  Yes, some of them, they wanted you to come in and put it in their  refrigerator. Most of it was left it on the steps. Bottles in those days.  Would they pay you then for the milk?  They wouldn   t. I just had a salary from the Borden Company.  But would they pay for the milk? Like would you pick up their money?  No. I think some of them sent it in. I had more trouble collecting in the  rich part of town than people did in the poorer part. That   s the truth.  That   s how people got to be rich, isn   t it? (Laughter)  Yes. (Laughter)  How many children do you have?  Three. Two girls and a boy, and umpteen grandkids. (Laughter) We   ve  got how many great-grands?  At the end of this year we   ll have ten.  Great-grandkids.  We   ve got six now, and we   re expecting four this year.  Four this year?  Yes.  That is going to make thirty-three of us.  Wow  Do you all get together at holidays?  Christmas time.  Christmas, yes.  35  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Smith  U. Smith  L. Wilson  L. Smith  U. Smith  L. Smith  U. Smith  L. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Wilson  Here?  Yes.  Yes, we had to move to the garage this year. (Laughter)  The house sure gets small when they   re all in here.  I bet. (Laughs) Do any of them live nearby?  Our daughter   one daughter lives south of Bessie out in the country.  North of Cordell.  Randall lives in Stillwater and     Diane is in Mustang.  Well, south of Mustang, but her address is Oklahoma City.  And you said on the fiftieth anniversary of Pearl Harbor you got  something special in the mail?  Yes.  Do you want to show that on the camera?  I guess.  And describe it. Let   s see if I can focus. Did it come with a letter or  anything?  I don   t remember if it came in a box or     I don   t know if it did. If it did, we didn   t keep it. I think they just mailed  that.  I   ll take a picture of it. But it   s a commemorative coin,    Remember  Pearl Harbor, December 7, 1941. For those who served. A date which  will live in infamy.   Did you put it on this  chain ?  Yes, I put that on there.  Have you been in touch with any other servicemen from Pearl Harbor,  or that you served with?  36  U. Smith  L. Smith  U. Smith  L. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Smith  U. Smith  L. Smith  L. Wilson  L. Smith  L. Wilson  L. Smith  U. Smith  L. Smith  L. Wilson  U. Smith  L. Smith  L. Wilson  No. There are none around here. There is a guy that lived in Elk City. He  came here and lived here for six months I guess, and then left. He was  with me, but I think he moved back to California. That   s where he was  when he came back here. I   ve been wondering how many people are in  Oklahoma that was at Pearl Harbor.  Well, we went to this one meeting at Weatherford, remember?  But that wasn   t everybody.  No.  But there were a few there?  Yes.  There were a few there. But he didn   t know anybody     No, I didn   t know anybody.  And he didn   t really enjoy that so we never did go back.  Were there like ten or so there?  No, there were probably twenty.  When was that? A while back?  Oh, fifteen years ago. Brenda, our daughter that works at the VA Center   Veterans Affairs Medical Center  found out about it and told us about  it, so we went, but we didn   t continue in that.  The paper of Clinton interviewed me, and it was in the paper.  Yes.  When was that?  Oh, what was it? Five years ago was it?  Probably longer than that.  Do you have anything else you would like to talk about, or stories to  share?  37  U. Smith  R. Wilson  L. Wilson  U. Smith  I guess not, unless you   ve got some questions.  I think we   ve covered about everything from A to Z. (Laughter)  Well thank you very much for talking with me.  You   re welcome.  -------  -------  
