 Finchum  Jones  Today is May 17, 2010. My name is Tanya Finchum. I   m with the  Oklahoma State University Library, and we are doing an oral history  project called Women Agricultural Extension Educators. Today we   re in  Duncan, Oklahoma, talking with Sandra Jones. Thank you for coming  today.  You   re welcome.  Let   s start by having you tell us a little bit about your youth, where you  were born and your family, and we   ll work our way forward.  I was born in Carnegie, Oklahoma, and was raised on a farm south of  Mountain View,  Oklahoma . My folks had a farm which was  homesteaded in 1906. My grandparents first homesteaded there, and  then my dad and mom bought this just as they married in 1936. It   s been  interesting to have the family involved that long. Now my brother does  the farming at the home place. I   m one of four children. There   s two  boys, two girls. I   m the youngest of the four.  And the farm was where?  South of Mountain View, in Kiowa County.  Where did you go to high school?  I went, first of all, for grade school to a consolidated  school  called  Sedan. The high school went out, so the last three years, I went to  Mountain View and graduated from Mountain View High School.  You grew up on the farm?  Yes, I did.  5  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Did you have certain chores?  Yes.  Such as?  Such as. (Laughter) It might be gathering the eggs. It might be working  in the garden. We had lots of things to do in order to get the work done.  It could be scooping wheat, along about wheat time. Chopping cotton.  So, it was, I   d say, a team effort.  So, it was a cotton and wheat farm? Not a cattle     Well, we had cattle too, and also alfalfa. Raised alfalfa and some barley,  but basically wheat, cattle and cotton.  And do you recall county agents coming to the farm, visiting with your  parents?  I sure do. Early day, Tom Morris would come out to look at the pigs.  And he was actually a distant relative of my husband, so it   s kind of a  small world.  How did you get interested in home extension, home economics?  I was interested, actually as a 4-Her. I spent nine years as a 4-Her, did all  my home ec projects, public speaking. I did not do any of the livestock  projects, but I did do extensive public speaking, meat judging, all the  projects that has to go with that, and also took home economics in high  school. So, this is one way I got involved in it, and of course another  way was that I admired and respected the 4-H agent and home demo (at  that time, that   s what we called them) that came out and helped us with  the projects. In fact, Arlene Goulden Sellers was at one time one of my  home demos. And Lonnie Sellers used to be a 4-H agent, so it   s kind of  evolved around.  When you were in 4-H, did you win any awards?  Yes, I did. Yes, several awards. Of course, every year we had meat  judging. I always liked to do that, and, of course, it   s something that  follows you the rest of your life. Was selected as a team, and we went to  Hobart to do our judging, and then on to the state level at one of the  packing plants. That was fun.  How do you judge meat? I have not had anyone tell me.  6  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  You have to look at the marbling, which is the fat that   s interspersed  within the lean meat. And, of course, you want quite a bit of lean meat.  If it   s beef, it needs to be a good red meat in order to be a good quality  meat. There are other things that we look at, but that   s one of the main  things.  When you shop today, do you still think about those things before you  buy a piece?  I sure do. Of course, pork was another thing. We didn   t eat as much  lamb as they do in other places, but we had to judge beef and pork and  lamb. Had  to give  place reasons. So, they   d give us a class and we   d  have to  state  why did we place one over the other and substantiate why  we did it.  Did you go to national, then?  No, we didn   t go to national, but I still enjoyed it. It   s fulfilling. We also  had what we called a horticulture judging team. That was at the state  fair, and they   d set up the different classes like clothing and, at that time,  home improvement. We were doing the aprons and that sort of thing  when I was a 4-Her. I think they do a tote bag or something. All of these.  Foods was another area. We might set up a class of foods.  Did you go to 4-H Roundup in Stillwater?  Yes, I did. I started as soon as I could. I think thirteen was their age,  eighth grade through the twelfth grade. My specialty, I always enjoyed  giving speeches. Got involved with co-op talks, and one year I won the  division on that. With it was a wrist watch and also a trip. We did a tour  of Texas during the summer.  Do you remember your topic?  It was about the night the lights came on. We were talking about when  rural areas finally got their electrification, and ours happened to be in  1947.  Firsthand knowledge.  Right. It was very easy to write on something like that. That was  important, I think. This is probably one of the most important things  that   s happened in a rural area, is when they got the electricity.  And then you got your indoor bathroom at that point?  7  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  No, we did not have an indoor bathroom until    56.  Almost ten years later.  We had a path to the outdoor facility. (Laughter) Simply because we had  a cistern. That   s what we got our water from. And then, of course, when  we had to get to the well, oh gosh, it was half a mile or more from the  house. When we bought the Butler place is when we were able to dig a  well. We had to pipe it, the plastic pipe across, and that   s when we  actually got the indoor restroom.  The electricity would   ve brought refrigeration. Did you have a  refrigerator at that point?  Yes. I don   t know whether you know much about it, but the folks had  what they call kerosene or gas refrigerating in the early day. This was  before we went to electricity.  Did you help your mom much in the kitchen?  Yes.  Cooking and canning that early?  Yes. You learned to do that, and we had harvest hands when  it was   wheat harvest, so we had to get the meals on for that. I never did run the  combine, but my brothers and dad would run the combine, and they  would work in shifts, so the meal was a little bit strung out, I guess  you   d say. It was something that you had to do. It was a part of the  process of harvesting the crops.  They helped you, and then they   d help the next neighbor, and on down  the pike.  Right. And you were talking about canning. Yes, we did lots of canning.  We had a big garden with tomatoes and potatoes and just lots of onions,  okra, and green beans. We canned the green beans, fruit, and tomatoes. S  Would they dry some things, too?  No, we didn   t really dry all that much. Now, you could   ve.  I can remember Grandmother drying beans.  Yes. Our Native American brothers did a lot of drying, because they   d  dry on the rooftop, but we didn   t do that much drying. We did more  8  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  canning, freezing than anything.  When it was time to go to college, did you ponder much which way you  would want to go?  You know, I had the choice. I thought at first I wanted to go into  physical therapy, and Chickasha had a degree with that. I leaned toward  OSU I guess because I had two older brothers that were involved in that,  and had a small scholarship. My folks had three in college for about  seven or eight years there, so we were humping it to get it done.  (Laughter) Of course, kind of a tie-in also was all my 4-H work, home  economics work, and that kind of helped me to decide what I wanted to  major in.  And you were familiar with campus, I guess, because of that experience  of Roundup?  Because of Roundup, sure was. And I used to go see Brother every once  in a while.  When you got to campus, which dorm was yours?  The first year, I stayed in what they call Brumley Apartments, out by  Vet Medicine, in that area, so it was quite a ways. We had apartments;  there was four of us that were staying there. The next three years, I was  at Willard, which is much closer. We had a lot of library cards that we  had to do, some of those note cards. You probably remember those. At  that time, we had hours, 8:15 hours at night. I don   t know that they have  that much time, as far as they   re concerned, but anyway, I spent a lot of  time at the library, and it was good to do my studying because it wasn   t  as noisy as it was in the dorm.  Did you have a favorite professor?  Beulah Mae Kenney I would say was one.  And what did she teach?  FRCD, Family Relations  and Child Development .  Was your specialty nutrition or sewing or home management?  I took a lot of the courses. Nutrition would   ve been one, and of course  clothing. Consumer education. We did some family economics, family  relations. Housing and interior design. So, it was a well-rounded  curriculum.  9  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Did you do any time at the home management house?  No, I didn   t have to stay at the home management house. I heard lots of  experiences about it. (Laughter)  How did you get out of that?  You know what? I think we could take some courses, and I forgot  whether we had to do   it may have been they had us to do a quite  lengthy file of subject matter area;    on the block    they called it. Dr.  Chapman would have us do the file. We did nine weeks of student  teaching.  Did you have Dean  Lela  O   Toole?  Yes. Dr. Casey happened to be my advisor, Dr. Laura Casey, at that  time.  And Emma Chandler?  I remember Emma Chandler. I didn   t ever have her.  When did you graduate?  I graduated in 1967.    63 to    67 were the four years I was there in college.  When I first got out of college, there were no extension openings, and  that didn   t happen until July. Well, I went ahead and went through a  practicum with OG E there at Oklahoma City, and they had home  economists in business then. I did writing of programs to help the gals  out in the field. That was really not my cup of tea. I still wanted to go  with extension, so I checked in with the personnel supervisor there at  OSU, and in July they had five openings come available. One of these  happened to be Osage County 4-H program, which I later was able to  secure, 4-H program in October of that year.  Was that your home county?  Kiowa County is my home county. I was clear across the state from my  home county.  And Osage is a huge county, from what I understand.  It   s the largest one, right, in the state.  How long were you in that position?  10  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  I was there a little over a year. I had a sister at Bartlesville, so we got  better acquainted. She   s actually nine years older than me.  She   s the   oldest, and I   m the youngest, and I could spend some time seeing her.  You know, there were a lot of advantages, I think, to that, but I look  back now and I probably worked with two or three of the top-notch  county directors. One of them had to be here, one, and there at Osage  County. And then I guess in December of    68, I came down to interview  for Stephens County. Of course, the whole process is you answered the  resume thing. They pulled in so many to interview for it, and if you were  fortunate enough to be in the final round, or whatever you want to call it,  of applications, well, then they would pull you in. I did an interview  with Mr. Bill Cook, the district director. If I was selected, then you   d go  to a formal meeting, and I actually met with J. D. Lockwood, the county  director here, and Mr. Cook. Then, after that was a formal meeting with  the county commissioners. So, I had lots of bosses. (Laughter)  It sure sounds like it.  I would say that I   ve probably worked with some of the best people in  the state.  So you were in Stephens County from    68 to     2003.  When you retired?  Yes.  Doing what types of jobs?  In Stephens County, I did both the 4-H, the youth phase, as well as the  adult phase of home economics. First rattle out of the box when I got to  Stephens County was a 4-H demonstration contest. (Laughs) So, you  know, you hit the ground running when you get your feet wet.  You had a little bit of training with a year in Osage  County . I guess  that helped a little.  Yes, right.  In Osage, did you have an apartment on your own or did you live in  someone   s house, as a single person?  I was a single person; there were no apartments available. My brother-in-  law had   a Mr. Batdorf worked for him. Well, his mother lived there  11  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  in Pawhuska, and I rented a front bedroom. I actually had run of the  whole   she said,    Well, you   re welcome to invite your family to come  see us.    But I actually rented a bedroom from her and stayed all this  time, and it was almost like staying with your grandmother. It was a real  good relationship with her.  So, you had access to the kitchen to practice demonstrations?  Right. And she worked what she called the graveyard shift. It was the  night shift with the hospital as a nurse   s aide. There were at least a  couple of meals that we could eat together, which was good.  What did you do for transportation, because you probably had to be on  the road quite a bit?  Yes. My little yellow Mustang,    67 Mustang, was my first mode of  transportation. I had a lot of fun with that Mustang, and I   m sorry that I  traded it off. (Laughs)  Well, between Osage County and Stephens County, I would think it  would be a little bit of a difference. Was there any particular thing that  was different, other than one being larger than the other?  Yes, there was a difference because in Osage County they had   of  course, Stephens County has lots of cattle, too, but they had the Tall  Grass Prairie. So, that   s a little bit different, and we had just a little  different set up than we do here in Stephens County. It   s just a matter of  working with the   up there I worked with 4-Hers and parents and other  adults. We went to Osage Hills for 4-H camp. I don   t know that I  mentioned that. That is one of our parks.  So, there you would not have been as involved with homemaker clubs.  No, strictly the 4-H program, but I did work with other youth that were  not 4-Hers. It   s very, very busy when you   re working with youth and  adults, I think, because I can think here, we would do educational  programs for the clubs four or five times a year. Homemaker groups, I  tried to make them four or five times a year, not necessarily at the same  month. Anytime you did planning for leader training and that sort of  thing, it got kind of busy, and all the projects and the contests. It got  kind of busy.  At the peak, how many homemaker clubs do you think you had to help  with?  Eighteen, I think it was.  12  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  How many do you think there are still?  They have five or six. See, I think the working woman, that has  increased an awful lot during my tenure as a career. And, of course, we  had to do a different turn around on how we could reach these people,  like working through businesses, maybe meeting at a lunch-and-learn  type thing to do an educational program. I also worked with the  Department of Human Services and Marie Detty. You   re familiar with  probably both of those. Working with the disadvantaged homemakers  and trying to reach them strictly through, most of it was through family  financial management and also nutrition. Senior nutrition sites were  another group that I worked with, doing educational programs, in  Marlow, Comanche and Duncan.  Are those still going on, that type of activity?  Yes.  Did you teach sewing somewhere along the way?  Yes, we did. We had workshops and little short courses. The 4-Hers,  always, in order to get them to complete their projects for the fair, you  had to do some workshops, you know, to kind of help them along.  Sometimes you have help at home, and sometimes you don   t, and of  course we   d have some out in the schools or even at the fairgrounds to  try to get them to complete their projects. That always, I think, was a big  help for us. Our fair, I   m not just saying this to be braggadocious, but I  think we had one of the better fairs in the state as far as overall  participation from all ages.  When you were working with that group, too, it wasn   t a forty hour  week, either?  No. (Laughs) It   s really funny. The contract would say eight to five, but  you would end up working, of course, preparation time at home for  different things, and even with 4-H we had some Saturday activities and  then night. I know Share the Fun, we   d have it at night during the week.  What was Share the Fun?  Where they actually had some type of recreation, whether it was singing,  piano playing, a skit, whatever they pulled together for Share the Fun.  There was also a county, a district, and a state Share the Fun. The kids  really got into that, they really enjoyed that.  Is that still going on?  13  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Yes, it is.  I   m assuming there   s not much sewing going on anymore?  Not as much, there really isn   t. I   m hoping that we   re going to have a  turnaround in that. I see a little bit more. We were talking about a lot less  clothing made. One, if you   re careful, you can get quality items if you  don   t have the skills, but there   s something about making the garment  yourself, whatever it might be. The kids I know make tote bags. So,  there   s a pride I think. A lot of satisfaction can be gotten from that.  I have to confess, I looked up an article that was talking about you  helping a lady make a pink and white jacket for her son. He was in a  fraternity at OU, and when she brought in the fabric to the class, the  class couldn   t believe that she was making a male jacket out of that  fabric.  That was a tailoring class, workshop.  Something about interfacing and     Yes. Where in the world did you come up with that? (Laughter)  It was in the Daily Oklahoman back in    78, I think.  Oh, really?  And she was impressed by how you taught her how to do interfacing and  how to stuff things in certain spots. Maybe that had something to do with  the collar, to make the points.  Stabilize, for button holes or whatever needs to be down the front if  you   re putting button holes.  You were a hit, because she was quite happy with her  jacket . And the  son was quite happy with the jacket, too.  Oh, my. I can remember back earlier we made neckties. One year was  the scarves, where we made the scarves. The Oklahoma scarf was   I  should   ve brought a copy of that, because we had a workshop on that.  What makes it an Oklahoma scarf?  Well, you pull the southwest tip through a loop of fabric, and it   s the  panhandle. That makes you your tie. It was kind of unique how we had  that. You have to try to zero in on the people where their interests are.  14  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Remember back when we used to do lingerie? We   d do the panties and  the half slips. I never did get into the bras that much, but we did some  lingerie workshops.  Was it popular and well attended?  Yes.  I   m assuming that still doesn   t go on.  No, I don   t think so. I think you just have to take people where they are  and to teach them some practical skills to better their education.  So, you worked just a little bit in the    60s, then in the    70s and    80s.  Three decades, then.  Yes.  Was there much difference? I know trends and things change, but if you  had to say one or two things that were different with each decade, what  might they be?  Well, from the very early day we did the practical skills, basic skills, and  that progressed into consumer education. If we   re talking about clothing,  you had to help them look for what makes a quality garment. We were  talking about the jacket material. Well, what type of fabric do you get in  order to make this jacket, and for it to be stable and a real sturdy piece?  So, yes, I think it has changed. I know the working homemaker has, I  think   it   s helped, but yet it   s hindered the program. So, you know, I  guess it   s however you look at it. They don   t have as much time to  devote to being in a homemaker group. I know Dr. Harriman used to be  our director. She would try to get us to think about organizing groups at  night, and we mentioned the lunch-to-learn type thing. That was a way  to reach them on their lunch hour, but it   s a real struggle to try to find  the niche, to get the different people back into the program.  Now that homemaker clubs aren   t as popular, what   s the other venue for  adults?  Well, let   s see. I think you just have to reach out to them, like the  library. This has not been very long ago; the last year or two. The  homemakers did a workshop. I think it was on family economics. It was  a lot of work. Considering green, going green. You just have to think  about what are some of those areas that you have to reach to find them.  It can be a real test for you.  15  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Back in the    70s, what would a typical day be like for you? How early  would you get started?  I always get up about six o   clock, because our office opened from eight  to five. It varied about what your schedule was, whether or not you got  to go home then, or you might even have a meeting that night. Or hurry  home and get a bite to eat, you know, and then have another meeting. It  could be there at the office, the fairgrounds, or it could be out in the  county somewhere. And back when I was doing the AARP financial  management workshops, we   d have six or seven programs. One year we  had them at the nutrition site here in Duncan. That was at night, usually  from seven to nine-thirty.  Would you get comp time?  No, we really didn   t. That   s something you have to look at, I think. You  had to contemplate getting things ready to go, as far as your program  was concerned, before you ever went to district or to state level in  Stillwater, wherever we were going for a meeting. And of course, that  also depended on how many programs you had to give to get ready. So,  it did take some thorough planning. Organization.  I was going to say, time management skills on your part.  Right. It really did.  And supporting a family, I guess, too.  Yes, I probably have one of the best husbands that I could ever have,  because he was very supportive. Some weren   t that understanding. I  doubt if I   d have lasted as long with extension.  Well, let   s back up then. When did you get married?  In August of 1969.  And what kind of work did he do?  He was an electronics professor at Cameron University.  So, he had a little flexibility with his schedule.  Yes. He taught. That   s another thing we had to do, a little time  management in order to take vacations, that sort of thing. I worked year-long,  but I did try to take some summertime and Christmastime so we   d  have some time for vacation. But he worked   it was a ten-month  16  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  contract. Most of the time he was off in June, July.  Do you remember one or two of your first lessons or demonstrations that  you did early on?  As a 4-Her, or a career?  Either one.  Well, let   s see, with the 4-Hers, basically you worked with teaching the  leadership training, officers, trying to lead out. And then my skills with  family relations, I think, helped us in working with the different people,  adults, parents, as we worked with that. Gosh, we talked about 4-H  individual projects like clothing, or whether it would be nutrition, trying  to help them get ready for a meat judging contest, whatever it might be.  Have any of your 4-H students gone into extension work?  I only had one or two, and I did try to enthuse them about extension,  because I felt like there was some possibilities for them. I can remember  a girl from Central High, Jamie Ferrell, went into it. So, every once in a  while. Terri Henshaw was another one. In fact, she went on to work,  actually, not extension, but she was a real outstanding speaker. Went to  work in Chicago in business. It was real interesting to see her do some  things.  Sure. So you worked in county fairs for other counties? Did you have to  go to other counties and do judging for them?  Yes. We did some reciprocating as far as judging was concerned, and  we   d take leaders with us. Some years there might be six counties  calling for judges. So, it   s a give-and-take situation. I felt like I needed  to go to at least two or three and then send leaders to others if I couldn   t  go. Another thing was fairs coming the same week. Like, I know we had  a problem with that with Caddo County and Comanche County at one  time, and as time went on, ours was a little bit earlier, so we were okay  on that. I have gone to Pauls Valley and Grady County, Chickasha, their  fair. Caddo County, Comanche County, Jefferson, Cotton County.  There   s several of them.  Quite a few. Not to all seventy-seven, though. (Laughter)  No. Afraid we don   t have time for all that. But we always felt like it was  important to work with the leaders, to get them ready to go to judge, if  you couldn   t go. I guess you   d call it kind of a working list of people  that were capable and would agree to go, but it wasn   t during our fair.  17  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Because you   d turn around and need them to come to yours?  Certainly would. I even went one time to Jackson County to judge a  district fair, and an important experience there was I went by myself. I  should have taken a leader with me because I was there all day. So, that  was a good experience for me, I guess, because I learned that you had to  take folks with you. (Laughs)  When you went places like that, would they reimburse you for travel or  mileage?  Yes. The rules and regulations were, like if you were judging a fair, you  either claimed mileage to the event and back or took pay from that  particular county. You couldn   t double dip, so to speak; you couldn   t  claim both.  Did you have an assistant, a co-worker during that time, or were you it?  Osage County, yes, there was an adult home economist, Violet King.  And then here, I worked the home ec program and started 4-H, and then  in 1980, I think it was, Lynn Beam came aboard as 4-H agent. So, we  did a lot of work together.  Between both of you, that   s a pretty big job, isn   t it?  Yes. And, of course, we had a county director, so he worked some 4-H.  That was expected of us, to have 4-H responsibilities along with the  adult programs, as well as agriculture.  If you wanted to be promoted, what would you have to do?  Well, let   s see, we had a district position, because I think Arlene   Sellers , see, at one time, was district home economist, and when she  retired they opened it up, and a lot of people thought I would apply for  it. I really wasn   t interested. I think as a district person, you lose a lot of  your contact with the county people, but then they also work with the  counties and the boss is state level, too. So, I guess it   s a catch-22, but I  never did see the desire to apply for it.  But if you would have wanted to, you could   ve?  Yes.  Gender wouldn   t have kept someone from getting it?  I don   t think so.  18  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Not at that time, anyway.  I didn   t really have a problem with that.  Did you have to carry lots of things in and out, that were heavy?  Yes. I felt at times I needed to take the filing cabinets with me,  (laughter) but we couldn   t do that. Are you familiar with those crates? I  always had my things in one of the plastic crates that had handles on it,  so that became pretty handy to carry things back and forth to meetings.  Just leave it in your trunk?  Yes.  Would you get phone calls at home?  Yes.  How would you answer those? Would you have your reference resources  around you there, too?  Well, I would try to keep canning booklets, that sort of thing. I guess it  kind of depended on the time of year, but it never did bother me for  people to call me at home. You could count on some people always  doing it, and I don   t care if you told them we were open from eight to  five. I don   t know whether they didn   t feel secure to call the office or  what, we certainly got lots of calls there, too. I still get some calls,  believe it or not.  That was my next question.  I said,    Have you talked to Brenda Gandy?    (Laughs) She   s now the  home educator. Maybe they just have known me a long time and they  just want to call.  Do they stop you in the grocery store and ask you questions?  I   ve had that happen, too. Yes.  Is there any part of the job you did not like?  Yes. The part I enjoyed the most was working with the people, the  leader training, and to see them flourish, be it youth or adults. The thing  that I didn   t like, probably, the least thing I didn   t like was all the reports  and plan work. We spent quite a bit of time, I   d say probably half our  19  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  time on planning and reports. I realize that   s justification for the  program, and as the funds got fewer, we had to justify the program. And  I don   t know what a good word is for it. I call it    lobby.    Justifying the  program, we went to the state level to meet with legislators. Letter  writing to state and national, I   ve done my share of that, and also asking  leaders to write on behalf of the program.  Was that sporadically, or were there some years when would you have  done more of that?  I would say, probably, the last ten years. Because, extension is a tiny  part of the higher education budget, at OSU, that   s where our  responsibility was. So, we   d go to bat to the legislators. This year is a  real good example of being without money, being short. So, I   m sure  there   s been a lot of that going on. There   d have to be.  Would they cut staff at that point?  1967, I guess that was before I came on. That spring, they cut quite a  few staff, because I can remember Sue Loughridge was a 4-H agent at  that time here. She went back and took coursework and worked as an  elementary education teacher.  Speaking of coursework, did you go back and do a master   s at some  point?  I took hours toward a master   s. I never did get to a master   s.  Was it one way to get a pay raise if you accomplished it?  Yes. We talked about funding, also. The emphasis on grants was given  to us, and you could apply for grants. What I realized is the more grants  you get, the more paperwork you   ve got (laughter) in order to justify the  need. But that was one way that in home economics we were able to add  to the budget.  In your years of service, did you have to do narrative reports?  Yes, ma   am.  Less so as the years went by?  No, not less so. No, we always had to do lots of reports, and the biggie  was the plan of work. We had impact teams. That   s how you  emphasized what you were going to do on a plan of work. We had an  FCL team, family community leadership teams, where the home  20  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  economists would work with a team of three to four leaders in the  community. Also, financial management was one area and leadership  was another area. It just takes a lot of effort for you to be able to decide  what you   re going to do, and it needs to be something that   s concrete,  something that you can measure. (Laughs) There   s something called an  evaluation, so that was expected for us to be able to do.  You couldn   t turn around and do the same thing again next year? You  had to cycle it through a little?  Right, and you might even expand what you   re doing. I don   t know how  many years I worked   financial management was one area I worked in a  long time. It was an area I enjoyed working on, and we had, I think,  some good resources here to help us from the banks to the legal  institutions I know I   d used an attorney when we were talking about  estate planning. Also used an area economist, A. L. Hutson. I don   t  know if you ever met him or not, but he was very good to help us in that  area.  Sounds like it.  In order to have a good program that   s reaching out in several areas, I  think you do have to zero in on some areas. And of course in nutrition,  the sky   s the limit as to what you can do with that, from a young child,  youth, to adults, senior adults. There   s different needs for those age  groups.  Seems like you had to network with business people, as well.  Sure.  You had to know everybody, really.  Right. I felt like our office was kind of a resource clearinghouse,  because we worked with lots of, not only just business people but we  also worked with the lay public. One of our bosses was county  commissioners. They actually had some say-so about our budget. Excise  board and county commissioners were the determining factor for us as  far as budget was concerned.  And that was year by year?  Yes, it was. Some years, we would get some increase. Some years,  they   d be lean. So, you   d just tighten your belt and try to do more for  less.  21  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Well, your salary didn   t change that much. It   s just what you budget to  do the work?  Right, here in the county. We were fortunate in that our own budgets  weren   t affected. Like I say, I tell you I worked in two of the counties  that were probably the best as far as the budgets were concerned. We did  have a good working relationship, also, with county commissioners. I  think that is key. Excise board, as well as the other officers in a  courthouse.  Is that where your office was?  Yes.  Was yours in the basement?  Yes, the lower floor. Now it   s out by the fairgrounds.  Better location.  Better location. Closer to where you do a lot of the training, where you  do fairs and livestock shows. So, it kind of balances out.  It doesn   t sound like you spent a great deal of time actually there,  though.  It varied. I could think about the money management program. We have  used the conference room for a workshop. I think there was three  different days we   d run like a nine to three, using our resource people to  help us. And also those resource people would help you to get freebies  for the little notepads or pencils or whatever they might have.  Participants always enjoy those.  Did males and females both come to that type of class?  They sure did. And likewise, both male and female presenters. So, you  have to make sure you do that, that you   re not overloaded as far as all  ladies presenting, but we had some very capable men. I mentioned the  banker, and I mentioned also the lawyers. We even had people from  Lawton that would come over and help us.  Did you do newspaper articles or radio slots?  Yes, ma   am. Also did an article in what we call the Cotton Electric  Current. It reaches parts of six or eight different counties, and I felt like  that was a good way to reach people that weren   t necessarily homemaker  22  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  groups or youth groups, because you could also provide educational  material to those folks. So, I   ve lost track of how many columns I used  to do. Yes, we did columns for   let   s see, it was every other week, Lynn  and I rotated as far as giving a column.  Did you pick your own topic, or did someone else choose the topic?  We picked our own topic, and I tried to balance local activities that were  happening along with sometimes they call it canned material, to dress up  the educational material and put the columns in there. That also went to  the Cotton Electric and also, let   s see, Marlow Review, Comanche News,  and of course the Duncan Banner ran it; had our picture there in the  office with the title.  Did you keep copies of all of these?  Yes.  We may ask to see those at some time.  Well, I didn   t bring my scrapbook. I probably might have some in that.  Would they come and interview you for any of the articles, as well?  Special event-type things, they would come and do. Now, like the  Duncan Banner, you put it on the computer and email it. We did a lot of  the work for them. All they had to do was take and run with it.  Speaking of the computer, it became popular while you were     Yes, it did, because I had to take a computer class at Red River.  Did that help, when the computers started?  It was supposed to make it faster for us, wasn   t it? (Laughter)  It was supposed to.  Oh, gosh, we did yearbooks. We did livestock show and fair books. All  of our columns were on computer.  That helped some, then. You could do your narrative reports that way,  too?  Yes. If we had the forms, the program, the format, we could do that, too.  23  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Well, before computers, were they hand-written, or just a regular  typewriter?  Regular typewriter. Of course, before that was handwritten. So, I guess  it   s progressed some.  I understand some of the more current narratives, though, were more  statistical oriented instead of telling you that you worked canning or  whatever, more detail. Some of the older narratives are more  interesting, is what I   m saying.  Yes. Oh, and I don   t know whether the office still has some of the  reports that the ladies used to have to do; they were quite in depth.  That   s another thing. The ladies spent lots of time doing projects out in  the county. I told them one time, I said,    You need to write this up,    and  they received several awards from filling out these reports. There   s a lot  of work involved in those projects. They might as well receive some  type of gratification, some kind of satisfaction for a job well done. I was  real honored to see some 4-Hers and some homemakers go on to win  awards. Some of the 4-Hers win on the record books and I   ll show you  this afterwards, what the different program areas like citizenship,  leadership, or if it   s clothing or whatever, they could win an all expense-paid  trip, used to be to Chicago. Now I think it   s to Atlanta, Georgia, so  it was very interesting to see them want to carry through with that. The  ladies, I worked with four state council presidents. I don   t know whether  I was a glutton for punishment or what, but they were a very big help to  me as an educator.  Do you want to name their names?  First one was Zelma Wood from Marlow. Mildred Coffelt. Then, came  along Sheila Ely, you   ve probably heard her name. She   s still doing it,  by the way. Barbara Cox lives here in Duncan. That   s the four. And they  also worked on committees. Let   s see, Vicki Malone has been district  representative along with Gala Mosteller. Of course, Sheila was before  that. She   s served, probably, in every office that I can think of as far  as   extension would never be able to repay the work the family has  done, coming to bat for extension, both in the youth as well as  agriculture as well as home economics program. Another family was the  Ketchum family. Marie Ketchum was president when I came to the  county; very solid force working with the program. She   s still, believe it  or not, these days working with a shooting sports team. I still see her and  visit with her, so she   s been involved a long time.  Let   s switch gears a little bit and talk about your association work with  Oklahoma. Did you hold any offices?  24  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  I certainly worked on several committees. I worked as a district   did we  call it director? Anyway, all the districts had a directorship and you  worked with those home economists in that particular district. I did not  hold any state offices, but certainly enjoyed my work with them.  Did you attend the annual meetings?  Yes. Enjoyed that. Went to a few of the national meetings.  Where to?  First one was to Portland, Oregon, so that was interesting. I   d not ever  been to Portland at the time we went. Also went to Lincoln, Nebraska. I  received the distinguished service tray in Louisville, Kentucky. We went  through Tennessee, though. Stopped in Nashville, saw some things.   Also went to Denver, Colorado.   Who were the other three in the car, if there were four of you?  Ida Fay Winters from Altus, Loretha Roper from Beckham County, and  who was the other one? I missed somebody besides myself. Anyway,  there was four of us. We had a lot of fun.  You were pretty good friends with other people that held jobs like yours.  Yes, and you know, I   m not sure we mentioned this, but we did lots of  sharing of program ideas across county lines. When you   d see a good  program, you   d call them up and ask them how they did this. Or if  they   d ask you, you   d send them the outline or handouts, whatever. We  had an opportunity to see that at state meetings, and of course, some of  our district meetings. At Christmastime, we usually had a day of sharing  of programs, along with food and fellowship.  Across the state?  Yes. Actually, our district. And, of course, state was sharing of  programs. So, it was a lot of fun. You learned a lot.  And it wasn   t competition? It was to help the program.  I never did feel like I was in competition with them. There was a lot to  be learned. Another thing, I think, that was a benefit of seeing programs  from the persons that were more experienced than you, it was a good  experience for you, because you learned from how they presented the  material. It might be in a totally different way than what you   d thought  about.  25  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Were there ways for you to update your skills, other than that?  In-service training, you mean? Yes, both. We would have a state in-service  training along about December.  Yearly?  Yes. And then we   d have some type of in-service the day before we had  our state meeting for impact teams, financial, nutrition, family relations.  So, that was another way that we could update, and of course, we   d have  workshops throughout the year. You   d sign up for certain ones you   d  want to take.  And if it wasn   t covered there and you wanted to learn something, you  learned on your own?  Right.  Constantly learning.  Yes. And you never learn it all. That   s the thing, if you have that  attitude, I think you   re overconfident on it, because there   s always  something we can learn from others.  And you learned to say,    If I don   t know, I can find out.     Yes, I sure did. And that   s what all these resources, the bulletins and the  books and all that that we had in our files or other resource professionals   were for . I certainly asked lots of questions.  I understand that the communication went both ways. You all would  teach, and it would filter down, but then things in the community would  be going on, and problems would arise and you   d pass it on up the line  for someone else to figure out how to solve it?  Are you talking about just extension? It could   ve been extension, or it  could   ve been like with the Chamber, working within. So, there   s lots of  professionals that are there to help you if you   ll avail yourself of them.  Keep the communication lines open.  That   s right. Even public school teaching, there   s a lot of people there  that, I think, could help you with different topics.  In the    60s when segregation and integration and all that was going on,  were there any issues with that here in this county with your work?  26  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  You mean, as far as integration? You know, I guess I can remember  asking that question with some of the black homemakers. We had, it was  a home ec aide with Langston, Lois Combs, and she still lives here. She  came into our office and reported, and I asked her about that. Well,  Douglass was the black school, and they were integrated into the  Duncan school system, but that Douglass site is still open as a senior  nutrition site and also a senior citizen center, which is great because  they   re still utilizing that. We did day camps over there, worked with  kids, with the 4-Hers helping us put on a day camp. I never did  experience the problems of that segregation problem. But now, we had,  after 19   when did we start the affirmative action? 1967 or    68. We  were required to have what we call an affirmative action report, and you  would update that, how you were contacting diverse audiences.  Probably a little bit different than it would   ve been in a big city.  Oklahoma City would probably have a different take on it.  Yes, I   m sure it is. In fact, they even had some blacks on staff in  Oklahoma City and Tulsa. Well, even at Lawton, Comanche County.  Has there ever been a male in your group? I haven   t asked anybody  that, but it just dawned on me.  A male home economist? No, we haven   t had a male home economist,  but we   ve certainly had male, female 4-H agents and directors. We   ve  had some county directors that were ladies.  I   d be curious to see if other states say that, too. You would think that it  would be    no    most of the time, but there   s probably one out there  somewhere.  Probably is.  When you were at OSU, were any of the teachers that taught the home  ec-type classes male?  Are you talking about family relations? Yes, I had some. I did not in  nutrition. Interior design, I had one.  You had a few, then.  Architects and interior design would be closely related there. Let   s see.  Clothing, no, we didn   t. Hotel and restaurant, of course, there would be  some in that.  When you would go to conferences, would you see many?  27  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  No.  Unless it was husbands.  We didn   t have that many.  I guess the farm agents could say the same. There probably have not  been many female farm agents, either.  No, but you know there has been a lady IPM agent, integrated pest  management. We used to have one here. Pat would just go right out  looking for those bugs and working with the farmers. (Laughs) It was  kind of unique.  What was her last name?  Miller.  Pat Miller. Do you think she   s still in the state?  I don   t know where Pat is now. I think she   s originally from Missouri. I  don   t know where she is now. It didn   t bother her one bit to go around  out there and work with the farmers and ranchers. Of course, that   s what  you have to do, regardless of what program it is.  When I first got here, we were talking a little bit about quilts, and you  said you had received one. Do you want to talk a little bit about it?  That was back in the    70s. The cultural arts committee took a box of  material and just did different, blocks represented what they thought as  far as our county was concerned. Each committee did a block. We had  the cultural arts, there   s family relations, and resource management had  a block. Council is kind of right in the center of the block. Each  committee worked around centers, I   d call it a kind of a spoke each  group worked on. We had over 600 hours in that quilt. It was a real  surprise, and I was just shocked to get that one Christmas. We used to  have Christmas dinners, and 1983, I think, is when I  received the quilt .  And you had seen it being made, you just didn   t know it was for you?  I had also worked on it. (Laughter)  That makes a surprise even more of a surprise, huh?  Yes, it really does. One or two of the ladies had quilt frames. A couple  of them out at Empire have quilt frames, and they   d put that quilt in  28  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  there and work on it off and on. They kept track of how many hours they  put into it, and it was over 600 hours. Lots of time and energy put in it.  Lots of loving stitches, I guess you   d call it.  And that doesn   t happen too much anymore, I wouldn   t think.  Now, the ladies still work with an annual quilt show, and that is held at  the Stephens County Museum in the park.  A particular homemaker group or all of them?  All of them. It   s a county-wide project, and they work with the   it first  started out a couple of ladies as part of a quilters    guild, they were  overseeing it, and then they asked the Homemakers to become a part of  it. And it   s just a pretty good project, because it   s a day and a half, like a  Friday afternoon, all day Saturday, usually that first Friday and Saturday  of October. Of course you set up. You have to have it turned in and have  to set up, so it becomes a three- or four-day project.  Competition, or is it for money making?  Well, it   s actually a fundraiser for the Stephens County Museum. That   s  one of their projects, to do that. And they used to have a stew dinner  along with it, but the last few years I don   t think they   ve done that.  They   d sell their pies and have their stew dinner as a project, and that  was always a big treat. They had a fall festival and quilt show, and I  think it hurt them when the antique equipment, tractors and cars and that  sort of thing, pulled out, because it was right there on the grounds there  at Fuqua Park.  Some of those activities, I guess, have changed over the years, too?  Yes.  Suppers like that are not as common?  I suppose they   re not. Now, the ladies, they still sell their pies at the fair.  There   s different groups that host. Like, every day there   s so many that  have the meal, have it open. Some of them may be doing like a spaghetti  meal. One of the Homemaker groups, the Comanche Homemaker  Group, is still doing the stew dinner. Very popular with the public. In  fact, I try to go out every year to see the projects and have a meal with  them. It   s a lot of work, and as your Homemakers get older, they   re not  able to carry on for four days at the fair, morning, noon, and night. I  mean, it was a long day, nine to ten o   clock at night, nine a.m. until ten  o   clock. Takes lots of workers.  29  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  It   s hard on them. Is there any particular part of the job you miss the  most?  I miss the people, working with the people. Even though you still see  some of them, you don   t have as close of contact with them. I don   t miss  the reports. (Laughter) That was the hard part, I think, the plan of work  and the annual reports, that sort of thing.  You   re happy with your choice of careers?  Yes. Really am.  You wouldn   t change it?  It was lots of work, but it was fulfilling. I put in nearly thirty-six years.  That   s a long time. Was your mother encouraging for this type of career,  or would she have preferred you be a school teacher?  You know, Mom never really pushed me in that area. My folks were  never 4-H leaders, but they were always very supportive, taking us to the  meetings and like the county fair started out with Kiowa as an exhibitor  and, of course, worked our way through. They never did really dictate  or,    I wish you   d do so-and-so,    because I think each one of us were  able to pick the particular trade that we felt was best for us.  Would you go back and give her lessons and tell her something you   d  learned that would help her?  Well, yes. Mom was very reserved, but I think she was very open to any  suggestions you made. In fact, about three weeks ago I went back to  Mountain View to my alumni banquet and was able to pick up Mother   s  sewing machine, an old Singer. As far as I remember, that was the one  that I learned to sew on.  Does it still work?  Yes. I   ve got to put a new cord on it and everything.  Is it a treadle?  No, it   s not. My grandmother had one, but this is a Singer in a cabinet.  I   ll have to work it over and see how many stitches I can use with it.  Do you still do some canning?  30  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  I do. We still have a garden, by the way. I don   t can the corn. We  usually cut the corn off the cob and blanch it and put it in the freezer, but  it   s not been too long ago that we canned the beans. But that   s about all.  Beans and relish, basically, is what I put up.  No tomatoes?  No.  Or pickles? Bread and butter pickles?  Oh, I have done that in the past, but not lately. I still like the pickles.  Do you use a pressure cooker?  Yes, sure do.  Have  you had  any blow up and hit the ceiling?  No, I hear people talk about that, but as long as you use the right method  on it, it   s a great deal of respect you have to have for them, I think. Of  course, from time to time, to get the seals that wear out, and you have to  get those replaced. That   s another thing, I think. The amount of  availability of canning supplies has decreased. There   s not that many  people that carry the supplies.  Kind of like sewing and fabric. Not that much of that left, either. Do you  use a microwave?  Yes, I do. I sure do. Probably every meal. I don   t know what we   d do.  When was it we had our ice storm? That was in February. We had a  snow storm in December, and then an ice storm took out all the  electricity, and I sure missed the microwave, and of course, we have an  electric range, and I wish I had put gas in because that   s what I grew up  with. You learn how the pioneers operated. We weren   t without that  long, but some of the areas were without. Marlow was without twelve  days. So was Altus, because ice actually took down the lines, and they  had to go in and completely redo the area.  Microwaves came out while you were working.  Yes. That   s a real time saver, I think.  Did you have to go somewhere to get lessons on how to use one? How  do you recall learning, yourself?  31  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  We had a book. Have to learn to use that book. Seemed to me like the  equipment specialist did give us a     Did you go do demonstrations on how to use it?  No. I can   t remember doing any on microwaves, but if I remember right,  she wrote a leader training program on the use of microwaves.  What about crock pots?  Yes. That   s a pretty good little appliance to have, too.  It just doesn   t taste the same, though. (Laughter)  No, but if it   s cooked slow, it gets tender. I   ve learned a much quicker  method is to use the little Presto cooker. The thing about doing a pot of  stew is that you   ll have a meal ready to go. You can put it in the freezer  and have it ready to go in case you   re gone. I know when I first retired,  my mom was in a nursing home at Carnegie. Once I retired, I told her,     I   m going to try to come see you every week.    Carnegie is 75 miles  from here, so it   s 150 miles round trip. Most of the day, you   re at work  or you   re visiting, and you   d come home and you   d be tired. If you had  stew or if you had something put up in the freezer, it made it a lot  simpler. I learned to do lots of pots of stew. We still do cook up stew.  And bypass the fast food window?  Yes, we try to. Yes, January of 2008, I had open-heart surgery, three  procedures, and I   m trying to stay on the heart-healthy diet. Dr. Clark  emphasizes that, a low-salt diet. It   s one of those things you have to  really work at, but it   s a lot healthier if you do.  With your background you know what you   re supposed to do, I guess.  Just doing it is the tough part.  Yes. I   m not knocking the fast food industry, but that   s certainly been a  detriment to our youth and adults, and they   ve also slowed down the  amount of activity they get. If you   ll remember, the exercise was taken  out of the classroom. They don   t get as much, unless they are involved  in soccer or basketball or some of those things. It can be a detriment.  Same way with adults. Fast food, picking it up. Too much fat and salt.  Too much of a good thing, in excess, is not good for us.  Did you work some of that into the later lessons?  Yes, I did. Eating for your health. In the nutrition area, we did  32  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  everything from basic cooking to low salt. Diabetes is another area that  we need to concentrate on, as far as Oklahomans are concerned.  Those are good topics for the lunch meetings that you mentioned earlier.  They would have to be short, of course, but you could get in quite a bit  of information if you did more than one.  I had a question about rural travel in the early days, if you were to have  car trouble. But if you had a new Mustang, you probably wouldn   t have  had car trouble.  No.  Flat tires or anything like that?  I can truthfully say I was fortunate and I didn   t. I really didn   t.  The farm-to-market roads were pretty rough, still, at that time.  Yes. I guess I was fortunate in that. I don   t ever remember having a  problem with that. Well, you asked me about a flat tire. I did have one.  That was back when I was still in Osage County. We were having a  night meeting at Fairfax, and guess what? I had to find a place to get the  flat fixed, and I did finally find a station that was open to get the flat  fixed, so I   d have a good tire to go home on. So, it is a definite need, and  now it   s even worse because they don   t stay open as long. And, of  course you   ve got to find that magic one, the one that   s open. But it can  be a problem for a homemaker.  With cell phones nowadays, I guess it helps a little bit.  That   s been a big   yes, it has. One of the experiences, this was taking  groups to a district council meeting, and we got up before breakfast, like  four-thirty, five, and left and went to Elk City. We had a car load.  Coming home, we had just started home. You   re looking at about the  third week of March. Very warm day, so we had the air conditioner on.  Well, when I got over past Hinton, I was coming on I-40, back toward El  Reno, and the car quit on us. That was before I had the cell phone, and  we finally had to go for help at a station, and I finally had to call the  Ford dealership at El Reno, Diffee Motors. I had to get the car towed in,  and we had to go in a separate car, because we couldn   t all ride with the  person that was towing the car in. So, that was an experience getting  home. I was worried that we weren   t going to get home, but we finally  got home about nine-thirty that night. We had to leave the car.  33  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  I could not get hold of my husband. He was between the house and the  barn. He was feeding the cattle. We were able to get hold of one of the  ladies    daughters who came after us. And then, in the meantime, I called  in and Gail said,    Where in the world are you?    I said,    Well, the car  quit us before I-40, so we were towed in to El Reno.    We had to go back  the next day then, after work and get it, and it was the fuel filter, that  fuel pump, it   s within the gasoline tank. I didn   t know that the Tauruses  had a problem with that. The gasoline tank had to be taken off and  replaced. So, that   s one of the hazards, I guess, of the trade. Hazards of  the job.  You probably don   t really think about that when you   re considering it  for your career, that you   re going to be on the road so much.  Really, I had dependable rigs, but it just happened to be a fluke, I guess.  That might have been a shortcoming.  Once in thirty-five years not too bad.  Not too bad, because we put in a lot of miles, back and forth. And I think  back, in all the hours that we put in, I   m surprised we didn   t have more  problems.  People were friendly, though, and would take care of you, too, along the  way?  Yes, and in this day and time, we do have some problems with your stop  along the road, much to my regrets.   Is there  anything you want to add before we close off?  I can   t think of anything. I   d just say it was a real good experience.  Working with top-notch coworkers always makes the job a little easier. I  guess every day was a challenge for us, but I never dreaded going to  work, even though we worked hard at our job.  That   s a good plus. Do you have any comments about the different name  changes through the years, which one you like the best?  Not really. You know, extension educator is what we do. So, the one we  have now I guess is    Let   s see, it used to be home demonstration agent,  way back early. Then it became extension home economist. Then in, I  think, mid    60s they changed it.  I think now they   re calling them home and community     34  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Finchum  Jones  Is it FCS? Anyway, educator is what it is.  When history is written about you, what would you like for it to say?  How would you like to be remembered?  That   s a loaded question. That I was able to help youth and adults from  taking them where they are to learning a practical skill to better their  life.  I   d say the county is much better off having had you here for so long.  Well, it was a lot of fun. It really was.  Thank you for sharing your story today. It   s been very nice.  Well, you   re welcome.  -------  -------  
