 Wilson  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  Wilson  L. Bratcher  Today is March 22, 2012. My name is Latasha Wilson, and I   m with the  Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at Oklahoma State  University Library. I am in Midwest City today, at the home of the  Bratchers, where I will be interviewing Lloyd and Inez for the  Spotlighting Oklahoma Oral History Project. Thank you for having me  here today.  You   re welcome. Glad to have you.  Thank you. Glad you   re here.  To start out, would you mind telling me when and where you were each  born?  I was born June 6, 1925, Bromide, Oklahoma, which is a small  community in the vicinity of Tishomingo. I left there when I was  probably a year and a half old and moved to the Tribbey, Macomb, and  Trousdale area, south of Shawnee about thirty, thirty-five miles, give or  take. I was raised on   my dad had 320 acres, half a section. We farmed  with team and horses back in those days, no tractors. Tractors were very,  very limited in those days. Had team and horses. If people did have cars,  they could buy gasoline anywhere from eight cents to nine cents a  gallon. You had three types of gasoline. You had ethyl gasoline, had  regular gasoline, and you had white gas. White gas was used basically  for the lanterns. The other type, bronze gas they called it, and ethyl gas,  in one of the stand-up pumps, held ten gallon, and you   re pumping it by  hand.  Of course, the cars back in those days, they didn   t drive them too much.  The roads were horrible, gravel, dusty, and very muddy. During my high  school years, well, my grade school, most of them, we had to walk a  mile to catch the school bus. Went to Tribbey High School. I started my  6  Wilson  L. Bratcher  senior year and went into the military. Prior to this, the Trousdale school  bus, where my wife went to school, went right in front of our house  because we were in Tribbey district, and right across the road was  Trousdale district. My dad tried to transfer us to Trousdale because the  bus come close to home. They said,    No, we need your tax money for  Tribbey district    because it was a poor community, also.  Of course, everyone was poor back in those days. (Laughs) We were a  poor family. The family next door was a poor family. Next door to them  was a poor family. We didn   t know anything about being a poor family.  During our survival, we milked a bunch of cattle by hand and by lantern  light. We called it coal oil back in those days, which is kerosene now.  We would turn the separator, which would separate the milk from the  cream. We   d generally get about ten gallons of cream per morning.  That   d be shipped to Shawnee to the Pantier Creamery Company. The  next day, the train come back and bring whey back. My dad mixed  ground wheat with that whey and fed it to our hogs. About every six  months, he   d have a load of hogs to take to the market. That was our  survival, farming what little we had. We didn   t make a living; we just  survived. (Laughs)  Where was the market that the hogs went to?  They went to the packing company in Shawnee. Had a little small  packing plant there. I was the oldest of ten children. Since then, I   ve lost  seven brothers right in a row. That leaves myself and my sister and my  youngest brother that   s living out of the ten children. I   m from the  Cherokee descendent. My great-grandmother was a full Cherokee. We  did not get on the rolls because my mother never did try, but we do have  my great-grandmother   s roll number. One of my nieces there have. So,  that   s about the way it was.  Of course, when the war came along, December 7, 1941, I was a  sophomore. My first class on Monday morning was science. Radios  were not allowed in school back in those days. All I had here was a  battery radio and a little electricity now and then. We did get to listen to  President Roosevelt   s famous speech. I won   t forget that. He says,    I   ll  now ask Congress to declare war on the Japanese empire for the incident  which happened yesterday, December 7, on the islands of Pearl Harbor.     Here I am, sixteen years of age and a sophomore in high school.  I went ahead and started my senior year and went to the Navy. I got my  GED that way because if you had training in the military at that present  time they would give you your high school diploma. My dad, when I  graduated in May of    44, he received my diploma for me. Not many  people has their dad   s signature on their high school diploma. He was on  7  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  the school board at the time, which was very nice to have there. Then I  went ahead and went in the military. Left the eleventh day of October. I  was sworn in on the fourth. Had one week off. I left here the eleventh of  October, arrived in San Diego, California, on a Friday evening, the  fifteenth of October. It was kind of misting rain. There was five of us  from the Oklahoma City area going.  Well, real soon they   d bring a bus to pick us up in or something like that,  but, no, they had a cattle truck, just a side-open truck, side boards on the  side of it. Had    US Navy    on the side. They hopped up in that truck.  Well, they took us to the receiving barracks. This chief petty officer was  there, (I retired as a chief later on) and he was rough. (Laughs) He had a  large box in the middle of the receiving barracks there. He said,    Dump  everything you have on you except the clothes you have on your back in  that box.    Some fellow said,    What about my comb?    He kind of got a  real rough voice.    You wasn   t listening were you?       Yes.       What did  you say?       Yes. Yes, sir      One guy says,    What about my cigarettes?       What did I tell you?  What  did I tell you?     That was the way it went on, and I spent nine weeks of  grueling, grueling boot camp in San Diego. My tenth week, the last  week in boot camp, we were separated out and went different places to  do things. Some people were on guard duty, some went to mess hall,  worked in the mess hall, and some of us then went to the stenciling  company. We would stencil clothes, uniforms, for the recruits that come  in. We pushed them around. We thought,    Well, we   ve been in ten  weeks.    We   d stencil uniforms for them. We would have to sometimes  get up at 0330 in the morning, which is three thirty, and march off to  chow hall.  Well, the first morning in the Navy was on a Saturday morning, October  16, 1943. We had breakfast. Our breakfast consisted of navy beans, a  piece of bread, half a grapefruit (the sour type, not the sweet type they  have now) a bowl of oatmeal, coffee, milk and etcetera. Nobody said  one thing about,    Where   s my eggs? Where   s my biscuits? Where   s my  gravy?    You ate that, and that was it. That was all you got. From there,  we went to the barber shop, and everyone got their hair peeled. It was  worse than Michael   s  Michael Brock, grandson-in-law . (Laughter)  Worse than Michael   s  (Laughs)  That was peeled, I mean, peeled off. (Laughs) From there, then, we went  to get our uniforms. My shoes were a size and a half too large for me.  Wore blisters on my feet, but you wore them. You didn   t have any  comments. They just threw them at you, and you put them on. From  there, we went to get our shots, started getting shots. Not one or two. I  8  mean bookoos of them. Your arms are sore, then your swimming test  comes up. We took the swimming test, best we could. We had a lot of  people that could not swim. I considered myself a fair swimmer when I  went in because I was raised on the farm and we swam in the ponds.  After we drilled all day long, doing everything we had, then the ones  that could swim would take these other troops down to the pool and  teach them how to swim there. That   s extra duty. We went through that  for nine weeks. They   d march us out to the rifle range, which was a  four-mile hike out to Mission Beach. They   d either march us one way,  haul us in a truck one way, or haul us in a truck the other way and we   d  march back. Out there, they had a pool that we was training on. It had a  nineteen-foot tower. You had your lifejackets on and your white uniform  with the step-over collar. So, you   d jump off a nineteen foot tower. It   s  kind of equivalent to abandoning ship, nineteen feet. If you didn   t jump  off, the instructor would push you off.  I went ahead and stepped out, and down I went. I had a lifejacket on. It   s  saltwater; you bounce right back up. Then you pulled your lifejacket off,  and then we had to take our trousers off under the water. You had what   s  called clothes stops, little lines about that long like a shoelace. On the  end, they had the little end where it   s tied. You always carried those with  you. You   d take those and tie them around the legs of your trousers. Get  your trousers wet, you shake them like this, they inflate, and you lay  between those, and that   d give you a balancing buoyancy to swim with.  You had that little white hat that you turn the brim down with, get it wet.  If you was at sea, put it down like this and kind of like a balloon. You  could swim that way. That was for survival. Then we, of course, had to  crawl under wire and climb over big barricades of things with monkey  grips to climb over that thing like you was abandoning ship or  something like this. It was pretty intense training for the Navy.  Then when I got out of boot camp, I went to sixteen weeks of torpedoing  school. That was a very, very mechanical electronic school we went to.  From there, some of the people left and went direct to sea, and some  went to different ships, different stations. They took the highest twelve,  most qualified, physical and otherwise, and sent them to the New  London, Connecticut, Submarine Base. My height, I was around six  foot, then. When I got there, I thought,    Man, these submarines look  small for me.    (Laughter) Well, I passed the physical, but when they  give me the pressure test (they have a tank above the ground equalized  like you   re under water pressure) my left ear wouldn   t pop. They got the  medics, got me out, took me to the hospital, got the medics. Of all  people, they got psychiatry after me to see if anything would happen.  Well, so, I guess I was kind of flunked out of school, there.  9  Then I was shipped to the  USS  Wasp Aircraft Carrier, which was  stationed off the Quonset Point Naval Air Station, Providence, Rhode  Island, air station there. I began drawing sea pay then, once assigned to  the ship, and was working with torpedoes. During that period of time, I  got some gun powder poison in my lip, right here, which bothers me  some yet. So, anyhow, I was assigned to a ship there. I was there for a  while. Then we left there, and they sent me to Lewiston, Maine. It was a  NAAF Base, there, Naval Air Auxiliary Facility station. That was the  last landing strip that the pilots on those F6F Hellcats had to practice  landing. It was like an aircraft carrier. It was down in the mountains, and  so the runways were very short. They had to take off fast. They had to  come in straight down, almost. I was in a squadron there with them for a  while.  Then they went to sea, and then I went to the Boston Naval Base out at  Boston for a while. The asbestos, when we was making those ships and  was sawing it and everything, it was flying through the air like  cottonwood fuzz in the spring of the year here. That   s when I contracted  a lot of my lung problems, there. From there, I was shipped to San  Francisco, California. I caught a ship there, and I went to the Marianas   Islands , which is Saipan and Tinian, there. I was there for a while, and  then I caught the USS Stack  DD- 406, a tin can, which is a destroyer. I  was on that then, and we was the occupation force for the Southwest  Pacific, the sixth fleet. Of course, I was a torpedoman. We manned the  torpedoes and the depth charge, which is one of those things that hits a  submarine.  From there, we got a call, orders, to go to Iwo to help mop up around  Iwo Jima. We anchored out there, and we did get to see Mount  Suribachi.  The Japs  had a Widowmaker there. During the invasion of  Iwo,  they  rolled out on these tracks. The third and sixth Marine  division was trying to take Iwo over. On account of that Widowmaker,  the water things they had there, they   d roll out on tracks, did all their bad  work, and rolled back in.  The marines  lost about six thousand in one  day there, at one time. They had sulfur on the island. You couldn   t  hardly stand it for the sulfur. The sulfur mine, you could see the fumes  coming up out of the ground, blue-looking stuff out of the ground.  Then we got a call to go to the Bonin Islands from there. That   s a small  place about 240 miles off the coast of Japan. Haha-jima is nothing much,  just a rock kind of sticking up. Chichi-jima had a little landing strip there  where they land their Zeros on.  The Japs  had a cave built back in,  modified with a machine gun about that far apart. So the Japs, if I may,  they had not surrendered yet. They didn   t know everything was kind of  over, that the bomb had been dropped on Japan. They were still hostile.  We had to go back to Iwo to pick up an interpreter that we had there. He  10  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  Wilson  L. Bratcher  was a sergeant in the Japanese Army. He finished school either in UCLA  or USC. When President Roosevelt made all the Japanese sign and go  back home or go to a concentration camp, he decided to go back home.  He was very, very intelligent. English very well, fluent English, so he  was our interpreter.  Then we went aboard there at Chichi, and that   s where I got those  cigarettes. We got some of their weapons they had there, so I stayed  aboard the Stack until May. Well, we left there to come home   let   s see.  Left there the day before Thanksgiving 1945 to come home. We arrived  in Pearl Harbor the twenty-fourth day of December, 1945, day before  Christmas. The next day, then, we started back on the way to San Diego,  California. Then we had five days on the road on a trip, I   m going to  say, to San Diego. We was there probably a week or so while the troops  come home. I stayed aboard the ship, went back to Pearl Harbor. From  there, they took the ship   I was there until about the first part of May of     46. Then we would come back to San Diego, home port. Then some of  us started coming home. Then I was released from the Navy. Back then,  it was hard to find a job, kindly, so I worked in the oil fields two years,  which is mighty rough, oil fields. Two years in the oil fields. Then I  started going with  Inez  in 1948. September 13, had our first date,  wasn   t it?  It was the twenty-third.  Twenty-third, okay.  Can   t believe you missed that. (Laughter)  Twenty-third, had our first date. Then I went to work at Tinker. I worked  there thirty years. During this period of time, I got into the reserve  program, Navy program, and had a lot of activity there. One of the best  deals I had there, I thought, I got to attend Brigham Young University  through the Navy, the National Security Seminar School there. How  they picked me to go there, they needed a chief petty officer to handle  the office supplies and set up the office, etcetera. They recalled seven  Navy, seven Air Force, seven Army, seven Marines there. We had the  seminar, and I got one semester for attending there at BYU. Very  enjoyable school. I got to attend two football games there, free of  charge. I showed Mike the tickets, didn   t I, Mike? One of them? I  believe Wyoming. I got to see Wyoming play there.  So you still have your tickets?  They bought the tickets for us. I   ve got the stubs somewhere. (Laughter)  I showed it to Mike one day, Mike and Rebecca. Anyhow, one of my  11  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  Wilson  L. Bratcher  other trips I enjoyed quite a bit, I was gone three weeks or more down to  San Juan, Puerto Rico, in that area there. The gunners had to fire their  weapons, of course, the five-inch guns on the   I was on the DD- 712 ,  on the  USS  Gyatt. Then we departed to Norfolk, Virginia. Then I got  recalled to come up on the  USS  Oriskany in    65, February of    65, the  aircraft carrier. It was an aircraft carrier. I went ahead and stayed in the  reserve program and retired in 1983 (wasn   t it?) after twenty-nine years  there, plus my three years I had in the active-duty military. That wasn   t  enough for me, so I went to work in a funeral home. Worked twenty-eight  years there.  Eisenhower Funeral Home.  I got my apprentice license and had to embalm twenty-five people, show  cause and embalm twenty-five bodies. The funeral director signed the  affidavit that I could do that, and so I was issued a license, which I have  over here somewhere, a certificate. I retired there in 2008. We have two  children, four grandchildren, seven great-grandchildren, and another one  due the twenty-ninth of May, a boy. I   ve worked practically all my life. I  don   t know whether I should say this or not, but I have not drawn  unemployment. I   m lucky. I   m lucky. I have a very nice family. Got  three wonderful grandson-in-laws, all have college degrees. One has a  double master   s. They all got good jobs, and we   re proud of that and  proud of our home, proud of all of our family.  He forgot to tell you, we did get married December 23, 1950. (Laughter)  I   ve enjoyed my life. Enjoyed my military life, enjoyed the civil service.  That   s about all that I have to say about myself.  What made you want to join the Navy?  Well, either go in the Army or the Marine Corps or the Navy, and I sure  did not want the Army. Before I went in the Navy, I had a cousin that   s  six months older than I am, and he went to Fort Sill about April. His  birthday is in January. He went to Fort Sill about April and took his  basic out there. He weighed around 200 pounds and was about my  height. He came back then about August or September and weighed  about 140. He said,    Slim      he called me Slim. Why, I don   t know, but  he always called me Slim. He said,    You do not want to get in this so-and-  so Army.    He put a little English in there. (Laughter) I said,    Why?     He said,    Look at me.    I said,    What   d you do with all your weight?    He  said,    They get you up and march you, march you, they march you, they  march you.    He said,    If you fall out into a ditch, the meat wagon will  come by,    which is an ambulance.    The meat wagon will come by in  about an hour and pick you up.    He said,    The food is horrible.    He  12  Wilson  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  Wilson  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  says,    Stay out of the Army.    I had a cousin that was in the Navy. He  went in in    36 and stayed until    40. I thought the Navy uniforms looked  pretty nice, too, so that   s why I got in the Navy. I   m not sorry. I   m very  not sorry about the Navy. They   ve done real good to me. Everything  good.  When you headed to boot camp, was that your first time out of  Oklahoma, your first adventure?  Yes, and believe this or not, a grown man should not cry, but I cried.  He was eighteen years old, never been away from home.  It was rough. It was rough on us. You couldn   t even   we marched  everywhere. That   s when I started smoking a little bit because I was  nervous. You didn   t know what they was going to do the next time.  You   re liable to get up at, like I say, three o   clock in the morning.  They   d march you to the chow hall, you eat breakfast, then you come  back, get everything you own. You owned a hammock, (they issued a  hammock) a sea bag, you put all that together, you rolled that thing up.  They put you on a grinder, which is parade drill in the Army. It   s a  grinder for the Navy. They would march you, sometimes duck walking  (that   s on your knees) because it just gets you in shape. I still enjoyed  the Navy.  Were any of your brothers in World War II?  My dad   s furnished six boys to the military.  Not during the war.  Three Navy and three Army.  It wasn   t during the war, was it?  No. I was the oldest one of ten children, two years apart, mostly, down  the line. My dad didn   t   he was too young for WW I, and WW II come  along, he was in his forties, although he did get a draft card, I think, 3A  or something like this, a farmer. I didn   t bring up back then because  everything was rationed back in those days, back in the    40s. Shoes was  rationed. Coffee was rationed. Gasoline was rationed. We didn   t have  any problem with gasoline because we were on the farm.  Sugar.  Sugar was rationed. Just about everything was, but you had to do the  13  Wilson  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  Wilson  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  best you could. We still have some ration stamps here at the house, now,  somewhere, a little book of them. It   s got in there like E stamps. You put  a sticker on your car, if you had a car, an E. My dad had an E on a old  pickup he had there because he was exempt because he could get gas if  he wanted it. They didn   t sell it to you   if you didn   t have a stamp, you  could not buy it.  In other words, we had to grow about everything we owned to survive  by. My mother would can in the summertime. We had a peach orchard.  We   d can peaches. In wintertime when we   d butcher a hog, we would  can the sausage and eat that in the summertime. Of course, in the  wintertime, we had to butcher a lot of rabbits, wild rabbits. Had a lot of  them back in those days, cottontail rabbits. In the summertime, we   d eat  a lot of squirrel for our meats in the summertime. Of course, we had a  nice garden. We made it through. I   ll be eighty-seven the sixth day of  June if I make it.  Was there much dust blowing around in this area in the    30s?  In the    30s it was, and 1936 was a very, very hot year, like last year here.  The temperature was 110, 112, 113, etcetera. My dad had appendicitis  that summer. He was thirty-nine years old, and we thought he was an old  man. We were children. We had to all farm, ourselves, milk those cows,  and bale hay. My mother couldn   t drive, so she had to get a person to  take her to the hospital to see my dad. Us children couldn   t go because  then they had a law that you had to be sixteen to go to the hospital to  visit. Had to be sixteen. If you didn   t, you didn   t go in at all. You had to  be twenty-one to get your driver   s license. Had to be twenty-one to vote.  I was unlucky. I didn   t get to vote until I was about twenty-two or  twenty-three because of the time period in there. My dad, like to lost  him. He stayed in the hospital fourteen days with appendicitis.  It ruptured.  Oh, wow.  They thought they was going to lose him.  Ruptured on him because he didn   t know what it was. All we had was  country doctors. He thought it might be from working. He done a lot of  lifting, like an old hay baler. He baled with horses, going around the  baler. He   d buckle the old baler like this to punch the wires back through  to tie them, and he thought it might have been he hurt himself because of  this appendicitis he had. We like to have lost him. Then another period  of time, Jim, the fourth boy down, had an abscessed kidney, wasn   t it? I  think abscessed kidney. Had to operate on him. He was about four years  14  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  Wilson  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  Wilson  L. Bratcher  Wilson  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  Wilson  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  old, I guess it was. Something like that. He was born in 1932. He was  four. We had to take him to the hospital.  You lost a little brother while you were in the service.  I lost a little brother while I was in the service. He was seven. I didn   t  get to come home for that.  Due to an illness?  He was just seven. Born in    38; died in    45. He was the seventh down  the line, I guess. Me, Dean, Jack, Jim, Jerry, JT. There   s seven of them.  From me down until the last two, they   re all dead. Five passed away  with cancer. That   s why I keep myself checked to make sure I don   t  have   my dad died of cancer. My mother died at ninety-four and a half  of old age. (Laughter) She was in the hospital three times, I believe, the  whole period of time.  You   ve got to be tough to have ten kids.  Yes.  Quite a bit of Indian descendent in her, I guess. Cherokee. She was just  tough back in the days. Had to farm. Worked on the farm.  Did she do much sewing?  Lot of sewing, the old-time machine. No electric. We did not get  electricity, my dad didn   t, until 1948. Had to draw water out of the well.  I don   t know if a lot of people knows what that is or not. With a bucket,  a well bucket, draw it out of the well. At this period of time, it   s just,  we   re still kicking around, aren   t we?  We   re kicking, but not too high. (Laughter)  For bath time with ten children, being the oldest, would you get to go  first, or did you have to go last?  Well, general rule, I took a bath first in a big old number three washtub.  Some of those come along after I left. When I went in the military, my  sister was     Six months old.     six months old. When I come home, they didn   t know who I was. She  was six months old and my brother, then, Derrell next to her, he was  15  Wilson  L. Bratcher  Wilson  L. Bratcher  Wilson  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  three. One of my brothers hadn   t even been born, yet. I   m twenty-three  years older than him, my youngest brother.  Did you stay in touch with your family through letters while you were  away?  Yes. When I was in the military, boot camp, you had to write home one  day a week. The letters were read by the commanding officer, which  was the chief petty officer. The letter was read by him. Anything in there  that pertained to the military whatsoever was cut out. All you could say  was,    Hi, Mom and Dad. How are you doing? I   m doing fine. Lloyd.    It  was free. Didn   t cost anything to mail them. They would write    free    in  the right-hand corner, and put    USN    under it. That   s what we had to  do. Put your name and my rank on there,    Naval Training Station, San  Diego    on the left-hand corner. That   s so they could know. Some of the  letters got back to them when I was at sea. It   d be five or six months  before we   d get them, a bundle about this big, you know. (Gestures) So  they were censored. The letters were censored. All we could tell them  was just    Hi.    They knew I was there. Couldn   t tell them what ship you  was on when you was at sea. They didn   t know where I was because the  fleet post office was in San Francisco, California. So that was one of  those things we had to put up with.  Did you take a train from Oklahoma to California for boot camp?  Took me from Monday until Friday to get there, stopping everywhere.  Picking up more people?  Yes, they did. We wore the same clothes. Now, here   s what they said.     Don   t bring anything with you, no clothes with you.    We kept the same  clothes on that we put on when we left home until we got to San Diego,  California, and we didn   t smell all that well. (Laughter) But anyhow,  boot camp was rough after that. We had a lot of duty. Another thing in  there, if you was on guard duty, you carried a loaded weapon. If a  prisoner escaped, you did his time, or you shoot to wound him, you kill  him. That was just pushed into our brain. You do their time or kill him.  That   s all there was to it. I   m sure glad I didn   t have to put up with guard  duty like that. I did stand gangway watch, something like this. I   ve got  pictures of me with a .45 on my hip, which I   m not proud of that, but I  had to do it. I had to do it. I was gangway watch. When the ship was  docked places, taking on supplies, like Enewetak and Guam and those  islands there, we   d be there, and you had to stand gangway watch.  We tried to find pictures of that because we   ve got pictures of him on  guard duty. We   ve collected so much stuff over the last sixty years, we  16  L. Bratcher  Wilson  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  Wilson  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  don   t know where any of it is.  We got films made, too, refueling at sea, which is a very, very dangerous  job, refueling at sea. It   s in one of those books by Michael, over there,  too. So, that   s about my     Did you get to choose your torpedoman school, or did they just tell you  that   s where you were going?  When you   re in boot camp, you went in this auditorium, and they read  off the following men. They sometimes call your name off and you give  your serial number. Sometimes they give your serial number, and you  say,    Harold Lloyd Bratcher.    Sometimes they read them off,    8-48-83-  56    (that   s my serial number)    Harold Lloyd Bratcher.    Or they   d say,     Harold Lloyd Bratcher,    and I   d say,    8-48-83-56, Sir.    They took  twelve out of torpedoman school and sent us through New London,  Connecticut.  I imagine they sent you where they thought they had a need, wouldn   t  you think?  They did. We had a need, and they sent us there. I didn   t last long at it.  My left ear   I   m wearing hearing aids now, but that   s because a lot of it  was those guns are pretty loud, those five-inch guns. They fire, and  they   re pretty powerful.  Did you stay in touch with anyone you met during that time after the war  was over?  No, I didn   t. I sure didn   t. I   ve got a lot of addresses here, but probably,  I say two thirds, three fourths, a lot of them is all gone.  They   ve been gone a long time.  A lot of them was a lot older than I was because I was one of the  youngest ones in at eighteen in    43. U. L.  Smith  is what, ninety-two?  He will be? Ninety-two, I believe. So he   s one of the older men. There at  Tribbey where I went to school, we had one fatality, 1942, a person by  the name of Curly Watkins. He was a prisoner of war, captured, prisoner  of war. What they did, then, they put him on this troop ship, took him to  a concentration camp. Well, the Japanese, they were pretty wise on  certain things. What they did, they took the American flag off of a ship.  They put the Japanese flag on the ship. The American people bombed  the ship, so their own people killed them. Bless the Japs hearts.  Was that sneaky or what?  17  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  Wilson  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  Then my third cousin lost both his legs over in New Guinea. He was a  sergeant in the Army. He lost both legs over there. He was going on a  little hill, on a ride, and they just mowed him down like that. He was  sergeant leader of the company. That   s the Army for you. That   s why I  decided I   d rather have the Navy. (Laughs)  It wasn   t fun if you got your ship attacked and you were floating around  out there in boiling oil, either. Some of them that I knew did that.  Well, I know. They had motor whaleboats, and we had survival kits and  something like this. Anyhow, that   s a part of my life.  Well, thank you for sharing. Inez, would you tell us when and where you  were born?  I was born in Trousdale, Oklahoma, March 10, 1933. I had two older  half sisters whose mother died in 1918 from influenza. My dad  remarried my mother who had lost her husband at the same time. They  didn   t have any children at that time. Together, they had seven more  children: six boys and me. Boys run in our family, and I wanted a girl  badly. My mother was forty when I was born. She had one more after  me when she was forty-two. We begged and begged her to get us a baby,  and she wouldn   t do it. We thought she was being selfish. What did we  know?  That   s where I was born. You saw the pictures of the old house and  barn. I went to school at Trousdale. First time I saw Lloyd was at a pie  supper during World War II where they had those pie suppers they sold  to buy bombs to finance the war. I thought he was the cutest thing I ever  saw. I was about twelve. When you first notice boys is about twelve.  Keep that in mind, Michael. (Laughter) He was sitting over there with  another woman. This is my future husband. I was twelve  (Laughter) No  telling how old he was. Well, he   s almost eight years older than I am.  I still remember that because he was in uniform. You know what?  Women really like that Navy uniform. All women like the Navy  uniform. That   s probably why he got in the Navy. (Laughter) Anyway, I  never will forget that because she was sitting there patting him on the  leg, and I thought,    Women don   t do that     (Laughter) I thought that  was gross  My sister-in-law is her sister. She   s still alive. That same girl  is still alive. Lives in California. Anyway, I graduated from Trousdale  High School on May 10, 1950. I will tell you, I think, a little interesting  story about us. We had our first date on May 23.  September 23.  18  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  Wilson  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  Wilson  I. Bratcher  Wilson  I. Bratcher  Wilson  I. Bratcher  Wilson  I. Bratcher  September 23, 1950...  Forty-eight.     of 1948, and we dated two years and three months, to the day. He  gave me my engagement ring May 23 of 1950 after I   d gotten out of  high school. That same year in December, we got married on December  23. None of that was planned. (Laughter) It was just a funny little thing  to wonder how things happen like that. I didn   t have an exciting life like  he did, but it was a lot of work on the farm. Girls and everybody had to  work.  What crops did your father farm?  Of course, we grew the big gardens, and he had corn and sometimes  hegari. That   s a feed-type thing. We had cotton, which if you   ve never  seen a cotton sack, you don   t want to see one. (Laughs) It has a strap on  it, and you go bend your back over and pull the bolls, and they carry  them to the   what is that place called where they process it?  Cotton gin.  Cotton gin. Make bales out of it, and they make cotton out of it. That   s  very hard work, too. And chopping corn and cotton. Had to do all that.  Plus, I started cooking at age five.  Really?  Everybody started to work by the time they were big enough to walk,  almost. (Laughter) I wish I could get up and go get the cookbook. It  shows that old range that I learned how to cook on.  Oh, really? We   ll have to look at that.  We   ll look at that after a while.  Do you remember some recipes that you learned early on?  Yes. For one of our family reunions a few years ago, Donna and I (that   s  our daughter) got together and wrote letters to everybody to send recipes  from the family, and we published a cookbook.  Oh, neat. Well, what were some of your favorite things to make?  Well, we didn   t have a lot to choose from back then, but there was an  19  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  Wilson  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  awful lot of good recipes sent in by the family that went into this  cookbook. There   s a lot of good cooks in the family. In fact, Kim made  the little cocoa chocolate cake that   s in that cookbook while she was  here last week. I   ve got some in the refrigerator if you want it. (Laughs)  It came from that little cookbook. There   s pictures of that. Lloyd built  me a little house, about the size of that little house, that I do artwork in  out there. My brother brought that range home because I wanted it real  bad when my folks died. He had taken it home with him. I said,     Richard, I learned to cook on that, and I really would like to have it.     Finally, he relented and brought it to me. That thing must weigh six  hundred pounds or more. (Laughs)  It   s heavy.  It was big. It had about six burners and a ten-gallon reservoir that you  kept hot water in, so we actually had hot water most of the time. We  didn   t bathe in cold water; we had heated water. That was in the days  when you didn   t have any electricity and no way to have hot water  except in a tea kettle, but we did have on that stove. Anyway, I kept it,  and we moved it to Wanette when he and I decided to go back to the  farm in 1994. Biggest mistake. We were way too old to do that again,  but we got a lot of interesting memories in that experience, I can tell you  for sure. (Laughs) Anyway, we   ve had a long marriage and a happy  courtship, two years and three months to the day. He practically raised  me, so I blame everything on him. (Laughter)  What do you remember about wartime when you were still here?  There was a base at Norman and another shooting range. Was that at  Lexington?  Yes.  Which is about eighteen miles west of us. It was real scary. I was eight  years old when the war started. You could hear that firing range from  eighteen miles away when they were target practicing. They had a big  hill of dirt that they fired into to give them training for shooting and all.  The next thing that I remembered that scared me to death was they had a  lot of planes fly over real low. They would just come from out of  nowhere and come right over us down there. There was such a loud  noise, and we would hear these horrible news reports. We had a battery  radio, and naturally everybody had their ear to that radio to see what was  going on in the world.  There was a reporter called Keltonmore. I don   t remember what his first  name was. Keltonborn? What was his initials?  H. V. Kaltenborn   20  Wilson  I. Bratcher  Anyway, he had one of these voices that made you   it was a gloom-and-  doom voice, anyway. They would turn that radio on and listen to all  that war news, and it just really frightened me along with the guns and  the planes flying over. At that time, almost everybody in that part of the  country had   you   d have stars in your window that told how many  people was in the military from that family. You could tell by driving by  this house or that house how many people they had in the war. Some of  them didn   t come back. A lot of them didn   t come back.  Did you go to movie theaters during this time and see anything about it?  Not during that time. We started going to movies   well, my first movie  was Snow White and the Seven Dwarves. A school bus took us to  Shawnee to see Snow White and the Seven Dwarves and Pinocchio when  I was about five, six, seven years old. Didn   t see movies anymore  because there wasn   t much in the way of transportation. That   s one thing  really attractive to me: he had a car. (Laughter) I got to go more than  most girls did. He had the cutest little    40-model Ford coupe you ever  laid eyes on. I   d give anything   I   ve seen one every once in a while  now that somebody has restored. That was our courting car. Most of the  girls did not have boyfriends that had a car. That wasn   t the whole  reason. (Laughter)  How I met him was through my brother that played the guitar, and he  played the guitar. He would come down to our house, and they would  practice playing what they called these country dances. They played for  those square dances. He got to play in way more than I wanted him to  play. I couldn   t go to those places because there was a lot of drinking  and stuff going on, and my mother would die before she   d let me go,  too. (Laughter) I got kind of tired of him coming down practicing and  going off to dance and leaving me sitting at home after we were going  steady, so one day I thought,    You know what? I really don   t like this.     I   m not one to too much speak up on the negative side of anything, but  before they left to go play that night, I said,    Lloyd, can I talk to you?     We walked down the road together. I knew he thought,    What   s up?    I  asked him if he liked me, and he said yes. I said,    Well, do you like  playing the guitar?    He said yes. I said,    Which one do you like better?     (Laughter) I nailed him right there, didn   t I? (Laughter) He said,    Well, I  like you     He didn   t know he was going to have to make a decision  because, see, I didn   t say anything until I   d already had it up to here. I  was fifteen years old, would you believe? (Laughter) You get a lot of  nerve when you   ve got six brothers. You either learn to fight back or  don   t fight at all. I   ve got letters from my oldest half-sister telling me,  when I was thirty years old, she thought I did a wonderful job,  considering I was raised up with all those boys. (Laughter) I think I was  21  Wilson  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  Wilson  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  more tomboy than a girl. To this day, I can still talk to men more  comfortably because that was my whole atmosphere. The only other  female in our house was my mother.  Where were these country square dances held?  Just in houses, whoever...  Just around different places there, you know. They made so much  moonshine back in those days, they wore badges so they wouldn   t sell to  one another. So many moonshiners and bootleggers.  All of our neighbors, I found out after we married   my mother wrote a  card to me one time and said the federals had raided the stills. They  found within a range of a mile of our house, all the way around, I think  there was seven or eight distills. They were all selling this rot-gut liquor,  (Laughter) which, in turn, went to a lot of these dances, which is why  my mother wouldn   t let me go  (Laughter) Oh, goodness. But anyway,  he borrowed my brother   s car. Left him on his own to play for that  dance. We went to the movies. We did start going to one, to the movies.  We did a lot of movies, didn   t we?  Yes, it wasn   t very high, then.  When we started dating, he had a car, so we got to go to the movies.  Twenty-five cents, I think, something like that.  It was mostly Roy Rogers and     All of them, Gene Autry and Roy Rogers movies.     Gene Autry and all those kind of movies, which were very clean.  Anyway, we had two children. The oldest was Donna, and she had two  children. Then we had a son named Randy, who is Michael   s father-in-law.  He   s got an adorable daughter. You see that little girl over there in  the pink cowboy hat?  Oh, yes.  That   s Abby.  Sweet as sugar.  She   s seven, isn   t she? Well, she wanted a baby sister. She was like I  was. We begged for a baby sister, and Mama wouldn   t give us one. I  22  Michael  I. Bratcher  Michael  I. Bratcher  Wilson  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  Wilson  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  don   t know if that had anything to do with you having this baby or not.  (Laughter) Anyway, Abby wants a baby sister. Rebecca just got  pregnant, and she was excited. I never will forget her. She was lit up like  a Christmas tree when she came to church one Wednesday night. She  said she was going to get a baby sister. They finally had to settle her  because she was just flying on cloud nine. She   s seven. Didn   t you have  a talk with her and tell her that God may send us a little boy? (Laughter)  She said,    What if God sends us a little boy? What will you do then?     She said,    I guess I   ll just have to deal with it.    (Laughter) Now, I hope  he   s not as ornery as my brothers were. (Laughter) Anyway, we can   t  wait to see   tell her what Abby named the boy, the baby.  Eugene Fitzherbert.  Fitzherbert  (Laughs)  I think she got it from a Disney movie.  We   ve got a lot of great-grandkids. We went from two of us, to, when  this baby is born, there will be twenty.  Wow.  That picture over there in that corner is one that was made at our sixtieth  wedding anniversary, and there was nineteen of us. Wasn   t Valerie  expecting at that time? She was, wasn   t she?  Drew was born.  Do you generally all get together at Christmas or Thanksgiving?  It   s hard to get together. Not at one time, you don   t.  In periods of time. The family is scattered out so much.  We have to share with everybody. (Laughs)  We share now because, like, Mike   s family is still living. Rebecca   s  family is still living, grandparents. So, like her and I, then, when they get  a little time, we go visit them, and they come here and different places,  you know.  The oldest granddaughter is forty years old, now. She   ll be forty-one this  year. She has four children. I think that   s a picture of them on the wall  over there. Up at the top is when they were little bitty. That   s the four of  them when they were a lot younger. She   s about five foot tall, and not  23  Wilson  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  bigger than a gnat, and she runs and blows and cooks. She   s absolutely a  gourmet cook. She came down here when we both got real sick during  that cough that went around last winter. We got real sick at the same  time, which is against the rule. We were having a hard time cooking and  even feeding ourselves it was so bad, and Kim got worried about that.  Then he got in the hospital recently, and this is a weird thing. He went in  there to have his stomach checked to see why he was cramping. The  doctor hit the vagus nerve and knocked him clear out flat, and they  called the ambulance to take him to the hospital. Anyway, she was  worried about us, having all this stuff happen to us. They were coming  down here on vacation a week ago, and she came over here and spent the  whole entire day cooking. We   ve got frozen stuff. Our freezer is full of  stuff she made. She didn   t want Memaw and Grandpa going without any  food. (Laughter)  We   ve got some very special grandkids. I never thought that one would  be my grandson-in-law or I would   ve been harder on him. Do you want  me to tell him about the dating rules? Okay, I won   t tell him. I won   t tell  you that I wrote him my dating rules when he was about thirteen or  fourteen years old. I think he threw it away. I said,    Michael, if I   d have  known you were going to be dating my granddaughter, I would have  made your rules a lot stricter.    (Laughter) I don   t know what happened  to the set of rules. He   ll understand it better when his daughter starts  dating.  Well, when the war was over and you knew you were heading home, did  you know that you wanted to come back to Oklahoma?  Yes, I did. Come back to Oklahoma, come back here because I was born  and raised here, practically, except the few years I was gone. That   s why  I liked the Navy so well. That   s why I joined the reserve program and  stayed there with them, too. It was something to do, extra income.  He   s retired from everything.  My lungs were damaged in WW II with asbestos poisoning. Everything  had asbestos, all your insulation, your steam pipes. Everything was  asbestos.  In the ships.  The tin can I was on, which is a destroyer, by the way   you never want  to get the bottom bunk on a ship. Always get the middle bunk or the top  one because the bottom bunk, everybody is sitting up playing poker until  they get caught. I always had the second bunk, and right beside the  24  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  bulkhead there, which is a wall (it   s a bulkhead on a ship), is a steam  pipe about that large. It had a brown wrapping all around it, which is  asbestos in that thing. Well, in case I didn   t have time to wash a pair of  socks at the laundry, I   d hang them on that thing to dry at night, which is  very bad, breathing that stuff all the time. Those torpedo tubes was lined  in something similar to that, and we had to clean those things out. It   s  got that, plus, the Boston Naval Yard there was nothing but   they were  building ships there at the time. They were making the fuzz through the  air. All those planes, I imagine some of the cowling on those things was  asbestos. Some of those things probably have asbestos in there. So that   s  how my lungs got bad. I didn   t know it until about several years ago.  Went to a pulmonary doctor     It was about four years ago, four or five years ago when he first really  found out what was wrong with him.     and he said,    Mr. Bratcher, do you smoke?    I said,    No, I have not  smoked since 1949.    He said,    Are you around harsh chemicals?    I said,     No.    He said,    Have you ever been exposed to asbestos or something?     I said,    I spent a lot of time in the military in the Navy.    He said that   s  where I picked it up. By the way, he was in the Navy ten years, himself,  as a lieutenant, doctor, a pulmonary doctor. So then he worked from  there, and he found out what it was. He said,    That   s asbestos poisoning  you   ve got.    So then they wrote to the VA, wrote a letter to the VA.  No, you first got a hold of the VA through...  Well, the DAV  Disabled American Veterans  over here.     the DAV grabbing him.  I got ahold of them first.  He didn   t do anything until the letter.  He had to write a letter to them, and then they finally got around after so  many months in here. They finally come up with 60 percent disability on  me, on account of my lungs.  After sixty-seven years.  I think that when I go back to him the twenty-ninth of this month,  because I   m getting worse all the time, I believe he   ll bump it up to 100  percent. I don   t know that, but I can   t help that because I   ve got that in  my lungs.  25  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  Wilson  I. Bratcher  It is really strange how that happened.  You take days, like if the humidity is real high, like 90 to 100 percent,  it   s hard for me to breathe. I cough a lot because of that.  I called 911 for the first time when that cough came through here. He  was choking to death right here in front of me. That was just a few  months ago. He came out of the kitchen doing like this. (Gestures) I  said,    What? What? What   s the matter? What   s the matter?    He couldn   t  talk. He couldn   t say anything. Finally, I think he pointed to the phone,  and I thought,    Oh, he means for me to call 911,    because I didn   t know  what to do to him. Well, they had somebody out here in less than five  minutes.  Phlegm came up from my lungs, so I couldn   t breathe.  It   s a serious thing. Actually, how it was found was it wasn   t through the  pulmonary doctor. We were at Golden Corral. They were having dinner  for the veterans, so we went over there so he could get his free meal, and  he loved that.  I didn   t get the free meal. They paid for it, but...  Well, you paid for mine, but yours was free. They had a bunch of the  DAV  Disabled American Veterans  there. They had tables set up out  there. He had his Navy hat on. I want you to show that to her before you  leave. They said,    Well, did you have any damage?    Lloyd says,    Well,  I   ve got damage to my lungs.    They said,    You get down there to the  DAV     I think we saw them a second time, and they kept on insisting  that we do that.  I have to back up a little bit. I   d been to the pulmonary doctor that day,  and I said,    I   ve been to the pulmonary doctor as of today.    They said,     You got lung problems?    I said,    Yes, a little bit.    They said,    Go to  the DAV office.    I knew one of the fellows there. I was in the Navy with  him. We did, and they signed us up, all this stuff for it. Then we just let  it ride by, ride by, ride by.  I looked at Lloyd, I said,    It   s been sixty-seven years. Do you think  anything will ever come of this?    He said,    No.     Well, thankfully, it didn   t flare up worse earlier.  Well, it did. He   s had pneumonia a number of times. It was. We just  didn   t know why.  26  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  The pulmonary doctor, Dr.  Greg  McKinnis, wrote them a letter with  the fact that it could   ve been I had   something in there with it.  He said he thought it was as likely as not that it was from the asbestos. I  said,    That   s the weakest letter I ever saw.    They said,    No, that   s a very  strong letter.    Shows you how much we knew. (Laughter)  Then I had to go down to the VA on Twelfth Street in Oklahoma City  and take a physical down there     From their doctors.     with a government-paid doctor there. They took x-rays of me and got  on the computer. Well, it wasn   t very long, and they came back and said,     We   ve classified you at 60 percent disability.     Now, that took a year. That sounds like just a short while, but it was a  whole year.  Then they paid me back nine months back pay on that. That   s tax free.  And we get a license tag back on our license plate. Eight dollars this  year. That   s just put like eight dollars on the car.  The day we found out there was any money involved in this, because  both of us together didn   t even know why they were doing this     I didn   t want it in the first place.  He didn   t want it, and he just did it to get them off his back. I never will  forget the day after they told him he would be compensated. He came  and sat down on that fireplace over there, and he was down more than  I   ve ever seen anybody, or him ever being down like that. I said,    What  is wrong with you?    He said,    I don   t deserve this.    He said,    Those  boys that are coming home now with their legs and arms shot off  deserve this. I do not.    What he meant by that, he wasn   t in any major  big battles, shooting guns at each other, but he served three years in the  Navy and was all over the place and could   ve been. They were within  sight of these Japanese ships. They were put over there for a reason.  Neither one of us thought anything would come of it. He got real  depressed when he found out they were going to. I said,    Hey  We   ve  got      I forgot how many thousands of dollars    worth of dental work  done when old Chief Bearfield told us there was going to be  compensation. I said,    Good, I   m going to quit praying for rain and pray  for money.    (Laughter) Remember the old drought we had last year?  We   d been praying for months for rain, and we needed a whole bunch of  27  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  Wilson  L. Bratcher  Wilson  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  dental work, thousands of dollars    worth, as a matter of fact. I said,    I   m  going to quit praying for rain and pray for money.    I was just kidding.  Lo and behold, when they told him he was going to get money, he got  real depressed. I finally got him cheered up, and then I got down. It was  kind of an emotional thing because I didn   t see any way on earth that  you could trace from here back to 1943.  Well, they   ve got medical evidence. They   ve got a record.  It took them a year, but they did it.  They   ve got all my records.  They sent us records. That place on his nose? We found that in those  records. They don   t just take your   you can   t go in and say,       Well, I   m  disabled,    which he never would have done on his own, anyway.  I go to a dermatologist with this pretty often, and he gives me a salve for  it to put on there and keep it from swelling. They sent us a bunch of  records about that thick, but they don   t send the records they want to  keep. Basically, the places I   ve been, they wasn   t in there at all. Like just  a little bit to get by on, for the VA and the DAV to get by on.  They gave him 1 percent disability because it was such a   1 percent of  the body, he didn   t get anything for that.  And that   s the gun powder poisoning?  Yes.  How did that happen?  Working with those torpedoes.  Well, I was aboard the Wasp and was belting ammunition. Something  come up there, and I scratched at it. I had it on my hands, and so it got  inflamed with me, and I was in the hospital fourteen days. They had a  hospital, consequently, on our station. That   s when penicillin first come  out, first part of    44. They gave me thirty-nine shots of penicillin, one  every four hours. I was like a pin cushion. (Laughter)  He still flares up. I said,    It probably won   t be your lungs. It   ll probably  be this thing right here that will kill you.    (Laughs)  Anyhow, that was in the part of the records they sent us from the Navy  department. The other part, the places I was at, different places, it wasn   t  28  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  in there. So that   s secret.  They were looking for the things that might have caused the damage to  the lungs. They just happened to find this thing here, too.  All those places I was at, they didn   t put that in there at all. Even the  ships I was on, that wasn   t in there. Nothing like this, a station, because  that   s kind of secret, I guess. It wasn   t in there at all.  It   s in my mind, because he had told me this before. His top bunk was  about this far from his face, so he was breathing that stuff for about a  year on that ship.  Yes, you never want to get that bottom bunk in the military.  Well, you should have stayed on the bottom bunk. (Laughter)  No, no, that   s where everybody sits and gathers at night and talks. When  you   re out in general quarters, always sits on the bottom bunk. The  bunks up here, the other two bunks, high, just one person that   s up there,  put his feet up and climbs up. On the bottom bunk, they   re sitting down  there and playing dice and playing poker.  I   m wondering how many hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of  sailors had done the same thing that have died and never knew, because  he didn   t know.  Yes, probably why we really got ours was on account of my age. They  said,    Oh, that old codger is not going to make it many more years.     (Laughter)  He thinks they thought that. (Laughs)  Because we   ve got some laid back. But it   s not. It   s not. It bears on me a  lot. It bears on me a lot.  Well, he   s been on a CPAP  continuous positive airway pressure   machine for almost five years now.  Five years. CPAP machine, which that   s helped me. It   s helped me quite  a bit.  I liked to never got him to go, but you know what he was doing? He was  quitting breathing numerous times during the night. I   d reach over there  ,and I thought,    He   s not breathing.    Put my hand over there. I thought,     He   s going to die in his sleep on me.    We went to Dr. McKinnis, and I  29  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  Wilson  I. Bratcher  Wilson  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  said,    He has been quitting breathing several times a night. I wake up  and I feel of him, and he   s not breathing at all.    So they put him on a  CPAP, which helps the lungs and breathing. He gets oxygen whether he  breathes or not with that CPAP on.  Lots of people are on those things, those CPAP machines, young people.  Randy, our son, is on one. Our daughter has one. Our son-in-law has  one. The guy next door, he   s probably in his early forties, he has one.  Fay, a lot of people have them.  Well, there   s probably a lot of stuff in the air from so many automobiles  and airplanes in this area that you breathe that you don   t realize are not  good for you.  But yes, that   s kind of about my life. Don   t know how many more years  I can make it, but I   ll try to make it as long as I can.  We   ve been fixing the house up, and we got it painted last weekend, the  inside. I said,    We   ll fix the house up real nice so the kids won   t have to  do anything when we go.    Lloyd said,    Well, in a couple of years, so  and so, they   d last a couple years.    I said,    Where do you think you   re  going? You   re not leaving me here     (Laughs) He thinks just because  he   s older, he might go first. He   s got problems, but I do, too. Mine is in  my joints. It won   t kill me. It   ll just make me suffer as long as I live with  arthritis.  What has kept you in this area?  This is where he retired from Tinker, and he went through the Naval  reserve all those years from right here. This is our hometown, mostly in  Del City, though, wasn   t it, Michael?  And your family, most of them live pretty close?  Mike lives in Edmond. Donna and Ray live about twenty miles east of  here, and Randy and Diane live that many miles over that way from  where we   re sitting here. They   re all still working.  About the same distance to Edmond, Harrah, to where Diane lives.  We   re just about the same distance, probably.  Yes, our two kids are about twenty miles, Randy is southwest and  Donna is straight east of here at Harrah. They   re all still working, so  they   re busy. They think we   re as young as we ever were, and they   re  going to be in for a shock.  30  Wilson  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  Wilson  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  Wilson  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  Well, when history is written about you, what would you like for it to  say?  I told you to go visit our tombstone that we set up, so you wouldn   t have  to do it. (Laughs) No, we have our tombstones in a real beautiful place at  Harrah. What   s the name of that cemetery?  Memory Lane.  Memory Lane. In a beautiful place where there   s trees and everything  around. We got our headstones. Everything is on there.  Everything except DOD.  Except the date of death, it   s already done. Our plans are all ready. Our  funeral arrangements are made over here at Barnes and    ?  Barnes and Friederich  Funeral Home .  Barnes and Friederich. They changed it so they won   t have to do  anything but show up. (Laughter)  You all are on top of it.  You accept facts when you   ve been married as long as we have.  Got our songs picked out. One of them was sung last night.  I asked Michael to sing because he   s got a beautiful voice. He said,    I  can   t do that     I said,    Oh, yes you can.    (Laughter) He has a beautiful  voice.  Do you have any secrets for staying happily married for so long?  Just work hard together.  Don   t go to bed angry.  Work hard together.  Most of our problems   well, we never have had any serious problems,  but everybody has had some problems. If they say they never had any  fusses or quarrels, don   t believe it.  No  (Laughter)  31  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  Don   t believe it. Most of ours we   ve resolved   when we went to bed  was our time to talk. One of us would be upset about something the  other one did. I said,    We   ve got to have a talk.    You talk through it, and  you   ve forgotten what it was about the next day. That   s how you get  through it.  It   s just keep working at it. That   s all you can do, and keep busy. This  year, we got someone to mow our lawn.  We had to have help this year for the first time.  We have a lady that comes in and cleans our house because the doctor  said I   ve got an aging heart. I   ve got a stint. I   ve got an aging heart.  They told me that, and I said,    Hey, I already knew that. Eighty-seven  years old, I know I   ve got an aging heart.    They   d tell me that. (Laughs)  He has a hiatal hernia. That   s what they found out when they hit him in  his vagus nerve.  Got a hiatal hernia, too, found out. Anyhow, we got Michael   s nephew  to mow our lawn, and we got a lady that cleans our house. She comes  every two weeks.  She just does the floors. I said,    You   ve got to leave Lloyd something to  do, or he   ll go crazy.    That drives me crazy. You   ve got to leave him a  little work he can do. (Laughs)  She does the mopping. We do the other dusting and stuff like this. She  does the mopping and vacuums. She comes in Monday and vacuums.  She can do it an hour and a half. I said we can do the dusting. I can clean  the bathrooms, and we   ll do a little cooking.  Behind everything, you know, she gets behind it. We do the dusting and  stuff like this. We signed up, yesterday, believe this or not   last winter  we called for Meals on Wheels because we were both sick. Well, they  didn   t get around to it until yesterday. She came over and wanted to  know if we still wanted Meals on Wheels, so we agreed to it. It   s a dollar  a day, two dollars a day for me and her, so we signed up starting next  Monday through April to see how we like it or not. I said,    Sometimes  we   ll be gone, so we eat lunch.    We like to drive and eat lunch. She said,     Put your ice chest on the porch, and we can drop it in there.    I said,     What time do you run?    She said,    Anywhere from about ten thirty to  twelve.     That   s most usually when we   re out and about, so she suggested we put  32  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  Wilson  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  Wilson  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  an ice chest out there. Anyway, we   re going to do that because these  concrete floors have been a killer for my arthritis.  For dollar a day, my goodness, that   s a drop in the bucket.  We were having a hard time putting a meal together. We eat a lot of  sandwiches. (Laughs)  So, we gave her fifty dollars for five weeks.  That   s a deal.  Yes, brings you a hot meal.  A dollar each.  There won   t be many T-bones in there, though. Maybe a pork chop.  Yes, (Laughs) but I bet it will be good.  She said yesterday they had a real good meal. It was day before  yesterday that they had ham and scalloped potatoes, and I thought that  sounded pretty good.  That sounds pretty good.  So we   re hoping they   re good. If they   re not good, we   ll just go to  McDonald   s.  One day they had pizza, she said. There   s five churches go together.  Each day, each church, one day, the next day, like Wednesday,  Thursday, and Friday.  They each take one day a week.  There   s five churches that gather together, and they deliver the meals to  you, so we   re going to try it for our first time.  Fleda got us that list. People were worried about us not eating, not being  able to cook. He   s a good cook, by the way. I found out he could do a lot  of things when I got down in the knees, and I   ve had I don   t know how  many surgeries since we   ve moved back up here. I didn   t know he could  do all that stuff. See, we were raised in the time when the men did the  men   s work and the women did all the house and baby work.  Yes, but I was the oldest one in the family. I had to raise the little ones.  33  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  But I didn   t know he could do all this stuff. I did not know that. He  never sat up with a baby sick. He never diapered any, if he could help it.  He certainly never sat up with them when they were sick.  I had work the next day.  He didn   t do any housecleaning, and I had dinner on the table when he  came home at five o   clock. I didn   t know he could do all this stuff he  helps me do, but let me tell you, he came to my aid whenever I got  down.  But now we   re   he can only lift five pounds, and I can barely walk, but  we   re still going.  I spent three months working in a spud locker at the Quonset Point  Naval Air Station one time.  Peeling potatoes?  Well, yes, and working on a chow line and all that stuff. We ate good  then. That   s a big naval base. I was in the spud locker, peeling spuds,  fixing all the potato salad, all this, the radishes, all the salad, get  everything all ready. Had to help the cooks get it ready.  Even though for the first time in our whole life we   ve had to have some  help, like with mowing the lawn     First time.     and he can   t lift, and we   ve got jobs now that need to be done that has  lifting. If I can   t lift it and he can   t lift it, it may have to be left to  Michael, if we can catch Michael.  We have Scott and Daniel, when they come over here.  You should have seen Daniel. That was hysterically funny. His nephew  is sixteen or seventeen?  He   ll be seventeen in August.  He   s never pushed a mower, a push mower.  It was the first time.  I went out there and he was strolling along like he was going about this  34  Wilson  I. Bratcher  L. Bratcher  I. Bratcher  fast, and I thought,    This kid don   t know how to run a lawn mower?    I  started Randy mowing the lawn when he was about twelve. (Laughter)  Well, I   m going to thank you for visiting with me. I really enjoyed it.  Well, we enjoyed having you.  Enjoyed having you. It   s been a pleasure for me. Probably didn   t tell you  anything.  It   s kind of scary to think that somebody might actually listen to this one  day. (Laughter)  -------  -------  
