 Little Thunder Today is April 28, 2015, and I   m interviewing John Knifechief, a  Pawnee tribal member, at the Pawnee Nation museum in Pawnee,  Oklahoma. John, you make different cultural items, handmade arrows  and bows, buffalo spears, lances, and you often do demonstrations. You  will be at three different museums in Nebraska this summer,  demonstrating and selling with your youngest son. A number of your  cultural items are owned by collectors, and one of your spears is  planted at Ground Zero  New York . Thank you for taking the time to  talk with me today.  Knifechief You   re welcome.  Little Thunder Where were you born, and where did you grow up?  Knifechief I was born in Pawnee, Oklahoma. We grew up in a little town called  Ralston, Oklahoma, and when I got to be ten or eleven years old, we  moved to Pawnee, Oklahoma. Ever since I can remember, my dad was a  farmer. He grew corn, and potatoes, and stuff. He plowed fields, and I  would find arrowheads or something to make arrowheads. My dad  showed me how to gather the dogwood for my arrows to make the  shafts. I   d use turkey feathers or chicken feathers because my dad had  chickens. I   d use fishing line or any kind of string I could find to make  the arrows. My dad would make the bows out of bodark or hickory.  Ever since I was a little kid, I used to carry a bow to school and hide my  bow and arrows outside by the propane tank at school. (Laughter) I  would be able to shoot squirrels out of trees, and I   d shoot rabbits. I   d  shoot pigeons at the cotton gin in Ralston.  When we moved to Pawnee, my dad owned a lot of land in Pawnee and  Skedee and Ralston. We would hunt rabbits and raccoons and different  things. I would kill the raccoons and skin them and sell the pelts for  money. When we were younger, we used to make our own toys. We  5  didn   t have color TV or telephones or anything like that, what they have  nowadays. Everything that I have made   I used to sell my arrows for  three dollars apiece a long time ago. Now I sell them for fifty dollars  apiece. Now I have certificates of authenticity with each thing I make.  The wood is dogwood, and the string is sinew, and the feathers are wild  turkey feathers from his wing or from his tail. I use goose feathers,  white ones, or I can dye them black to make them black, different  colors, whatever anybody wants. Arrowheads are flint, chert, obsidian,  just whatever I can find to knap arrowheads out of.  I also make tomahawks, and spears, bow-plant spears, arrowhead  necklaces, buffalo knives, and buffalo scrapers, skinners. I would go to  museums and see what the Pawnees have made. I would keep the  pictures of the things that I seen in museums in my head, so whenever I  got home I   d go to the land, and I   d gather up what I needed to make  the same things that I seen my ancestors and what they used back in the  1800s. I   d bring it back to life in my own way. A lot of people, they will  buy my things for collectors, or they would ask me who made them. I   d  tell them that a Pawnee made them. They   d say,    Who   s the Pawnee?     I   d say,    I am the Pawnee that made them.    I am a full-blood Pawnee,  and my ancestors came from Nebraska. There   s different things that my  dad taught me how to do. I have a little boy, Charles Knifechief, that  helps me right now. He   s nine years old, and he helps me make my  arrows, and he knows what to gather with me.  Bodark, we let the bodark trees lay for five to ten years to let them cure  before we make a bow because if you don   t, they   ll split or they   ll  crack. If you go sell someone a bow and it cracks, it   s not good for me  or for them. My arrows have been all over the place. I was a Pawnee  Fire Scout. To raise money to pay my bills, I would make the arrows  and bows and things and sell them to pay my rent and my utilities and  different things. I get invited to go to different towns or states to  demonstrate how to make arrows or to raise money, and also to pay I  and my little boy   s bills. It helps me support my son and, like I said, pay  my bills. Everything and anything that I make is the way that my  ancestors used to make them. I can make just about anything. I used to  draw and paint. When my son John, my firstborn, John Knifechief,  when he was born I drew and painted pictures of Pawnees. I   d go jump  on my bike and ride around and go sell them so I could buy formula and  diapers for him.  Then came along my next son, Dennis Knifechief, named after my dad,  and I would do the same thing. Make arrows or bows or do beadwork to  pay for his diapers and milk. Then I have another son, Jeremiah  Knifechief, that I did the same thing, also. I have one final son. He just  turned nine years old, April 28. He helps me gather wood, flint, and  6  sinew, and turkey feathers. He splits the turkey feathers in the center,  and I wrap them on the dogwood to make my arrows. He   s the one  that   s going to be carrying on the art that I do, hopefully. All my boys,  they know how to do different things. My son John Knifechief works at  the Pawnee Museum. He   s a good artist, but he has a regular job to pay  his bills. My middle son, Dennis, is a pro-boxer. My son Jeremiah lives  in Arkansas. My nine-year-old lives with me. It   s him and I. I just enjoy  doing what I do, and I want to keep it alive in my tribe.  I   m going to be going to Republic, Kansas, in June this year. I   m also  going to Kearney, Nebraska, and Pawnee, Nebraska, Pawnee Highway.  Me and my little boy   s going to demonstrate how to make arrows and  bows, and we   re going to be selling my things that I make. I enjoy  meeting different Native American tribes and all kinds of different  people because they have not seen handmade things. It makes me happy  to show them what I have learned from my father. We   re just going to  be going around Nebraska, checking out the places where my ancestors  made the journey from 1876 to Oklahoma (now called Pawnee,  Oklahoma) to honor them through things I make, to honor my father  and the ones that have gone.  Little Thunder Did you have brothers and sisters at home?  Knifechief Yes, I have. Dennis Knifechief passed away when he was a baby, my  first brother. My oldest brother is James Knifechief, and my brother  Charles Knifechief. I   m the middle one, so I got picked on a lot.  (Laughter)  Little Thunder How about your mom. Was she a housewife?  Knifechief My mother passed away when I was a baby     Little Thunder Oh, okay.  Knifechief    from smoke inhalation here in Pawnee, Oklahoma, so I never knew  my mother.  Little Thunder I   m sorry.  Knifechief My father raised us by himself.  Little Thunder Were your dad   s folks passed on already, too? Did you have any  grandparents on either side?  Knifechief Yeah, on my mother   s side, Bob Rice worked down here in Pawnee,  Oklahoma, at the trading post. My mother   s mom was still alive, Tina  7  Rice. My mom   s side has numerous brothers and sisters. On my dad   s  side, Dennis Knifechief is my dad   s name. John Knifechief is my dad   s  brother, and Manuel Knifechief. He had two brothers. I grew up in a  different time. My dad was fifty-six when he had me. Mom was, like,  twenty-something. I was born in   66. When I was a kid, knowing what I  had been making, arrows, this and that, everybody was older. I was  young. I was seeing everybody pass away. When I got big, they were all  gone.  Little Thunder You grew up around Pawnee language, though? Your dad spoke  Pawnee to you?  Knifechief Yes.  Little Thunder You   re passing that on to your son, I understand.  Knifechief Yes, yes, yes.  Little Thunder When your dad first showed you those arrowheads that he came across,  what kinds of thoughts or feelings did that spark in you?  Knifechief When I was little, I always had a Bear fiberglass bow. It was green.  Bear was the bow maker back in the late    50s. I had the wooden arrows  from the Army store here in Pawnee, Oklahoma, on Main Street a  couple doors down. I would shoot them arrows. I could shoot rabbits,  squirrels out of trees, birds, anything I wanted. Then my dad, just out of  the blue, cut some bodark off the land in Skedee, Oklahoma, and he  made a bow. Then he showed me how to make them the old way. The  arrows, he showed me how to get the dogwood because they   re straight.  They come out in the springtime, and when they bloom they have white  flowers on them. That   s when you go get them. They have little bitty  pinholes in them. When I   ll gather up a bundle of them, I will peel  them, let them dry for like a month or two. Then I   ll start a fire. I   ll roll  them over the fire, and there are burn marks on the dogwood that will  harden and straighten through there. You can see the little pinholes  where the smoke will puff out when you bend them.  Little Thunder Probably your hunting was important in feeding the family, too?  Knifechief Yes, I killed a lot of, ate a lot of rabbit and squirrel gravy back in the  day, and biscuits, (Laughter) and fry bread.  Little Thunder Aside from the obvious element of skill, what   s the difference between  hunting with a .22 and hunting with a bow and arrow?  8  Knifechief You get more meaning out of hunting, killing something with a bow  and arrow. My dad taught me if you are going to kill something, eat it  and use the hide. Eat and use what you kill. Don   t just go kill it just to  be killing it, to say    I killed this or that.    If you shot something with a  .22, that   s a  inaudible  way of using to hunt. It has more meaning to me  to hunt and kill something with your own thing that you made with your  own hands. You can go buy a gun just about anywhere, put a bullet in  it, and shoot whatever. Nowadays, they have compound bows that have  sights and everything on them. To me, that   s cheating. If you want to go  kill a trophy deer, elk, or bear, go make your own bow and arrow and  do it the old way. That has more meaning to me. It means a lot to me.  Little Thunder What were your favorite subjects in elementary school?  Knifechief Math, and social studies, and English. I did pretty good, but I had to go  to a special class because my speech. I used to slur S   s and different, in  the alphabet. I had to go to speech therapy when I was little. Then I got  into the third and fourth grade, and I liked playing basketball. I was the  tallest one, so that   s pretty good. (Laughter) Little bitty guys. When I  was thirteen, fourteen, I went to Chilocco Indian School. I learned how  to do better in painting and beadwork. I had art teachers, and I was real  good at swimming. I already knew how to make arrows and things. I  didn   t have no money. I   d make arrows and sell my arrows at Chilocco  Indian School, and people would buy them from me. It would give me  money to go to the movie. The movies were only fifty or seventy-five  cents to go watch a movie. You could take two dollars and get you a  popcorn, and pop, and some candy, plus going to the movie. Nowadays,  it   s ten, fifteen dollars for a ticket, real expensive now.  Little Thunder I was wondering if you got any kind of art instruction in public school?  It sounds like most of it came from Chilocco, or was it a mix?  Knifechief It all came from my dad. I would see things in museums, Pawnee  Museums or for Pawnees, and I kind of mocked them. I would see  them, and in my mind I could take a picture of them. I   d be so eager to  get home to go out in the woods and get what I needed to make it and  see how I made it. I would go to different towns or whatever to show  people, and they   d offer me money for it. They thought it was real  good. They   d never seen anything like it, so it made me want to  continue making. Chilocco Indian School, they taught me how to paint,  and draw, and do beadwork. Making arrows, and bows, and skinners,  and buffalo knives was from my father. I learned to make things to  survive, to pay my bills. I just had to go to Chilocco because I was a  ornery kid, teenager. (Laughter)  Little Thunder You boxed there a little bit, too. Is that right?  9  Knifechief I, and my oldest brother, and my cousin David Knifechief, my brother  James Knifechief, boxed here at Pawnee, Oklahoma, at the Armory.  Johnny Haymond was our boxing coach and Bob Littleson was a  boxing coach. Tim Brown was a boxing coach. I boxed at Chilocco,  too. I was just a little teenager. Got worked over at Chilocco, but I did  better here at Pawnee, boxing, because I had my own people that taught  me. At Chilocco, they more or less put gloves on me, a pair of shorts  and boxing shoes, and I got worked over sometimes.  Little Thunder What did you do after high school?  Knifechief I went to Talking Leaves Job Corps at Tahlequah, Oklahoma, for three  years. I took the trades: welding, carpentry, and masonry. I became  certified in all three of them. You go there three years, and then you  graduate. Then they give you a certain amount of money for taking  them three classes. They fed you, and they gave you a roof over my  head. I met a young lady there, or young girl. I was just out of high  school. We got our own place. It was a journey through life, good and  bad. I   d rather enjoy the future instead of look back at the past because  it   s good to reflect on the past sometimes, but it   s better to look towards  the future. That   s why I do what I do.  Little Thunder So even though you   re selling your work, you   re continuing to sell the  things that you make, but you did get involved with the Wildland  Firefighters for a while, I guess.  Knifechief Yes, I was a Pawnee Fire Scout for Pawnee, Oklahoma, for four years  or five years. I came home from a wildland fire, and I had motorcycle.  It was my brother Charles Knifechief   s motorcycle. On a rainy day I  was on the highway, and a kid hit me. They had to reattach my right  foot back to my leg, so I can   t do what I used to. What I learned when I  was younger, making arrows and stuff, that   s the only way I could  survive. I can   t work. I   m disabled, I guess, because I can   t walk around  for too long at a time. So I went back to the old way, the only good way  for me, because people will buy my things. It helps me pay and eat, buy  things I need to eat, and clothe my little boy, help my older children if  they need help. Good thing that my father taught me what I know how  to do because it   s helping me pay my bills.  Little Thunder I didn   t know if maybe also the skills that you had from your childhood  helped you as a firefighter.  Knifechief Well, when I was a Wildland Firefighter for the Pawnee Fire Scouts, I  knew different things about the woods and land and everything. The  fires that we went to, and hurricanes, and oil spills, and space shuttle  10  recovery in 2003, all kinds of things that I   ve seen and done, different  things when I was a Wildland Firefighter, you wouldn   t believe the  things that has happened. I used to be about two hundred pounds when I  used to be a Wildland Firefighter, in good shape. Now I weigh, like,  285 or 295, and I   m just bigger. I can   t   my right foot, I can   t go  around very good.  Little Thunder When you   re gathering materials, that   s quite a bit of walking. You   re  planning that into the seasons, I guess.  Knifechief Yes. In the spring, the dogwood, they come out, and they bloom out at  our campgrounds. That   s where I get the dogwood, and out at Pawnee  Lake, I go out there and get the dogwood. At the south cemetery where  my mother   s buried at, they have dogwood around the cemetery. In  north cemetery, they have dogwood out that way. I already know where  to go, where the best places are. You have to wait at least two years  before you go back to gather them because you have to give them time  to grow back up. There   s different places here in Pawnee, Skedee, that I  go get my material and things.  Little Thunder Pretty much you don   t get anything down Choteau way, which is where  you live. You   re coming back up here for most of what you need?  Knifechief I come back on certain times of the year to get my things. I get enough  to last me. I moved away from here in Pawnee, Oklahoma, more or less  to give me and my little boy a fresh start because I   ve had him since he  was a little bitty guy. I wanted him and I to be together so I can teach  him what I know. He does good in school. He makes As and every now  and then a B. He   s real smart. He just turned nine, but he thinks he   s  eighteen. (Laughter) He likes to boss me around, but I love him.  Little Thunder You   re also, of course, hunting, I assume. You   re getting your turkeys,  for the most part? When you do use wild turkey, are you getting your  own turkeys?  Knifechief Yes, turkeys and deer horns are plentiful on our land here in Pawnee  and Skedee and different areas. In this area they   re real thick because  it   s Native American, restricted Indian land. We lease them out for  farming, grazing and oil and gas royalties, so the people that lease them  can   t hunt on there. I come out and kill a deer or two, and a turkey for  their wings and for their tail. My dad   s birthday   s on Thanksgiving, so  it   s good to have a good turkey on his birthday to honor him.  Everything that me and my little boy use, we know where to go, ever  since I was his age, a little boy to now.  11  Little Thunder Have you been   have you noticed any changes, though? Is it harder to  get certain things because the land is changing?  Knifechief Yeah, there   s a lot of different things because of the erosion and people  litter. It just changes the land. It   s totally different. When I was  younger, dogwood and bodark and hickory trees were so thick and  plentiful. Nowadays, everything   s getting polluted, and people throw  trash out, and they don   t care. I know different places where to go, to go  get my stuff.  Little Thunder When and where did you first make your first museum contact for  selling, I guess, or demonstrating?  Knifechief I was in Cushing, Oklahoma. I made me a quiver. My friend had a  truck, and I told him to drop me off in the middle of town. He dropped  me off in the middle of town, and he said,    What are you going to do?     I said,    I need to get some stuff, formula, milk, and some diapers for my  boy.    He said,    Oh, you can   t sell them arrows.    I went to a couple  businesses, just walking the main street in Cushing. The man asked me  how much were the arrows. I told him how much the quiver was. He  said,    I   ll buy everything from you.    I was all happy. My arrows are  five dollars apiece, and I had six arrows. That was thirty dollars. The  quiver was twenty-five, so I had fifty-five dollars. That was a lot. I went  and bought my friend some gas, and got the milk, and formula, and  some diapers. Came back to Pawnee and made some more. Kept doing  it, making and making them. Now my arrows are fifty dollars apiece  and my quivers, a hundred and fifty apiece. You can kind of tell how  much from back then to now. My son is twenty-seven now, so it   s  twenty-seven years ago when I was selling for five bucks apiece. Now  they   re fifty dollars apiece for my arrows. It   s a big difference.  Little Thunder Right. You have different kinds of customers. You sell to other Native  people who actually do use bow and arrow, right? And you also sell to  people for whom it   s something that they enjoy but they display.  Knifechief Yes, I   ve went to several different tribes. They buy my arrows to shoot  out of their bows. They like my arrows better than they do from their  own tribe. That   s pretty cool, to them honor me that way. I have repeat  customers from lawyers to senators, different people. I have my arrows  and bows and different things all over the United States because when I  used to be a firefighter, I used to take arrows with me so I could sell  them to different people in different states. They would have me sign  them, and they   d put them in their museum. I have them all over the  place. The faster I make them, the sooner I can sell them. Sometimes.  (Laughs)  12  Little Thunder Right. Have you had a museum ever request specifically that you make  something specific for them, for their museum?  Knifechief Republic, Kansas, about five or six years ago asked me to make a bow,  a quiver, and six arrows, and a couple of buffalo knives, and skinners,  and scrapers, I guess more or less two of everything that I make, for the  museum in Republic, Kansas, and a couple museums in Nebraska,  down by the Platte River where the Pawnees are from. I have stuff in  museums in Nebraska and Republic, Kansas, where the Pawnees have  been through, making their journey.  My dad has his Indian corn that they regrew in Republic, Kansas. Also,  two years ago my oldest son and my youngest son and I were at  Kearney, Nebraska, for the hundredth, the centennial of the archway  that they have there. It   s a big museum. I got to be a guest speaker, I  guess, there. My oldest son, John Knifechief, was giving tours on the  Earth Lodge like we have in the background. My little boy was running  around. I seen where in Nebraska they were replanting my dad   s Indian  corn on that land. They were bottling it up and selling it to raise money  for what they do down there. I   m honored that my dad is still kept alive  there.  Little Thunder Yeah. Do you do a garden, a little garden?  Knifechief I did a while back, but now I   ve been so busy. Once my youngest son,  Charles Knifechief, gets big and can take care of himself, I   m moving  back to Pawnee. I   m going to live here by the Black Bear  Creek  where  my dad left us some land and where he grew his corn. That   s what I   m  going to do. I   m going to live off the land when I get   . I   m forty-eight  now. My son   ll be done with high school not too much longer, I hope. I  want to enjoy myself, living on my land that my dad left me, and make  what I make, and pay my bills.  Little Thunder Sounds like a neat plan. You, of course, have been such a good  marksman since you were little. I guess you have participated in at least  one Cornstalk Shoot?  Knifechief Yeah, I did. It was a while back, though. I was invited to the Cherokee  Holidays to the Cornstalk Shoot, and I accidentally won it. These guys  do this every   three or four times a year they get together. For a  Pawnee to go down there and accidentally win it   I never got invited  back. That   s okay. They invited me to sell my arrows down there. My  brother Charles Knifechief, my youngest brother, him and I sold my  arrows down there. I had a table full of my arrows. I sold all my arrows  within five hours, and I had a lot of arrows. All the other booths, there  13  were a little bit of people there, but mainly they were all focused on my  arrows.  Little Thunder Not many people doing that, and they are so beautiful. We   re going to  look at them pretty soon. Do you mind sharing the story about after  9/11? You felt really moved by the firefighters    sacrifice, and there was  something you wanted to do.  Knifechief I knew some of the firefighters that cross-trained with the Wildland  Firefighters when I used to be a Oklahoma Wildland Firefighter,  Pawnee Fire Scout. One of the firefighters from New York called me  and asked me if I would make something to help raise money for the  men and women that we lost. I made some bow-plant spears for the  tenth anniversary of 9/11, and they sold them. They raised money for  the 343 fire fighters that we lost. They planted one of my spears at  Ground Zero. That   s really an honor. That   s something that, it was the  right thing to do. It   s just something that I   m happy that I done, just like  anybody else would do something for our country.  Little Thunder I   m sure you have to do a lot of educating when you demonstrate and  when you sell. I   m wondering what   s one of the biggest misconceptions  that you have to try to address?  Knifechief There   s not a lot of people but there   s some people that think that  because I   m from Pawnee that we still live the same way, on horses and  tipis and wagons. When I was a Wildland Firefighter for Pawnee Fire  Scouts, I   d meet different people around different states that would ask  me,    Do you still live in a tipi? Do you still have round houses? Do you  still ride horses?    I let them know that we still have tipis, but they   re for  meetings, peyote meetings. We have earth lodges and roundhouses for  gatherings. Everything has a purpose. It   s not like it used to be. We  have powwows and gatherings of different tribes that gather together.  We have Straight Dance contests and Fancy Dance contests. Different  tribes come from all over the Unites States to enjoy theirself and meet  their relatives from different tribes and get together. Some even ask if  we still make bows and arrows. I   ll say,    Yes, I know a couple of them  that still do,    but they don   t know that I   m one of them. (Laughter)  Little Thunder What   s one of the craziest or most humorous situations you found  yourself in, in your travels maybe, when you were selling?  Knifechief I was in Nebraska a couple years ago, Kearney, Nebraska, and a guy  said that he would buy a couple arrows from me, and a bow, if I could  split a apple with one of my arrows. I said,    I can only do it if you stick  it on top of someone   s head and you walk back twenty-five paces.     There was a man standing next to him, and he said,    My brother will  14  put it on top of his head.    We   re inside the museum at Kearney,  Nebraska, a couple years ago. I said,    Are you serious?    He said,    Yes,  I   m serious.    I said,    Okay.    That man took twenty-five paces. He got  the apple, put it on top of his head. I pulled that arrow back on my bow,  and I act like I was going to shoot it. That guy was squinting his eyes,  and his brother was laughing. (Laughter) I didn   t shoot, but that was  one of the craziest things.  Little Thunder What   s your favorite thing to make?  Knifechief My arrows. I love making arrows. I can probably close my eyes and  make an arrow. I   ve been doing it for about forty years, off and on,  through the years. Arrows are my favorite.  Little Thunder How did you know when it was time to start raising your prices?  Sometimes the business part   s hard to figure out.  Knifechief It was real easy for me to figure it out because first time I sold them in  Cushing about twenty-seven or twenty-eight years ago, the man bought  them all, bought everything I had. I   d wait maybe six months, and I   d  go up to ten dollars. Then I   d go up to fifteen. Then one of my brothers  said,    Why don   t you go up to twenty-five?    So I went up to twenty-five,  and they were still buying everything. I just progressed every six  months or a year and gradually got up to fifty dollars an arrow for each  arrow, fifty. When you buy something that   s handmade, you get a  certificate of authenticity with it, and it tells you who I am and where  everything came from. It   s all typed up. My brother Charles  Knifechief   s wife, Donna Knifechief, typed it up for me on a computer  because I don   t know how to do any of that.  On the top of my certificate it has    Chahiksichahiks.    It means    men of  men    or    people of people    in our language. It has all the chiefs in the  background, and it has Chahiksichahiks on the head of the paper  certificate. Usually, people ask me to sign my name on a piece of paper.  I used to charge five dollars for my signature. Now I get fifty dollars if I  write my name on something. I   m honored people will pay me for my  signature and a certificate of authenticity, but I   ve worked hard for what  I have. People, if they want something that   s real and authentic, they   ll  pay the money for it. It   s good to know that people still want real things  instead of something made in China or Taiwan. Mine   s made in the  USA, and that I   m real proud of.  Little Thunder Do you get a lot of commissions, people who call the house, maybe,  wanting     15  Knifechief Yeah, I have these business cards, and I   ll give them out. If someone  buys something, I   ll give them three or four business cards, and they   ll  give one to a friend. I usually get two or three phone calls a week where  people order something. I   ll get it together, and I   ll drive to where  they   re at. I   ll deliver them, and they   ll pay me, and I   ll drive back  home. I get asked to go to schools or different places to demonstrate  how to make my arrows to people. I enjoy doing that. I   m older now,  and it   s hard for me to hold back the tears whenever I talk about certain  things. I don   t want it to be that way. It   s just from becoming older, but  that   s a good, good thing.  Little Thunder What   s one of your favorite school memories of working with school  kids?  Knifechief Whenever they had a little elementary school in Pryor, Oklahoma, my  little boy went with me. He handed out tickets to every little kid in  there. I had six different arrows up there. When I got done, we   d draw  six tickets, and you   d get one of them arrows. That last ticket, all them  little kids were standing up, just wanting it. There   s one little kid sitting  in the back. He was just sitting there, rocking his chair. Called that last  ticket, and no one said anything. That little kid just rocking his chair.  He looked at that ticket, and, boy, he just flipped over the back of his  chair. (Laughs)    I got it  I got it  I got it     That was the funniest thing.  Everybody was laughing and stuff. (Laughter)  Little Thunder That   s a great story. What   s the hardest, one of the hardest things that  you   ve ever made?  Knifechief The hardest thing I   ve ever made was probably the bows because you  have to have a certain length and certain thickness. You have to bevel  when you   I have my dad   s drawknife. You have to draw that knife  from the center. You find the center of your bodark, and you have to  pull from the center, out. It has to be thicker and goes down to a little  bit skinnier towards the tip where you string up your bow. That was the  hardest thing to teach myself, but after doing it for several years, I can  do it pretty easy. That   s the hardest thing.  Little Thunder Can you talk a little bit more about the buffalo spears? Are their shafts  made from bodark, too, or what are the materials that go     Knifechief The bow-plant spears, I call them, they   re six or seven foot long. They  have buffalo hide for the center to hold them. The points are either  metal, or people can have them out of flint. Usually I have four feathers  on there, or eight feathers. Eight feathers represent the eight wars that  the Native Americans have been in war, conflict with. Four feathers  represent north, east, south, and west, and the four bands in our tribe,  16  also the four, like, spring, summer, autumn, and winter. They all have  different meanings. Like, for the stars, when I was little, my dad used to  point up when there   d be a clear sky. He   d tell us what each star, the  pattern for the Pawnees, what that meant and everything. Everything  that I have has a different meaning for it. The burn marks that I put on  anything and everything I make, it looks like fingerprints on them.  That   s to honor my ancestors on there. I   m the only one that makes the  burn marks on everything that I make, that I know of.  Little Thunder You mentioned, I know, in one interview that there   s a significance that  lances have in terms of war and peace. I wondered if you   d mind  sharing that.  Knifechief When the head chief would have his   people nowadays say    the left  hand man    or    right hand man.    The chief would be in the middle, and  there   d be a warrior on the left of him and one on the right. Whenever  they   d go into war, one of the warriors would have a bow-plant spear.  Before they went in, he would throw that spear into the ground, and  that   s where the war   d begin. On the way out, if one of the warriors  didn   t make it out or the chief didn   t make it out, (there was always one  that made it out) he would pick it up and take it back to the camp, and  they would talk about who they lost in that war or what happened. In  the tipi, the chiefs would get together, and they would figure out who  needed to take care of who. That   s the meaning of the bow-plant spear.  Little Thunder If you   re getting ready to make a knife and you   re looking for materials  for knife handles, do you go by the grip more, or is it also partly how it  looks? Is it both things?  Knifechief After making them for several years, it depends on where I   m going to  go sell them at because people want different shapes and sizes.  Everybody is not the same. Our mind is totally different. Some people  can see something that I make, and they just got to have it. There   s  some things that people won   t even touch or look at. I make different  colors and different sizes and shapes. Some things I make that I don   t  think would sell, (they   re oddball, I call them) someone will be attracted  to it because it   s oddball. It depends on if someone orders something a  certain way. I   ll make it the way they want. If not, I   m just going to  make it the way I feel. Usually I do good with the way I feel making  something.  Little Thunder So what   s your creative routine? Do you try to work mostly while your  son   s in school or   . Sounds like he works a lot with you.  Knifechief I   ll do everything, try to do everything during the daytime while he   s at  school or at nighttime when he   s asleep. It just depends on how I feel. If  17  my leg   s not hurting or whatever   . John Knifechief used to be a  singer. He traveled all over in the service, and when he got out of the  service, he went around to powwows. Tom, Steve, and Charlie  Knifechief sang all the time. I   ll put in one of his CDs or cassettes. I   ll  listen to it, and it   ll get me in the mood, and I   ll start making arrows or  knives or whatever. It just depends on my mood and how I feel. I  always listen to CDs of my family singing and stuff.  Little Thunder You   ll have several things going at one time, different phases of the   .  Knifechief Yes. People always ask me to make one arrow, and I try to make six or  twelve. I try to make everything in sixes for some reason. It benefits me  more if I make six or twelve at a time because usually people   . In a  set, there   s six arrows, one quiver, and one bow. That   s a set. Or  someone wants to buy a set of arrows, that   s six in a set. I have on a  piece of paper what I make and this and that. It has a contact number if  someone wants to order something. Even if they ask me to come to  where their school to demonstrate how to do what I do, I   ll do it for a  small fee. I   ll bring my little boy with me, and he   ll help me do things.  Little Thunder Looking back on your work so far and your career so far, what was a  turning point for you where you could have gone one way and you  chose to go another?  Knifechief When my son was born, April 28, nine years ago.  Little Thunder Today   s his birthday.  Knifechief That   s what made me turn for the better.  Little Thunder How about one of the low points of your career so far?  Knifechief My motorcycle wreck. It made me see the light.  Little Thunder We   re going to look at some of your work and talk about that for a few  minutes. Is there anything we forgot to talk about or anything you   d like  to add?  Knifechief I enjoy doing what I do, and I   m honored that people ask me to do what  I do. I   d be happy to go just about anywhere to show what I do, to let  people know that there   s still people like me. I   m sure there is in other  tribes that do what I do, but I   m honored that I   m the one in my tribe.  I   m really honored that I   m a full-blood Pawnee, but it   s a dying art that  I   m trying to keep alive through my little boy. He   ll be the one that will  take off with it. I am a mere shadow, walking in the path of the light of  our Lord. My oldest brother told me to say that. I seen him over the  18  weekend. He said,    Next time you   re going to thank for whatever,  remember to say,    I am a mere shadow, walking in the path of light of  our Lord.       My brother is a ordained Baptist preacher, the oldest. I seen  him over the weekend getting gas out at that Stonewolf Casino, me and  my little boy. He was teasing me. He said,    Make sure you say that next  time.    I said,    I will.    (Laughter)  Little Thunder Now you can send him a copy of it.  Knifechief Yeah. He said,    I   m going to watch it, too.    I said,    Okay, okay  brother     He   s my big brother. (Laughter)  Little Thunder He sounds like a big brother.      Knifechief Last year, that Oklahoma magazine, they had me in a magazine. People  called me like crazy, which is good because   .  Little Thunder That   s great  It really set off a flurry of publicity, huh?  Knifechief Native Times did two stories, and then USA Today did a story     Little Thunder USA Today did a story?  Knifechief    a whole bunch of different people. I told them,    I don   t want the  publicity or whatever.    Then my oldest brother said,    No, you want to  publicity.     Little Thunder You do want the publicity. It helps get     Knifechief Now I know. Now I know.  Little Thunder It helps get your work out there.     Okay, we   re looking at some of your  arrows, John. I notice there are some with some pink shafts.  Knifechief The pink shafts are for breast cancer awareness. Feathers are pink, and  the sinew   s dyed pink, and the black ones are dyed goose feathers and  dyed black sinew. The white   s goose and wild turkey feathers from his  wing. The sinew   s different colors. This is regular, and that   s dyed  black. The pink is dyed pink.  Little Thunder Right. Oh, they   re beautiful.  Knifechief The wood is dogwood. The burn marks are straight and through the  arrow. They   re all     Little Thunder Each one   s unique.  19  Knifechief Yeah. They   re all thirty-one and a quarter inches long, not including the  arrow. Arrowheads are flint, chert, agate, obsidian, different types.  Little Thunder Beautiful. Okay, now we   re looking at quiver, bow, and medicine bag. I  don   t know if you want to talk about some of the detailing. You can see  the bow there real nicely, how it   s scalloped on the edge.  Knifechief Like on these?  Little Thunder Yes.  Knifechief It   s from the bodark. You know, they got all them knots in them.  Little Thunder Oh, that   s from the knots in the bodark, okay, wow. Then you painted  the stripes on the quiver.  Knifechief To match the feathers. The medicine bag is to protect the hunter or  warrior when he goes into battle, or if he goes on a hunting trip to guide  him to where the deer, elk, and buffalo are at.  Little Thunder Beautiful. Okay, now we   re looking at one of your lances here. It   s got  the metal point on it.  Knifechief Yes. I should have brought another one.  Little Thunder You   ve done some painting on the wood, too. Is this bodark?  Knifechief Yes. The wood   s bodark and  inaudible , and the four feathers represent  the four bands in our tribe, also the four directions, the four seasons in  the year. I   m a Native American, proud to be an American, so I put the  USA flags on there to represent that. The burn marks are to straighten  the bodark. They   re my fingerprints, and they   re honoring the ancestors,  from them making a journey from Nebraska to Oklahoma.  Little Thunder Wow  This is beautiful work. I   m so glad you   re carrying on your  father   s legacy, and your son   s going to carry on, too. Thank you very  much for your time today, John.  Knifechief Thank you.  -------  -------   
