 Higgins  Hildebrandt  Today is Friday, May 16, 2014. My name is Jason Higgins, and I am an  intern with Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at the OSU  Library. I am Broken Arrow to speak with Jack Hildebrandt regarding  his experiences during and after serving in the United States military.  This is part of the Spotlighting Oklahoma oral history research project,  and along with me is Juliana Nykolaiszyn. Thank you for joining me  today, Jack.  You   re most welcome. Enjoy it.  All right, to begin, when and where were you born?  I was born in Enid, Oklahoma on the 24th of January 1927.  1927. And did you grow up in Enid?  Yes.  Describe that. What was it like growing up, during that time?  Well, we didn   t have much money, but we always had a lot of food to  eat.  Oh, Okay.  I wore overalls all the way through high school.  Okay.  Mom would patch them, and we   d wear them. Wonderful experience,  my mom and dad were wonderful, and like I said, we didn   t have much  money, but we had a lot of love.  5  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  A lot of love. What did your parents do?  My mom was a stay-at-home. Dad drove a beer truck.  Drove a beer truck. And during the Depression, that is, was he employed  as a truck driver?  What?  During the Great Depression, he was a truck driver, is that what you  said?  Yes, I think so.  Oh, okay. And where did you go to school?  My dad?  You?  Oklahoma A M.  Okay, what about elementary school, grade school?  Grade school, Jefferson in Enid, Oklahoma. Jefferson, I guess it was just  elementary.  What was that like?  I had some good teachers, and I loved math, so we   d go up to the board  and have a math deal. And, I really enjoyed that.  Did you walk to school?  Oh yes. Only lived about, I guess a half mile  from school .  Did you go to high school in Enid as well?  Yes. I went to high school for one year and then it burnt down. We went  back to junior high.  Was that a one-room school house?  Oh, no. It was a big one.  6  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  It was a big one, okay.  There   s only one high school in Enid. Had two junior highs, but just one  high school.  Did you work?  Did I work? Yes. I had a big box I carried around, a fridge, that had ice  cream bars in it.  Wow. How did you keep it from melting?  It was insulated pretty good, and I kept dry ice in it. So, I worked since I  was in the sixth grade.  Okay.  Something.  What year did you graduate high school?  1945.  1945.  I think I graduated May the 30th, and by the 5th of June, I was in the  Army.  In    45?     45.  Okay, so why did you decide to join the Army?  I got a piece of paper that said,    come on in.     So you were drafted.  Yes. I tried to get in the Marines. I tried to get in the Navy, but they was  all full, so I got in the infantry.  What unit? What was your unit?  I didn   t have one that I know of. I never did go overseas. Just went to  Texas all the time.  7  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Okay. So where did you do your basic training?  Camp Fannin, Tyler, Texas.  Okay, and did you go to school after military?  Oh yes, when I got out.  So you were in Texas most of the time.  Yes.  What was that like?  Hot. (Laughs)  What did you do in Texas?  Basic training, primarily, and then I went back to Fort Bliss. I played a  lot of golf down there.  Sounds relaxing.  Well, no. I had my own Jeep and a driver. He   d take me out to the golf  course then come get me. And I  was  just waiting until discharge, so I  didn   t have much to do.  What was an average day like in boot camp?  Hot. I hadn   t been away from home since I was a kid, not even then.  And it was kind of different. I was out of school five days, and back  down to Camp Chaffee, so it was a big change, I   ll guarantee you.  Camp Chaffee, in Arkansas   Fort Smith.  Yes.  How long were you there?  Couple weeks is all. Then I went to Texas.  And how many weeks was your boot camp?  Well, I left down there in November, I think, so I went down there June  to November, however many months that is.  8  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Okay.  When I left there, I went to Fort Riley, Kansas. I pulled KP once on  Thanksgiving Day up there and to this day I can   t eat carrots or raisin  salad. It was hot in the mess hall. An old sergeant, he would mix it all  up, sweating. Sweat would run all off his hands, into the salad. Oh, I  can   t eat it anymore.  Too much salt? Too much salt in the salad   Yes. Yes, that   s right   Any other memorable experiences in Fort Riley?  No, I was only there a few days.  Oh okay.  They got us up and shipped us to Virginia.  What did you do in Virginia?  Well, I got in there about four o   clock one morning, and an old general  came on and said,    You all get your business in order because three days  from now the sea breeze is going to hit you in the face.    I thought,    uh-oh   .  So, I was willing to go, but when everybody pulled out, I stayed  because they put me in an academy back here, teaching people other  things. So, I stayed there for a while.  And, what were you teaching?  Just whatever they had   basic things and other  inaudible . I don   t know  why I stayed, but I did.  So, the other men were deployed? They were sent?  Yes, all of the rest of them went overseas that I know of. I don   t know  any that was left. I had a couple of buddies that was with me, that was  from Enid, and they went on overseas.  Did you keep up with them?  Yes, when we got back. We had class reunions. I   d see them then.  And they were Army. Did they go to Europe?  9  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Nykolaiszyn  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Yes, Germany.  Germany, and that   s right at the end of the war.  Yes, the war was over.  The occupation.  Yes, the war was over.  And how long were you in the military?  I was in, not very long, May until the year after that. I think I got out in  November to go to school. It was just about two years. I guess, a little  less than two years.  Anything that you want to talk about from your military days that   ?  No.  All right.  At what point did you meet your wife?  When did you meet your wife?  We was in the seventh or eighth grade, I guess. So, I must   ve been     well, anyway I don   t know. But, I moved, and she moved, and I got  acquainted with her again in junior high. And, that was about 1940,  probably.  You said that your father was in the military?  Yes, World War I.  Can you describe anything about that?  He was in a balloon company. He never talked about it very much, as  most people don   t I guess. Anyway, he come through that all right. He  only had a sixth grade education, but he was one of the smartest guys I  ever knew.  Really. And is he from Oklahoma?  Yes, he came over from Germany. He was a German.  10  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  And he was in the United States Army?  Yes.  Did he ever talk about going back to fight against Germany?  No.  No, that   s an interesting detail. An interesting chapter in American  history. Did he speak German?  Yes, he could. We didn   t very much. I learned a few things, but I forgot  them now. I   m too darn old.  I understand. And what about your mother?  My mother, she weighed ninety-eight pounds, I think, if she was out in  the rain or something. But, she was a tremendous lady. She took care of  us, and she was always there for us. I think she was ninety-something  when she died.  What year was that?  When did mom die?  Jack asks family in room - 1990   1990.  Okay, yes.  So, did they meet after your father got back from the war? Do you  know?  No, no. They met before. My granddad had a big farm. He was in the  run and claimed out around   I can   t remember the name of the town.  Anyway, he had a big farm. And there was how may in our family?  Eleven kids, I think. Anyway, Dad was working out there, and they met.  Then he went to the service and come back, and got back together.  So, did he farm sometimes as well during the Depression? Was he a  farmer during the Depression, too?  My Dad?  Yes.  No, he just worked on the farm for my grandpa.  11  Nykolaiszyn  Hildebrandt  Nykolaiszyn  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  When you came back from the military, you went to Oklahoma A M.  I sure did.  Why did you choose Oklahoma A M?  Well, I   m going to make a statement   for the people who don   t have  any money, and OU was for the money-people. And, I had buddies over  there too, so. In fact, I moved in with two of them over there in a house.  Was that off-campus?  Off-campus, yes.  Okay. Did you go back on the GI Bill?  Yep.  What was that like?  Money coming in every month. My brother, I helped him some, too, off  the GI Bill.  Did you attend classes with other veterans?  Oh, yes.  Did they have a good community of veterans at the school?  Then, they had Quonset huts way across campus, and that   s where they  taught all the math. And, I loved math, so, of course I got into that. I  took trigonometry and something else the first semester I was back, all  together. But, it   s changed so much now. That was the Vet Village over  there, out by where the Quonset huts was.  Can you describe the Vet Village? Can you describe what that was like?  The Quonset huts?  Yes.  They were just big, round-top Quonset huts. Going to class there, walk  across campus, all the way across campus, and go to class.  Did they have heaters?  12  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Nykolaiszyn  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  I guess so.  You don   t remember it being cold or hot then?  No, back then you didn   t even have to have a heater. It was generally  pretty warm anyway, when you   re young like you.  Yes sir.  Can you talk a little bit about Vet Village, what you remember from Vet  Village?  Well, a lot of the vets was married, and they lived out there in the  village. And, I didn   t know any of them, but they seemed to have a  pretty good life out there. I guess that   s all gone now.  Were you a bachelor at that time or were you married?  No, I was a bachelor until 1951.  Oh, okay.  When I graduated   the last semester, we got married my last semester,  and she came over to Stillwater. I got out of mid-term, didn   t even go  back for graduation. I had to go to work. I was in debt. Old people. I  went to work for Douglas  Aircraft .  What year was your first semester? What year did you go to A M?  I enrolled in    47.  And what was your major?  Engineering physics.  Was that a four-year degree?  Yes, I think I went three and a half years. I run out of money and had to  quit one time. Went to work over in Enid at the Air Force base and then  I went back.  What did you do at Enid? What was your job?  In the motor pool. I worked all kinds of jobs over at Enid. I worked at  Pillsbury Mills scooping wheat for a bunch of summers.  13  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  So, what did a bachelor at A M do on campus for fun?  You play sports, intramural sports, and you drink a lot of beer, and then  you could live on one dollar a day. You had a cup of coffee and a donut  for ten cents in the corning, and you had a bowl of chili for twenty-five  cents at noon, and for thirty-five cents, you went down to one of the  houses there that fed people. A dollar a day.  What kind of house was that, that fed people?  Just a regular house, and she would cook up all the meals. If you went  down there and said,    I can   t pay today,    she   d say,    I   ll put it on the  books.    That   s how people were over there.  Do you remember how much a month the GI Bill paid?  No.  It paid your tuition.  Oh yes, yes. It paid the tuition and the books. It helped me and my little  brother.  What do you mean by that?  I paid part of his stuff.  Oh. So, you had money left over, that you could give to your   ?  Well, we was real frugal. We didn   t spend much, but you   re going to  talk to him. He had a room up there, probably about oh, eight-by-twelve     no, eight-by-eight probably, real little room. It didn   t cost us  very much, but it was a real good room.  Were you on campus at the same time, going to school?  Yes, yes, for a couple years.  What was that like? Did you fight?  No, I was a lover, not a fighter.  Okay. Did you guys ever double-date?  No, didn   t have enough money to date anybody over there.  14  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Nykolaiszyn  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Nykolaiszyn  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  So, you said were frugal, and you grew up during the Great Depression.  Did that change after you graduated from college?  No, I still hunt bargains.  Good.  Are there any classes or professors from your time at Oklahoma A M  that stick out in your mind?  Yes. He used to take us out on the lawn, and we   d have class out there.  He told us one day. He said,    I may not teach you any history, but if I  can teach you to think for yourself, I   ve done my job.    And he   s right.  Do you remember his name?  No. He used to ride around Stillwater on a bicycle, and I could still  see   remember them clamps you put around   well, you   re too young     but around your legs to keep your pants legs from getting in the chain.  Oh yes.  All right. But he was a very smart man.  What did he teach?  History.  History.  Now, engineering, even in the forties, was a really tough degree. Tell me  a little bit about your engineering classes.  Well, I only failed one course, and I had it on Saturday, and I generally  went home on Saturdays, so I didn   t make enough classes, and I failed it.  But outside of that, I carried twelve hours of physics my senior year, but  I got married, and I didn   t run around very much.  So, you got married while you were in college?  Yes. We got married in September, and we moved to Stillwater, and  then when school was out, I already had a job over at Douglas, and we  moved over there.  What did your wife do while you were in school?  15  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Hildebrandt  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  I do not know.  Okay, and did you have kids while you were in school?  No, not until we got out.  And what year did you marry?  1951, September of    51.  Can you describe how you proposed? How did you ask her to marry  you?  I think I bought a ring, and I give it to her, and I asked her,    Will you  marry me?    That   s all.  Pretty straight-forward. Did she say yes the first time.  Yes. She said,    If we don   t get married now, I think we   re going to have  to wait a while.    But anyway, I worked for Pillsbury. The day we got  married, I worked    til four o   clock. I went home, took a shower, and got  everything ready, and got married at seven o   clock, and we left.  Pillsbury, I don   t know ya   ll know what that is or not, but it was a mill  that they took in wheat, and they also made flour. It   s in Enid.  So, you drove back and forth from Enid to Stillwater?  No, moved to Stillwater.  Oh, oh.  We had a third floor apartment up there, and you know how the roof  slants. Well the bathroom was right in that slant, and you had to back  into the bathroom because you hit your head if you didn   t.  How tall are you?  How tall was it?  How tall are you?  Well, I used to be five-foot-ten. I   m not quite that anymore.  Were you involved in ROTC?  16  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Involved in what?  ROTC.  No, I already served my time.  So, you were out.  No, not then. After I got home, I went to Stillwater, to school, but I  didn   t go to the ROTC. Freddy, my brother, was, and you   ll find out that  later.  Okay. Were you involved in any other organizations at school?  Engineering clubs, or anything?  No.  Oh okay. So, you were a married man, and you worked your way  through college.  Yes.  Did you have much time for fun? What did you and your wife do to enjoy  yourselves on the weekend? Did you vacation?  Lots of times, we would go back home. Of course, in those days, before  I got married, I always hitchhiked. You know where Bill   s Corner is out  there, I guess. You   d catch a ride with somebody going north to Bill   s  Corner, and then you stand there until you get somebody going west  then.  Were you ever late by hitchhiking? Did hitchhiking ever make you late  for work or class?  Lots of times you waited. I got stuck one time, right outside Enid there.  The snow had covered the road, and I had to call a ride to come, and  they got there, and the train was coming through. I thought well I   ll just  catch that train, you know   it went too damn fast. So, I caught the bus,  and we got stalled all night, out there in a place that they had a little  caf  . And we stayed there all night. You remember them big old long  bolognas, you ever seen them? They sliced up two or three of them on  the bus. We stayed there all night.  Did you have blankets on the bus? Was it cold on the bus?  No, kept it running.  17  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Nykolaiszyn  Hildebrandt  Nykolaiszyn  Hildebrandt  Nykolaiszyn  Hildebrandt  Nykolaiszyn  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Oh.  When the driver leave, I   d stay there with it. We had a lot of kids go  home.  When did you buy your first car?  You won   t believe this, but I   m going to tell you any way. We saved our  money. Mary went to work at Douglas also, and we saved our money,  and finally, we got  1,600 which was the cost of the car at that time. We  got a brand new Plymouth. So, we bought a brand new Plymouth that  cost  1,600.  What year was that?  Probably about    52 or    53, I imagine because we walked back and forth  to grocery store, or wherever we went, we walked of course.  Tell me about the interview process at Douglas.  About what?  The interview process at Douglas.  Well, we were working on B-47s. We were redoing things to them, and I  was in the bomb bay area or things like that and the gunnery part. And I  worked for two guys that come in there from California, and it was a  pretty good experience.  How did you get that job?  Oh, the representative for Douglas come over to Oklahoma A M and  interviewed people. At that time, Tulsa had a hockey team. I was  interviewed also by Phillips and a telephone company. I had about four  jobs, but I decided that because of the hockey team. And we went.  So did you attend many hockey games at that time?  Damn coliseum burnt down. Are you aware   you know in Tulsa, this is  right down town, they had the ice rink, but it burnt down before I could  get to go to any of the things. It was a good move anyway.  So, you worked on B-47s.  Yes, retrofitting things on them.  18  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Were they modifying military planes for civilians?  Yes, yes.  Okay because they were downsizing the military, right? After World War  II? All the airplanes were being converted, right? Is that what you did?  No, no, no. They just had different things. They had what they call  ADCNs. They made changes to the airplane. You may have to catch it  on the flight line, just anywhere you could to get the changes made. I  worked for Douglas, but they were doing this for Boeing, and the Air  Force, but Boeing was calling the shots on it out of Wichita.  And your wife worked there as well?  Yes.  What did your wife do there?  She was in some kind of library where they had all the prints.  So, she did library work?  Yes.  Oh, interesting. How long did you work there?  About four years.  What did you do after that?  I went downtown to work for BS B. They had contract with the Atomic  Energy Commission, building heaters for nuclear reactors. I went down  there for them.  Can you describe what it was like working for them?  It was good. One morning, I went in kind of late, and the chief engineer  said,    You better get in and talk to the boss.    I said,    What the hell   s  wrong now?    I went in there, and I said,    What   s wrong?    He said,     You better get around. We got an eight o   clock tee-off time.    So, that  was a good job.  Oh yes, and did you stay for there a while?  19  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Nykolaiszyn  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Nykolaiszyn  Hildebrandt  No, they closed the project out. They moved it out to another place. I  was there about a year or so, two years, maybe. It   s kind of fuzzy  because I   m getting so old, I don   t remember very well.  What do you remember from that time, anything exciting or fun happen  during that time?  No, not really. We, my wife needed a pharmacist for something, and it  was over the holidays, New Year   s Eve and all. I worked all New Year   s  Eve even. But that   s just part of the job.  So to back up just a little bit, when you graduated from A M, what was  that like, that day?  When I left?  When you graduated.  I never did go to graduation.  Never did?  No, they sent me my diploma. I had to work. I was needing money.  So, you chose not to go because of a job. Were you the first of your  family to graduate?  Yes.  Would you go home often to visit your younger brother?  Well, yes, I   d go home when I was single probably two or three times,  on weekends. Of course, we didn   t go so much after we got married  because I didn   t have a car.  Have you lived in Oklahoma all your life?  Except when I was in the Army.  Through the years, have you gone back to visit Stillwater much?  Sometimes, my brother lived over there for a long time. He was in the     we used to go over there, but I probably wouldn   t know it now. I  couldn   t even find the old physics building before, so I don   t know. It   s  all changed.  20  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Nykolaiszyn  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Nykolaiszyn  You said you liked to play sports.  Yes.  Did you play for the Cowboys?  No, no, no, played intramural.  Intramural, can you describe what that is?  Yes, it   s basketball, touch football, stuff like that.  Okay.  And softball.  Did you ever go to any games?  Yes.  Any of the Cowboy games?  I always did, and I always carried a half-pint of whiskey with me. One  day, the Cowboys scored, and I jumped up, and the damned whiskey  bottle fell out, down on there, and broke. So, I moved out of that seat.  The smell wasn   t too good. (Laughs)  Tell me a little bit about your children.  My children? I had two children. One   s an engineer. The other one   s an  attorney.  What year were they born? Around?  Let   s see, must   ve been    56, I guess.    58 somewhere in there, about  thirteen months apart.  You had a boy and a girl?  No. Two girls. She was an engineer.  Did they go to OSU?  Where else?  You   ve been married a very long time.  21  Hildebrandt  Nykolaiszyn  Hildebrandt  Nykolaiszyn  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Yes.  Any secrets to a long marriage?  Just get a wonderful person, and stay with it. You   re going to have  problems, but you can work them out. We got a big problem now. She  has lost her hearing, and she has degeneration in her eyes, but she   s still  going, and we will.  You were born in Oklahoma, and you   ve been here a very long time.  What does Oklahoma mean to you?  Well, it means a lot to me. One thing that sticks in my mind, we   ve got  the dumbest senator and the best senator there is. And how come we  keep getting him in there, I don   t know. But, I love Oklahoma. Even the  tornadoes, you can put up with. So, I just think, it   s good.  Over the years, what are some of the biggest changes that you   ve seen?  Biggest changes?  In America, or Oklahoma.  I guess the weather   s one thing that changes. We used to have a lot of  snow, and we don   t have much anymore. The climate has changed. The  people have   they   re not like they used to be. If you have a problem,  you have neighbors, they   d come help you fix it. You know, right quick.  Now, people shy away because, I guess lawsuits and things   I don   t  know. But, yes, it   s changed a lot.  If you had a message for the young generation, what would that be?  Live your life to the best you can, and do what you want, when you can.  Because when you get old like me, no more golf, no more softball. My  knees is gone, so do it while you can. I retired when I was fifty-six, and  I   ve been doing the things I wanted ever since.  What are some of those activities that you   ve done since you   ve retired?  Played golf, for a long time. I played, I was a catcher around Tulsa for a  long time in softball. That   s what wore my knees out, and I   d do it again.  I coached some good people. And we used to go back to Hiltonhead,  play gold every year. Can   t do that anymore, but I enjoyed it. That   s  why I say,    Do it while you can.     22  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  And your family mentioned that you coached?  Yes, softball girls, we set up softball for Broken Arrow. Built the  diamonds, put up the lights and everything, three other guys and me. So,  yes, I coached, all years.  What   s the most rewarding experience in that?  Seeing the smile on those kids    faces. The girls didn   t have nothing,  when we moved down here. In fact, when we moved down here, there  was 5,000 people in Broken Arrow. Now, it   s up over 100,000. I lived  right on up here. You used to see a car go by about every five minutes.  Now, you got fifty or sixty every minute. So, right across the street,  there used to be a dairy, and we used to have pheasants in the backyard,  and quail. Not anymore, that   s all built up.  What was the biggest difference when you were raising your kids here     Living what?  Did you raise your kids here?  Yes.  What was the difference between whenever they grew up here, and  whenever you grew up here?  I don   t really know. I can   t give you a good answer on that.  What about today?  Today?  From whenever you grew up here.  Yes. We didn   t have to put up with all the stuff you do in school now,  like  Janet Barresi . You didn   t take a third grade test. You either passed  or you didn   t because the teachers knew whether you could do it or not.  Now, you got too much time on tests, and not enough on learning stuff.  What did teachers do whenever you were in school to help you succeed?  I had a math teacher. If you couldn   t understand what she was talking  about, she   d stay after school as long as you wanted to. Now, you   ve got  to get out of the way of them because they   re going to get out of the  school just before the kids do if they   re not careful. So, it   s changed.  23  Nykolaiszyn  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Looking back on your life, your career, and your family, how would you  like to be remembered in the future?  How would I like to be remembered? Oh, a hard worker that liked to  figure out things. One time out at American, we had an airplane that  went off the runway, on the dirt, and buried the landing gear. In fact, I  worked in the maintenance department out there, plant managed. But  anyway, it was about two o   clock in the morning, and the boss called,  and he said,    They want you out at American.    I said,    What for?  You   ve got supervisors out there.       Well, the main guy over the  maintenance wants you.    So, that   s very good. I mean that makes you  feel really good. You don   t like to get up at two o   clock in the morning  and go out there, but it makes you feel good. I guess that   s what I   d like  to be remembered for.  Throughout your life, what   s your most enjoyable experience? What was  the happiest time in your life?  When my kids were born.  On the other hand, what was the most difficult time?  The most difficult time   when I lost my parents.  The World War II generation, right before you were in the service, has  been described as the greatest generation. Why do you think that they   ve  been called the greatest?  I guess they had to put up with a lot of the most difficult stuff, I don   t  know. A lot of stuff was invented at that time, and we went through hell  for a while. I guess that   s all I can say. I don   t know.  Okay.  Are you through?  If you are. (Laughs)  I am.  Is there anything else that you   d like to add that I haven   t asked?  Well, let   s see. No, I don   t think so. That   s about it, if that   s enough for  you.  24  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  Hildebrandt  Higgins  I   d like to thank you very much.  Well, thank you for having us.  You   re welcome.  I   ve enjoyed it.  Me too.  -------  -------  
