 Little Thunder. Today is Monday, October 1,  and I   m interviewing Kiowa bead artist Richard Aitson at his home in  Claremore, Oklahoma. This interview is part of the Oklahoma Native  Artists Project, sponsored by Oklahoma Oral History Research Program  at Oklahoma State University.  Richard, you   ve done beadwork of many different kinds, from cultural  items to beaded stethoscopes, winning some of the top awards in  beadwork at shows like Santa Fe Indian Market, the Heard Museum.  Your work has been featured in a number of beading books, including  one that came out this summer during Indian Market. Thank you for  taking the time to talk with me.  Sure.  Where were you born, and where did you grow up?  Born in Anadarko on December 26, 1953, and it   s questionable whether  I ever grew up. (Laughter)  What did your mom and dad do for a living?  Mom worked. When I was in elementary school she was a house mother  at Riverside  Indian School  and progressed all the way up to Head of  Guidance at Fort Wingate School.  At Fort Wingate, she was a guidance counselor?  No, she was the Head of Guidance. She changed careers several times.  She was the Dean of Students at Bacone, and then when she retired from  that, she decided she was going to teach Kiowa language in a different  way, so she wrote her own textbook. Subsequently, she taught at  5  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Riverside, Anadarko, and University of Science and Arts (USAO) in  Chickasha. They will be releasing this in the next several months, a  forty-hour series of videos of her actually teaching one-on-one with one  of the students. She   ll be going through her whole book. That video, I   ve  been really impressed with that. Looking forward to it.  Did you live in Muskogee while she was at Bacone?  Yes, I was a beadwork instructor there. I   d taken over for Grandma  Spinks (I guess everybody referred to her as such) who retired after  teaching there for over fifty years. (Laughter) She handpicked me to  succeed her.  What about your grandparents on either side of your family?  My father   s side   my father was Marland Aitson. He lived in Gallup,  New Mexico, for many, many years and was associated with the  Intertribal Indian Ceremonial. I think for three years he was the  president, and several years he was the vice president. He always  seemed to be on the board.  His parents were an interesting group. My grandmother was the only  daughter of John and Florence Momaday. Her brother was Al Momaday,  and although we don   t wear that on our sleeve, we don   t hide from it  either. Since then, I   ve developed a close relationship with Scott  Momaday and his daughters.  Al Momaday was my hero in many, many ways. I got to know him  when I was in high school. I was sort of his gofer when he taught a  summer class at USAO. In that class there were some pretty heavy-duty  painters: Ernie Blue Jay Keahbone, Dennis Belindo, Robby McMurtry,  and, I think, Jean Bales. It was a good, strong, core group of artists in  there.  His command of the room, it was just overpowering. I loved watching  that man work. Very similar to watching Dick West work, overpowering  voice, the big presence, command of time and space, knew everything  that he should know, and very likeable. Those kinds of teachers are few  and far between, but when you have them, you embrace them. Since I  was his gofer, I got a lot of free art instruction but also a lot of wisdom.  My mother   s parents   well, let me get back to my father   s parents. His  father was a man named James Konad from the White Buffalo family.  He died when he was twenty-three or twenty-four years old, but prior to  that he was a legend in early Fancy Dancing. After he died, my  grandmother married Richard Aitson, who was an aspiring professional  6  Little Thunder  baseball player. He was at Ottawa University, well, first at Chilocco   Indian School  and then Ottawa. He and his friend, John Tippeconnic,  were drafted by St. Louis, but since they were recent converts to  Christianity through the Rainy Mountain Church, they refused the  contract because that meant they would   ve had to play ball on Sundays.  It   s just something unheard of, but I admired so much their faith and  their desire to do it correctly. When I think about that in regard to other  well-known Indian or even non-Indian athletes, that   s some powerful  stuff.  Now, my mother   s family, her grandfather was a Kiowa Apache  headsman named Tennyson Berry, who was a graduate of Carlisle   Indian Industrial School . He also was a saxophonist and the assistant  conductor. They played at William Howard Taft   s inauguration. He was  also a figure skater. (Laughs) Carlisle debated Harvard and Yale, and he  was on the debate team. Just a real visionary and Renaissance man.  I think he and I probably would   ve killed each other because I don   t  know if he really had that much respect for artists or artists with radical  ideas and notions, (Laughter) but we may have been the best of friends. I  don   t know. When I knew him, he was very old, very feeble, almost  blind, almost completely deaf, and it was very hard to communicate with  him, and yet you know at some point in time there was a lot of glory in  this man.  His wife was Kiowa Annie. Union Pacific Railroad elected her the most  beautiful Indian girl in the country. Her picture was in all of the train  stations west of the Mississippi. Matter of fact, I just purchased one on  eBay the other night. (Laughter) She   s a beautiful lady. Again, I knew  her when she was very, very old, well into her nineties and certainly not  the beauty that she was outwardly when she was much younger.  My grandma was a quiet lady. Her sister was Jeanette Mopope, who was  somewhat more flamboyant than my grandma, but they knew the same  things. They knew how to beadwork. They knew how to tan hides. They  knew Kiowa cultural issues perfectly. My grandmother, in her early  years, chose to be a farm wife rather than a powwow wife. Later on,  when my Grandpa  inaudible  began to get jobs as a powwow  announcer, we then started going to a lot more powwows and embracing  camp life. When we camped at the Indian fair, we camped at the Indian  fair, two weeks ahead. That was something to look forward to. At the  same time, while other kids were getting ready for school and that kind  of thing, we were still living in the tents at the fairgrounds. That   s what  we did.  Were those some of your first memories of seeing Native art, at the fair?  7  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Take it back even further. My grandma   s cousin was married to Jack  Hokeah, her sister was married to Steve Mopope, and another cousin of  hers was Lois Smoky. I don   t recall ever seeing her paint, but she would  put soles on moccasins for my grandma. As time went on, when I began  to actually study beadwork, I found out how significant her contributions  in beadwork were, as opposed to painting.  There were designs that she was doing before anyone. I would always  try and find multiple sources if someone made a certain claim about her  or her sister, Lucy Jackson. For example, the sunburst concept that  everybody uses came about in the    40s with Lucy Jackson when she and  her then-husband, Clyde Ahtape, had gone down to Mexico for a peyote  meeting. They came back, and she was copying serape designs in  beadwork. Consequently, everybody in the world, including Marcus  Amerman, has used that. It   s particularly significant among Shoshones  and Paiutes, probably as much as in Oklahoma. I don   t think that  anybody has recognized that.  Thank you for sharing that.  There are small things that only beadwork geeks would (wow, I   ve  never used that before ) beadwork geeks would appreciate in terms of  other contributions. (Laughter) That   s the big one. That is the big one.  Probably six or seven different people have confirmed that, and it was  people that were her peers. The original piece may even be in existence.  I   ve been looking into that. It was a belt she made for her nephew,  Spencer Ahpeahtone when he was ordained. She told me that was the  first piece that she   d done in that concept. I would like to find that.  What was your first experience making art of any kind?  Second grade, Fort Cobb. Ms. Byrd said,    All of you Indian kids can  draw.    (Laughter) So I figured if I   m going to wear the mantle, I better  wear it well. (Laughter) I wished she   d said    cook.    (Laughter)  Secondary through the grade levels, any involvement with visual art,  very strongly? Did you continue to have it?  Not particularly.  For part of high school, you attended Kimball  Union  Academy in  Meriden, New Hampshire. How did you end up there?  Got kicked out of Santa Fe for taking over a building in Albuquerque.  8  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Oh  Well, tell us about your Institute  of American Indian Arts   experience first. (Laughs)  My radical politics?  Your radical student days. (Laughter)  I   d rather not. (Laughter) Needless to say, the school gave me an option  of either leaving, or, as the agent told me,    I have a list of all of your  family that works for the government, and if you   d like to see them  working tomorrow, you   ll leave school.    (Laughter)  Did you go to the Institute during high school?  Yes, I was a sophomore there where I met Jan Chaddlesone, Sherman   s  sister, and through her I got to know T. C. Cannon. Later on, when I was  a preppy, he was the Artist-in-Residence at Dartmouth. Whenever he  was giving a lecture, he always recognized the former Institute students.  It makes you feel so good when somebody that important is pointing you  out when you sort of consider yourself to be insignificant.  At the Institute, were you interested in three-dimensional media? Were  you interested in beadwork?  No, actually, I went there as a music and creative writer. I found out how  poor the music department was, and it was one of the reasons I chose to  leave, anyway. I wanted more academically than what they were  offering. When I first left, I first went to Madison, Connecticut. Had a  program called A Better Chance, and that   s where I met Donald Walsh  as my poetry tutor. Through him, got to know, through letters, Pablo  Neruda.  Because he was translating?  Yes, he had translated The Captain   s Verses in 1972 for Neruda, and  consequently Neruda won the Nobel Prize. It was also about that time  that I began to hear some rumblings from Scott Momaday and James  Welch and other Indian writers. Began to formulate things in that way,  writing a lot, getting things published without having to work at it very  hard.  In the poetry journals or what kinds of places?  Yes, also won several major awards. This is really difficult to talk about  because traditional Kiowas don   t talk about themselves, but I   m trying to  do it as gracefully as I can. From Madison, I went to Kimball Union  9  Little Thunder  Aitson  Academy. Traveled quite a bit during those summers, just getting a feel  for what it was like to be outside of Oklahoma, outside of New Mexico,  just expanding my world, and decided that I wanted to go to Stanford.  Took an extra year of high school to get prepared, got accepted, went  there and wasn   t really happy, particularly when the earthquake came  and my roommate   s bed and mine were hitting together in the middle of  the room. I decided, well, since I   d already been accepted at Oberlin   College  and the door was still open that I would go to Oberlin, where I  stayed for the rest of my college career. I   m still lacking eight hours.  (Laughter)  During that time, one of the things I did was try and make a little extra  money. I had watched my grandma beadwork for years, picked up a lot  of ideas and techniques, and made a little money. My junior year, she  was trying to get us, all the dancers in my family, ready for a dance in  Carnegie, and I said,    I don   t need a new pair of moccasins. I want a  new pair of moccasins.    She said,    You know how to do it. Here   s the  buckskin, and here   s the rawhide. You have your own beads, so go  ahead and make them.    What surprised me is the first pair came out  right. I can   t say so much about the second or third pair, but I learned  how to correct my mistakes.  Shortly thereafter, Taft Hainta came to me for some beadwork. He was  our headsman. Nelson Big Bow, a number of our headsman began to  come to me for moccasins or other things. I don   t know how prepared I  was to do that, but I also knew that I wasn   t allowed to turn them down.  Fortunately, I still had my grandma with me to coach me, and then when  she passed away, I relied on my aunt, Gladys Ahtay Parton, as my coach  and mentor. Fortunately, her mother was still alive, (and that was Lucy  Blanche Jackson) so I could go to both of them for coaching when I  needed.  I learned so much about family history from that. I learned that my  family from Verden was related to the people in Meers, and that   s how  come their beadwork looked alike, and that my Great-Grandma Berry  was also from that same family. It was about that time I began to decide,  again, to meet beadwork and museum people who considered  themselves to be experts. I began to see flaws in their expertise, but they  had the credentials.  Can you give examples?  Okay, I   ll give you one really good example. The trailer fringes on the  back of Southern Plains moccasins, for many, many years those were  regarded as hiding one   s footprints. Now, it made no sense to me  10  Little Thunder  Aitson  whatsoever for a couple of reasons. One, these were not used during the  days when people were actually tracking people, so that made no sense  at all. Second of all, they were meticulously done. These weren   t your  work moccasins. These were your absolute best, and, generally, they  were ceremonial pieces. And third, if you   re a 180- to 200-pound Indian  being tracked by another Indian, there ain   t enough fringes on the back  of a moccasin that   s going to hide anybody   s tracks. (Laughter) So that  made no sense whatsoever.  After finding out that was a BS story, I let those guys continue with that  because those were actually made for, initially, for horseback riding. The  reason, when they would come back from a raid, they would camp  outside the initial camp, the main camp, for four days. During that time,  their families would bring them food and clean clothes and fresh horses  and let them get cleaned up, get rested.  Then, when they came back in, they would be riding the best horses with  the best buckskin suits. When you   re riding a horse, you want to look     and Kiowas particularly like those wonderful flamboyant rolled fringes  on their shirts and on their leggings. Since these fringes on the backs of  their moccasins were extremely long, (I   m talking maybe at least a foot  long) obviously, they weren   t made for walking. They were made for  riding, for showing off when you   re riding a horse. So I let the experts  continue that kind of nonsense, and then when I   m asked, I figure I can  show them up if I have to.  When you first started beading, what do you think set your work apart?  Attention to technique, attention to detail, making sure that   moccasins  are a funny thing. Either they are very elegant, or they are really ugly. I  couldn   t see myself rushing through a pair of moccasins that just looked  ugly on someone, so I spent a lot of time making them look right.  My early customers were Ray and Ethel McKee from McKee   s Indian  Store in Anadarko, and Nellie Stevens at Mohawk Lodge. These folks  were buying everything I made. Also, later on, Snoopy   s Indian Store,  Marci Davilla in Anadarko, and later, up into the mid-   90s, I developed  a relationship, friendship, customer-dealer relationship with Doris  Littrell, Linda Greever.  Also, before that time, around 1980, I left Oberlin, and I picked up a  really neat job in Aspen, Colorado. I started out as sales at the Squash  Blossom Gallery, which was one of the finest, high-end Indian galleries  in the country. I learned so much from Earl Vance, who was very much  a part of the Gallup trader legacy.  11  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  He started out in guest ranches and selling a little bit of silver and  turquoise there, expanding his private business, all the way to having  five galleries and then developing places like Tubac, Arizona, West  Gallup, and Aspen Highlands. It was all from those beginnings of  working in guest ranches and tourism, of what the tastes of the clientele  or how to judge the tastes of the clientele, and work the market in that  way.  I see galleries all the time trying to force the public to accepting their  tastes rather than reading their tastes and offering that to them. I learned  a lot from Earl Vance that way.  Was this about the time you started shifting to not necessarily making  cultural items that are utilitarian but thinking more in terms of other  kinds of applications of beadwork?  Yes, I got to know a couple of folks there. Nathan Youngblood was an  early influence, even though he was my age, but I saw that somebody in  their mid-twenties could already be considered a Master, maintaining  high family standards with attention to detail. Watching him, like I said,  somebody my age, working, setting extremely high standards for  themselves, I liked that. I liked it to the point that I put myself under  those same restrictions because if I had the audacity to say that my  beadwork came from the same bloodline as Lois Smoky, then, by golly,  I better prove it, at least with quality.  Were you selling some of your beadwork out of the Squash Blossom?  I was so busy then that there was very, very little time for that. A  number of times, I was working seven days a week, and this is tourist  industry. When I had the month of October off, I came back to  Oklahoma just to recharge for the rest of the winter season. Spent  Thanksgiving, Christmas, New Year   s, all of that in Aspen, completely  away from my family. That was tough, but all during that time, I was  learning.  What was the first competitive show you entered with your beadwork?  The 1969 Indian Fair, Anadarko.  How about another sort of show after you   d worked at Squash Blossom?  Well, the first one I set up at was probably Red Earth. I just really shied  away from doing shows. I liked to go and see my friends compete. I just  didn   t think I had the temperament for sitting in a booth and entertaining  folks telling me about their Cherokee princess grandmothers and keep a  12  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  straight face. (Laughter) But finally, Bill Glass and several other people  talked me into doing Red Earth. Since we were living in Oklahoma City  then, it wasn   t like I was going to be out of town much, I mean, not too  far out of town that I could always make it home. The first year I got  three third places. The next year I got a first and a Best in Category. My  third year I got Best in Show.  That was the award for your miniature cradleboard?  No, that was a Gourd Dance set, moccasins, gourd, fan, blanket, and  blanket pin. The cradles, I think I   ve gotten first place and Best in  Category just about every time until very, very recently. I can   t believe  that I blew out totally at the Cherokee show with one of my cradles.  (Laughter)  They   re just wonderful. Talk about how you first started getting into  them.  I owned one. I owned the  inaudible  cradle. She was an ancestor of Lois  Smoky and my great-grandmother, Annie Berry. It got passed down to  me. There came a very serious time when a bunch of people in my  family were losing their houses or in danger of losing their houses  within a matter of days. I decided,    I have something that will rescue  everybody.    I really never looked back after that. I felt no remorse about  selling that. I feel no remorse now. I did what I had to do, but I didn   t let  it go without taking a lot of notes in my head about what to do.  When I felt like doing one, I made two full-size cradles before I tried the  little ones. I like the little ones because it takes me a week, maybe ten  days to do one, from start to finish. That includes planing and sanding all  the wood, all the design work, everything from start to finish, aside from  tanning hides. When I get started, I don   t like to work on anything else,  so that   s why it takes a week to ten days at the most.  I   ve been known to pull all-nighters once I   m in that zone. I think I just  look forward to that point when time and space are irrelevant and they  are focusing on,    What will this look like in ten minutes? In two hours?     Or,    What will it look like in the morning when I   m close to being  finished?    You never want to feel like you   re finished with it. Even  when you finally sign your name to it, you   re looking at it like,    I  could   ve added something. I could   ve done this or that.    But once you  put your name on it, you really don   t own it anymore. That   s like telling  the world,    Okay, now it belongs to you. Just pay me what it   s worth.     That   s your cutoff point, when you sign it.  13  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Yes.  You showed, of course, at Santa Fe Indian Market for a number of  years. When did you start showing there, and what do you like about  that show?  What was that, about ten years ago? Yes, about ten years ago. Oh, it   s  just the biggest and where you run into all your folks and friends. The  first show of the year, of course, is the Heard. I like doing that because  everybody is so fresh after being holed up for the winter, the new ideas,  the new beads, the new artists, and they are getting good. They are very,  very good, particularly like Dionne Smith Young Bird and Kenneth  Williams Jr., pure beadworkers and excellent, excellent. Just love their  work.  Of course, there   s always Jamie Okuma, who even though she   s  probably not even thirty yet is considered one of the older group because  she   s been competing with us for so long. And a jillion of those Growing  Thunders, and every one of them is better than the next. (Laughter)  Generally, as a rule, we are friendly with each other. I don   t see that  happening with all the artists, but the beadworkers are generally really  friendly with each other and willing to help and willing to give advice. I  enjoy that part. The bad part is I   m considered the old man of the  movement now. (Laughter)  But they come to you for wisdom and advice. (Laughs)  I don   t know about that.  How important are commissions for you?  Commissions? Oh, boy. They pay the bills. They really do pay the bills.  I don   t know if I would rather have commissions or do a good regional  show because the commissions are sure money, and sometimes you end  up spending much more money doing a show than you bring in. I like  that part of being assured that I   m going to get something. I don   t like to  gamble, so I like the commissions.  You   ve taught beadwork for numerous years now. How do you approach  your classes?  Well, I figure that I   m going to have some that are real rookies, and I   m  going to have maybe 10 percent that are experienced beadworkers to  some degree. I work from that perspective first. I have to talk about  regional styles. If somebody says they want to do beadwork like their  14  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  grandmother, and their grandmother was, say, Lakota, then I have them  look at pictures of Lakota beadwork and show them the technique or a  number of techniques that they can use.  If they   re just wanting to make a pair of moccasins, a nice respectful pair  of moccasins for themselves, I approach it from a different way, more  from technique.    This is the sole. These are the tops. This is how you cut  it. This is how you form it to your foot,    and encourage them to use their  own mind   s eye for designs. Now, of course, like any other working  artist, there are some things I keep for myself.  When it comes to beading, do you think a distinction should be made  between art and craft?  It all depends on how high quality the craft is. If it   s the same piece over  and over and over again, then it becomes mindless, and it doesn   t have  to be done by a tribal member. That   s why I work so hard at teaching my  students to look into their own past and then show them the techniques  that were associated with that culture.  What beadwork creation are you most proud of and why?  I did a pair of moccasins with long fringes instead of jingles. I   ve seen  several pairs like this in magazines with mescals on the fringes. I took  that pair to Los Angeles to the Autry  National Center  for their show. I  had what I considered better pieces. I had a buckskin shirt, had a toy  cradle, and yet these moccasins got Best in Show.  My contention is you can never, ever plan on Best in Show. You can  push yourself to have Best in Category, but that   s the best you can plan  for. Even then, you   re really at the mercy of judges and your  competitors, but you know what you have to do to get to that point. Best  in Show, you can never, ever plan on that because you shouldn   t be able  to sway judges. You shouldn   t be able to sway anything when it gets to  that level and let the judges have their fun.  You   ve been on that end in the judging process. You   ve done judging,  too. What challenges does that present?  Well, at some point, you   re judging apples against oranges. I would  imagine it   s like judging the Westminster Dog Show. You don   t judge  the Great Dane versus the St. Barnard and which one is the better dog.  You look at this one and think,    Is this the best Great Dane there is in  competition, and how does it stack up against the best St. Barnard?     Eventually, it gets to what piece actually moves my heart.  15  Little Thunder  Aitson  Several years back, I judged Red Earth with Jaune Quick-to-See Smith  and Michael Horse. Since she was the elder of the three of us, Michael  and I designated her as our head judge. Ordinarily, that doesn   t mean a  whole lot, but it really came down to two pieces that were exceptional.  Mitchell Boyiddle had done a whole peyote set in size sixteen beads. I   m  just so impressed with the fact that it was all done in super-tiny beads.  The fan was a match set of red macaws. All the beadwork was exactly  matching. Even the bundle of sage was beaded. On the other hand, I  think Clarence Lee (I think that   s who it was) had a sterling silver  pickup truck that, if you turned the wheel, when you put your finger  inside there and turned the wheel, the tires turned. (Laughter) There  were even tiny little windshield wipers. This thing was beautiful.  So what do you do? Do you go for the piece that is so traditional, or do  you go for the piece that has taken silversmithing to a completely  different level? You do what a really smart judge does. You pass it off to  your head judge who stood there and looked at both and looked at both.  (Laughter) All this time, you   re learning from her. She says,    Okay, you  guys, we   re going to do it this way, and I expect you guys to back me up  on this.    She said,    The only reason I   m giving it to the peyote set is  because you can actually take that and use it at a meeting tonight. The  quality of these pieces are so high that this is the only standard that we  can apply.     That builds on what you   ve learned, and now you have another reason to  add when you   re judging. I try and learn things like that. If I   m judging  silver and turquoise, I try and see if they   re staying with Zuni standards  or Navajo standards, if the lapidary work is high-quality, if they   re doing  innovative things, or if they   re going so far out of the box that they   ve  left too much of their Indianness behind. If people say,    Well, you don   t  have the right to make that determination,    well, as the judge, I can say  anything I want because I   m the judge. It doesn   t mean I   m always right,  but it seems like the right thing for me to say at the moment.  I   ve had some folks really disagree with me violently, but that   s okay.  (Laughter) If the quality of their work is high enough, they   ll be asked to  be a judge. Then they can have all the revenge they want on me.  (Laughter)  You   ve sort of explained the business education that you got through  Squash Blossom. I   m wondering what the most important thing about the  business of art is that you   ve learned?  Integrity. By that, I mean I turned down pieces when buyers would come  in because I knew that they were misrepresenting, telling me that a  16  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  certain person was Indian when I knew that they weren   t, and yet I could  buy from that person, from the Indian. Or even if an established artist  comes in and his work is not up to standard and if they   re trying to sell  me a piece of junk, I have the option to say no.  I think once you   ve worked on the back side of the counter, you earn the  right to say and do some things, particularly if you have been successful  on that side. Earl Vance taught me to be successful on that side, to earn  him money and do it in a righteous way, so when I worked for Linda, it  translated that way.  At the Art Market?  Yes. I worked for her for about nine months. I buy and sell on my own  on occasion. I   m fanatical about garage saling around here. I   ve found  some good things. Found this double kachina for two dollars in Verden.  About all of these baskets, I   ve probably paid no more than thirty dollars  collectively for all of these. I had a whole stack of these Cherokee  baskets I bought for a buck and a half. There   s seven of them.  Found this Seminole for, I think, a dollar and a half. This little Mexican  basket here, I bought for fifty cents. This little Navajo basket, a quarter.  Another Seminole, my father-in-law found that for a dollar. I kind of just  went basket crazy up here because that   s what   s available, but I   ve  found wonderful things. I found a Jack Hokeah painting for fifty dollars,  a Willard Stone for forty dollars. (Laughs)  Oh my goodness, you   ve got quite a collection. That   s amazing, Richard.  You should be in the appraisal business, too.  I am, with Linda. I   ve been doing research for her for years.  In 1990 when the Indian Arts and Crafts Act was passed, requiring  artists be certified by that tribe as artists of the tribe or that they provide  proof of enrollment, do you remember how that impacted artists and  galleries?  Galleries went into a panic because they had been handling work of  undocumented folks for all this time, but then there are some that were  hard to define, like Willard Stone. There were people who were being  outlandish about their claims, like I   ve run across several people who  were claiming Kiowa who were obviously not, could not give me a  family history. The first thing, if one Kiowa meets another Kiowa  outside of our territory, the first thing you ask is,    What family are you  from?    If they can   t tell you, then you become real suspicious.  17  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  I   ve seen people claim one tribe at one show and another tribe at the  next show. I know it   s very difficult for a number of the gallery owners.  You try and stay out of it because you have friends on both sides, but at  some point, for your own well-being, you   ve got to draw a line in the  sand and decide. If their tribe accepts them, then you really don   t have a  whole lot to say about it, but you still want to see the documentation  from their tribe.  I know people were throwing fits at major shows because they couldn   t  get in anymore. So be it. It   s not for us to determine. It   s for the tribes to  determine. Some people were getting in with letters from tribal  chairmen, probably paying political favors back. We all know about that.  I mean, we   ve been in this business a long time, and we know who the  real ones are. Indian politics is not the same as Indian art. Although they  do intersect on a number of levels, it   s still up to the tribes to determine  who   s the real thing.  We   ve all heard,    Well, my grandpa was too proud to have his name put  on the roll.       Great. That means you don   t qualify.    Or,    Well, my  family separated from the Trail of Tears.       That was probably because  they didn   t want to be Indian, so you   re paying the price for that.    I take  a jaundiced look at a lot of those folks. The only territory that I can  actually get into are those who claim Kiowa, and I   ve weeded out  several who are not. I have no, no bad feelings about that at all.  Going on to the next question, which is about your process and  techniques. You use primarily cut glass beads?  I use cut beads.  What else should we know?  I use hides from Montana, rawhide from wherever I can get it. I think I  might may be having to make my own rawhide at some point very soon.  If I can get one of the slaughter houses to sell me a hide, I   ll be in the  back scraping it.  Because the hide maker     Yes, the rawhide maker died, and everybody was depending on him.  Do you use antique beads very much?  When I   m doing restorations for museums. I keep a stash of those back.  A friend of mine from Florida, Tom Halkis, about every couple of years  sends me a stash of antique beads that he picks up in Italy. I will go to  18  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  estate sales and such and buy up trashed out pieces just for the beads.  Do you do very much restoration work?  Not as much as I used to. It   s more profitable right now for me to do my  own work. I think I   ve pretty much rescued all the museums in the area.  (Laughter)  What has changed about your beading process over the years?  It   s gotten much slower.  Because you   re more exacting?  Yes, I   m much more critical of my own work, but I also find it   s not  quite as daring as it used to be. The twenty-four-hour events, marathons,  don   t happen any longer. (Laughter) If they do, I   m usually a grump for  about two days afterwards. Even when I was much younger, a drive out  to Santa Fe was more a spur-of-the-moment decision rather than  planning months in advance now because you can pack twenty college  students into one room as opposed to   your own family has to have  certain necessities nowadays, like Starbucks. (Laughter)  As I remember, you use a lot of family designs, but I   m wondering if  your colors, your palette, has changed much over the years in terms of  your beadwork?  Yes, because I   m taking more of an academic approach just because I  have to.  By academic, you mean     More concise with colors that are opposing or complementary, as  opposed to,    Man, that looks good. Maybe I   ll just try that.    (Laughter)  Sometimes it works, and sometimes it   s really, really ugly, but it   s worth  a try. I don   t experiment. I can   t afford to experiment like I used to. And  then taking designs and concepts that are very traditional and modifying  them oh, so slightly to fit what I   m doing, that seems to be more what  I   m doing them nowadays.  Primarily working with peyote stitch?  Peyote stitch, overlay, lazy stitch, about six or seven different kinds of  edging. In my younger days, I would actually buy antique pieces, take  them apart, just to see the technique. I could kick myself for that now,  but it did help out when I did a restoration on a walking stick that had  19  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  been owned by Geronimo.  Now, I know everybody in the world has heard that, but first, the guy  asked me to do an appraisal on it. He had military photos from Fort Sill  with Geronimo actually using it, as opposed to sitting there selling it, so  that worked for me. That told me at one point he owned it. But to  actually look at the piece, do the restoration on it in the same technique,  all came from taking apart old pieces and knowing that technique well  enough to do that restoration.  You   ve already referenced your rolled fringes a little bit. There   s the  fact that there   s the beadwork in these pieces, but there   s also the work  with the buckskin that   s time-intensive, too, I imagine.  Oh, yes.  Is that a pretty time-consuming endeavor?  Well, I buy my hides from Montana for a couple of reasons. Yes, I can  tan hides. I don   t like to tan hides. It   s not something my nice little ol     white neighbors would like me doing in the backyard because it smells  bad. (Laughter) We certainly don   t want raccoons and skunks and other  vermin showing up in the middle of the night because we have enough  of that here. I buy my hides the same way my grandma did: by quality. I  don   t care who it   s made by, but I do have a source in Montana that does  absolutely wonderful hides.  What is your creative process from the time you get an idea for trying a  new piece?  Draw it out, see what it feels like. Say, if I   m working on a purse, how  that purse will be held, if it   s a shoulder-strap purse, if it   s something  that needs to be held in the hand, what kind of impact will the major  design have, and will it complement the other work, or does it need to be  a stand-alone piece? All those things go into,    This is what I will do with  this.     Once I get to that point, take out the sketchbook, get a rough idea of  what I   m doing, do the initial big piece first. Say, if it   s a medallion, do  that first and then do the complementary lazy stitch around that.  Hopefully, by then, it   s something that I can actually put fringes on and  like.  You   ve talked a little bit about two different approaches to research, one  of which has to do with taking things apart, seeing how they   re put  together, and then, also, scholarly kinds of research. Do you still do  20  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  both?  Don   t find as many pieces that I need to tear apart because I think I   ve  probably learned all I   m going to learn on that. I will look at classic old  pieces for a long time, trying to get into the beadworker   s head. What  were they thinking? Why were they doing things in this way? Were they  doing this for a ceremonial purpose or utilitarian or both? Were they  doing it as a piece for, say, a family member, or were they showing off?  You can tell a whole lot about those things by keeping those things in  mind.  Were they showing off? I can tell you exactly that the women in my  family went to the extreme to show off their talent. For my competition  pieces, that   s what they left me, the desire to show off, because as  traditional Kiowas, we don   t speak about ourselves. I   ve heard two  Kiowa women say that they were the best beadworkers in Oklahoma.  They already violated rule number one. You never, ever refer to yourself  as the best if you   re a real Kiowa. That puts their    traditionalist     moniker in another place for me. I can make that judgment now. I   ve  earned the right to make that judgment now. I   ve been doing this for  well over forty years.  But you can show that you   re the best.  That   s the idea. You don   t have to say it if you   re proving it. Let  somebody else say it. Let the judges say it. Let the person who buys it  say it. You   re just not allowed to say it, and to do that is really insulting  to the way that traditional values were taught.  What   s your creative routine, or do you have a routine, per se?  It   s pretty mundane. (Laughter) There   s nothing special about it.  Do you work every day?  Every day, in some way. If I   m not actually in the beads, I   m designing.  I   m absorbing something. I   m reading an article. I   m on the computer  looking at older pieces or even newer pieces.  That   s been a great tool.  Yes, seeing what these kids are doing and how I   m going to have to  compete against them. I still contend that although my game may not be  what it was twenty years ago, I don   t hit foul balls every time.  (Laughter)  21  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  In terms of beadwork, I think by common agreement, it   s been one of the  art forms that just has never brought in the money it deserved. What do  you think the situation is now? Is it better?  If you want it that bad, you   ll find it. You   ll make it. There are a couple  of truths that will always exist. Indians need moccasins. Indians will  spend money on moccasins, so moccasins have been my mainstay. They  can always find a medallion for their blanket or something like that, but  they have to have moccasins that fit them well.  I   m sure that is the case with the Sun Dancers. That   s the rules. You  don   t come in there with street shoes or sneakers. It   s the case with  Black Leggings and Gourd clan, that you really don   t need to show up if  you are not wearing moccasins. These Osage folks around here buy my  moccasins. They pay me well. Still make allowances because they are  Oklahoma Indians, and most of the people I sell to are friends, anyway.  If you want to work that hard, you can earn well, but you got to keep  your quality up.  Looking back on your career so far, what   s been one of the high points?  Having the Kiowa Museum designate me as a Master.  That   s wonderful. When was that?  Twenty-five years ago. Now there are two of us left out of the initial  group, and one is Vanessa  Morgan . I would like to see it expanded,  again, to include some people like Teri Greeves because she   s earned  accolades, and not to be considered a Master? Also, I think it also goes  in terms of what you know in terms of all of the techniques, not just  what you   ve won. She   s proven that, and I feel very comfortable  referring to her as Master.  What has been one of the low points of your career so far?  It hasn   t happened yet. The reason I say that is that I   m mature enough  to find something usable in terms of my career every day. Now, personal  life, not even getting into that. That   s something outside the realm of this  interview. Professionally, as long as my eyes and hands and back are  functioning, I   m going to be beadworking, and that will sustain me.  If there   s an event that is so memorably destructive that it becomes a low  point or the low point, then my angel of beadwork has been defeated,  and I   m not going to allow that to happen. I   ve got too many grandmas  that would be very disappointed if I reached to that level, and it   s not  going to happen. (Laughter)  22  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Little Thunder  Aitson  Is there anything else you   d like to add or talk about before we look at  your beadwork?  Nope.  All right. We   re looking at some examples of your work. Would you like  to tell us a little bit about each one?  Okay. Coming up with a concept of a blackjack oak leaf and trying to  modify that into something that   s workable for a dress, so I   ve come up  with this. I   m sure I   m not through with it yet.  This other, this will be the medallion for a very fancy bolo tie. I   ve  gotten a new kind of strap that runs about a hundred bucks apiece.  This one will probably be a blanket pin and a pair of moccasins that  should be finished in a couple of days. I   m modifying those and  changing them. If you can see, there   s a whole lot more work than the  usual Southern Plains kind of moccasin. That   s the kind of thing I   m up  to nowadays. Even with the buffalo rawhide soles, these are going to be  fun.  Gorgeous.  I wish I had more, but it goes out as soon as I   m finished with it because  I   ve got to feed all of these puppies. (Laughter)  Well, thank you so much for your time today, Richard.  Absolutely.  -------  -------  
