 Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University  Library. Today is Thursday, September 3, 2009. We   re at the Muskogee  Public Library in Muskogee, Oklahoma interviewing Muriel Desmuke.  This interview is being conducted as part of the Muskogee African  American Heritage Oral History Project, part of the Spotlighting  Oklahoma Series. Thank you for joining us today.  Thank you.  If you could, please tell us a little about your early life. Where were you  born originally?  Well, as you so stated, my name is Muriel Desmuke. I was born here in  Muskogee May the 23rd of 1939. I was born in a black hospital,  Providence Hospital, which was only the equivalent of about two blocks  from my house. And from there, my mother attempted to start me in  school at the age of five. The teacher asked her,    How old is he?    and  Mama said,    Six.    And I said,    Five.    So she had to take me home for  another year. (Laughs) And so I started school at Dunbar grade school  which was probably maybe four or five blocks. I kind of lived in the  center of everything that was black at that time. I went to Dunbar grade  school, first through the sixth grade. I went on to what at the time was  Manual High School in 1952. That was a new school that had been built  and in 1952 when I went to the old school they had not quite opened the  new school. So the next year when they did open the school, they  changed the name from   well they just added    Junior High School.     And in 1954 I went to Manual Training High School, from 1954 to  1958. I spent my first four years with the basic academics and also four  years in woodwork shop building furniture and so forth. Matter of fact,  we built most of the furniture, desks and so forth, for the school system  during the years I was there.  5  Nykolaiszyn  Then graduated in May of 1958 and from that time I spent  approximately four months in St. Louis, Missouri. And where I lived, I  lived in the main artery of the slums, it was quite an experience. I made  a decision that I needed to get back to Muskogee and maybe go to  college because that situation didn   t seem like it was going to work out.  Not that I couldn   t handle it, but I felt like education might be the best  solution for me. When I got back I entered Muskogee Junior College in  September of 1958 and I stayed there the first semester. When it came  time to pay off my tuition and fees, I decided to terminate my  enrollment. I enlisted in the United States Air Force; this was in  December. Of course, I assumed that since I enlisted I would go right  away. By the time that the Air Force called me, I had forgotten all about  the Air Force. This was in May of 1959. I got a letter that I needed to  report, which I did. I left Muskogee, went to Oklahoma City. From  Oklahoma City I went to Lackland Air Force Base where I received all  my basic physical training and other training. Also at Lackland I was  entered into the Personnel Specialist School, which I was in that class  until October of 1959.  Once I completed that I was reassigned to an Air Force Base, which was  Altus Air Force Base in Altus, Oklahoma. Now it appears the Air Force  was giving me a selection as to where I could go and I put down  Oklahoma City, but they told me Altus was close. Then I found out it  was 150 miles away, it wasn   t commuting distance. But anyway, I spent  three and a half years at Altus Air Force Base as a personnel specialist. I  made a decision about a year before my expiration term of service was  due that I didn   t like the idea of having to pick up and move every time I  would be reassigned, so I made a decision and advised the Air Force that  I would take a discharge in May of 1963. And, of course, this interview  was about a year before the expiration term of service was due. My  intent was to leave the Air Force and go back to school. Of course in  May, May 14, 1963, I completed my four years of service and I was  discharged and I came back to Muskogee for a brief period.  Then I moved on to San Antonio, Texas, stayed there about five and a  half months, then I decided that the best place for me was Muskogee,  Oklahoma. Matter of fact, when I left San Antonio I was living with my  sister. I remember I pulled my car up in the carport and I was loading  my things in the car and I was in such a hurry to get back to Muskogee  that I caught my pants on a nail and I ripped them down to the knee and  I didn   t change till I got back to Muskogee. So after I got back to  Muskogee I worked various jobs and so forth. If I may, may I digress a  little bit?  Absolutely.  6  Desmuke  Okay. I   d like to include some of my work history because when I was a  kid, say between six and ten years old, there were two gentlemen in the  neighborhood that had little truck services where they would haul coal  and firewood and so forth and they would always let me go along, make  ten cents or twenty cents that whole day and so forth. Then I believe I  must   ve been eight or nine years old at what is now the Martin Luther  King Center, used to be the USO for black soldiers. And I can   t  remember the person   s name, but they had a shine stand outside of that  and I remember helping this person. And for some reason I ended up in  downtown Muskogee at a shine stand called Black Cat Shine and it was  owned by Mr. Ed Chandler, who was an expert on baseball. Matter of  fact, he read every paper. But anyway, I was about nine or ten years old,  and the shines were ten cents per shine and I would get a nickel of that.  And from that nickel, I would get a lunch break. I would go down the  street to Farmer   s Caf   and I   d get a hamburger and a malt. It was pretty  exciting to me at ten cents.  But anyway, from Mr. Chandler I decided to follow some of the guys to  the Muskogee Country Club to be a caddy. And of course we used to  walk, it was three and a half, four miles to the Muskogee Country Club  to caddy. And to caddy the full-length of the course, which was 18  holes, it would take you approximately four hours. And I was probably,  wasn   t very tall, matter of fact the bag would almost drag the ground.  And, of course, I felt like I had found some riches because they paid   1.50 for those four hours. And if you could carry two bags, you   d get  three dollars. So as a person that was determined, I would carry the two  bags even though some of them were dragging. But that was a good  experience. I spent four years as a caddy at the Muskogee Country Club.  And from that, like most of the caddies, I became interested in playing  golf and learned how to play. And matter of fact, most of the caddies  there had developed pretty good games. Of course, we did not have a  golf course to play on, so we played in the park. Even though we didn   t  have the golf course to play on, I think some of us developed a pretty  good skill in the game.  Well anyway, from that I did various jobs while I was in high school just  to try to make a little money. Of course, working was just a part of my  makeup. And how much you paid me, I guess that was the going rate,  but whatever I was paid, for some reason I managed to save some of it.  And to say that, I had accumulated some money. Of course, I worked in  the pool hall also. In 1952 my sister graduated from high school and she  wanted to go to college. She had gone with my mother, who was a  housekeeper, and she said she just did not like that. She did not want to  be cleaning white folks    house. She cried and cried so we found some  way, at least Mama and Daddy found some way, and of course I  contributed to the expense that it took to get her there. She went to  7  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Langston University. And, of course, I had to go into my reserve, which  I didn   t let Mama know that I had that much money. But anyway, she  went on to college.  Now prior to that, I have a brother named Austin Brown and he finished  in 1948. Now he was a football player and he went to college at  Maryland State University so the direction was kind of set for us. We  had a cousin that played football with him; he went to college at  Langston University. So I   m pretty sure that encouraged my sister to  want to go to college and plus she did not want to work in anybody   s  house. So I think that that kind of planted a seed within me that at some  point in time I needed to get back in school and finish. So from there I  think I mentioned that I had gone to junior college prior to. But after  service, once again, I entered in 1966 at Northeastern State University  and in May of 1969 I graduated with a bachelor   s degree in Business  Administration. Of course, prior to graduating, my plan was to take my  diploma and my family and move to California. I was sitting in the  stadium during the ceremony before I walked across and got my diploma  and all of a sudden I decided I wasn   t going to California, that I was   instead  going to try to find a job here.  Why California?  Well, that was the heaven for most of us because I always heard that you  go to California and I just assumed it was such a nice place. They would  meet you at the border and give you your keys to your house and your  car and everything and you were set. But anyway, it was a land of  promise and so forth. Plus I had cousins there and also my uncle had  gone there. So it was a Promised Land at that time. But then again, I  thought that Promised Land for me would be right here in Muskogee. Of  course, it was very difficult to find a job. When I was in high school and  as I previously stated, I worked at the pool hall, which was across the  street from the Veterans Administration   s regional office. I used to see  all those people walk out every day and I often wondered what they did.  But the thing is, I never did see any black people come out of that  building. And so it was my desire to get a job with the Veterans  Administration.  At the time, they had a Federal Service Entrance Exam that you had to  take, which I took it and they sent me a notice that said I failed. At that  time, there was no numerical rating that they would give you. So I took  it a second time and they did give a rating and I was about two points  from passing it. Of course, I had been checking with the Veterans  Administration about hiring me and they would always say,    Well you  have to pass this test. You have to pass this test.    So I took a test for the  post office. And when the post office contacted me and said they would  8  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  hire me, this was in Tulsa and of course I needed a job. Of course I have  failed to mention that at this time I had a wife and four children. So  obviously I did need a job.  I went to the postmaster here in Muskogee and I talked with him about if  he had a vacancy, would he give me a chance in Muskogee. I told him I  just felt compelled to take the job in Tulsa but I   d rather be in  Muskogee. It just so happened, I don   t know, it was something he  mentioned to me about this prior employment. He said he was a  photographer at Grant   s Store which was downtown. And I showed him  a picture that had Grant   s on the back of it, he said,    I took that picture  in 1939.    Well anyway, he decided he would give me a chance. So I  went to work in Tulsa and I worked there for, let   s see, it was seven  months I believe. I contacted the postmaster and he told me he did have  an opening. So I transferred from there to the Muskogee post office.  After working in the Muskogee post office I went to the VA and asked  about employment with the VA. I was confronted once again with taking  the test. And it just so happens that a white guy that I went to school  with at Northeastern State used to work at the post office in Muskogee  and I had seen him and he had transferred to Muskogee before I got to  the post office. He transferred to the VA. So I talked with him and he  said,    I didn   t have to take a test, just transfer.    So I went back to the  VA and they told me I would have to take a test. I said,    Well not  necessarily so. I   m in the postal system, so I was told you can now  transfer from the postal system to the VA regional office. You have a  guy here that did.    So first I was told,    No, he didn   t.    Then the guy  decided, well maybe I need to check. So when he did check, he found  out that the guy did actually transfer. So when he came back, he didn   t  say that he did. He says,    If I hire you,    at the time I had a beard, he  said,    Would you cut this off?    And I said,    Do you have a razor blade  or a piece of glass? I   ll cut it off.    And so anyway, I was hired at the  Veterans Administration   s regional office, which I worked there in the  Oklahoma State toll-free telephone lines. I worked there for 26 years in  that same department. I enjoyed every minute of it and just like the Air  Force, I would do it again if I have to.  I want to take you back a little bit. Can you tell me about your parents  and how they came to Muskogee?  Well, let   s see. Now my mother and her sister lived in Waco, Texas.  Their mother died and I think they went with their uncle to Wewoka,  Oklahoma. And then one of their brothers, older brothers by a different  mother, came and got them and my mother stayed with him for a little  while. Now how they got to Muskogee other than transportation wise, I  don   t know. But then my dad, I believe, was born in Gonzales, Texas,  9  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  that   s as close as I can tell you. I can tell you how he got here. My  grandma was a pretty brutal type of person. And the story that I was told  is that she was on a bus in Gonzales, Texas and some white lady accused  her of stealing a necklace. And, of course, she jumped on the lady and  beat her up. And so people got with her and told her,    You need to leave  town.    And that   s how they got to Muskogee.  And what did your parents do for a living?  Well, my mother was a housekeeper, which I didn   t like. My sister  didn   t like. I remember when she used to come home, the white lady  would give her a ride home and she   d want me to come out to the car to  introduce me to the lady. I never would go. And my dad worked at a  place called a Compress, which dealt with cotton, cotton bales, and so  forth. He worked there until he retired.  Tell me about the neighborhood you grew up in.  I grew up in, at the time, the traditional black neighborhood. It was a  poor neighborhood. We didn   t have running water, which means we  didn   t have inside toilets and so forth. But, of course, I didn   t feel  deprived because that was the norm for most of us. There were very few  people that had bathrooms and so forth. Very few, maybe one or two in  our whole neighborhood. But I guess if you   re raised in that type of  environment and you hadn   t been accustomed to these things, then you  don   t miss them. Of course, when I went to school and found out they  had water on the inside, it really intrigued me. Watching that in the  bathroom, I couldn   t believe that. And I guess some years later, I  must   ve been in about the tenth or eleventh grade, my daddy put in a  sink with running water. Of course, it drained to the outside.  I remember coming back to a sociology teacher named Mrs. Wiley. Mrs.  Wiley would ask everybody,    What did you do during the summer?    It  felt like everybody in the class had been out of town but me. They would  talk about their trips to Chicago and California and to Kansas City, to  Wichita. So when she got to me, she said,    Desi, what   d you do during  the summer?    I said,    Well Mrs. Wiley, I went east for about two  months and then I went west for about a month.    She said,    Where   d  you go out east?    I said,    It was the Golden Goose Caf   on the east side.  Then I went to a caf   on the west side.    So anyway, she thought that was  kind of impressive. At least I felt like I had made some type of a trip.  Also in one of her sessions she asked us to name some important  inventors. Of course, I named the usual, Eli Whitney and Bell   Alexander Graham  and so forth. And I named my daddy, Lamar  Desmuke. She said,    What did he do?    I said,    He put running water in  10  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  the house. So as far as I   m concerned, that was great.    But prior to that,  our water was next door and I had to carry buckets of water for use in  the household, washing and so forth.  What was bath time like?  Well, I guess we just had to carry more water. I had mentioned this, but I  had five sisters and a brother. And, of course, we managed. Like I said,  we weren   t accustomed to anything else. So whatever we had, it was  acceptable. And, of course, we took baths and so forth.  Did you have a big metal tub?  Yeah, we had a number three tub.  Most people remember the numbers.  Where   d you see that, in a museum some place? (Laughs)  I interview a lot of farmers and they always talk about the tub number.  Yeah. We had a number three tub, yeah we sure did. And I remember, of  course we had a woodstove early on but we ended up getting gas, I  think, sometime in the    40s. But like I said, I didn   t feel, and still don   t  feel, I was deprived because what was happening during my time, you  just made the best out of it. Now our neighborhood was pretty close as  far as the socializing with your neighbors and so forth. And that   s one of  the things that I miss because this so-called integration that happened to  us, it split everything up. We no longer have that unity and that type of  association where we can support each other. Some of us have gone off  and been successful and moved into other neighborhoods. It really has  damaged the unity because you can   t recapture it unless everybody is  experiencing the same problem.  Well as a community, as a youth, what were some of the types of things  you would do? Would you have get-togethers?  Well, in my family, Mama liked to go to the movies. I think we went at  least once a week. We   d walk to the movie, which was probably about a  mile and a half from where we lived to downtown Muskogee. At the  time there was a black theatre called the Grand Theatre. We would go  almost every week. I still follow that desire to go to the movies. Of  course, they   re not ten cents anymore though. That   s the only problem. I  paid ten cents, it was up to age 12. I was a very small-framed person; I  probably weighed about 118 when I finished high school and they voted  me as the shortest person in the class, which really disturbed me. But  11  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  anyway, I was still able to go to the movie for ten cents without being  detected until one of my grade school teachers took a job there selling  tickets. She said,    Well Muriel Desmuke, you   re older than 12 years  old.    Yeah, I was about 18 then. (Laughter) So I surrendered my  privilege of going to the movie for ten cents. And, of course, I had some  friends that sometimes I used to pay ten cents to go in and open the door  and the rest of them rush in.  I mentioned I had a brother. My brother is nine years older than me. And  as I previously stated, we lived in the center of most things, the schools  and also the park. The swimming pool was just above us, probably the  equivalent of two blocks. My brother was a lifeguard at the swimming  pool. I learned how to swim when I was four years old and just was  constantly, every year I never missed a day of swimming. And he was a  lifeguard instructor so I took training under him and when he left (he left  in 1948 to go to school) some of the activities and as I   ve mentioned  earlier, from being a caddy I learned how to play golf, we played on the  park and so forth. And, of course, we also played basketball and we  played football, touch and also tackle. And being such a small person, I  had to do a little thinking when I was playing. I remember one incident  where I had developed a play in which it worked and kind of made this  guy mad. So the next time I approached him with the ball and he went to  tackle me, I jumped. And when I jumped, he raised up and I hit the  ground and I don   t know how long I was out. That was my last attempt  at trying to fool him.  Would you have to go to church?  I did. I did, I guess, until age 12 when I started going to the golf course, I  went to church every Sunday.  What church did you go to?  New Zion Baptist Church in which I still go to. Yeah, New Zion Baptist  Church on the corner of Third and Iola.  Did you have a constant pastor during those early years?  Well, as best I can remember, the pastor that I can remember the most  when I was going was Reverend Hawkins. He came to the church, I  guess, in about    46 and I left in    52. Then it   s kind of hard to say who  came after him. And I stayed out for a long time.  How large was the congregation? Any idea?  Well, I could tell you probably just like it is now. We have about 80  12  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  people on the rolls but we probably average about 35 or 36 per Sunday.  Now I would assume that it was pretty close to that. But we may have  had more attendance back then than we do now.  Why is that?  Because it was a neighborhood church. See, now people have vehicles  where they can go to other churches. Plus, the neighborhood I lived in,  the majority of the houses are not there anymore, just vacant lots. So that  contributed to the reduction in the attendance. Like I said, some people  have moved off to other churches.  Is the church in the same location from your youth?  It   s the same location. It was rebuilt about 30 years ago, which was a  very good decision because it had about eight or ten steps you had to go  up in order to get in, it wasn   t ground level, which would make it very  difficult for people to get in and out that are disabled and so forth. So  whenever the church decided to tear that old building down and build a  new one, it was probably the best thing that could   ve been done.  You just mentioned how there   s lots of empty lots now where the old  houses used to be. Can you tell me how Muskogee has changed from  your youth to now?  Well, of course, it has changed, but in my opinion the change came  about when, if I may, the so-called integration happened. Now, I say so-called  because I called it the annihilation. And I called it annihilation  because when our school was closed, we were not given any prior  information about what was going to take place.  And you   re referring to Manual?  Manual Training High School and all of the other schools. Because even  in grade school we had basketball teams and so forth, we had trophies  and things. And we found out that all of our trophies and so forth from  Manual Training High School were taken to the landfill. Yes. And  somehow the word got out and some of our former students found out  about it and went out and retrieved whatever they could get. Yeah, there  was no notice at all. That   s why I call it the annihilation because it  annihilated our culture and disregarded it. And in my personal opinion, it  still goes on. So that, from a situation of total unity, it was just  destroyed.  I   m pretty sure some people think that the so-called integration was a  good plan, but it still hurt us because in our schools we had our black  13  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  teachers. In the system here now, most of the teachers have been purged  from the system, especially our black males, so we don   t have that type  of guidance for our kids. Plus, we lost our system of discipline that we  had. We didn   t have the type of behavior that you have now. Because  most certainly I   m one to believe that if you   ve got a behavior situation  that you cannot handle with a voice command, then you need to do  something else. I   m talking about a whooping. I   m not talking about a  whipping or spanking, I   m talking about a whooping, of which I got  quite a few when I was in school. I wasn   t actually a bad guy, I just got  caught in a bad situation most times. But we lost that because in our  school you didn   t have the situation you have today where there is so  much disrespect. The one thing is that, let me say the philosophy that I  used in raising my kids is I didn   t raise them to be cute. And if they were  smart it was good. I raised them to be good citizens. So I wanted them to  be disciplined, to respect people, property and authority. I think if you  can do those things then you would be successful and you don   t have to  worry about people liking you, if they respect you. That   s the key.  Liking you is not that important, it   s respect. And what we have now,  we   ve lost that. Because parents seem to think that society says that  whooping your child is a bad thing, but we   ve lost that discipline.  We   re sending kids to school nowadays that are not prepared to learn. So  if you   re wondering why they   re not learning, they   re not prepared to  learn. If a child can   t sit there and take instruction and not disturb the  teacher, obviously with all that going on, nobody   s going to learn, very  few are going to learn. Well we lost this, because we didn   t have that  type of situation. And my first year in school, I   ll never forget this man,  his name was Mr. Barnes. I don   t know what I did, but I do remember  that belt he struck me with. But anyway, as I moved on through the  system, then even I started out with one. And as a senior I ended up  getting one by the football coach. And the only thing I can say, I was  really glad when he finished.  What did you do?  Well, I got into it in his class with another student. The student threw  something and hit me and I threw it back. Then we got into a fight so we  were sent to the principal   s office. And the administrator there, first  thing he says,    I   m going to suspend you.    And I told him,    Well I don   t  want to go home, Mr. Hodges.    I said,    I   ll take a whooping.    He said,     Well I don   t whip kids.    I said,    Well,    the other guy was ready to go  home, and I said,    No, I don   t want to go home. For 12 years I have not  missed a day in school. Now I   m going to go home and tell my parents  that I   m suspended for three days?    So he told me to have a seat.  So anyway, the teacher came in, he was a coach, we called him Uncle  14  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Walt. He said,    What did these fools do?    And so he told him,    Well  Desmuke says he   ll take a whopping.    He said,    I don   t care what he   ll  take, he   s going to get one anyway.    The other guy was standing by the  door so he ran and got him, so I said to myself I better go first. He made  me empty my pockets. And man I tell you, after that second lick I didn   t  feel anything else. When he got through with me, I thanked him, I said,     Boy, I appreciate this.   And as I left I could see him chasing the other  guy around the boiler down in the basement.  But anyway, we had that discipline. We had some renegades, but I mean  the system knew how to deal with them. Plus, the coaches and the  teachers and so forth would not let a lot of kids just drop out. Some  wouldn   t come back. They   d go and try to find out why and so forth. Of  course, compared to the dropout rate nowadays, we just didn   t have that.  I attribute all this to being in that black system where you feel like  you   re in a family and you can identify with this person and I   m going to  make something out of this person, the teachers were not going to let  you leave here. One teacher I had named Mr. Riley, an English teacher, I  think he graduated from Howard University in Washington, D.C. and he  says that,    The world will never know that we graduated a fool from this  school.    So that means that if you didn   t get to work, you were going to  fail.  But the key was respect and the key should still be respect. In my  opinion, this is why we   re losing so many. And once again, we most  certainly don   t have the same type of system we used to have. And as I  say we don   t have very many black male adults in our school. Now what  has happened to them I can   t tell you, the only thing I can say is they   ve  been purged some kind of way or put in a position where they have left.  But our system is in a sad state. They   ve tried all types of methods to  recapture or to do a better job. And I don   t know if they can do a better  job with the methods they   re trying. A lot of kids don   t respond to a  voice command. Matter of fact, they show a lot of disrespect. So what  do you do? I think I would rather go back to the old system as far as I   m  concerned because our kids did graduate, they did learn. I   m not going  to tell you all of them graduated. Some of them did have to drop out  because they were lost. But at least they were not disturbing the class.  When you were going to school, would you have teachers often check up  on you at home?  No, didn   t have to because the parents supported them. See, all those  whoppings I got at school, I never did tell them. You know why?  Because they felt like if I got a whopping at school, I   d need one at  home for disrespecting somebody, making us look bad. I wasn   t going to  go home and tell them,    Mr. Foshee gave me a whopping today.    I was  15  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  satisfied with the way it was. I wasn   t going to create another situation.  But they supported the school system. Of course, the school system and  teachers were highly respected. Plus, something that   s trivial, but at least  they dressed in a professional way, which is somewhat different  nowadays. It   s gotten so casual now that it doesn   t lend itself to a  professional environment. That   s just my opinion.  Did you have a favorite class? Favorite teacher?  Well let   s see, as I said, I stayed with Mr. Foshee for four years and I  liked being with Mr. Foshee because Mr. Foshee talked about his  college, going to school in Langston. See these little seeds were being  planted and I was listening to that. I   m pretty sure with him talking  about going to college and then right next door was the agriculture  teacher, Mr. Parker, he had gone to Langston. As I say, the seed was  planted. And it did not, I say, germinate when it should have, but  eventually it did. And, of course, Mr. Parker   s the only one that   s still  left at 94 and I still have that respect for him I had back then.  Did you participate in any extracurricular activities at Manual?  I attempted to. In 1954 when I moved into the high school I was, at the  time, a water boy. So the next year, I figured that was my year to play  football. I went down to the coach, he looked at me and said,    You go  get your bucket.    (Laughs) I must   ve cried for two weeks about that  because I wanted to play. My brother played, my cousin played, and plus  that was an avenue to a scholarship. Both of them had gotten  scholarships. And like I said, I cried for two weeks. I said,    I know I can  play,    but then again I thought, well maybe he might   ve protected me  from getting hurt because I was pretty small. But I said,    I played with  these guys when we play sandlot and did pretty good.    See, it   s not all  physical. It   s being able to think well and so forth. And when you are 60  pounds lighter than everybody else, you   ve got to learn how to think,  learn how to run, which I did a lot of that too. Matter of fact, in our  physical education class, we used to have races. I couldn   t outrun the  coach, but I said, with the right stimulus package I can outrun most of  them. Because somebody was always running me home. And most  certainly they never could put a hand on me if I could get a step on them.  Why were you running home?  To keep from getting somebody jumping on me.  Would that happen often?  Yeah, it did if they caught me. Then again, I say, I never was a fighter  16  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  and, of course, my sister that graduated in    52, she was a fighter. Matter  of fact, there was a girl in my class and she was always running me. But  as long as my sister was there, then we had peace. When she found out  my sister had gone to college, I had to keep running. But also I found out  that   I often say that back then my battle plan consisted of 99 and 9/10  percent retreat. So if a fight was going to happen, I was going to try to  remove myself. If you caught me, then that  point  one percentage of  that battle plan, it actually went into play and it surprised me. I had a guy  that had been running me forever and he caught me one day and it  surprised me and him both. And I ended up beating him up. I felt so  good about it, I got up and slapped his cousin and that was a mistake.  (Laughter)  Cousin took it out on you, huh?  Well, he couldn   t catch me but he was much bigger. Yeah, I had  overstepped myself.  You had to be tough.  No, I wasn   t tough, I just     You had to be smart.  But see I had the edge on most people. Most of them said I talked too  much. I had the edge on them so I could talk about them. One night  coming from the movies, I don   t know what I said, but this guy named  Herman and one named Minor Nunley, they had me by my heels and  were dragging me. I was hollering and crying and talking about them.  And Herman says,    Let him go. We can   t make him shut up.    So they let  me go and I got up, I got a little distance and I said,    Now if you bother  me again, you   re going to get some of the same stuff.    But it was always  said that I did a lot of talking and I always thought I was pretty quiet.  Looking at the black business district, do you remember some key  businesses that really stand out in your mind?  Yes. I remember Mr. Barnes, the principal, had a cleaners there. Gentry  Jewelry, Ezell Cleaners, had Williams Cleaners, and I think we had four  or five barbershops. I remember the one on the south end of town and  the barber there, his last name was Reed. Matter of fact, I think his son   Porter Reed  is supposed to be interviewed. Of course, he   s 87 now. I  picked him up yesterday and he was telling me about it. Then on the  north end of town we had the Metropolitan Barbershop, we had the  Tommy Robbins Barbershop, and we had Solomon   s Barbershop. So we  had quite a few. Mentioning Mr. Solomon, I guess I   m trying to think, in  17  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  the    40s, I remember he had a barbershop. We had, I guess, what people  call like a strip mall now, we had a row. It was a brick building and we  had a grocery store, we had a pool hall, I think we had two beer joints,  and then we had Mr. Solomon   s Barbershop in there. And later on he  moved to downtown Muskogee. But also we had Myra   s Tailor Shop,  Mr. Grime   s Tailor Shop, we had I think it was Dowlin Shoe Repair, and  we had Farmer   s Caf  , we had Just Hat Company, and the most  prominent business in black Muskogee was the Elliotts. They had a  clothing store   they had two different stores, one for men and one for  women. And, of course, they established themselves here years ago and  I don   t know what other businesses they had, but they had clothing  stores there.  And then let   s see, this is basically on the south side of Okmulgee and  then on the north side, of course, there were those three barbershops, and  then we had cafes, we had People   s Caf  , used to be People   s Hotel and  we had Caf     I don   t know if the lady ever gave it a name, but I knew  her name was Miss Helen, she had a caf  . We had a pharmacy on the  north end and then we had a tire shop, a tire and furniture, Grant Smith,  and then across from him he had the place where everybody went, Mac   s  Bar, which sold some of the best hamburgers you   ve ever eaten. And, of  course, that was validated by not just us, but a lot of white people ate  there because of the reputation they had. Let   s see, we had a lot of black  businesses in this town at one time. And, of course, I attribute again to  the so-called integration that with integration they could no longer  compete with the white establishments because they couldn   t get the  loans to eventually put in a nice business, so eventually they just  vanished for lack of financial support.  Who would you consider were some of the community leaders when you  were younger?  Well, let   s see. I believe that Grant Smith was somewhat of a leader. Of  course, I was so young when he was in his leadership role. We had, of  course, preachers and so forth. Then I had my junior high principal, Mr.  Jennings, Emory Jennings. I always thought quite highly of Mr.  Jennings. Let   s see, Mr. Simmons, he was a leader.  What did he do?  Well he had his own business, he was in the oil business, oil leasing and  so forth. Jake Simmons was his name. Plus he also travelled to Africa  and quite a few places, contracting and so forth. Now I think he was the  president of the local NAACP for a long time. And he was a pretty  forceful person. Of course, he could be because he had his own income,  but he didn   t mind speaking out.  18  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  You mentioned when you were younger the shoe shine place. Did it have  a specific name?  If it did, I can   t remember it. Yes, it did, I take that back, it was Black  Cat Shine. Ed Chandler. And I still can   t remember how I got that job.  That   s pretty good money when you were young.  Well, it was to me. Any money that I could hold onto was good.  And the pool hall, did it have a name?  It was TNT Pool Hall and the person that owned that pool hall was  Oletha Thomas. He was a guy that I always admired because he had a  very even temperament. And if you know the environment or the  atmosphere of the pool hall, that   s kind of unusual. But that way he was  able to keep the peace. Yeah, he was one of my idols for a long time.  Matter of fact, I worked for him for a long time. The pool hall would  stay open till 12 o   clock and he would say,    Muriel, don   t you ever go  home?    See I would stay with him and clean up and he would give me a  little something. He   d say,    Now on Saturdays you come in here,    he  had a guy that would open up for him, name was Sarge.    Sarge comes in  at 7 and tells me that you come in with him.    So then when the other  guy   s shift changed, his name was Shep. He   d say,    Shep says you were  still here with him.    And he   d say,    Then when I came in at 6 you   re  still here.    He said,    Don   t your parents ever miss you?    I say,    No, they  don   t miss me.    So, of course, I enjoyed it and plus, as I say, Mr. Oletha  Thomas, I just admired him. He was an even-handed person. But I  enjoyed being in that pool hall. I just knew this was something I   ll do the  rest of my life. And when it faded away, I can   t even remember when it  happened. Also, he was a good businessman.  I need to mention also, Leo Vaughn. He was a businessman, a good  businessman. He furnished quality clubs for blacks in Muskogee.  Quality clubs as far as the building, the d  cor, and the service and so  forth. Also he had a sundry shop. Everything that he did, there was  quality to it. He was a good businessman. On his people skills he was a  little slack. If he   d had a little bit of Oletha Thomas in him... But he was  a good businessman. He provided to this community quality and safe  entertainment.  Do you have any role models? You mentioned some of these great  businessmen. Are there any other role models that really made an  impact in your life?  Well, Mr. Foshay, who was   and even though I didn   t take a class under  19  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Mr. Parker, Mr. Parker was highly respected. He was a parliamentarian,  so he knew the rules of the game. Let   s see, and also Mrs. Bonner. Mrs.  Bonner, Mrs. Simmons. And I mention Mrs. Bonner because she had a  daughter with the same name as mine so she called me Muriel all the  time. See Mrs. Simmons was Mrs. Bonner   s sister. So in the fourth  grade she called me Muriel. Mrs. Bonner and Mrs. Simmons kind of  liked me. And also let   s see, Mrs. Riley, she was a forceful teacher but  she got it done.  Well I was really touched by the way you helped your sister get through  college, you helped a little bit financially. Did she finish college?  She finished in 1956 and I immediately started billing her. She never  paid that. (Laughter) Matter of fact, I visited with her last week. She  lives in San Antonio, Texas. Every once in a while I bring up my  contribution.  Well that   s good that she went on and finished it. You mentioned that the  best place for you was Muskogee, Oklahoma. You kept on making  references, you would go here and you   d go there, you saw a little bit of  time in the Air Force and different places. Why was Muskogee the best  place for you?  Well, I just liked the atmosphere and, of course, this is where I was born  and raised up. So I knew a lot of people and I just felt at home. And I  was at home. And wherever I   ve gone, I   ve felt accepted, but it just  wasn   t like Muskogee. When I went to St. Louis and I lived in a   I  think it was a building that had two apartments and I went up there with  a guy that was in my class and  we were  staying with his uncle and  aunt. They found out little things that I could do, a little carpentry and  things like that and they got to a place where they started liking me. And  the people in the neighborhood, which liked to have scared me to death  at first, but then again, got to the place where people, we got along pretty  good together. But then again, I just always felt that coming back to  Muskogee is where I wanted to be.  Looking back, would you have done anything differently?  Yeah, I probably would have. Well, I don   t know, things would change  if I had gone to college right out of high school and stayed for four  years. Of course, I wanted to go to school at Langston just like my sister  did. My brother spent a year there and my cousin spent four years there.  My friends went to school at Langston and some of my enemies went to  school at Langston. So I wanted to go. I went there and one of the guys  that I knew that played golf said,    Langston has a golf team and they   d  like to know if you   ll come out. They want some golf players.    I went  20  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  out and talked to the coach and he wanted me, but he said,    I don   t have  any money to help you. All of our money goes to football and  basketball.    So I came back to Muskogee and stayed here until the G.I.  Bill went into effect on June the 1st of 1966, that   s when I started to  school. But I think that my heart has always been in Muskogee and it  always will be. And just like I told you early on that idea of moving to  California, that was with me for a long time. But just before I walked  across the stage to get my diploma, all of a sudden something hit me and  said,    I   m staying.     What is one thing you would like people to remember about you?  Well, let me put it this way. When I worked at the Veterans  Administration before I left, I had a guy and I will characterize this by  saying he was a white guy. And the reason I say that is because I was in  management there for 20 years and I had some people that didn   t quite  respect that. But anyway, he came over and I was getting ready to leave  and he said,    I just want to let you know that you probably have been  one of the toughest managers I ever worked for. But I want to let you  know, I believe that you were fair.    I say that that is the ultimate  compliment, being fair. And I said,    It   s never been my intent to try to  embarrass you in front of anybody.    And he said,    Well, I   m aware of  that,    he said,    I just wanted to let you know.    And it touched me. It   s  even touching me now, thinking about it.  Well that   s the sign of a good manager, to be fair. But I think it   s also a  challenge and hard to do sometimes to not let personal feelings get in  the way.  Yeah. Well I tell you, I enjoyed it. There are certain things that you do  as a manager and I think that you want to most certainly complete the  goals that are set for you, but you can do it in a way that people feel  respected and so forth that you don   t have a problem getting them to do  what they   re supposed to do. I had a few people that would always try to  go around me. They didn   t want to talk to me, they wanted to talk to my  superior and so forth. I would address that each time to them, you need  to contact me. But I enjoyed it.  Matter of fact, talking about being fair, I had a guy that used to come  late all the time and I would write him up and counsel with him. And  when it came time to have a review, then he complained that I was lying  on him. So I told him,    I   ll tell you what we   ll do. Here are all my notes  and everything, but what we   ll do is that I   m going to tear all this up.  I   m going to tear this up and we   re going to start again, okay?    I said,     Now, next time when I write something up, I   m going to get you to  sign it.    And, of course, after about three or four times he came in one  21  day and he says,    Calf rope,    I say,    I   m not a cowboy, but I think I  understand the term.    I said,    Okay, yeah. So we have an understanding  now. You just need to be here on time.     Talking about on time, as I say, I lived in the center, I lived probably no  further than four blocks from every school that I attended. I know when  I was in high school, almost every day I was late. And the administrator  was Mr. Hodges. I had to stay in with him every evening that I was late.  People would come by and I just told them I was his assistant, I was  working for him. But that went on for the four years. Of course, it  looked like everybody on my side of the school, which was the east side  of the school, I   d see my friends coming up the hill at the same time I  was, they were running late too. But anyway, Mr. Hodges would keep  me in. So when I went into the Air Force, I lived across the street from  where I worked. For some reason I   d run late almost every day. And  that   s a no-no. But the only thing that carried me was my dedication to  work, to the job. And I guess they kind of gave me a pass because my  supervisor, which I think he was what   s called a Master Sergeant, one  Monday he called me over and says,    I came by here the other night and  the light was on.    He said,    Were you here?    I said,    Yes, sir.    He said,     Okay.    Then he said,    I came by one weekend and you were here.     And I said,    Yeah, I sure was here.    And running late I think didn   t  cause me to do that, it was just a dedication to trying to get the workload  taken care of and so forth. I think that earned me a few credits.  And then when I left the Air Force, I went to work for Corning Glass out  here in Muskogee. Same habit. I worked for one of the guys, they  considered him to be the worst person in the plant to work for. So  anyway, he had me and a couple other guys digging a ditch one day.  Those other guys asked him,    How far you want us to dig?    He said,     You dig until I tell you to quit.    I didn   t ask him anything. So about an  hour later, he came back. Those guys had been standing around  smoking. He came back and he told me,    Why don   t you go take a  break?    I said,    Okay.    Those guys said,    We   ll go too.    He said,    No,  you all have been breaking all along.    This guy was tough. Then I  worked for him in other areas and one day he says,    We   re going to have  a meeting in the morning.    He said,    I   d like to have it at such and such  a time if we can get Mr. Desmuke in on time.    (Laughter)  So anyway, that continued until I went to work for the post office and I  said I   m not going to ever be late again. Then I had 26 years at the VA  and I was never late. Matter of fact, there was a guy that started to work  the same day as I did. His name was Silas Crutchfield. We started to  work at eight, he would come to work at 7 o   clock in the morning. And  we got hired the same day. I said,    Now if I come at seven, at least that  would eliminate the possibility of being late, so I   m going to start doing  22  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  what he does.    And that   s what I did, I started doing that. Started  coming to work an hour early every day. And I found that   s good.  Matter of fact, that   s what I used to convey to some of the people that  worked with me. I said,    Now when you come to work on time the only  thing that I can say to you is good morning,    which that is something  that I did daily. And some people didn   t like to have you speaking to  them. Some of them would go to the bathroom. So I   d go to the  bathroom and say,    How are you doing this morning?    (Laughter) I said,     I don   t want to start a workday without us first recognizing that we   re  here. So I want to speak to you first.    You know, I   ve had people walk  to my desk and I say,    Why don   t we speak first? Why don   t we speak  to each other? Let   s do that.    And that was something I did for 26 years.  Matter of fact, when I left the Veterans Administration, and we had 380-  something people. I approached the personnel manager and I asked him,     We ought to have a contest to see who can name the most people in this  building.    And he said,    Why?    So I said,    Because I believe I can win  this hands down. A lot of people pass people, they never ask their name,  they never speak or anything. I   ve been doing that for years.    So I said,     Not only do I know them, a lot of them know me.    But anyway, he  decided not to do that.  How long did you work for the post office?  Oh, I said seven months but let   s see, I went to work in   I worked five  and a half months. I worked two months in Tulsa and three and a half  months in   no, it   s more than that, let   s see, no it   s eight months.  Because I worked three months in Tulsa and five months in Muskogee. I  went to work for the Veterans Administration on August 31st of 1971.  And I want to jump back to your youth one more time. You mentioned  earlier that you never missed a day of school.  Never missed a day of school.  Why was that?  Well, I just enjoyed going to school. Plus, you get a nice lunch there and  everything. It was just a lot of fun to me as long as I didn   t have to run  most of the times.  Well speaking about food, what are some of your favorite food memories  growing up?  Well, in high school, the teacher   s name was Mrs. Marshall and she was  over the cafeteria. She made some of the best meatloaf I      d ever tasted,  23  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  meatloaf sandwiches and so forth. And also beans   and, of course, there  are a lot of things I don   t eat, but the things that I do eat, you can tell I  enjoy it. Because as I say, when I finished high school, I have five sisters  and all of them were taller than me other than one. And I   m taller than  everybody now. I didn   t grow until after I left home and went into the  service and found out that people eat three times a day. Then I seemed to  start growing. I didn   t pick up all this weight until I got out of the  service. I weighed 140 pounds when I got out. And at one point in time I  weighed 240.  I just enjoyed going to school. I was a fairly good student and  competitive. I didn   t believe you could beat me doing anything. All  those guys that were bigger than me, they couldn   t beat me doing a lot of  things and that   s what made them mad most of the times. I played golf, I  played pool with them and I played basketball. Now, of course, they had  the height advantage in basketball. But I would stay and practice and  practice. And when I thought I was ready, I went in junior high, the  coach told me   this is another junior high coach   he patted me on the  head and said,    Son, go home and eat some more beans and then come  back.    But anyway, I would practice playing basketball and then  sometimes I noticed that I had the advantage, I was back there by  myself. Of course, what I didn   t realize until some time ago, these other  guys had girlfriends then.  What about favorite food that your mom cooked?  Oh, probably rice, maybe meatloaf and corn, things like that. Things that  I shouldn   t be eating too much of, but I do. And still I   m a hamburger  fiend right now. And, of course, at my house, everybody used to eat  hamburgers for years on Saturdays. Now it   s just me and my wife and  she hates to cook most times. My youngest daughter went off to school  in 1984. For a long time I thought she took the stove with her because  we didn   t hardly cook much. Also, I need to mention, I did on that form,  I have four daughters and, of course, raised a granddaughter too.  How did you meet your wife?  I met her at a club.  Here in Muskogee?  Yeah. But she was from the neighborhood where I lived.  And how long have you been married?  Forty years.  24  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  And what is the secret?  I don   t have any secret. If I did I would sell it. No, it   s a tough contract.  Yeah, I   m not going to tell you that it   s easy. People ask me,    Do you  live at 231 North 16th?    I said,    I did when I left home. You never can  tell when you go back. It might be padlocked.    (Laughs) You know  that   s something, of course, that people give you the impression that  marriage is something that will last forever. But it takes a lot of effort to  hang in there. It takes a lot of effort. See, some people stay married for  40 years, some make 40 weeks, and some probably 40 minutes.  Courtship is not reality because people put on their best behavior,  everybody   s taken a bath and cleaned themselves up, brushed their teeth,  and so on, dressed well and everything. It   s different than seeing a  person day to day, waking up with them and so forth. I think that   s, you  see these differences that come up and so forth. So it   s a tough contract.  Any words of wisdom for the youth of Muskogee?  Well, I think the words of wisdom need to be given to the parents. You  need to teach your kids to respect people, property, and authority and  also teach them to take instructions. Also I think with doing these things  it would improve on the number of kids that do get an education. It   s  hard to get an education when there   s disturbance in the classroom;  somebody   s going to be left out. In many cases a lot of people are left  out. And also I think to parents, you need to send your kids to school  prepared to learn. And they need to do these things. You send your kid  to school telling them that you can do what you want to do and you  don   t have to do what they tell you to do and so forth.  Now, I have sisters that live in this town and they, in many cases, didn   t  have husbands or the husbands were away so I had to step in and try to  help them raise their kids. And it was a tough situation, especially when  the mother thinks their kid is special. I say,    Now they   re special to you,  but nobody else.    And I   d have to go some mornings and try to intercept  my sister from going to the school to talk to them about her son. And I   d  say,    Now every time you go, it   s all their fault.    I said,    You know this  boy is a problem. He is a problem. I   ve given him a whopping a couple  of times you know, trying to get his behavior straightened out.    They  were going to put him off the school bus. So I talked to the principal and  I had to go down and make sure the bus driver didn   t put him off. So he  stayed on the bus and I went and talked to the principal, plus I got my  sister to sign a statement. I told the principal,    There   s no sense in you  spending all your time trying to call her and then she come over here and  raise hell with you about this boy knowing that he   s out of line.    I said,     Now she   s giving you permission to give this boy a whopping.    So he  said,    Okay.     25  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  I have another sister I had to help her with her boys, but she   s done a  pretty good job with hers. But those things, to me, are key. If you respect  people, property, and authority, I think you can make it. I think you  stand a better chance of making it if you can learn and you set an  environment where learning can take place. It can   t take place when you  send kids to school and they   re not prepared to take instruction because  they want to talk out when they want to and they want to get up and  raise hell with the teacher and so forth. So I have no criticism for the  school situation in that respect because we as parents haven   t been  sending kids   ever since the laws decided that whopping a child is  considered to be abuse. I consider it to be abuse if you don   t do  something.  Now what happens to our kids is that you take the whopping out of the  home, but the police don   t have any qualms about beating them up on  the street. Now that   s abuse. Now one thing, they don   t respect  authority, so they   re going to get beat up on the street. And if they go a  little step further and they get incarcerated, the parent has no control.  The only time you have control is when they are in the house with you  and you have to teach them these things that they must do, because it  will be administered to them by the authorities. If you break the laws,  there   s no telling. So we   ve had at least, I think it   s been at least six  young black men that have been killed here in this city by police.  That   s a lot.  Yeah. If you don   t mind my mentioning.  That is a lot.  Yeah, it   s a lot but it happened. My wife had a nephew that got shot by a  policeman. He got shot and the policeman claimed he was wrestling  with him but he got shot in the back, I believe. Then we had a guy that  was running from the police when he got shot. And, of course, the  police   they did do something about that one because that guy left the  force. Because it wasn   t any danger to him. But these things do happen.  Matter of fact, where I live now I have a pretty long driveway and it had  a basketball goal there. I had it open for about 13 years for the kids to  play basketball and when I first started that program, I would give them  a lecture about,    I   m not a coach; I   m just trying to teach you the rules  and regulations of play. And these are the things that you do.    I said,    If  you break the laws, some of you are going to end up with a scholarship  at OSP. That   s Oklahoma State Penitentiary.    I said,    Then some of you  are going to end up Booker T. Washington.    And one of the guys said to  me,    Well, I   m not going all the way to Tulsa to go to school.    I said,     No, that   s the name of the cemetery.    Uh-huh.  26  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  And so I think six have been killed. Now one of the guys, I think,  might   ve been killed by his friend, I think playing with a gun and it  discharged. But anyway, I had some very strict rules at my house. And I  had kids all over the city that played there for years. Matter of fact, I had  it up for so long, the coach would bring me basketballs and nets and so  forth. And on the weekend, they   d play that at 2 o   clock in the morning.  I said,    Well as long as I hear that ball dribbling, I know they   re not  breaking into something.    I had a lot of kids come there. Now the ones  that are names that I can remember mostly are the ones that broke the  rules. I had a lot of good kids that came there that are doing well. Matter  of fact, if you remember, the airplane that crashed into the Pentagon, the  young man that was killed there used to play basketball at my house.  Yeah, and he was a good citizen. Good citizen. But I had   are you from  Muskogee?  No, I   m not.  You   re not, okay. I had one of the guys there that I had to dismiss  because, of course, you couldn   t use any profanity. And at least if you  decided to use it then you were going to be dismissed. I let them play  music, but don   t play it loud. I said,    Now my neighbor is a white guy  and he likes country and western.    I said,    If you want to play some of  his music, you can play it loud. But he doesn   t want to hear your music  and I don   t either.    So eventually I had to stop that because the rules  were violated. You came, you couldn   t take your shirt off and if you  weren   t playing you had to take a seat. Then I had numbers, you had to  take a number so you   d know when you were coming up. Then I had  some guys that would bully the guys and take their numbers. One of  them was my wife   s nephew. I went and talked to him. He had about  five guys that used to follow him. I said,    I   m going to have to terminate  you playing at my house.    And he says,    Okay.    Took it very well. I  always had a good relationship with him after that. They just couldn   t  deal with the rules I had there. He came to me one time and he said,     You know, if I had listened to you, I don   t think I would   ve gone to the  penitentiary three times.    I said,    Well, I appreciate that.    I had another  one of his friends, he went twice. Well, it was a lack of having that  respect and not being prepared to learn when they went to school.  I was going to say awhile ago, I don   t have any criticism of the school  teachers like most people do because I know that the subjects that  they   re getting in school are not prepared to learn. If kids are prepared to  go there and sit and listen, it   s hard to learn when you   re talking too.  You   re an extraordinary person if you can talk and actually take in  exactly what the teacher is talking about. And I still believe, until we  reach that point, we   re still going to have the same problems we have  with all the sophisticated methods that we   re trying to educate kids and  27  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  want to blame the teachers for everything. You know, it   s a  combination. You may have some bad teachers, but at least you can  learn something from a bad teacher if you   re being quiet.  Once we do that, if we reach a point where we have kids in the school  that are prepared to learn and parents are not wanting to go to school and  jump on the teacher,    You did this and that to my kid. My kid is  special.    Well, everybody   s kid is special to their parent. Don   t expect  for them to be special to me. See I tell the same thing to my kids about  some of my grandkids. I say,    I   m having a problem with him. There   s  something wrong there.    I say,    It   s hard for me to deal with them. And  I   m not going to be the doting grandparent as most people... You know  I   m not going to tell you that this is fine with me. I      m not going to do  that. You need to do something. You need to get on to these kids.     Well, it was good that you were able to try and be a role model and give  back to the kids with the basketball. It   s just so needed.  Yeah. Well, I finally had to stop because that era of not respecting  people showed up. And, of course, they couldn   t smoke, they couldn   t  sit in their cars, they couldn   t stand in the street. The rules were they had  to stay on my property. And I had a kid that he went to a corner of my  property and lit up a cigarette. I said,    Son, you can   t smoke here.    He  said,    You can   t tell me what to do, my mama lets me smoke.    I said,     Well you need to go to your mother   s house. You can   t come here.     So what have you been doing in retirement?  Well, my major effort is put forth to waking up in the morning, just  breathing. I don   t do a whole lot. I don   t play golf that much anymore.  For years I played golf but now I   ve gotten   I am old, can   t say I   ve  gotten old. I   m 70 years old. And I tell people,    When I hit the golf ball  it   s coming back to me now,    when I used to be able to beat a long drive  and play pretty good. I watch a lot of television. And the Martin Luther  King Center got me involved in a lunch program that we   ve been in for  three years. So we do that Tuesdays and Thursdays. I don   t have any  specific hobbies as you call it, like I say I enjoy watching television,  especially Law and Order. I figure I   ve watched it long enough I can  pass the bar. So I don   t have anything spectacular to tell you about that.  You   re just enjoying life.  Well, yeah, I   ve always enjoyed life. I can   t say I enjoyed it when these  guys were beating me up, but once they were finished, every once in  awhile I would thank them. But I enjoy everything. Yeah.  28  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Well is there anything you   d like to make mention of that we haven   t  touched upon today? I know we just skimmed the surface here.  I don   t know. Do you have any questions that you haven   t asked me?  Well I guess the only other thing I was interested in is did you ever feel  any tension between white Muskogee versus black Muskogee?  Yes. Yes, things I didn   t mention. I was stopped by the police driving  slow. And I asked him why he had stopped me and he said,    Well, you  were driving kind of slow. I thought maybe you were checking things  out.    Then next question he asked me,    Whose car are you driving?     And then I was working at Corning Glass and I was going to work one  night about 11:30 and the highway patrol stopped me and said,    What  are you doing on this side of town?    Now what do you call that?  Then while I was working at Corning Glass, working the night shift,  there was a white guy by the name of   gosh I can   t think of his name  now, this was back in maybe    64   Compton. He came to me, he said,     Man, look,    he says,    Tonight when you get to work there   s three or  four of these guys going to jump on you.    So I said,    Well man, I  appreciate you telling me,    because I was working out back of the plant.  He said,    Well I tell you what, I   ll stand with you.    I said,    Okay.    So  they did come out and they called me a nigger and they told me,     Nigger, you   re taking the job of some good white person.    So I just  stood there, listened. Of course, the other guy stood with me. I guess two  against three was too much for them to deal with. So I told them,    Well,  I   m here. And I   m going to defend myself if anything happens.    So  anyway that dispersed and the next day I went to the plant manager and I  related to him what had taken place. I don   t know if he verified it or not  and I don   t know if what he told me he did, but I had a feeling that he  did because the guy that was the leader of that little group, I saw him  about two days later. The plant manager told me,    I talked to those guys  and I told them if there   s another incident that happens, every one of  them are going to get fired.    I saw this guy about two days later and he  spoke to me like we were long lost friends. Believe it or not, his name  was Richard Burton. He wasn   t an actor either. (Laughter) Sure did.  I had a chance to talk to our mayor when he visited the Martin Luther  King Center. And I wanted to bring up an issue to him because he made  that statement that racism doesn   t exist in Muskogee. And I wanted to  tell him it doesn   t exist when it doesn   t affect you. You can   t speak for  me. You can speak only for yourself. Now, have you ever felt any  racism?  No.  29  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Okay. It   s kind of hard for white people to feel it, because we   re not  going to treat you in a way that you   re going to feel racism in some  cases, most cases I would say. I wanted to tell him, he   s a young guy, I  just wanted to tell him,    You can only speak for yourself. I just want to  let you know racism does exist in Muskogee and you can   t do anything  about it when you don   t recognize it. You can keep trying to cover it up,   saying that  it doesn   t exist       He   s 19 years old. But I think he would  be open to hear what I have to say. I wished I   d said it when I saw him.  If he ever shows up again I am going to tell him. You know, I think he  would consider that. Yeah, I think he would. He seemed to be a pretty  bright kid even though he   s a republican.  Have there been any major local or national events that have really just  put everything into perspective for you? That you look back on your life  and go,    Oh man, that was amazing?     Well, of course the rise and fall of Martin Luther King. The entry into  the struggle for human rights with  Louis  Farrakhan coming in. And, of  course, most certainly it   s highlighted with the election of President  Obama. But I   m still worried about people out there that are trying to  kill him. I was reading an article the other day where they took a .44 off  of somebody who was trying to enter one of the town hall meetings.  Racism is not dead and it   s not going to die, especially when a lot of  whites are addressing him in terms that some don   t want to call him Mr.  President and I heard a lady on TV say,    You get out of my business.     And probably some of that anger, as far as the economy is concerned,  should   ve been aimed at the previous president because he put us into, in  my opinion, a situation we didn   t have to get into. I don   t know if you  remember, but I do remember, the first thing he said before he started  that war,    He tried to kill my daddy.    We lost over 4,000 lives because  he wanted to get revenge. And that bothers me. The news media are not  replaying that like they would  like  they replay things about Michael  Vick. As a matter of fact, racism won   t go away. Talking about Michael  Vick, there was a story about the quarterback from Pittsburgh raping a  lady. They mentioned it one time and it died. The television news media,  they didn   t jump on that like they did Michael Vick. So all of these signs  are there. And it cannot be ignored by us. We know what racism is  because we   ve been victimized by it. You know, a lot of people can say,     It doesn   t exist here.    Well, as long as it doesn   t affect you, it doesn   t  exist.  You know, one of the worst things I ever ran into when I was in the Air  Force, I was coming home and I stopped in Sallisaw and it was dark.  These three white guys come out, big guys wearing cowboy boots, and I  was stopped to get some gas and they said,    Nigger, what do you want?     Now you think that   s not a scary situation? I wanted to tell them a few  30  things, but I didn   t think I was that dumb yet. But that was scary. And I  could   ve ended up like some of our other   getting hanged, getting beat  up, getting thrown in a river like they did a young man from Chicago.  That stuff still goes on. Our judicial system contributes to this because  we have different levels of treatment from the judicial system and our  legislators. For one thing, we   re still dealing with that crack cocaine,  powder cocaine issue. White boys use powder cocaine, blacks use crack  cocaine. They commit the same violation but the treatment is different.  They get probation and we get years in the penitentiary. And we still  can   t get them to change that. This is bothersome to me. And people talk  about how fair we are in this country and so forth. Well there   s some  fairness, but then again, who is it directed to? Who   s been the benefit of  the fairness?  We get the maximum, in many cases, when sentencing is concerned. We  had an incident here in Muskogee where they have this Chili Fest. The  highway patrol arrested some guys, matter of fact it was downtown,  during that Chili Fest. And he discovered what he considered to be  powder cocaine. I think they sent it off to someplace in Tahlequah to test  it and so forth and it come back and it was baking powder. See, now that  would   ve been different if that would   ve been me. All that I   m looking  for in this country, all that I   m looking for is fairness. If you   ll treat me  fair, then I believe I can make it. That   s the way I feel about it.  You know, it reminds me, I was on a committee to consider re-districting  the school districts. I was with a group, there was six of us  blacks on that. I think it was about eight, but three of them wouldn   t join  us, two or three of them wouldn   t join us. There was a lot of discussion  on what should have been done and so forth. And the moderator says,     Well we want to let you know, we don   t have a plan already. And when  we come up with something, we   re going to implement ours anyway.     Told us that constantly. Then we would come up with ideas and discuss  them and then we   d vote on them. He said,    We   re going to narrow it  down to the best three.    So he narrowed it down to the best three and my  group was one of them.    And then once we do that, then we   ll pick the  one we think is the best by vote.     Come in next day,    Well you know, so and so came up with a good idea  and we want to include that one.    I said,    Well you said it was just going  to be three.    Well anyway, it didn   t change. But when we came down to  the vote, they accepted ours and it was never implemented. It was never  implemented. And we came up with an idea to re-district rather than  doing it east and west, do it north and south, that way you get pretty  even among students black and white. Plus it also, north and south, it  placed three elementary schools on the south and three on the north. And  those are feeder schools into the seventh and eighth grade centers, they  31  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  call them.  They change stuff every year, it used to be junior high. And see that  would   ve given the old school out here that they   ve abandoned just  about, which was West High, then they were trying to find something to  put school back into the system. That would   ve given three feeder  schools from the south going into the West High and three going into  Alice Robertson  Middle School . Our plan was voted and it won. And  there were a lot of whites that voted for it on that committee but the  school system never implemented it. And during that meeting, I kept  saying,    The only reason that I   m here is that as long as I feel like I   m  treated fairly, then I can deal with it. I   m looking for fairness.    I must   ve  said that at least every time I spoke. I   m looking for fairness.  Wow. Well let   s end on a good Muskogee question for you. What is your  favorite Muskogee memory? When you get together with the family or  you get together with your old school buddies and you   re reminiscing,  you   re sitting around the back porch, what is your    remember that time  when   ?  Well I have so many special times, I just don   t   I   ve been fortunate  enough not to experience too many bad times, and been fast enough to  get out of them in case I could. But then again, I put a lot of effort into  enjoying everything that I do.  I get that feeling from you.  Yeah, well let me say this. I heard some people that work for the  Veterans Administration now and they were complaining about the job  and so forth. They were working in the telephone unit. And they said,     Well, then this guy said this to me and he said that to me    and  everything. I said,    Well, one thing you have to remember is you   re  getting paid to listen to him. He   s not getting a dime to say what he   s  saying.    You know I had a lot of people call, I had a lot of them call me  the big N on the telephone but I talked with them. I had a guy that was  going to come down here to Muskogee and was going to stand on my  desk and give me a good whopping. I told him to come on, I said,    I   m  6   8   , 280 pounds.    (Laughs) So anyway, he showed up, we were about  the same size, we went and had lunch together. (Laughter) But I try to  enjoy everything. And I told him,    Now you   ve got to concentrate on  you   re getting paid every two weeks. That person is not getting a dime  from talking to you.     And, of course, I   ve always felt that   I like to think that I   m my  brother   s keeper. And I like to think that I was fortunate enough to get a  job in a place where I could help some people and so forth. I like that.  32  Nykolaiszyn  Desmuke  Nykolaiszyn  And I like being away from the job  so much  that I still try to reach out.  I   ve been fortunate to have a few things and so I   d like to be rich, but I  don   t want to take advantage of somebody else in order to gain my  riches and I see that happening. Of course, as I said, early on trying to  help my sisters with their kids and so forth. Some of them are grown and  I   m still trying to help them. I   m trying to pass on to them a philosophy  that they can embrace and that if you   re not making much money you  can   t spend much. It   s a touch battle. But anyway, I   m going to find  some enjoyment out of everything I do. I don   t want to make myself  miserable. And we can do that.  Well, Mr. Desmuke, thank you so much for joining us today, we do  appreciate it.  I didn   t think I was going to have anything to say.  (Laughs)  -------  -------  
