 Little Thunder  Seabourn  This is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is December 1, 2010, and  I   m interviewing Bert Seabourn for the Oklahoma Native Artists Project  of the Oklahoma Oral History Research Project at Oklahoma State  University. We   re in Bert   s home in Oklahoma City. Bert, you have such  a range of subject matter and formats, but your style   s always instantly  recognizable as yours. Where were you born and where did you grow  up?  Well, I was born in a little town called Red Barn, Texas, but I was born   at home . A midwife  came  to the house. I lived on the banks of the  Pecos River, and then I think the next day they took me up to the closest  big town, which is Iraan, Texas, and that   s where my birth certificate  is  from .  What did your mother and father do for a living?  My dad, when we were in Texas, he worked for the Humble Oil  Company and Refinery, and my mother didn   t work. From there, I think  I was in the sixth grade, we moved to Arkansas for a couple years. Then  my dad decided to go to California to work in the shipyards, so he  dropped us off in Purcell, Oklahoma, which  is where  my mother had  lived in her early years. He went to California and stayed there.  Were your mom   s parents still around?  No, her father died many years ago, but her mother died while I was in  the Navy. I was stationed in San Diego at the time, and she died in, I  think 1952.  Any brothers or sisters?  I have a brother and a half-brother, and they   re both deceased.  5  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Bert Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  All families have stories about who they are and where they came from.  What are some stories that your family told?  Gee, I don   t know of any stories. Just a struggle to make a living     On your dad   s side did you have contact with your grandparents at all?  No. In fact, I called my grandfather    Mr. Seabourn.    I was that far away  from him. We   d see them about once a year. We all lived in Texas and  they lived in Cisco, Eastland, Texas, but we only got to see each other  maybe once a year.  Like Ben Harjo, cartoons were one of your early loves. How young were  you when you first became interested in cartoons?  Well, I started wanting to be an artist, a cartoonist, when I was five years  old. And I kept that desire on up through high school. I enjoyed comic  books, things like that, and I could envision me doing a super colossal,  flying red Zenith or something.  You actually sold a cartoon, right?  I did. I sold a cartoon to King Features Syndicate when I was in the  eighth grade at Purcell, Oklahoma. And it was published in a comic  book. I think I was paid five dollars for it, which wasn   t bad at that time.  I went five years before I sold my second cartoon, and then I was in the  Navy. I sold a lot of cartoons while I was in the Navy. I had cartoons  going back and forth, to publishers, magazines, things like that, plus  local publications. So, I really was doing a lot of cartoon work then.  You didn   t have art classes in high school. Did you have art at the  elementary school level?  No art classes. I guess the closest thing to an artist I knew was a sign  painter, and I   d watch him paint for hours. But no, when I was in high  school, I would hitchhike up to Oklahoma City, either that or catch a  freight train there in Purcell, ride it to Oklahoma City, and got to the Art  Center. So, I saw art every month, but it was all just hitchhiking up and  back. Growing up, we didn   t have any paintings in the house, no books,  nothing except my comic books, and so the only time I could ever see a  painting was, maybe, at the Oklahoma Art Center. And I had to work to  see that.  Did you have to work to get your comic books?  6  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn   I sacked groceries at Pratts Grocery. I picked cotton and cut broom corn  to get a little money.  I managed to get them someway. At one time I  had first issues of all the comic books, Superman, everybody else. And  then when I went in the Navy, they all got destroyed.  I was curious if your folks were supportive of your drawing, or your love  of cartoons. Was your mom aware of the fact that you loved to draw  cartoons?  I don   t think my mother was aware of anything concerning me. I did my  own thing.  Did you have any exposure to Indian Art during that period?  Not growing up, no. After the Navy, I went to OCU  Oklahoma City  University , and I was doing non-objective abstracts then.  You were taking classes there? Had you already developed an abstract  style on your own?  Well, probably a little of both. I had a friend out there, Bill Flores. And  Bill worked at Tinker Air Force Base, doing artwork there, and I worked  at OG E, doing artwork, so we had shows together. And he   s actually  the one that convinced me to start showing in an all-Indian mall show,  and so if it hadn   t been for Bill, I probably wouldn   t have ever pursued  my Indian heritage that way.  Bill Flores was Cherokee/Papago  cartoonist whose work reveals a subversive and brilliant use of Indian  humor.   So you met Bill at OCU. Was he taking classes, too?  Yes, he was taking night classes. We worked during the day and  were   taking classes at night.  You became interested in your Cherokee heritage in college. Was it  mainly through Bill, or also through encountering other students, or  what you were studying?  Well, we   d have assignments in class to do, maybe still lifes, something  like that, but then on our own, we could paint anything we wanted to, so  that   s when I would do my Indian things.  That   s great  it  wasn   t discouraged. For some artists taking classes, it  was.  During that time, doing the little mall shows, Fred Beaver, Rance Hood,  7  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  LittleT hunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Kelly Haney, you could buy any of our works for five dollars.  What was the reception of the works like? Were people pretty interested  in Indian art?  So-so. I might sell as much as five dollars    worth a whole weekend at a  mall show. So, that   s how interested people were.  What was it like  showing  with Fred Beaver and Rance Hood?  My first good show I had was with Fred. We had a two-person show at  the Heard Museum in Phoenix. That was way back in the late    60s or  early    70s, something like that. Then they bought some for their  permanent collection. That was a good experience. Fred and I were good  friends for many years.  Did you ever enter any of the Philbrook Annual Shows?  Oh, yes. I won awards at Philbrook at their annual Indian Show. It   s  been a long time ago, but I did enter the show, sure. Blackbear Bosin, a  lot of well- known people were showing at that time.  That was an exciting time. I just found out about the reject room not too  long ago.  The what?  The reject room at the Philbrook Annual. That was where they would  hang paintings that didn   t make it into the juried selection.  I didn   t know they had one. I   m sure I had many in there. (Laughs)  I don   t know  about that . I don   t think so. (Laughs) So during the Navy  you worked in the public information office?  Yes. This is when I was in VR-8 at Hickam Air Force Base, a Navy Air  Squadron. And we   d do training and safety brochures, evacuation  illustrations, how to get on and off a plane, and how to put on a Mae  West  Military term for an inflatable life vest . Then I was an art director  for the little magazine they had, monthly magazine. I did covers,  illustrations for that. I was there two years, and from there I went over to  Pearl Harbor, and I was the artist for Sincpack Fleet. It was a big  operation. We had one large building where they had nothing but  journalists, writers, photographers. And there were two artists: myself  and one other person. We did work for all the ships at sea. If they didn   t  have anyone, they could request what they wanted. We   d do a work for  8  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  them. We had one feature called    Little Known Facts About Your  Navy,    which is like    Believe It or Not.    Another one  was     Navy  Heroes,    and then Navy cartoons. These were published during that time  they didn   t have offset printing. Everything was letter press. So we   d do  the artwork there at Pearl Harbor, ship the work up to Great Lakes, they  would make mats from those. We had a mailing list of 1,500 weekly  newspapers that used our work. That kept the Navy name out front, in  case somebody was wanting to join something, maybe they   d join the  Navy. So these were supplied free of charge, and it was a great  experience for me.  Because you   re drawing all kinds of poses, et cetera?  And in addition to that, my work was being published in All Hands, The  Navy Aviation News and different magazines. I   d submit cartoons for  those. And I free-lanced downtown with a magazine. One publication  did about twenty cartoons a month for me in their magazine in  downtown Honolulu. I had a lot of cartoons going at that time, and I was  submitting cartoons to magazines here in the states, selling that way.  Was your initial thought that when you came back to civilian life you  would be a commercial artist?  How about a cartoonist? Yes. I had my own little syndicate for a while.  Weekly newspapers I   d have a one cartoon page, little local newspapers,   like the  Yukon Review, El Reno, Mustang. But I was still working at  OG E.  Have you saved all those cartoons?  I used to have them. I found one the other day, an old Navy cartoon. It  was published probably about    53, something like that. It showed a  sailor, he was in a doctor   s office, and he had tattoos on his chest, a map   of the  South Pacific. And he was telling the doctor,    Yeah, doc, the  pain   s somewhere between Kwajalein and Enewetak. (Laughter)  At OG E, well, Simpco Color Press, I started out with them, fifty cents  an hour. But I could work as many hours as I wanted to, and I kept it up  for a couple of weeks. Then I went to work for Oklahoma Gas and  Electric company as a draftsman. And I was doing about fifty percent  drawing,  and  posters, bulletin board posters   I worked with the  magazine there. And then the other half was engineering drawings. Then  Simco Color Press offered me a full-time art director job, so I turned in  my resignation at OG E. And the last day of my two weeks    notice,  OG E said,    If you   ll stay here, we   ll create an art department here for  you.    I said,    Okay, I   ll stay.    So, I went ahead and stayed there twenty-  9  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  three years, doing magazine, newspaper advertising, brochures, billboard  layouts, whatever. Magazine, art director, and during that time is when I  went to night school at OCU.  You were also painting on the side?  Really, I wasn   t doing too much painting then.  When  I first started out,  I wanted to be an illustrator, a commercial artist. And then at OCU, most  all the art courses were geared to fine arts. So after a while, I decided  that   s the way I wanted to go. I would spend weekends, nights,  at  little  mall shows, painting, whatever. I used to enter the Scottsdale Annual,  which was, at that time, the biggest Indian art show, I guess, in the  world. I think they had several categories, and I would send out five or  six paintings in each category. And my paintings were like five, ten  dollars, something like that. Fritz Scholder, his was like fifteen  dollars .  He was in the shows, too.  I remember reading that when you started doing Indian images, because  there wasn   t a market for those images, you suffered a bit financially  because you were having to sell your paintings for much less.  My mother, she used to tell stories about Indian fables, stories involving  Indian people, and I thought,    Well, it would be nice just to start doing  something like that.    So when I first started painting  Indian subject  matter , for about the first two years, I did very stylized linear, outline  Indian-style painting.  The flat style?  Yes. I did that for about two years. Then I decided that wasn   t for me. I  liked what I was doing, but I wanted to do my own version or different,  a little more abstract. And I came up with a bird of prey, with maybe a  grandfather image, superimposed somewhere within the painting, and it  caught on. That was a reason I had the show at the Heard  Museum  that  early in my career.  What year was that?  It was either late    60s or early    70s. But I was the only one doing that at  that time, and it spread like wildfire. That   s what people thought Indian  art was then, an Indian image and a bird of prey.  It   s interesting because it   s an archetypal image. Some people interpret  it like as a medicine person or a shaman, I think you   ve sometimes  referred to it as a storyteller.  10  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Of course, throughout Indian history, they   ve always been involved with  animals, birds, talking to them,  getting  guidance. So, I just made a  good story type  image . I could create my own, I could do reference  work, and find things related to it, and there was so much to work with  that I just really enjoyed all of it. The researching, the painting.  So they were helper figures sort of?  Sure. So many clans were named after the different animals, things like  that. So it   s only natural that you can work out a nice subject type thing.  That lasted about twenty-one years.  You really focused on     People. No portrait type things. Just the grandfather image.  When you finally decided,    I want to do this fine art thing full-time. I  want to make it my job and do this,    how did you negotiate that?  Well, in my work at OG E, I could split my vacations up for shows. I  would take a week off here and a week off there. But I had a good  opportunity to go to Germany one year, to do paintings and talk about  Native American art. And I   d already used up my vacation so I couldn   t  get off. So, I started thinking then,    I need to get away from here.    After  about twenty-two years there at OG E, I talked to Bonnie, my wife,  about leaving. And she said,    Well, we need another refrigerator. Let   s  wait. Next year, we   ll talk about it.    So next year,    Well, the old car   s  about ready to fall apart. Let   s wait to get another car.    Finally, after  about the third year, I said,    I   ve got to get away.    So we gave up all the  good fringe benefits and hospitalization, and quit. And I started painting  twenty-four hours a day.  I read you were putting out around 365 paintings a year. That   s a lot of  work.  I kept that up for about twenty-one years. I might skip a day or two, but  then I   d make up for it. Maybe traveling from here to California, I  wouldn   t have time to paint, but when I got up there, I got backed up and   I   d  paint maybe eight or ten. At that time they were all numbered on  the back. So I had a little code to tell me the day, the month, the number  of the painting for that series.  Did Bonnie take on some of the business  responsibilities  once you  made that shift?  Oh, she did all the business. I   m not smart, so she took care of all the  11  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  book work, go to the framers, pick out frames, pick out mats. She  became quite an authority on art, a very good art critic.  Sometimes that   s the most important feedback  from your spouse .  It is, and she didn   t mind telling me if something   s wrong with a  painting, either.  You showed at the Red Earth Indian Arts Festival in    67 when it opened,  and at the Oklahoma City Arts Festival when it opened. How were those  shows important to you?  Well, it gave me an outlet to sell. Red Earth, the first show they had, I  was the poster artist. They used one of my paintings for the poster, and  from then on, it was usually the Best of Show got their work published.  But the first year they didn   t have anybody, so they picked me, which  was good. It gave me a chance to get exposure, same way with the  Festival of the Arts downtown.  There were  a lot of people at the  Festival of the Arts. It was earlier than Red Earth, of course. There for a  year or two, my most expensive painting was maybe fifteen dollars. I  would go down there, and I   d have a hundred to a hundred fifty original  paintings I sold for fifty cents each. There was one dentist from Duncan,  he came up and he   d buy fifty at a time, and then he   d give them to his  patients as gifts. But they were nice little original paintings. Next year I  raised them to a dollar, and the next year after, I think they were five  dollars.  When you began painting for a living, did you have to rethink your  pricing?  By that time the paintings were up to where I could make a living  painting. For twenty-something years, I did about thirteen major shows a  year. And these were from Port Jefferson, New York, to three or four  galleries in California, Santa Fe, Taos, Albuquerque, Gallup. We had,  like, thirteen major shows a year for about twenty years. Sometimes  we   d maybe fly in from New York, change clothes, take a bath, get in  the car and take off for California.  That   s a very heavy show schedule.  It was mad  But we both enjoyed it. We were young, and we could do it.  In addition to that, during those years, I had two shows in Germany, one  in Singapore, Taiwan, England. I was in a traveling show in South  America, showed at the  American  embassies, in each country there. So  we worked those in.  12  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  How did that impact your style or your philosophy of art?  When I went to France, there were five artists  that  went. Ben Harjo  was one of those. And we had about fifty patrons of ours that went with  us. They were from Oklahoma and Arkansas, both. It was through  Shirley Wells    Indian  Territory  Art Gallery in Sapulpa. But, in addition  to my Indian work, I called them,    Ladies of the Fast Lane     paintings .  They had real kissy lips. I tried that for a couple years, but I couldn   t sell  enough to make a living so I had to drop that. When I went to Taipei,  and Singapore both, I think it was their twenty dollar bill had a  kingfisher on it. They did a lot of birds  in their art, but  not too many  birds of prey. So I came back   I was getting older and more mellow, so  I pretty much phased out my fighting birds, birds of prey. And I just do  other kinds of  birds , mocking birds, whatever.  Did you look at very much Chinese art while you were there? Did you  have that opportunity?  As much as I could, sure. Every place I go I look at as much art as I can.  And I taught over there, when I was in Singapore. I taught every night.  OCU sponsored the trip. The first night, they kind of publicized a little,  and we had maybe twenty, twenty-five people there watching. The next  night we had about a hundred and fifty, the next night between three  hundred and five hundred people   they couldn   t even get in.  Word of mouth got out, didn   t it? (Laughs)  And the newspaper   Kelly Haney and I were together, showing, and  they had    Red Indians     in the  headlines. I   d never seen that before, but  India being so close to Singapore, they have their Indians there, so to  distinguish, they call American Indians    Red Indians.     Did you do any sculpting at OCU?  No. I did some pottery-type things, but no sculpting.  When you got the commission to do  a  bronze sculpture in    86 for  Southwestern Bell, how did you go about it?  Well, I wanted to incorporate the medicine man/grandfather image with  a red tail hawk   we see more of those than we do eagles around here. I  wanted to do a red tail hawk, and I didn   t want to do a typical buildup of  wax, so I used sheets of balsa wood and constructed  it  that  way .  It  was  a little different from anything around, but I came up with five or  six models before I ever turned one in, and about a hundred drawings. I  finished this one, and had it cast here in Oklahoma City, at Scissortail  13  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Foundry. And it was one of the five finalists. I got the commission from  that. That was my first sculpture, and I felt honored. The other four were  professional sculptors. And Charlie Pratt was one of the five.  You   ve worked in a variety of  paint  media. What determines what  medium you use? Does it depend on your mood or on your subject  matter?  No, not really. I started out with oil paints, did oil for several years, then  from there went to watercolor. Did watercolor for twenty years, and then  I wanted to start doing more canvas pieces, so I switched to acrylics. So  I   m working ninety-nine percent  in  acrylics now. Still love it. I   ve been  with it several years, but I   m still learning. And I teach two nights a  week at City Arts Center, acrylic painting classes. I   ve been there quite a  while, too. I enjoy teaching. I didn   t think I would, but I do.  Could you talk about your acrylic collages a bit? What gave you the  idea to kind of combine more traditional acrylic painting with collage?  Of course, in the abstracts, you   re always picking up pieces of paper or  cloth or bottle caps or something. As an artist, you   re doing that, picking  up all kinds of junk, and you need a place to put it. So, if there are words  on it   I guess my first one  was  my show in France. I did this painting,  this little American girl, she had a little French hat on and kind of a little  sassy look about her. She was an American in Paris, we   ll say, and she  says,    I want an order of French fries, French toast, and a French kiss,  please.    (Laughter)  When you combine the text with the paintings, there   s humor, but it   s  humor with an edge, like you   re trying to get people to look at some  behavior they   re engaged in.  Sometimes I have a good title, and rather than put the title on the back,  I   ll just put it on the front.  Make it part of the text.  It   s nothing new. Picasso, he did names on some of his paintings, and so  it   s nothing really new, just different words.  I was interested to see that painting that cited  Egon  Schiele   s work  and another where you referred to  Willem  de Kooning. Do you  research art history for ideas? Or is that the impact of your travels?  I guess all of it, combined. I go into a doctor   s office   I never read a  book, I look at pictures. I can go through twenty books pretty fast. But  14  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  every once in a while, you may look through twenty books, and you   ll  find something that would make a good painting. So I jot down a note or  two. Just like when I was cartooning, different things would come up  during the day you   d write down. Same with titles for paintings. When  I   m driving, that   s probably my most creative time. I always have a  notepad there, and I   ll tell Bonnie,    Write this down.    Or else, if she   s  asleep, I   ll write it down. But if you   re just sitting there, driving, nothing  to do except watch, you have all these thoughts coming around.  So it   ll be both titles and images, or     Both, yes. I can see a whole painting, and if I don   t write it down, I   ll  forget.  Do you think there   s any Fritz Scholder influence? Were you interested  in his work at one point?  Sure. I think I   ve been influenced by every artist I   ve ever met, one way  or the other. I knew Fritz. We   ve had dinner with him at his home in  Scottsdale, him and his first wife. And we   ve competed for twenty years  or so, in shows and galleries. But we   re friends. In fact, in addition to  maybe being influenced by him, I   ve been influenced by the person that  influenced Scholder, Nathan Oliveira. We   ve both been influenced by  Nathan, a San Francisco artist. The single solitary figure standing, that   s  very typical of what Oliveira did.  One of the images I like in your more recent work is a kind of dark-haired  woman, she looks dark-skinned, or she   s in darker tones. And her  hair, it   s either on top of her head or it   s kind of this triangular cut.  I don   t remember her.  I   ll have to show you in your catalogue. Well, up here for example. In  the corner.  Gestures  You   re not thinking of anybody in particular?  No, I   m just trying to get something that     Looks pleasing?  I do a lot of ballerinas, and they may wind up looking alike. I paint  grandmas, dogs, cats, whatever. I do a lot of paintings.  I like the motif of music in some of your paintings.  Let me tell you about that. I   ve always painted to country western music  when I painted, and after our grandchildren got up in high school, we  15  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  had two violinists and a cellist, and so I was forced to listen to classical  music then. And I loved it. So I painted for a number of years  to  just  classical music. I don   t know anything about it except I like the sound.  When I walked in, that   s what was playing.  Our grandson was a cellist, and I started painting a lot of cello-playing  people, and a few violinists. I still put music notes in a lot of my  abstracts. It may not mean anything to anybody, but I   ve done a lot with   music .  You  did  the cover art for the  OK  Mozart Festival  in Bartlesville .   But  that wasn   t music, it was flowers, as I remember.  Oh, yes. In fact, also I painted a violin for them. It was auctioned off. It  had a nice abstract on it. And we had a show up there. The gallery, our  gallery, Fifty Penn Place, had a show up there during their music  festival.  Humor is a big part of your work. Why is it so important to you?  Sometimes it   s not important when I   m thinking about it. And then  maybe after I   ve painted it, I think,    I don   t think I could ever create this  again.    Something that I hate to get rid of, like    Route 66 Shaman.     That   s always been a favorite. I don   t even show that anymore. I   m  scared someone will buy it. And Bonnie, if I have a painting she likes,  she gets to keep it for her insurance, I guess. So, she   s picked out a few.  One time, she   d picked out a painting, and we had a couple of people  from Dallas up here one evening. They stayed and stayed, and Bonnie  had gone to bed. And they wanted to buy one of the ones that Bonnie  had picked for herself. So, I went in and woke Bonnie up, and she really  wasn   t awake. She said,    Do what you want to.    So I sold it. The next  day, she found out what had happened and was very, very upset. About  two years later, this guy called me from Texas. He knew that Bonnie had  been upset. He called and he said,    I   m filing bankruptcy.    He said,     Would you like to buy that painting back? Same price I paid for it.    I  said,    Yes.    So I bought it back for Bonnie.  I think a lot of artists    wives feel that way. It   s wonderful to get the  opportunity to buy it back. What is your creative process?  I don   t have, necessarily, a creative process. I enjoy working in my  sketchbooks. When I first get to the studio in the morning, I may do two  or three little quick sketches, something like that. Nothing else, just  limbering up, finishing a cup of coffee, maybe. But I just start painting,  and it   ll kind of develop as I go. Maybe I want a warrior holding a  16  Little Thunder  Seabourn  shield, maybe three feathers coming down a breastplate, something like  that. Then I   ll start sketching and make changes, turn it upside down and  start again. Just experimenting. I know, basically, what I want. I want an  Indian with this or that. Then, trying to get it to look like something that  people would like, you   ve got to keep that in mind, too. You   re not just  pleasing yourself, you   re pleasing everybody. But you do need to please  yourself, first, and if you can   t please yourself, it   s hard to sell it to  somebody else.  I have let some get out that I wasn   t 100 percent sure of, but usually, it   s  something I really like. I was working at the gallery yesterday, and a  lady came in. She looked all around, and finally she said,    I   m looking  for A Tahlequah Potter. I said, And Friend? She said,    Yeah.    It   s one I  did several years ago, and shows this potter, holding a pot. And then   there   s  another little drawing of a dog. It looks like it   s been collaged  on, but it   s actually just painted right on there. And up by the face, by  the feather of the Tahlequah potter, it says    Tahlequah Potter,    and then  by the little dog, it says,    And Friend.    It   s probably, gee, eight, ten  years old at least, but I still have it. I   m going to take it to the gallery  today, actually, and she   s going to pick it up.  Tell me a bit about the gallery. It   s a co-op, actually. Can you explain  how they work?  Sure. About seventeen, eighteen years ago, this gallery was getting  started, Fifty Penn Place, and it was going to be a co-op gallery. They  called and wanted to know if I   d like to be in on it, and I said,    Sure.      There   s  only three of us still with it from the early days, but we have  thirteen working members, and we   re all equal owners of it. And then  we have guest artists   we let people show, and we charge a small fee.  We pay a fee ourselves, and we charge a small fee for the guest artists,  but that   s what we pay our rent with. We don   t make any money. All we  do is pay our bills, and pay for advertising shows, things like that. But it  gives us a place to show, and we take turns working. We work in  alphabetical order. Like, our daughter, Connie,  because she teaches , if  it comes her time to work during the week, then she   ll trade with  someone for a weekend. So, she   ll work a weekend and not have to work  during the week. It   s very flexible that way. We trade out days.  We had that for eighteen years. Then we had an opportunity to start  another gallery at North Park Mall. So, we went up there, and they had  two spots available. We looked at both of them and decided on one. We  told them we   d try it out for a couple months, and we repainted  everything   floor, walls, got everything ready. And we   ve been in that  one month. We just opened November 1, and there   s I think ten of us up  there. We take turns working. It   s open six days a week. It   s basically  17  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  the same as the other, except we don   t have guest artists. We split the  bills. We pay all of our bills that way, just split it, whatever costs. And  we all had to ante up money for opening day, have a little bit of money  in the cash register. But it   s a nice little gallery. That   s basically what  a  co-op  is. A group of artists get together, they want a place to show. And  maybe for a little extra income or help with the rent, they invite guest  artists to come in. But it gives them a place to show too, because a lot of  artists are looking for places to show. We don   t make much money, but  it sure helps.  And it   s not on a national scale. It   s just Oklahoma City and vicinity. We  do have a web page. We send out, I think, 1,800 invitations each time  we have a show. We have a show the second Friday of every other  month. Opening receptions, it   s almost elbow-to-elbow people. We get  good response, a lot of people come in. They may not come again for the  next opening, but a lot of good patrons follow what we do, and then  newcomers come in. So, it   s just a good experience.  A great idea for artists. The passage of the Indian Arts and Crafts Act in  1990 changed the Indian art gallery scene for some Indian artists that  couldn   t provide proof of Indian identity. I know here in Oklahoma, a lot  of gallery owners remained loyal to their artists, because there was  always a group of artists that were not enrolled. Do you remember those  days?  I remember quite well those days. I was probably the oldest one affected  at that time. I think Willard  Stone  had just died, so I made headlines  from New York to California to France. Since I was in high school, I   ve  been thought of as an Indian. Coach  would say ,    Give the ball to the  Indian       So you were  teased and all that     Yes.  When the Indian Arts and Crafts Act passed , we had to  disconnect our phone. We had phone calls coming in from all over the  world, wanting to talk to us about it. Bonnie couldn   t take it, and we had  to go to a psychiatrist for her. And I did a series of cartoons, not really  cartoons, it was birds talking, and it was about the Indian law. I couldn   t  sleep. I got up one night, and I did these sketches all night long. I made  etching plates the next day, and I did ten, ten etchings. Only nine of  them I used.  There was  a  Cherokee  tribal council  meeting  during  that period, they   d voted me to be an Indian artist. Not card carrying, but  just     Certified by the tribe.  18  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  And about a week later, Wilma  Mankiller  changed her mind, and said,     No.    So, I have a little deal  in one etching , something like,    You will  be Indian until the waters quit flowing, or until I change my mind.    I  have a letter from that time, I think Wilma was Chief, but I have a letter  saying, in general, you   re recognized as an Indian artist. Red Earth, you  had to get something after that to be able to show, so the tribal council or  someone sent me a letter. I requested it. They sent a letter stating that I  could show, but I quit showing anyway. I would love to go ahead and  show. I think I   m entitled to, but Bonnie doesn   t want me to show.  In Indian art shows?  She doesn   t even want me to show at the Master   s show at Muskogee  at  the Five Civilized Tribes Museum , but I do. I don   t show at Red Earth  because she doesn   t want me to. I paint Indians, probably seventy-five  percent of my paintings are Indian-related, and I love it. But I have a  disclosure I put on the back of them. Something like    If you   re buying  this painting because you think I   m an Indian, stop. Because  according  to  the Indian law of 1990. . . If you   re buying it because you like this  piece of art, then go for it.     So the art was the way of dealing with  that?   It was just one series of etchings, regarding that issue, and I did one  other painting. I did this Indian face and the circle with the line through  it. Like  the sign  for disabled parking. I did this one Indian face, I put  that circle slash on that, but I never did show that. I still have it in the  attic. I let it go, I just try to not let it bother me. I paint what I want to, I  just don   t say I   m Indian.  It   s a  hundred million dollars  fine , if you  say you   re an Indian and you   re not, so I just say,    Hey, I   m  undocumented.    If they ask, I say,    I   m undocumented. I   m not a  member of any tribe.    Undocumented. I can paint anything I want to.  One of your daughters, Connie, chose to be an artist. I understand she   s  teaching now and doing her art. Did you ever give her any professional  advice?  Well, when she was young (I was teaching then, too, nights) I would.  And she   d wind up crying. I didn   t know how to tell her to do something  without hurting her feelings. And then she got married, then divorced,  came back home and lived for a while. And by that time, she had  matured, I had matured. She took some lessons with me then and we  worked fine. Even today, some of my students, I   ll tell them what to do,  they   ll say,    But I like it this way.    I say,    Okay. Do it that way. That   s  fine. You don   t have to do it like I do.    Teachers walk a thin line.  19  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  It   s not unusual for artists to trade work, or when you   re flush, you can  buy someone else   s art. But you really have this really expansive,  wonderful collection here in your house.  My first year at OCU night school, Jack Vallee was probably, at that  time, the best watercolorist in Oklahoma and  the  Southwest. He had  gone to OCU, and he had donated a painting to be sold there. We  couldn   t afford it, but I bought it anyway, and we paid it out. It was a  little quarter sheet watercolor. That was our first painting we got in our  collection. Several years later, we were down in Santa Fe for a show.  We had a chance to buy a couple of Richard Schmidt   s works for  150  each. Bonnie wanted to get them so bad, and I told her,    We just can   t  afford them.    After making mistakes like that, I decided,    Hey, you take  care of the money. You know what we have, you know what we can  afford, if you want it, you buy it.    We still collect. We bought several  this year. I don   t know where we   re going to put them. About every year  we give about thirty paintings to our kids and grandkids and great-grandkids.  Of your work?  No, of things we   ve collected. Then we   ll start again. We enjoy  collecting, and we don   t trade. I don   t trade out. I traded one for one  piece, and I got a short end of the deal. It was a sculptor, and I told him  what I wanted, and he said,    Okay.    And it wasn   t typical of what he  does. So, he delivered it and I looked at it, and I said,    This is terrible.     He said,    Well, it   s what you wanted.    I took it, put it in the backyard. It  stayed out there for probably fifteen years. Then we got to be closer  friends later and I said,    You know what? I   ve got this sculpture in my  backyard I   d like to trade you for another piece. For that piece there.     And so we traded again. (Laughter)  That   s funny. Are you still putting out 365 paintings a year?  I   m doing 300-plus, now. I was in the hospital two weeks ago. I went in  on Sunday, got out Wednesday. And I did about ten nice sketches, and  I  was  painting in the sketchbook while I was in the hospital. Since then, I  haven   t been able to really paint, but I   ve sat and done a lot of good  sketchbook work. I   ll probably turn out twenty-five pieces like that, that  are frameable.  Looking back over your career, what do you think has been one of the  highlights?  Getting a painting accepted in the Vatican. It went in 1975, and it   s in  their permanent collection. Two different presidents, Bush and Ford  20  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  Seabourn  Little Thunder  both, have my work. Got to meet both of them. Bush Sr., him and  Barbara, and then Gerald and Betty. Their painting, it   s in their library  collection in Ann Arbor, Michigan. And Bush   s   he told me they were  going to keep it in their collection until they tire of it, then it   d go to  their library collection. So, I felt honored that way. Lonnie Anderson  and Burt Reynolds, they bought one of mine. I   ve had a chance to be  acquainted with several movie-type people, different times. Jonathan  Winters, he   s the first, I guess, star that bought one of my paintings. It  doesn   t take much to excite me. . .  That   s pretty exciting stuff.  Getting interviewed by you, that   s another highlight in my life. The  Chronicles of OSU. (Laughs)  (Laughs) Is there anything that you would like to add that we haven   t  talked about?  Not really. Art has been my passion all my life. I love it. I don   t know  what I   d do if I couldn   t paint. I can be feeling bad, terrible   I   d go up  there to the studio, and I   d sit down or stand up in front of a canvas, and  forget my pains. I can stand up there for hours. Bonnie would have to  come get me.    Get down here and get your medicine, and rest.    But it   s  been a great thing for me. I   ve enjoyed every bit of it. I mat my own, I  frame my own  art . I do it all, and I enjoy everything about it. I have my  own etching press. I can go out and I can pull etchings. I can do  monotypes, collographs. I started  with  oils, watercolor   I can still do  those if I want to. I feel like I   m a well satisfied person. Good wife, good  family, good kids. I   ve been very fortunate, fortunate to make my living  doing art, doing what I want to do. Got to travel, meet a lot of people.  And like I said, I still do 300-plus paintings  a year . I   m a workaholic.  For so many years, I   d spend twenty hours, easily, every day. I   ve  slowed down now. I usually work in the morning until noon, and then  we go out and eat lunch. We eat out 365 days a year. Unless it   s  Thanksgiving. We might eat in.  Did you start that when you were so busy on the road?  Yes. I would work up until noon, we would go to UPS, mail paintings,  go pick up art supplies, eat, come back home, start working again. It   s  been great. We   ve met so many good artists and good friends and  collectors. And it   s just been a wonderful life. My wife, she gave up     she didn   t go to college. She became a wife, taking care of me. She was  sixteen  when  we got married, I was eighteen.  Well, we all feel very fortunate, that you chose what you did. Thank you  21  Seabourn  for your time, Bert.  You   re welcome. I enjoyed it.  -------  -------  
