 Little Thunder My name is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is Tuesday, April 7, 2015.  I   m interviewing Yonavea Hawkins for the Oklahoma Native Artist project  sponsored by the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at Oklahoma  State University. We are in Yonavea   s home in Choctaw, Oklahoma outside  of Oklahoma City. Yonavea, you graduated from Oklahoma City University,  and your art is expressed in many areas, in painting, beading, weaving.  While you excel at Caddo and Delaware clothing you get orders for dance  clothes from people all over Oklahoma. Thank you for taking the time to talk  with me.  Hawkins Thank you.  Little Thunder Where were you born and where did you grow up?  Hawkins I was born in San Antonio, Texas. My dad was in the Air Force, so I was a  military brat until my folks separated at the age of ten. I spent most of my  time kind of going back and forth to different grade schools and in different  states and then finally settled back here in Oklahoma with my mother and  my sister.  Little Thunder You did a little bit of traveling?  Hawkins Yes. Yes. I actually lived in Montana, we lived in Arkansas, and two  different trips back to Texas and stuff, too. Also, I don   t remember, I was  pretty little, we lived in the Canal Zone, also.  Little Thunder Oh, in Panama?  Hawkins Uh-huh. My middle sister was actually born near Panama City.  Little Thunder What a great upbringing.  5  Hawkins So     Little Thunder What did your mom then do for a living?  Hawkins She was a homemaker. She, at that time, the wife stayed at home. She didn   t  work at all during my growing up. She was a homemaker.  Little Thunder How about your grandparents? Were you able to have a relationship with  them on either side?  Hawkins When we moved back to Oklahoma, I had a chance to spend some time with  my grandfather. My grandparents separated, too, so he remarried. He  remarried a Kickapoo woman. Lived outside of Harrah. There was quite a  few summers that we could just go stay with them and just run around  barefoot and climb trees. Just have a good time, just being young.  You know, my grandpa didn   t have  much , he just had a little bitty home.  No indoor plumbing, no running water, so I had experiences of pumping  water to bring it into the house and stuff. It was just kind of interesting,  looking back on that. It was a very interesting but a good experience.  I remember in the summertimes we would sleep outside because it was  warm. He would tell stories, Caddo stories and stuff. Being little, you know,  you don   t remember them as well as I would have liked to. I do remember  the experience of sitting outside, hearing the bugs and everything else going  on in the nighttime. Just hearing him tell those stories and stuff.  Little Thunder Were you around the language then a little bit too when you were around  him?  Hawkins Just a tiny bit. He   d say a few words and stuff. The same thing with my  mother. She would always say a few things, too.  Little Thunder You were mentioning that being around that side of the family, you did hear  a little bit of the language?  Hawkins A little bit. Not you know, as much as I would have liked to. As an adult  now, knowing that I didn   t, just don   t always think about asking questions  when you   re young. Now as an adult, I finally started doing some language  classes here in Oklahoma City, so I   ve started participating in those. It   s  harder to learn as an adult.  Little Thunder That   s with the Caddo Cultural Club?  Hawkins With the   we call it the Caddo Language Class, and some of the members  of the Metro Caddo Cultural Club are involved with it. We get together,  6  we   ve been doing it for about two years now and have been studying  weekly. Fortunately, you know, the first two years we didn   t think of calling  it a beginner class, but this year, the third year, we developed a beginner  class and an intermediate class. We don   t want to call it advanced. We don   t  feel like we are that proficient yet.  Little Thunder It   s great that you now have two different     Hawkins Yeah, enough to get     Little Thunder    levels.  Hawkins    get those kids interested and develop more programs. I shouldn   t have  said programs, but lessons. Then, the Caddo kids that are involved, they   ve  been doing the Caddo Language Fair. They   ve been doing very well too.  That makes us very proud. We are kind of behind doing some of those  things and stuff. One, we are not a very large nation. Not as many Native  speakers, of course. I think that   s true with any tribe. They don   t have as  many Native speakers as they really would like to and stuff. They   ve   it   s a  lot of programs and stuff that I think that the Caddos could take a look at  and try to take advantage and try to develop their own programs too.  Little Thunder You have a neat story about your name, your first name.  Hawkins Yes, yes. Yonavea was actually, is actually, a Comanche name. My  grandmother wanted to name me that. She went to the family (she was good  friends with a Comanche woman), and that was her name. She asked  permission to name me that name. That   s why I am a Caddo- Delaware-  Kickapoo Indian with a Comanche name.  Little Thunder (Laughs) With all your tribal heritages, has there been one that   s been more  dominant that the other?  Hawkins Interesting enough, my mother though raised by her grandmother who was  Delaware, she knew how to make Caddo clothes as well as Delaware  clothes. That   s where the influence lies. More so on the Caddo side because  we were involved with the Caddo dances, and cultural events, and so I know  more about my Caddo side. Not as much as I would like to know on the  Delaware side. My grandmother was   my grandpa remarried. He married a  Kickapoo woman, so there were some other things cultural, the Kickapoo  side that I got a chance to learn about and know too. You know, Delaware, I  know how to make those clothes.  Little Thunder What was the first time that you were conscious of seeing Native art?  7  Hawkins Maybe more so when we came back to Oklahoma. As a child, I always liked  to draw, and paint and always enjoyed the art classes that they would have  in the grade schools and stuff. It wasn   t, per se, a particular art class, but it  was more like a craft or a project, just part of the curriculum. That was  probably more my influence when we came back to Oklahoma, seeing some  of the things that were going on at that time.  Little Thunder When did you make your first art?  Hawkins In grade school, I got a chance to be part of   they must have been having an  art show. I was probably about ten. I remember drawing a cat. Just the head  and it was in pencil. Obviously, I have a lot of influence with drawing with  pencil and stuff. That was my first art experience.  Little Thunder (Laughs) Were you around beadwork or people making clothing like in your  extended family?  Hawkins Just my mother. When we came back to Oklahoma, we started being  involved with some of the Caddo events. That was my experience there. She  made our dresses. She didn   t do beadwork. She didn   t do moccasins. With  her, she liked to sew, but she didn   t like cutting out the clothes. That was me  and my sister   s jobs, was to cut out the clothes and then she would sew our  clothes up. I understood at least the cutting out process, but not the sewing.  Little Thunder How about any outstanding art memories in middle school or high school?  Hawkins I always took the art classes and stuff, but it wasn   t until college that I  entered another competition and placed. It was at the American Indian  Exposition  Anadarko, Oklahoma  when they had the art shows. That was  another exposure, too, being in the competitions. I think I won second and  third in Graphics with pen and ink.  Little Thunder That   s very exciting. You were how old then?  Hawkins I was probably nineteen, about nineteen. I was also tribal princess that year,  too. That   s why both of those things together stick in my mind. (Laughter) It  was more college that I started getting involved with the competition stuff. It  just so happened there was competitions going on and so I participated.  Little Thunder You started off at OCU  Oklahoma City University , is that right?  Hawkins Yes, yes, I did.  Little Thunder Enrolled as a fine arts major?  8  Hawkins Yes, I was. I went in and thought I wanted to be a fine art major and do all  the paintings and stuff. I really liked it, but about halfway through I thought  maybe I need to have something else to support me, so I started doing  graphic design. Took the commercial art classes and stuff that they had and  went on professionally to be a graphic designer.  Little Thunder That   s a great background to bring into your artwork. Your first couple of  jobs, are you both working full time in graphic design and also pursuing  your art on the side?  Hawkins Actually what happened, I went into the graphic design. Did that for several  years. That was a creative outlet, doing the graphic design professionally.  Then became a mother, and kind of job-wise switched into not much  creative process, but the pre-press, the production part, preparing things for  printing and going on lot of press checks.  By that point, my kids were needing Halloween clothes. I was making baby  clothes and so that was still a creative outlet, to do the sewing and stuff for  my kids. About the time they got into grade school, they were showing an  interest in dancing. Because up to that point, I hadn   t been participating  culturally as much because I was focused on my career and my kids. They  said,    We want to dance.    It was like,    How do you want to dance?    I  pointed to a Straight Dancer and then I pointed to a Fancy Dancer. Of course  they wanted to be Fancy Dancers. And so, it   s like,    I don   t know anybody  that makes those things,    and I ended up making their bustles.  Little Thunder Oh, wow. (Laughs)  Hawkins I still have them here, too. It was an interesting experience. Before then, I  had made my own clothes. Getting married and stuff, I had put on weight, so  I had to learn how to make my own clothes. That   s where I started making  my moccasins and my dush-toh and my beads, everything that a Caddo  woman would wear because I started with myself. Then, my sons come  along, so I start with their bustles. Fortunately, they wanted to start Straight  Dancing. Then I had to learn how to make Straight Dance clothes for my  sons (Laughter) and their moccasins and all those things that men wear.  Little Thunder When did you get involved in the art circuit again?  Hawkins It wasn   t until 2010 when Jeri Redcorn asked me to participate at Red Earth.  She wanted to do a Caddo co-op. At that time, of course, I had my own  things. I had a pair of moccasins that I was working on for myself. I thought,     I   ll put those into the competition    because I saw there was a competition,  and it was part of the booth. I assumed that you had to enter into the  competition to be a participant at an art market. Shows you how much I  knew at that time. Fortunately, I entered those in and it was a good  9  experience for me. I won in the beadwork category. I wasn   t aware, really,  that that   s a really stiff competition area because Oklahoma   s known for  their beadworkers. I was very blessed that I entered in my Delaware  moccasins, and I placed, so I was really thrilled. That was the start. That was  the start of me participating in Red Earth. I did that for several years at just  Red Earth, and then, the past two years, I have expanded to other art markets  and stuff and have been blessed to have also placed in the beadwork and  cultural items categories.  Little Thunder Now was that first show in the    90s, or was that already     Hawkins It was 2010.  Little Thunder 2010.  Hawkins I   m really a newbie at this.  Little Thunder (Laughs) A whole life   s experience that you bring to it.  Hawkins Exactly.  Little Thunder What painting media did you start out in?  Hawkins I liked doing acrylics. Did more pencil drawings and pen-and-ink and  realized that I really enjoyed drawing more so than painting. Not that I can   t  paint. I still feel like I   m learning on my painting techniques and stuff, but  drawing with pencil, and charcoal, and pen and ink has always been my  favorite medium. I like doing people. I just like people   s faces, capturing  their expressions and stuff.  Little Thunder We   ll take a look at a couple of those nice ones at the end, here. You also  took a pottery class with Chase Earles. Is that right?  Hawkins Yes, Chase had been talking about wanting to teach other Caddos about  Caddo pottery and stuff. I think, we forget there are so many different  Caddo pots and other items that belong to the Caddos, not realizing the  Caddos were a very large nation at one time and occupied a lot of land mass.  A lot of our items are in museums that you don   t always see. They   re in the  collections. He had been learning from Jeri and now has taken off on his  own with his knowledge and experience and his experimentation of learning  how to fire and do wood fires. Most people don   t realize the difference  between Southeastern pottery and Southwestern pottery. It   s a different  firing technique, different clays which require that firing technique.  We went to his home, in fact, one of my sons went with me and we learned  how to grind up the clay and make the clay mix. Then we went back and had  10  some firing. Also got a chance to actually work with the clay, and had Chase  show me,    This is how you do it.    I   m pretty proud of my first pot. It   s like,     It   s not too bad. It   s not too crooked. It   s acceptable enough.    I had one of  them at the Tulsa Art Market. I had a gentleman come up and he goes,    This  looks really old.    I said,    It   s not.    (Laughter)    I just did it a couple months  ago. Just fired it and everything else.    He wanted to buy it, but I said,    It   s  my first pot.     Little Thunder Okay. Where did you fire that one? Did you fire it at Chase   s?  Hawkins At Chase   s home. I   ve gone through two pit firings, and so now I understand  about how to, at least, build the fire and how to warm up your pots so that  you can actually come out with a pot. He takes pictures and stuff because he  says people don   t always believe that you pit fired.  Little Thunder Right.  Hawkins So it   s,    Okay, take pictures of my pots. These are the ones I pit fired.     Little Thunder We hope to see more pots, too, then. You   re making clothing for yourself  and your sons when they start to dance. Then did you start getting  commissions when you were a young mother, for other Indian clothes?  Hawkins Actually, no, because I never said too much about it. More of the  commissions and stuff have occurred since starting out at Red Earth because  I have pictures of my clothing. I would have people come and ask me,  women, would ask me if I would make some clothes for   make a shirt for  their husband. Would have men ask me about making Straight Dance  clothes.  Tim Tallchief asked me,    Could you make some Osage ribbon work?    I  said,    Well, yeah, I think so.    I   m pretty brave. I can look at something and  figure it out and so I ended up doing one of his   he said,    This is a family  design. Could you duplicate it?    I made some Straight Dance clothes for  him, and now I   m starting to get more orders for Straight Dance clothes as  well as women   s Caddo dresses and children   s clothing, too.  Little Thunder I didn   t get to ask you when you made your first pair of moccasins? Did you  learn from anybody or did you just figure it out     Hawkins No, I tried to do some research. I didn   t have anybody teach me. I would  look at examples that I would find in the museums and on the Internet,  different sources and look at those. I   d cut them and then I   d,    Those don   t  quite look right,    and so I   d take them apart and recut them and restitch  them. Just learned on my own about the construction and stuff and how they  11  should fit properly. Like I said, went on making my sons      I could see the  big difference from the first pairs that I made, to what I make now.  Little Thunder Right.  Hawkins That trial and error.  Little Thunder Right, right. It   s hard to   well, people are paying better prices (even  dancers) for moccasins, but it   s very labor intensive.  Hawkins They really are. It   s funny. Sometimes, someone will say,    How much are  those?       Well, it   s this much.    It does take some hours. Then, you have  some people say,    I could do that myself,    and I   ll say,    Okay, go ahead.  You   re not hurting my feelings one bit.    (Laughter)  Little Thunder As you   re getting into the business, that is the tricky part of it, how you  decide how you   re going to price things. What kinds of research were you  doing? Were you just observing other artists, people who were making     Hawkins Because I try to keep traditional, I would look at museums, the collections I  would see in museums, whatever was on exhibit. One of the things I  discovered about what   s traditional, tradition is sustained by material  availability. If the materials aren   t there, you can   t be traditional. Human  nature, being what it is, you use what   s available. Things that are traditional  now, weren   t traditional a hundred years ago. I had the opportunity to be  asked to give a presentation on Caddo clothing. Because of that, I did more  research, looking at written material that was available and descriptions that  were there in these written accounts of what Caddos were wearing.  At one time, we wore black buckskin. We don   t wear black buckskin  anymore. I   ve never seen a black buckskin in my lifetime. I wish I had my  grandmother here, I would ask. The descriptions were from the Spanish  explorers. It was black buckskin with white seeds, decorated with white  seeds. Fortunately, I had a chance to   to go to Alto, Texas and they had, it  was a replica from the descriptions and stuff in their displays. It was one of  those things that if I actually made one of those dresses, then it was like,     What kind of outfit is that?    Even today, wearing a Caddo dress, I   ll get  asked,    What tribe are you? What, what kind of clothing are you wearing?     because we are such a small tribe.  The funniest experience I had in Ada, I was at a powwow. I was dressed in  my Caddo dress. I think at that time, I was wearing probably my two piece.  Whether it was a one piece or two piece, I still had on my Caddo comb and I  had a little girl come up to me, and she goes,    Your crown   s on backwards.     (Laughter) Okay, she   s never seen a Caddo woman before. She doesn   t  know that that   s part of our traditional dress, is to wear those combs. Going  12  back to the fact of the cost of silverwork. You   re not going to see those  Caddo combs or as much silverwork as what you used to.  Little Thunder Right.  Hawkins It was (Laughter) kind of funny. I leaned down and told her, I said,    I   m  Caddo. We wear our combs this way.     Little Thunder I   m glad that you brought up those points about tradition. When you   re  actually making clothes to sell, when you first started out, in terms of  knowing how to price things, were you sort of looking at perhaps other  people? I don   t imagine there were a lot of people, for example, making  dush-tohs.  Hawkins No.  Little Thunder Were you just gauging your time     Hawkins Gauging my time.  Little Thunder    and materials.  Hawkins Yeah, time and materials. That   s my best rule of thumb, especially if it   s on  a new project. I try to keep it within reason of what I think it will take the  time for me to do. There   s a lot of times I underestimate. I get carried away  with the detail of it. A hundred years from now, someone   s going to come  across something that I made and I want it to hold up. I still want it to be  there two hundred years from now.  Little Thunder I was thinking, too, that even the art of sewing, just sewing with a sewing  machine, that   s kind of a lost art, anymore. I think Indian women are really  keeping that alive in a way.  Hawkins Right, we can   t go to the store to find our clothes. You have to know  someone who makes them and be able to find that person. That was the  same issues that I had. I want these things, but I don   t know who to ask to  make those for me. I guess, fortunately, at least I can do things with my  hands. God gave me a talent and a skill, and so I   m able to use those things  for myself, for my family, and now for other people, too. Just recently, I had  someone ask me if I would make her little girl, her Caddo dress, her first  Caddo dress. It   s real hard to not make that time for those first clothes for  those younger ones. The same way with the Straight Dance clothes that I  just got finished doing.  They   re for young boys. If I don   t make that time, when they are interested  in doing it, it   s lost, it   s a lost opportunity. It   s something they may not pick  13  up and want to do again while that interest is there. I did the same thing  about six months ago for another young lady that she wanted to have her  Indian clothes and she was like rediscovering who she was. Those things are  important. Adults that have already been dancing and that kind of stuff, I  don   t (it   s probably bad of me to say) but I don   t work them in as quickly  because they   re adults. They   re already participating. I take in a lot of  commission work and so I try to work that in and be fair to those people, but  those younger people get the priority at first.  Little Thunder I really appreciate what you   re saying there. Have you done any museum  shows at all?  Hawkins I have been down to Alto  Texas , the Caddo Mounds. They asked me to  come down there several years ago to show some of the Caddo clothing and  so I go just about every other year. In fact, next weekend I   ll be going down  there. They kind of changed the dates from October to April. I   ll go down  there and talk to the people that come through there. In that area, a lot of the  kids study the Caddo Indians because we were native to that area. Because  the Caddo Indians were there, they   ll come in and talk and ask questions and  stuff. A couple years ago, I had a young lady that I was visiting with and  sharing with her. She came back the following year and showed me her  history project that she had won with, based on the Caddo Indians. She was  so very proud of it and I was very proud, too, that she had won and that she  had also taken the time and the opportunity to come back and show me what  she had done, too. That was great.  Little Thunder That   s really neat. You know you inspired her. What was it like the first time  you went down there?  Hawkins It was interesting. Fortunately, I guess being at powwows (because I do like  to powwow and go to other dances and participate in other events)  I   m kind of used to the tourists coming up and want to take their pictures  with me, so it wasn   t like a totally different experience. The people there  were wanting to learn about Caddos. That   s what they are there for. They  were interested and so their questions were pretty good.  Now there   s always somebody humorous that kind of sticks in your mind.  You got the usual questions of,    Is that what you wear at home every day?     You just smile and say,    No, I wear regular street clothes. I have a regular  job.    All you can do is just smile.  Little Thunder Right.  Hawkins These are my Indian clothes. Yes, I am Indian, but you know, I do work  professionally.  Little Thunder When you go to art shows, does your husband go or your sons?  14  Hawkins Yes, my husband is very supportive. He   s my biggest booster. He helps me  set up. If I feel the need to go look at other things, he comes and he stays  with me. He stays in the booth and gives me a break to let me get out and  take a look and see what   s going on out there. Of course, with art shows and  stuff, sometimes there   s suppliers, and so it   s like,    I think I need more  beads.     Little Thunder (Laughs) Right.  Hawkins My sons do, they come and they stay in the booth and they enjoy that part of  it, also. My family really supports me in that. I   m fortunate.  Little Thunder When did you start your website and how important has that been in  marketing your work?  Hawkins I started my website probably in 2011, I guess, 2012. I   d have people ask  me,    Do you have a website?    I don   t sell off my website. I worry about the  commercialism that happens when you put too much out there as far as  Native American designs, the copyright issues. Show a few things on there.  The people that contact me ask if I could do this or that for them. Most of  my opportunities seem to come from some of the art shows. I   ll have people  ask me if I could do this, do a presentation, teach a demonstration, those sort  of things. It   s good visibility. It at least shows people that I   m there, what I  can do, what I can maybe help them with.  Little Thunder Have you taught a lot of workshops?  Hawkins I   ve taught a few, mostly grade-school level. Last year, I had the Choctaw-  Nicoma Park Schools ask me if I   d come in and do a class on loom work.  Little Thunder Wow.  Hawkins They had a good turnout. There was probably twenty-five, thirty people  there. Parents with their kids and stuff. We had at least a dozen looms. We  worked with pony beads because, obviously, that   s a little bit easier to  handle     Little Thunder Right. (Laughs)  Hawkins    and twine. You can teach those hand   I don   t want to use the word     crafts    because I feel like crafts sometimes is an undervalued term. It   s a  shortened form of master craftsman. You have to learn in a simplified way  to do that. That   s what we did. I   ll have an opportunity to teach in  November at the History Center on gourd stitch. Those opportunities are  there for me to take advantage of.  15  Little Thunder What do you learn when you   re teaching?  Hawkins To be able to explain it in such a way that they can take that with them and  continue. I don   t want them to be frustrated because if you   re frustrated with  something, you   re not going to want to do it and I want those people to  learn. I think you can learn, you can learn how to do anything if you choose  to.  Little Thunder You mentioned you might be expanding your shows a bit. Have you gone to  SEASAM  South Eastern Art Show and Market ?  Hawkins Yes, I have.  Little Thunder When was your first time?  Hawkins Two years ago.  Little Thunder Two years ago. What was that like?  Hawkins That was a great show for me. I placed first in Beadwork. Then, last year I  also placed first in Beadwork, also. Obviously, that   s always at the top of  my list of my good shows: when you place.  Little Thunder Yes.  Hawkins I also placed second in Drawing in their categories there. Good shows. I   m  set to go again.  Little Thunder Is there a show that you   re looking at that you haven   t done yet this year  that you   re considering?  Hawkins I   ve been asked if I   ve done Santa Fe, and it   s like,    No, I understand it   s  real hard to get on out there.    It   s probably on my list of something to look  at. Been thinking maybe I need to expand beyond Oklahoma on doing that.  I   m a planner. I don   t have to rush into it. If the time is right, then that   s  when I need to do it. The opportunities are there. I just need to figure out the  time to make sure I have things done. Beadwork takes a little while. That  one bead at a time.  Little Thunder You need that inventory.  Hawkins Yeah, exactly. You   ve got to have inventory to go into a show. Plus, the  competition side of it, you   ve got to have a good competition piece, too.  Little Thunder You work in so many media, what is your favorite thing to make right now?  16  Hawkins I still enjoy beadwork and I still enjoy drawing. I do like the clay. Talking  with Chase, he was talking about the fact that the Caddos were well known  for their baskets and fortunately, there was a class at the vo-tech, and it was  like,    She   s teaching basket making.    This past spring and fall and winter,  have been really busy with picking up the clay and picking up basket  making, and then still trying to get ready for competition, and all the other  things that I enjoy doing.  Little Thunder That   s amazing. The vo-tech here in Choctaw?  Hawkins Yes. They actually offered a basket weaving class.  Little Thunder Who taught it?  Hawkins Her name was Julie, and I can   t remember her last name now, but she   s  Cherokee. Wasn   t anybody that I recognized seeing in any of the art  markets. I think she picked it up by the fact that she just enjoys doing it. I  learned how to make a double-walled basket and a Cherokee basket and just  the basic little planter. It was good. Now it   s like,    Okay, we worked with  reeds. I   ve got to find cane river reeds, which is another indication of  material availability not being there.  Little Thunder I don   t know if you   ve ever made moccasins that somebody was going to put  in a picture box, but what is the difference for you in making items that  people use and wear?  Hawkins I have made Quapaw moccasins, and Sac and Fox, and Kiowa moccasins.  Interesting enough, the lady that asked me to make Quapaw moccasins, she  wanted to have them ready for when she passed away. I had to think long  and hard on that one because generally you make those up when someone  has passed away. I went to visit her and talk to her and her son. I said,    I  have a hard time doing something like this for you because of the timeline.  She goes,    But I want to have them to be ready.    She laughed. She goes,     I   m not planning on going any place real soon    and I said,    Okay.    I did  make those up for that lady. Most of the moccasins that I make are for  people that dance. A good friend of mine, she wanted Kiowa moccasins for  her grandchildren for the July celebrations, the Ti-pah, and I made those up  for her.  Another young lady with the Sac and Fox, her grandmother, she asked, she  goes,    I   d like these moccasins. I want some. I need another pair. I   m  wearing my grandmother   s and they   re wearing out.    I said,    Let me take a  look at them because the construction   s different.    The Sac and Fox, they   re  a Southeastern style. They   re soft sole versus the Kiowa style which are  hard sole. Looking at the construction, kind of laughed,    They   ve got bigger  17  ears.    I ended up making those for her. Fully beaded ears and stuff. I wished  they hadn   t been a commission piece because they would have been great  for competition. They turned out beautiful. I like to make sure what I do is  beautiful, so I was very proud of those.  Little Thunder In terms of dance clothes, can you explain a little bit what makes the Caddo  man   s shirt a different from the traditional ribbon shirt?  Hawkins A Caddo man   s shirt has tucks and ribbons in the yoke. You shouldn   t call it  a yoke, but it   s more of an inset piece. Actually, in the construction that   s  inset in there. Later, what I   ve seen in photographs and stuff, they have a  collar which tells me that the collar is more modern than very old because  most of the old shirts didn   t have the collars. Because of that yoke and the  tucks and stuff, that   s what you can define as a Caddo men   s shirt. Those  are, those are kind of tough to make because you   ve got to make sure you  get those tucks just right. That inset, the placket that goes in the middle  there, too, if you cut it too wide for that opening, then you   re going to have  to start over.  Little Thunder Wow.  Hawkins You don   t want to mess them up.  Little Thunder I   ll bet that makes it a little bit more difficult.  Hawkins I started making those for my sons. Now they have the collarless versions  because I wanted to make sure that when my sons Straight Danced, you  could tell that they had Caddo shirts under their Straight Dance regalia and  stuff.  Little Thunder What do you think is the least understood aspect of Caddo culture?  Hawkins I think that a lot of people don   t realize that we still have as many dances as  what we do, our own traditional dances. I make a difference between Caddo  dances and powwows. Powwows are very intertribal. You have to know  some of your tribal history of other tribes to know that there are certain  aspects of powwows that come from different tribes. Caddo dances, we  don   t have head staff. We don   t start early in the afternoon. We start late  afternoon. Turkey dance has to end before sundown. We dance real late into  the night. We used to dance, we have a morning dance. I remember as a  young girl, doing morning dance and the sun was coming up after dancing  all night.  Now we sing morning dance songs probably about three or four in the  morning because people are tired and they   re starting to go home. And our  clothing, just the story about the little girl telling me my comb was on  18  backwards. They don   t realize that   s a Caddo dress that you   re wearing.  Maybe it   s confusing because of the full collar blouse being a Southeastern  style. The Kickapoos, and the Shawnee, and the Delaware, all wear that full  collar blouse. If we   re wearing our one-piece dress, it   s definitely what they  call Prairie style, but it   s still different than some of the other styles of  clothing that you see other tribes wear.  Little Thunder Let   s talk a little bit more about your process and techniques for some other  media. You   re mostly exploring pencil and charcoal, I guess, and you   re  doing some painting.  Hawkins Yes.  Little Thunder In acrylics is that right?  Hawkins Yes.  Little Thunder Not any oils or anything?  Hawkins I took the oil classes in art school at the university. Acrylics and painting  oils, and watercolor. I remember watercolor and just like,    I   m trying to  paint with acrylics.    It wasn   t as thin. I   d like to go back and try watercolor  again. I   m always interested in trying to do something better.  Little Thunder You like representing people. Do you have   do you take photographs?  Hawkins Sometimes I do. I work with photographs that I   ve taken, or old photographs  that I come across. I do animals. I do have illustrations of animals. I did an  illustration of a wolf, and that was based on one of the Caddo creation  stories. I was involved with the Caddo Museum Board, and at that time, we  were getting ready to put in a Caddo section of the Native American Art  Gallery in the Oklahoma History Center. The museum director asked me,  she goes,    Why don   t you illustrate one of the Caddo creation stories?    So I  did. It happened to be the one about the wolf crying because when they  came out of the earth, they were cautioned not to turn around, and T  hshah,  Caddo for wolf, he turned around and the Earth closed up. That   s why it   s a  wolf with tears in his eyes.  Little Thunder I saw that on your website. That was a really powerful picture. How do you  think your approach to drawing with pencil or charcoal has changed over  the years?  Hawkins I think   I think my skills has gotten better as far as thinking about what I   m  representing, what   s important to show in that. It   s real hard to say, now that  you put it that way. It   s like my skill   s always been there. I had that lapse  where I didn   t do any drawing or painting because of, you know,  19  professional and raising a family. Then, all of a sudden, I start picking it up  again. It was like twenty years before I picked up a paint brush or a pencil to  actually draw again. I was pleased that the skill was still there. It   s just a  matter of what I was going to do with it.  Little Thunder Right. What about your beadwork? How do you think that   s changed?  Maybe like your colors or     Hawkins I   ve always kind of liked the bright color. I always wanted to know that if  someone looked at it that they would be able to say,    That   s Yonavea   s.    I  don   t necessarily use real traditional    Interesting enough, with beadwork,  looking at being in Oklahoma, we have a lot of Plains tribes. You see some  florals and doing some research, looking back at what they would have used  for their inspiration, those nature elements are always around us. So those  are the influence on the beadwork. I do have probably some Plains style in  there, but I also try to keep some of that floral in there. It   s real interesting  when you look at beadwork, if you don   t know, they use both. Both Plains  and Southeastern have both combinations of geometrics and florals.  Little Thunder Do you draw out your designs ever?  Hawkins Yes, I do. I do draw out a lot of my designs. I graph them out. Use colored  pencil. Not always in the colors that I   m going to actually bead. When I get  started on a project, a beading project, the design changes. I don   t always go  off my design patterns that I   ve done. Working on bracelets, sometimes I   ll  just start up the design in colors. I   ve been doing it enough now that I don   t  always have to have that graph. And of course with beadwork, there   s the  loom work as well as the overlay and the two-needle applique work.  Little Thunder Right.  Hawkins I do both of those as well as gourd stitch, too.  Little Thunder Right.  Hawkins One worked into the other with the boys wanting to have dance clothes, it   s,     I guess I have to make fans.    I taught myself on how to gourd stitch.  (Laughter) Then it   s like,    Okay, the moccasins need to have the beadwork  on the toes, so there came the applique work.     Little Thunder Right, right.  Hawkins You know, one leads to the other.  Little Thunder I didn   t notice if you do any finger weaving at all or not.  20  Hawkins I have been wanting to learn. When I start that learning process of  something new, I start gathering in research materials. You probably can  tell, I have a lot of books. There   s even more in my bedroom. I keep a lot of  books and I look for old books, books that are out of print to look at those  things that you don   t see anymore. That   s where I get my ideas of, it   s like,     This used to be made this way.    I have a collection of finger weaving  books. I   ve sat down with Tyra  Shackleford  a few times   I got a chance to  meet her about two years ago at Red Earth. She let me weave with her belts,  one of the belts. She had one of her looms. It   s like,    Okay, I   ve got the  materials. I   ve got the yarn. I just need to find that time to get in there and  do that.    While doing research I noticed, that Caddo women had beaded  belts on with yarn tassels. That   s something you don   t see anymore. For  SEASAM this past year, I thought,    I   m going to do a beaded belt with yarn  as being part of the loom work.    So I did that. That was a good experience  for me. It   s my first belt, so it won   t be for sale.  Little Thunder You might have to bring back that.  Hawkins Yes, I   m going to. I   ve worn it and I   ve started also wearing, buying finger  weaving belts for myself because that   s one of the style things that just kind  of faded out.  Little Thunder How many dush-toh (am I saying that right?) makers are there do you  think? In the area?  Hawkins Probably not very many. I would be surprised if there   s a handful.  Interesting enough with dush-tohs, they   ve changed over time because at  one time, the way they would wear them, there was a bag at the bottom of  that. It   s kind of an hourglass or butterfly-shaped piece, if you want to term  it that way, that they would gather their hair into  the bag  and that would  secure their hair back. With time, you put a clip on there, a ribbon and tie it  on or clip it on. Probably a handful. Interesting enough, they   re really not  that hard to make. It just takes the time of putting those colors together and  making sure there are layers of ribbons. Material availability, it   s real hard  to find six-inch wide ribbon or silk or taffeta. Those materials are expensive  to come by or they   re hard to find. You learn how to put those ribbons  together, so that they lay nice and flat and still give that flow, that flowing  look that they have when the wind catches them.  Little Thunder When you   re shopping for supplies, do you prefer to order online or do you  like to go do stuff, hands on?  Hawkins All of them. If I find a source online, then I will order it. If I find a source  that I can go in and look at, then I will do so. With beads, you kind of know  the colors, so you can order those online. I order from all over. When I   m  looking for beads, I found one company that would come to Red Earth. I  21  liked their beads, so I   d buy a bunch of beads. They didn   t come one year  and I had an order for a particular color of beads, and it was like (Sigh).  Then two years later I found another source for that same color of beads. I  buy a lot of beads to make sure I can get through a couple of projects.  Little Thunder I know that   s where artist   s profits go. (Laughs)  Hawkins Yes, making sure you have an inventory of supplies.  Little Thunder You sort of, I think, touched on this already, but do you think there is a  difference between bead art and bead craft? And if there is, how would you  define it?  Hawkins You know, with the moccasins that I do and stuff, I   ve had people say those  would be too pretty to wear, but because they   re pretty, you want to wear  them. Crafts, if it   s just a simple project, then maybe I   d call it crafts, but  crafts still take a skill to be able to do it well. I worked for a decorative  painting publishing company. A lot of that   s considered crafts. There   s still  a skill there to be able to handle a paintbrush, to be able to put those colors  together in a pleasing manner. Crafts is always not a good word, but it just  kind of comes in handy. Art, it   s a matter, I think, of the eye of the beholder  on what   s considered art. Art   s always considered drawing and painting.  Doing beadwork, it   s a skill to be able to put those things together and for  people to appreciate it. It   s an art form, it really is. To be able to do that, to  make it pleasing, to make it look good.  Little Thunder You mentioned in terms of research, the old books, a lot of times out- of-print  books. What other things do you do?  Hawkins Creatively or     Little Thunder For research maybe or to get     Hawkins I   m always curious of what   s out there and learning more about my heritage.  As a young person, I didn   t ask and maybe it wasn   t always explained. It  was just assumed that you would know it and learn it. I   ve had to do more  research because of being asked to give presentations, to be more  knowledgeable about who I am, where I come from. Those things that make  me Caddo, and Delaware, and Kickapoo. Knowing the, learning the  language, and just all those things coming together puts a different  perspective on what you need to know, and try to make sure that you present  it as accurately as possible, as you can. We   re all human and make mistakes  and don   t remember things as well as we should, but you   ve got to keep  learning.  22  Little Thunder When you   re working full time and balancing your art work, how do you do  that? Do you relegate certain times on the weekend? What   s your creative  routine?  Hawkins I   m usually    (and this is where my husband comes in being supportive) I  don   t cook anymore. He steps in and makes sure the house is cleaned up and  does the grocery shopping and prepares meals. He makes sure I eat because  sometimes I get busy and forget. (Laughter) He allows me that time in the  evenings to be able to spend a couple hours, two or three hours in the  evenings to work on what I do.  Weekends, the same way. I enjoy dancing and going to the art markets, and  so I have to balance my schedule and my creative time. I   ve got to have time  to create, but I also want to have that time to have some fun, too. I   m a  cancer survivor and so that puts a different perspective on what   s important.  Having a clean house is not on the list of my priorities of things to do.  Little Thunder Thank you for sharing that. What is your creative process from the time that  you get an idea?  Hawkins I   ll be thinking about things,    Okay, I need to think about what I am going  to do for a competition.    The competition side of it is kind of important  because you put that money out for a booth. You want to make sure that you  have inventory for sales. If you do a competition piece, then it takes off the  sales part of it. It kind of gives you a relief knowing,    Okay, I   ve covered  my booth fees. I   ve covered my meals. I   ve covered my hotel expenses.    I  start thinking about,    What can I do that   s going to be creative?    Sometimes  with a competition piece, more than likely, it   s something for myself.  You   re not supposed to sell commission pieces. It   s got to be something you  create.  Sometimes my creative process, I   ll be thinking about something when I   m  driving to work or going some place. I will be thinking,    What do I need to  do? What would be a good thing to do?    Then, once the concept is there,     What is it going to be? What are the elements of the design and the  colors?    They just kind of roll around in my head sometimes, just at odd  times. I don   t wake up during the night like that. I   ve got to be awake, doing  something else, and it   ll just kind of pop, pop in my head. I was driving  some place and a concept for a painting popped into my head. I still haven   t  put it down on a canvas or anything like that, but the concept   s there. They  get filed away until I get a chance to bring them out.  Little Thunder Just mentally? You don   t have to write them down?  Hawkins No, no, no, they don   t. It   ll be a cool piece when I get ready to do it.  23  Little Thunder You don   t have to say what it is, but do you already know what you   re going  to do for Red Earth then?  Hawkins Actually, I   m still kind of trying to get that nailed down. I do have an idea.  It   s a matter of starting to do the beadwork on it. When we   re going on these  out-of-town trips, my husband will drive, and I will be beading. He kind of  laughs, and goes,    She   s always beading in the car.    I don   t take my loom,  but I can do gourd stitch and I can do the two-needle applique stitch in the  car and not poke myself. On that trip, I   ll be working on my Red Earth  project.  Little Thunder He   s so supportive. Do you like to listen to music when you work, or TV?  Hawkins I listen to TV and it can   t be anything that I hadn   t seen before because it   s  too distracting. The noise is there, but if it   s something new, it   s kind of like  I   ve got to change it to something old. Don   t mind the noise. I do like  having music on when I   m working, also. I will put in anything from  powwow CDs, to Caddo music, to language tapes, just whatever, and then  I   m so absorbed in what I   m working on, that it   s not even running anymore.  I used to have my table toward the door and I   ve turned it around because  my husband would come in there and say something to me and I would  jump two feet in the air because I   m so absorbed in what I   m doing.  Little Thunder (Laughter) I know you haven   t been back in the circuit, the art circuit for all  that long, but just looking back on this decade that you   ve been showing  your artwork and winning prizes, what was a fork in the road when you  could have gone one way but you decided to go another?  Hawkins It goes back to when Jeri said to do the co-op. I could have not taken that  step, and not participated because that   s what started doing the art markets  and being involved. When I said something about being a cancer survivor, at  that time going through that whole process of not knowing whether you   re  going to live or die, a lot of reflection of what I would do with myself if I  did live. Thinking back, it   s like God was telling me,    There   s things that  you need to be doing. You   ve got these skills and these talents, you need to  be using them.    Because I had always put those things to the back. Going on  from that point, knowing that once I regained my health and started feeling  normal again, that there   s things I need to be doing. That   s where it comes  from.  Little Thunder Looking back on your career so far, what   s been one of the high points?  Hawkins I think, just being, just participating. Right now, I enjoy everything I do.  Some of the things that have come from it, the opportunities. I would have  never thought that I would be talking to people about what I do. It   s fun. It   s  24  exciting. I   m thankful that I   m here to be able to do those sort of things. It   s  just opportunities that God   s given me to take advantage of, to use.  Little Thunder Looking back you career so far, what has been one of the low points?  Hawkins I don   t think there   s ever really been a low point career-wise and stuff.  Professionally, I   ve had a lot of opportunities to transition from being a  commercial artist, graphic designer. I had some exciting projects when I did  that. I   ve worked for publishing companies, gained experience from that.  I   ve worked for advertising agencies, print buyer. Different parts of that  have always lead me from one thing to another, just different opportunities.  So I really can   t say, professionally, or on my work experience versus my  artist experience. I think I have always been blessed with a lot of high  points.  Little Thunder Is there anything else you would like to add or talk about before we take a  look at your work?  Hawkins I don   t think so.  Little Thunder All right. Let   s look at your drawings and your clothing.  Hawkins Okay.  Little Thunder What would you like to tell us about this?  25  Hawkins This picture is a charcoal drawing, and it is of my great-grandmother, Lizzie  Williams. I had a Xerox copy of a black-and-white photo of her. It was  probably about a five by seven. That   s what I took this charcoal drawing of.  For competition now, they always ask for the name of the piece. Sometimes,  when I   m working on a piece, a name will come to me, sometimes it  doesn   t. This particular one, because it was important to me, the name didn   t  come. What I do, is I   ll set a piece out in the dining room on the buffet table  there, so I can walk past it and kind of keep it in mind that I want to name a  piece. Also, when I   m driving, I come up with names of pieces, too.  This one, I noticed that her eyes, it   s one of those pieces where the eyes  follow you from left to right. Whichever side you   re on, her eyes follow  you, so I titled it Grandmother   s Watching because of her eyes moving. I   m  not for sure, but I think this picture was actually taken at Murrow Dance  Ground, which is a very old Caddo Dance Ground. I think we   ve been  dancing there a hundred years at least, somewhere pretty close in that mark.  I may be off by a few years, but I think that   s where this picture was taken.  Little Thunder You can pick out the figures in the background.  Hawkins Yes, so I know it was at a dance. You can tell it   s like it   s early    40s. You  know, somewhere in that time frame there.  Little Thunder That   s really neat. If you want to talk just about your moccasins and your  bag there...  Hawkins These are Caddo moccasins, and I had titled these, Hasinai Princess, which  means Caddo princess. I really liked the particular colors that I chose. These  were the size nine, two-cut beads. They are not Czech beads, they   re not size  26  thirteens, and the reason why is because with dancing, you   re seen across  the arena, not up close and stuff. I just like those colors. Some of the Caddo  designs, they kind of show, it   s not quite a diamond pattern. This is more  stylized, but I like the colors and doing the diamond pattern. One of my  great aunts would carry a turtle purse, and I   d see them and I thought,    I   d  like to do that.    That   s why I started doing turtle purses. It   s a little bit more  elaborate than probably what they did years ago. Caddo styles have kind of  changed. They   ve gotten a lot brighter. That   s why you have the brighter  colors. I do keep in mind what is traditional. This is more, the ribbon work  on the side is made from taffeta.  Little Thunder Oh, okay.  Hawkins Which is real hard to find, taffeta. Taffeta just folds differently than some of  the other fabrics that you can work with and stuff. It   s really pretty durable,  too. This actually has velvet on the ears, too.  Little Thunder It   s beautiful.  Hawkins I don   t know if I will wear these or not.  Little Thunder Yeah, they   re just gorgeous.  Hawkins I need to have something to display in my booth stuff, so I   ll probably  continue carrying them around for several more years until I think they   ve  served their purpose for being on display and then, I   ll start wearing them.  Little Thunder Then you can start wearing them.  Hawkins Yes.  Little Thunder This is the belt that you are going to bring back, we hope?  27  Hawkins Yes. Beaded belts. Like I said, I   d seen old photographs that some of the  Caddo women were wearing beaded belts. With that in mind, I had to think  about building my beading loom longer to accommodate that yarn you need  for the tassel part of it. I do make my own looms for all my beadwork. I  don   t use commercial looms. I learned that process from Martin  Weryackwe, Junior Weryackwe. He was a bead maker and he encouraged  me and he actually showed me how     Little Thunder He was an influence?  Hawkins Yeah, he actually showed me how on his looms, showed me his looms and I  found them to be better than commercial looms. With that in mind, I could  make a loom big enough to accommodate this style belt. It   s not size thirteen  beads, it   s size eleven cut beads because of the yarn. I had to look for really  thin yarn so that wouldn   t hide the beads. That was a learning process in  itself, but I look forward to making more of these. This one actually took me  about eighty hours to do.  Little Thunder Oh, wow. Those are some neat designs, unique combinations.  Hawkins My first beaded belt that I made for myself, now I   m talking about a  commercial belt, a commercial belt and then the beadwork that they sew  onto. This is my first beadwork design. It   s kind of like my personal design.  Little Thunder Okay, so here we have your Caddo clothing.  28  Hawkins Yes, this dress is a two-piece Caddo dress. It has a full collar. On the full  collar dresses, they had lots of washer broaches, so it   s got some washer  broaches on it. As time goes by, I   ll add more. It just takes a little time to  accumulate that many washer broaches to go around the collar of a Caddo  dress. They have a full skirt. Caddos also wear a one piece. It doesn   t have  the full collar. One of the things we also wear with our two piece dresses is a  beaded collar. Of course, I don   t have one right here with it. One of the other  things that makes it distinctive for Caddo women is that we have a dush-toh  and that is a headdress that you wear on the back of your head.  When I   d seen some earlier museum examples, they had a row of silver  washers going down the center of them. They   re layers of ribbons that are  stacked. Nowadays, it   s hard to find the wider ribbon. Silk ribbon, of course,  is even harder to find, so I   ve used layers of ribbons (and narrower) and  have to combine those together to have that effect. Part of the things about  the dush-toh is that a long time ago they used to have a bag at the bottom of  them and they would tuck their hair inside that bag and then, it was tied on  with their hair enclosed. Nowadays, they put a ribbon on there, or a hair clip  on the back of the dush-toh and put it onto their hair that way instead of  gathering it into a bag.  Little Thunder Right. It   s a beautiful dush-toh. Okay, we   re looking at this last piece of  artwork, which is a pencil drawing, I guess.  Hawkins Yes, this one is pencil. I came across an old photograph of a Kickapoo man  and you can tell that he   s young. He   s young, but he also has two feathers,  two eagle feathers, so I titled this one, Kickapoo Warrior. He   s got a  beautiful eagle fan. I really liked the expression on his face and just some of  the detail I could see in that photo of his clothing. I like the way that the  beadwork was done on that eagle wing. It gave me some thought, too.  Caddo women carried turkey feathers. We   ll use the wings and I thought, I  might do that for a turkey fan for the wing, emulate that the way that  beadwork was done. That   s another example, how do they do that? I have  got to figure out how.  Little Thunder Right, and your signature is in there. It   s very subtle.  Hawkins Yeah, I   m kind of discreet on my signature. I sign it with my first name, just  Yonavea because I feel and know that Yonavea is a very unique name. In  my college days, because my maiden name was Gunn, I would do kind of a  stylized gun. Then I got married and I didn   t really want to get into doing a  hawk for a short form of Hawkins, so I just kept it to Yonavea.  Little Thunder Well, it   s just a beautiful drawing. I thank you very much for your time  today.  29  Hawkins Thank you very much for asking me.  -------  -------   
