 Little Thunder My name is Julie Pearson Little-Thunder. Today is Thursday, April 30,  2015, and I   m interviewing Mary Smith as part of the Oklahoma Native  Artists Project sponsored by the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program  at Oklahoma State University.  We   re at Mary   s home in Bixby. Mary, you make a number of cultural items,  but you   re perhaps best known for your baskets and beautiful mats which  have won you numerous awards over the years. You keep pretty busy  teaching basketmaking workshops for Creek Nation in the various  communities. Before I start the interview we need to get one story out of the  way, which is the story behind your home here in Bixby.  Smith We purchased this house in 1974. It   s 103 years old. It has a history that   Charles Arthur     Pretty Boy    Floyd, the notorious outlaw, his wife, Ruby  Hargraves, was raised in this house.  Little Thunder That is really neat, and it   s gorgeous, just beautifully furnished with antique  furnishings. Where were you born and where did you grow up?  Smith I was born in Broken Arrow  Oklahoma . I   m a twin; I have a twin brother. I  grew up and went to school here in Bixby.  Little Thunder What did your folks do for a living?  Smith My father was a truck driver in his younger years, and then after he got older  he had his own trucking company.  Little Thunder Is the Creek on your dad   s side, or mom   s, or both?  Smith It   s on my father   s side.  5  Little Thunder What was your relationship with your grandparents on either side of the  family?  Smith We were very close, very close. My dad   s mother, and her name was Noma  Williams Edwards, she had always talked about us being Creek, but as you  can tell I   m pretty fair, and so we just kind of fluffed it off for years. After I  really started researching it, I took it all the way back to the early 1800s,  back to Tukabatchee, the head tribal town in the Creek Nation. My fifth  great-grandfather was Efa Haugo, which translated into Mad Dog. He was  the Principal Chief and the Head Speaker from 1792 to 1803. At that time he  had a son. His son   s name was Far Off Warrior.  He and Far Off Warrior were out on a hunting expedition, but really it was  said to be a war party with the Cherokees. On the way back they went by  Fort Rogers. They were kind of like, kind of worked up. My fourth great-grandmother  is Hannah Hale. She was a little white girl playing out at the  fort, and they captured her. They took her back to Tukabatchee, and at age  fifteen she married Far Off. That   s the line that I come from.  Little Thunder Also, I understand, although you   re enrolled Creek, you could   ve   you  actually have some Cherokee heritage, too.  Smith Yes, it was always told us that we could   ve either been Cherokee or Creek,  but since my ancestors moved here to the Creek Nation, they said,    Let   s  just be Creek, then.     Little Thunder Were you around the language very much growing up?  Smith No, not really. I did learn a little bit of the language by working with the  Creek Nation for the immersion camps for the children. I did that for several  years.  Little Thunder Did you have any family or extended family who were artistically inclined?  Smith My grandmother was very artistic. She made her living as a seamstress.  That   s the only job she had. She would sew for doctor   s wives. She made  her own patterns. I wish I had paid more attention to her when I was  younger. (Laughter)  Little Thunder I think you got some of that handiwork talent. Was this your paternal or  maternal grandmother?  Smith Paternal.  Little Thunder What are your earliest memories of seeing Native art?  6  Smith It had to have been when I was young. I   ve just always been drawn to it, but  when I really became interested in art was after I got older, though. We were  making trips back and forth to Colorado during the summer on vacation, and  I fell in love with the pottery, but it was the little storytellers, the little  figures, and just little figurative pottery.  I came home one trip from there because at that time I didn   t have any  money. I go,    I can   t afford these.    So I came home and I sat and made  about ten or fifteen pieces. I thought they were cute, but I wanted somebody  else   s opinion.  I took them to the Five Tribes Museum and asked them,    What do you  think?    They said,    Do you want to sell them?    I   m like,    Do you want to  buy them?    That   s really how I got started in pottery. I kept doing the little  storytellers and the little figurines until I  made  about 500. I was trying to  do every one of them different. Then I ran out of ideas. (Laughter)  Little Thunder I had no idea you started in pottery. This was before the big Southeastern  pottery revival, right?  Smith This was in the early    90s.  Little Thunder Oh, this was in the early    90. Okay, so Anna Mitchell and Jani Osti     Smith Anna...  Little Thunder    some of those people are already working. That   s really neat. Did you  take any classes from anybody or you just     Smith When I very first started out, I spent maybe three or four days with Patricia  Gilliam Stewart out of Fort Gibson. She basically showed me just the basics  and then she said,    Go home and just work on it.     Little Thunder That   s neat. What was your exposure to art in elementary school?  Smith Really, I don   t think we had that much exposure at that time. Of course, that  was in the    50s and we just didn   t have that  many art classes, or much to do  with art.  Little Thunder Do you have any memories of making art at home? Your earliest memory of  maybe making something?  Smith No, not really. It wasn   t until I got   probably I would say in my forties.  (Laughs)  Little Thunder Wow. How about art experiences in high school? Any?  7  Smith No, I just worked all through high school.  Little Thunder Bless your heart, going to school and working. What did you do?  Smith At that time there was a little drive-in, a little drive-in restaurant and I  started working there until I was fifteen to eighteen, waiting tables, being a  carhop. Then, they had carhops. (Laughter)  Little Thunder What did you do after high school?  Smith After high school then I started to work, and I worked for an insurance  company. I was an administrative assistant for probably twenty years.  Little Thunder You weren   t doing any art on the side?  Smith Not any art on the side or anything.  Little Thunder It was the Southwest  storyteller  pots that got you interested. When did you  first get involved with basketmaking? What was the progression to what you  do now?  Smith I was doing a lot of work with the Council House Museum. We really only  had, at that time, one basketmaker and that was Hepsey Gilroy. She was  elderly at that time. Ted Isham   I don   t know that he was the director, but  he was maybe the director of the museum. He said,    We only had that one  basket weaver. We need a basket weaver and you   re it. I want you do go and  I want you to learn everything you can because we need a basket teacher.     I did go and visit with Hepsey. We had the intention of weaving, but really,  her health was so poor that we just sat and we just talked. I enjoyed it so  much, I just started learning on my own. I did take a class or two with  Shawna Cain and Peggy Brennan. I did take a few classes with them, but  then, after that it was like it got in my blood and it seemed   I   ve always  been one that loved numbers. It seems like the numbers and the basketry just  go with my brain.  Little Thunder They do. There   s that mathematical component, isn   t there?  Smith Yes.  Little Thunder Patterns   yeah, there weren   t a lot of Creek basketmakers, but there were  plenty of Cherokee basketmakers.  Smith Plenty of Cherokee basketmakers, yes.  8  Little Thunder Did you also learn something about gathering natural materials at that  point?  Smith Yes. By that point I was already hooked on weaving, but I wanted to be able  to make river cane baskets, and to do our natural rimming methods. Every  tribe had, really, their own rimming method, and that   s a lot of times you  could tell what tribe had made that basket. The Creeks had, what we called,  a double-false braid rim. It hadn   t been done 100 to 150 years.  Joyce Bear, she had worked with the Creek Nation Cultural Department for  several years, brought me a basket that was handed down in her family. I  couldn   t take it apart so I just looked at it. That was my goal was to figure  that out. It took me three weeks, I could get the first round of it, but the  second round was driving me crazy. I went in one Friday morning and I said  to Ted,    Today is going to be the day,    because I was just so tired of trying  to figure it out. In about an hour and a half I took it to him and I said,    I  think this is it.    He looked at it and he said,    That   s it.    (Laughs)  Little Thunder And Hepsey wasn   t doing that?  Smith No, Ted had told me it hadn   t been done for 100 to 150 years.  Little Thunder That is amazing.  Smith Naturally, Ted filmed me.  Little Thunder What was one of your important early shows then, outside of the Council  House Museum?  Smith Of my earlier shows? Probably would   ve been Cherokee, North Carolina.  Little Thunder How did you end up going there?  Smith The first trip was with the Creek Nation, just took a group of us out. We  took our artwork out and demonstrated at the Festival.  Little Thunder And were you demonstrating basketry at that point?  Smith At that time I think I was demonstrating weaving. It was the heddle loom  and possibly basketry, but I want to think it was just weaving with textiles.  Little Thunder What were your impressions of North Carolina?  Smith I love North Carolina, and they have some absolute, wonderful, wonderful,  basket weavers there. Ramona Lossiah, her sister, Louise, I mean they are  excellent basket weavers.  9  Little Thunder So you made a few friends there?  Smith Yes.  Little Thunder How did you know how to price your work, starting out?  Smith When I first started out it was very reasonably low. Then it was like the  more ribbons and more acknowledgement I was getting, then I increased my  prices.  Little Thunder And reasonably low would be what for a smaller basket?  Smith For just a small basket, probably ten dollars.  Little Thunder When you started out were you incorporating any natural dyes with your  baskets, or did that come later?  Smith It came later. As far as natural dyes I use black walnut and bloodroot when it  is available and can be found.  Little Thunder You never make Cherokee baskets then? You exclusively do the     Smith I make Cherokee baskets, but I only make Cherokee baskets whenever I   m  teaching to children because I think they are an easy basket. They are an  easy basket for a child to make.  Little Thunder Okay. How have your baskets changed over the years? You make a number  of different kinds     Smith I try mostly to stick with Creek basketry. Then I do mats.  Little Thunder Right, but there are different formats for the baskets, like you   ll have bigger  baskets and small...  Smith    and smaller baskets. With the Creeks, our baskets, we used them like we  did pots and pans. There   s a set of four baskets that   s a corn processing set.  They were usually at least maybe fifteen to seventeen inches both ways, so  they were a bigger basket but shallow.  Little Thunder What   s been one of the most important awards that you   ve won?  Smith Best of Show     Little Thunder And that was where?  10  Smith For two years. I think it was in 2014 and 2012, Best of Show at Five Tribes  Museum. Best of Class at the Hard Rock. Several first place awards,  Cherokee, North Carolina.  Little Thunder That must have felt good. (Laughs)  Smith Yes.  Little Thunder How important are commissions in your work?  Smith Of course I love commissions, and I do them every once and a while.  Little Thunder So really booth shows are predominately how you earn your living?  Smith That, yeah, entering into shows and teaching.  Little Thunder Right.  Smith I love teaching.  Little Thunder How many booth shows do you do a year, and what are some of the most  important ones that you do?  Smith I don   t really do that many as far as sale shows. I just do like the art shows  and then teaching and traveling.  Little Thunder Do you use Mvskoke language at all in your basketmaking classes?  Smith No, other than when I introduce myself. I introduce myself as svmbv mvhaya  which is basket teacher. (Laughter)  Little Thunder You know they were such, as you say, a functional, vital, thing   everyday  thing. I   m wondering how   since most people aren   t using them for the  purposes they were used for originally, why they   re so attractive to people?  Smith As far as like a river cane basket?  Little Thunder Right.  Smith I just think they   re getting harder and harder to find. There   s fewer and  fewer people making them. There   s different tribes, just like the Choctaws  in Mississippi, they have more access to cane than we do here in Oklahoma.  Whenever I am pricing my baskets, our baskets are priced a little bit higher  than theirs.  Little Thunder So they   re attracted to the materials partly.  11  Smith Yes, it is. It   s just the river cane has a total different look about it. I just love  the look of river cane.  Little Thunder Can you describe it a little bit?  Smith Well     Little Thunder Contrast it with commercial materials.  Smith With commercial materials? River cane just has a   it   s just a different look.  Commercial materials have no nodes. When your river cane breaks down,  you have nodes. They   ll be anywhere from ten inches to as much as twenty-four,  although we have none of the twenty-four here.  On a commercial basket there will be no nodes, but on a river cane basket     that   s why I tell people, if somebody tells you it   s river cane, you look for  the nodes unless it   s just a small little basket. If it   s a small basket, then it  may not have any nodes in it.  Little Thunder I especially love your mats. I just couldn   t believe   I think that   s what you  won one Grand Award on, at least. Maybe it was both. I   m wondering how  you got into making mats.  Smith It was several years ago when I was spending some time with Shawna Cain.  I had been to Moundville Archaeological Park. They had flown me out and  asked me to make a floor-length turkey and goose-feathered cloak for the  chief in the exhibit. I was visiting with Shawna and we were discussing     because she was interested in making a cloak. At that point I was going to  enter into the Armory Show and Shawna said,    Just make a mat.    I   m like,     Okay.    That   s the very first one I made. I made a three foot by five foot  one.  Little Thunder Wow, and basically you hadn   t made a mat before?  Smith Just small, little small mats that I would put in frames, but not anything that  big.  Little Thunder That ambitious   going back to Moundville, what was your first trip there  like?  Smith My first trip to Moundville   it   s been so long. I   ve been going for probably  about ten years. I   m sure I probably went as a basket demonstrator, but I  love Moundville. I have spent so much time at Moundville. I spend months  at Moundville.  12  Little Thunder When you go, you stay for a period?  Smith I   ll stay   when I went and I did the cloak, I was there for three and a half  months. At that time that I was there, I ran out of feathers. I think it was  thirty Alabama turkeys that we had the feathers from, but I   d used them all  up. Every feather was sewed on individually.  While I was there the city of Columbus, Georgia, was wanting to repatriate a  Creek man. It was the bones and it was the full body. They traced me down  at Moundville and asked me, would I make a burial basket? So I did. That  basket measures  twenty inches tall, two feet long and one and a half foot  wide .  Little Thunder That was a real honor.  Smith Oh I thought   I was very honored to have done that.  Little Thunder They asked you to make this feather cape. As I understand it, nobody had  made one before. Nobody had made one.  Smith No, not at that time. There was one down in Cherokee, North Carolina, in  their museum. I don   t know how long it had been there, but it had been there  for several years. At that time, I was the only one that was working on  capes.  Little Thunder How did you go about figuring out that process?  Smith It was all new to me. When they called me, I   m like,    I   ve not ever done  anything like that before,    and Betsy Irwin said,    You can do it.    I came out  and we had Walter Gowen and he   s from Alexander City, Alabama. He had  made a twined netting. Then I took and drew out the design and just started  sewing on feathers.  Little Thunder So you had the netting background already?  Smith The netting background  was ready when I got to Moundville .  Little Thunder Right, wow. You also   one of your pieces was purchased by the Red River  Museum. Do you want to tell us about your first visit down there and how  you got that contact?  Smith Let   s see, how did I get that contact? Let me think. How did I get that  contact? I   m sure they contacted me about doing a basket class for them. I  was telling them about my mat and so   Jeannette Bohannon said,    Bring it  down, let us take a look at it.    I took it down when I was doing the basket  class and hung it up. Before I left she said,    We love it. We are going to find  13  a way to get it.    So they purchased it and they had it back in collections  probably a year. Then in December she contacted me and she said,    It   s too  pretty to leave in collections. We   ve brought it out. It   s on permanent exhibit  and it   s going to be on permanent exhibit for several years.     Little Thunder What did it measure again?  Smith Three foot by five foot.  Little Thunder I understand that last year at Moundville, you were not only demonstrating  basketmaking, but you were doing twined bags. Can you explain what  twined bags are?  Smith Twine bags are   you just make them on a little loom. I call it almost like a  little H loom. I use jute or hemp. It   s just the same process. It   s like  weaving, but it   s just,    Give them a little twist, a little twist.    I always say,     You can twine and think about something else.    (Laughter)  Little Thunder Yeah, they have a real neat look to them. Do you do any weaving still?  Smith Weaving of?  Little Thunder Of textiles     Smith Yes, I just got through having a twine bag class at Moundville and one at  Red River in February.  Little Thunder You don   t do any loom weaving, anymore, other than the twine bags?  Smith  Just  the twine bags.  Little Thunder Okay. You   ve made one bandolier bag. Do you want to tell us about that?  Smith Yes, it was a forever project. I started it   Martha Berry came over to the  Council House Museum several years ago. She was putting on a class. I  hadn   t really done hardly any beadwork at that time, so I started this  bandolier bag and I     Little Thunder In her class?  Smith In her class. Whenever I first started working on it, I was so gung-ho on it. I  finished the pouch, put the tassels on it, then I started up the sash. I got  halfway through the sash and my gung-ho was gone. (Laughter)  I would put it up and then I would weave on baskets, or do some other  project. Then I   d get it out, and I   d do a flower, one flower and then wait a  14  couple of months. Finally, I said,    I   ve got to get it finished.    I finished it  and took it to Cherokee, North Carolina, and it won First Place in  Traditional Beadwork.  Little Thunder That   s fantastic. You   ve been giving a lot of basketry workshops, and  currently giving one in Eufaula. Why do you think they   re so popular?  Smith The workshops? I think women like   well, not only women because I have  two men in my class   but I think there   s something about weaving. I think  you put part of yourself into it and people just seem to enjoy it.  Little Thunder What   s your favorite kind of group to teach? It might be in terms of age or  demographics.  Smith Really my favorite is probably from ten to twelve years of age. They are so  excited once they have finished a basket. It   s just fun working with them.  Little Thunder Do you have any funny stories you can share about teaching?  Smith I have this one friend in Alabama (and this makes me sound kind of bad),  but I was teaching her. I wanted her to get basketry. I wanted her to get it  because I could tell she had it in her.  Every time she would make a mistake, I would make her take it out. She  would even say in the end,    I can   t take it out.    I   d be,    Give it to me,    and  I   d just rip it right out. (Laughter) So she said,    I really thought at times you  were being mean to me.       No,    I said,    But look at how good of a basket  weaver you are now.    She said,    Now I see why.     We are the best of  friends.   Little Thunder That   s neat. What   s the hardest or most challenging basket you ever made?  Smith I would say when I   m working with river cane. Working with river cane  because it   s labor intensive. I don   t know. Should I show my hand or not?  (Laughter) It   s really hard on your hands. Different weavers and strippers  hold it different ways. I must put my pressure in here. This is my ligament  and my little finger wants to go   but this is on both hands. It doesn   t hurt. I  don   t feel like it   s from weaving, I just feel like it   s from stripping and  peeling the river cane.  Little Thunder When do you gather it, and without telling us where your sources are  exactly, where     Smith It can be gathered anytime. The best time to gather it though is after it   s  gotten cold. I like it then because you don   t have to worry about snakes, and  it just seems like the coolness of the air   the cane is greener.  15  Little Thunder So around November or something?  Smith Yes. November, December.  Little Thunder And in terms of access, you mentioned it   s getting harder to find.  Smith It is very hard to find. I think it needs to be on, if it   s not already, on the  endangered species list here, at least in Oklahoma.  Little Thunder Is it because it   s a wetlands plant?  Smith That and there   s just so many reasons why   pesticides, where it won   t grow  in certain areas. It needs a flowing water source, not a pond, but a creek. It  can be an underground stream, but it has to have that flowing water. It has to  have that movement.  Little Thunder What are you working on right now that you   re especially excited about?  Smith I haven   t started it yet, but I   m in the process of making another big mat.  It   ll be drawing out my patterns and getting it ready to weave with. I   m  really anxious to get another one started.  Little Thunder What   s one of your favorite trip stories, maybe? A place that you especially  enjoyed going to?  Smith That was in October. The Creek Nation took us to the Smithsonian, the  Native American Museum. We were there for a week. I had another big mat  I had made. A collector from Belgium bought it and took it back with him.  Little Thunder Oh, that   s wonderful. Did you get the opportunity to look at some other mats  out there as well?  Smith No. There was not really that much artwork to really be seen.  Little Thunder That was on display.  Smith That was on display.  Little Thunder Yeah, that   s what I understand, too. When you   re preparing for a show, do  you typically work on several baskets at a time, or baskets and mats  simultaneously? Or do you like to start one thing and work your way  through?  Smith Just start one thing and then finish, unless I have a big order. I just got an  order from a museum in Alabama telling me that they want fifty small  16  baskets. Whenever I have somebody that orders them like that, I   ll do it like  assembly line. The Creek Nation ordered 100 little small baskets from me a  couple years ago.  Little Thunder Oh, wow, for the gift shops?  Smith It was to give out. It was for the Tourism Department.  Little Thunder How neat. And the same with Alabama? Are they going to be giving them     Smith No, these will be going through their gift shop.  Little Thunder Through the gift shop. Is there anybody special who   s received one of your  baskets that you know about? They   re all special, I   m sure, but     Smith I can   t think of anybody right offhand. (Laughs)  Little Thunder I   m sure they really enjoy them. Have you made any new discoveries about  the colors or the dyes that you   re using with your baskets in the last few  years?  Smith I don   t really work a lot with dyes, because as Creeks, we didn   t really use  dyes. We would, maybe, in something ceremonial, but basically we stayed  away from dyes because our baskets were for utilitarian purposes.  Little Thunder Right. Can you talk a little bit   sometimes you do have to use commercial  reed as I understand it     Smith Yes.  Little Thunder    can you talk a little bit about that and explain? It   s kind of interesting  when you do have to use the commercial materials, how they have a double  use.  Smith What I use as a commercial is binder cane. It comes from China. It   s the  outer core of rattan, which that makes the shiny part look like river cane.  The inner core is what we call round reed. It would be used for the  honeysuckle baskets. I more or less just call it fake honeysuckle. (Laughs)  Little Thunder Right, but you also gather honeysuckle.  Smith Yes, I do gather honeysuckle. I use yucca. I   ve woven with palmetto,  buckbrush. I   ll weave with just about anything I can kind of try.  Little Thunder What   s a material that you really didn   t expect to like as much as you did? A  weaving material?  17  Smith As far as basketry goes? Buckbrush.  Little Thunder And what distinguishes buckbrush?  Smith It   s the gathering and the harvesting of it because it has to   it   s the roots  and it has to be dug up.  Little Thunder So you dig it up by the roots? It would be fun to see some examples. I don   t  know if we   ll get to. How do you sign your baskets or mats? Or how do you  let us know that they   re yours?  Smith I don   t. Whenever I first started out, I would take a little piece of dyed river  cane I would stick down in it. Then I just kept forgetting to do it. But I just  almost think by now, you just get a certain look to your weaving. You can  tell by looking at it, or at least I can, as to who made that basket.  Little Thunder And is it sort of like other textiles where the evenness of the weave or the     what makes for a good weaving?  Smith I   d say a tight weave. I would rather have an ugly little basket that was tight  and sturdy than one that would be loose and full of color.  Little Thunder Can some of your baskets actually kind of hold water or     Smith No, our baskets were not really made to hold water.  Little Thunder But they can hold meal or     Smith They could hold meal.  Little Thunder Do you continue to do research about baskets and mats at this point?  Smith I   m always trying to do research. Like I say, I was fascinated with the  natural rimming methods because so many basket weavers still use   I call it  a commercial rimming method. But the natural ones are where you take the  reeds and you weave them back into each other. The Cherokees have a  double-rimming method. I had worked with Shawna Cain on   we had  worked at one time together, but we really couldn   t figure it out. We tried,  and then I just got off on my own and was able to come up with the  Cherokee double rim.  Little Thunder Yeah, and they   re just a distinctive look. We definitely get to see that.  They   re just beautiful. What is your creative process from the time you get  an idea?  18  Smith It just drives me crazy. I get so bad sometimes I can   t even sleep at night. I  will be weaving in my head, or thinking of designs, get up during the middle  of the night, and then start drafting them out. (Laughs)  Little Thunder So you   ll think of the design. You   ll sketch them out in a little notebook that  you keep?  Smith On graph paper.  Little Thunder Have you tried to ever incorporate some of the more Mississippian older  motifs at all?  Smith I guess I   ve been doing   I just did a mat that I entered into the Five Tribes  Show. It was a Chitimacha pattern. The Chitimacha tribe, they made  beautiful baskets. Their designs were so elaborate. Right now I   m just kind  of really researching on the Chitimacha.  Little Thunder What is your creative routine? Do you like to work during the day, or at  night?  Smith I work during the day and during the night. I live alone, so it doesn   t matter  if I sleep. Sometimes, I   ll stay up until six in the morning weaving and then  go to bed. Maybe sleep a couple hours and get up and start weaving again.  Little Thunder When you   re going after your materials, are you pretty much within  traveling distance of your home when you   re looking for materials? Or do  you sometimes go farther?  Smith To get my river cane I have to go about an hour and a half. That   s my  closest from either way. There is river cane around Tahlequah, up and down  the Illinois River, and I do have permission to gather there, but I try not to  go there since basically that   s the Cherokee Territory. Shawna and Roger  Cain and I have spent a lot of time together, going out gathering cane, and  me spending weeks with them, just stripping and peeling cane.  Little Thunder Wow, actually staying down there while you   re working?  Smith Staying with them.  Little Thunder That   s interesting. How long does the stripping process take?  Smith Whenever I go, I try not to get any more than about thirty stalks, which will  take me three days of constant working. That   s just to get at what we call the  first peel. That   s peeling the first layer off.  19  Once you get that first layer off, then you can set it back and keep it. Then  whenever you have more time, get it out and keep thinning it down. That  first layer is probably sometimes at least a quarter of an inch. So if you do  not get it off, then it   s going to turn back woody on you. You won   t be able  to use it.  Little Thunder And there   s also a soaking process, I guess. Is that for the honeysuckle?  Smith Ted would always call me a cane-hog because when we went to the  canebrake I would say,    Just one more, just one more.    (Laughter)  Whenever I would get so greedy like that, I would bring it home, and I  would wrap it in a tarp and towels and pour water over it, and keep it moist  until I could get it worked up.  Little Thunder Right. I was wondering, who else have you gathered with? It seems like it  would be good to be going with a couple of people.  Smith Sandy Fife Wilson. I think that was last summer. Sandy and I went out, and  we came to the house and stripped and peeled cane. At one time, with the  Muscogee Creek Nation, we did take about fifteen or twenty of us out. Not  that many stuck with it, of course.  Little Thunder Were they adults or were they     Smith Adults, it was all adults. Mike Berryhill went with us. Then I   ve taken the  Creek Language Department several times and took them to the canebrake.  We gathered cane, brought them back and worked at stripping and peeling  it.  Little Thunder Have you ever taken younger children?  Smith No, not really.  Little Thunder That might be an experience that they would get a lot out of, too. What   s  been kind of a fork-in-the-road moment for you. It   s interesting that you  started in mid-life, you start this new journey. But looking back so far, and  hopefully you   ve got lots more baskets to make and things, what   s been a  fork-in-the-road moment where you could   ve gone one direction and you  went in this?  Smith I guess my fork-in-the-road was when Ted came to me and asked me to be  the basket teacher (Laughter) because before then I loved pottery. When I  very first started doing baskets, it was okay. Then I just got hooked on it.  Little Thunder You   ve never wanted to go back to pottery?  20  Smith I did pottery off and on. I still teach pottery classes, but basketry is just a  little bit above pottery.  Little Thunder When you   re doing your pottery classes, are you hand-digging your clay,  too? Or are you working with commercial clay?  Smith We   re usually working with commercial clay.  Little Thunder What   s been one of the high points of your career so far?  Smith I would have to say, even though it   s not to do with basketry, was when I  made the cloak for Moundville. It is absolutely beautiful. They   re hoping  that it will last at least twenty years, if not longer. I say that is my crowning  glory.  Little Thunder Right. Even still now, there are just a couple of people who know how to  make those capes. It was such an accomplishment. What   s been one of the  low points of your career so far?  Smith I don   t know that I have had a low point. (Laughs)  Little Thunder But I think you mentioned that you had your dad up until fairly recently. Did  they get to see, your folks, see your basketry? Did they get to share that?  Smith Well, my mother passed away when she was fifty-three. I hadn   t even been  doing anything in the artwork at all while she was alive. My dad got to  experience it with me. He would go with me to some of my shows, and he  would tell me he was so proud of me. He would tell me that my  grandmother, my Creek grandmother, that she was looking down and that  she was so happy for me.  Little Thunder That   s neat. Was there anything that we forgot to cover or that you   d like to  talk about before we start looking at your work?  Smith Not that I know of.  Little Thunder Okay, we   ll pause a minute and take a look at your artwork.  21  Smith This is a river cane arrow  carrier , a dart carrier. This is natural walnut dye.  Little Thunder Beautiful.  Smith This is oak around the top. I did have a arrow quiver that went with it. It was  like twenty-seven inches long. It had a very intricate design on it. I had it in  Alabama. A lady fell in love with it and wanted it for her son, and I told her  I didn   t really want to sell it, but she just kept on. Finally, I said,    Okay, go  ahead.     Little Thunder Oh my goodness. Yeah, that is really neat. Is it a little harder to make to the  longer shapes, to do them     Smith It is. I do what we call twining. Twining is where I would take a piece of  wax thread or a sinew and twine around each stake. That keeps the bottom  of it square. As I go up I would twine about every six or eight rows to keep  it going up straight. Who   s to know whether our ancestors did twining  because the twining was cut out, so there   s no way to know. But I assume  that they did.  Little Thunder Right, because you couldn   t keep the structure otherwise. That   s really neat.  I was just kind of thinking how light brown, that light brown on the dark  carrier, that walnut came out. I would   ve expected it to be really dark, dark.  Smith But with the river cane, it   s not as porous. When you are using a natural dye,  it can have to stay in the dye bath for as much as a month and a half even,  just to absorb the color into it.  Little Thunder Wow. Okay, would you like to tell us about this?  22  Smith This is a river cane. This is a Creek basket. This is the shape of our baskets.  The distinguishing features of a Creek basket is they were shallow. They  had square bottoms, kind of rounded tops, no lids, usually a double-braided  rim around them.  If you   ll notice the shiny side one, this basket is woven to the inside where  on the outside is the rough. Normally, on a lot of baskets the shiny side is  put to the outside. I believe that it was done this way because we used them  as corn processing and that way the corn would slide across the basket  easier.  Little Thunder That totally makes sense. This is just beautiful. So these are part of your big  order, right? For the museum?  Smith Yes, for a museum that they want fifty of these little small baskets. These  are made of binder cane. It   s a four millimeter cane, which is a smaller cane.  I used commercial dyes, which I always say come from the Wal-Mart root.  23  (Laughter) Then I put a little braid. If you   ll notice there   s a little braid  around the top of these baskets. That   s something that I do as my signature  when I   m not doing a double natural braid. That way I know when I see a  basket that has this little braid around it, more than likely, that   s someone  that I taught.  Little Thunder That   s neat. (Laughs) I hadn   t thought about the fact that your students  would, in a way, be following in your footsteps in terms of style and  remarque and things. Okay, this is your bandolier bag.  Smith Yes, this is the bandolier bag that I started under the instruction of Martha  Berry. It really took me five years to finish it. I hate to admit it, but it did.  Most people do not bead, under the flap. I even did beadwork under the flap.  This design is Creek. As Creeks, we used a lot of floral, but this design was  inspired by Murv Jacob from Tahlequah. The red on here is silk. They   re all  glass beads. This won First Place in Traditional Beadwork in Cherokee,  North Carolina.  Little Thunder It is beautiful. Let   s have a closer look here.  Smith Martha told me I was her best beader.  Little Thunder Okay, so we   re looking at one of your mats, your larger mats, and it   s got  some gorgeous natural colors in it. Do you want to tell us about this?  Smith This I called a Creek sleeping mat. I entered it into the Armory Show, that   s  the only show it   s been in. It won third place.  24  Little Thunder Oh my goodness.  Smith But that was okay.  Little Thunder Wow. It   s a gorgeous piece of work. How long did it take you to do?  Smith When I   m working on a mat this size, I quit counting after 400 hours.  Little Thunder Oh wow, yeah. That is really beautiful. Okay, we   re looking at some of your  early clay work. You want to tell us about these figures?  25  Smith These are the ones that I started making, which I called them storytellers and  figurative pottery. I started doing these in the    90s. This first one, John  Timothy came to me from Muskogee and he had a picture of him with his  outfit on. He said,    Can you make me in clay?    And I   m,    Let me try.     That   s my   of John in his outfit. I made one for me and one for him, and he  gave his to his mother.  Little Thunder Oh, that   s great.  Smith I just talked to him probably about two weeks ago and he brought it out and  showed it to Mary Beth  Nelson . She said it was the cutest thing she   s ever  seen. (Laughter)  Little Thunder Really these are just wonderful. You may have to pick these up again. How  about the second figurine?  Smith The second one, I call this an 1830s Creek man.  Little Thunder Nice detailing.  Smith I was putting babies on them, but on this one I just didn   t put any on. This  was just like a little medicine man.  Little Thunder Right. They are great. I understand that you get to move back out to your  workshop.  Smith Yes, I have, I guess you   d call it a double-garage. That   s where, when the  weather is nice and warm, I love to spend all my time out there weaving.  When I   m making a mat I put down a plastic tarp. Then I climb on top of it,  and start weaving.  Little Thunder And there wasn   t enough light, so we filmed indoors. You take your own  photographs?  Smith Yes I do.  Little Thunder Of your artwork. That   s great. Thank you very much for your time today,  Mary.  Smith Thank you.  -------  -------   
