 Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Today is April 9, 2011. My name is Latasha Wilson. I   m with the  Oklahoma Oral History Research Program, and I am here in Bessie,  Oklahoma, interviewing Joan  and husband, Archie  Franz. This  interview is part of the Spotlighting Oklahoma Oral History Series. I  want to thank you for talking with me today.  You are very welcome.  Let   s start out by having you state your name and your date of birth and  where you were born.  My name is Joan Gossen Schmidt Franz. I was born in Corn, Oklahoma,  out on the farm on May 24, 1935.  You say you were born on the farm. What was your farm like?  It was right during the Depression, so my parents were quite poor. It was  just one little frame house, and they lived there just a year or two before  they moved. It was about five miles south of Corn, in the country.  Did you have siblings?  I was the oldest child. Later on, I had a brother that died, lived one day.  After that, I had four more sisters, so there   s five girls in the family.  What were your parents    names?  John Gossen and Pauline Stobbe.  How did they come to live in the Corn area?  Well, they were both born in the Corn area, and my dad was the first one  5  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  of his family. He comes from a family of ten children, and he was the  first one born here. The rest were all born in Russia, the older ones.  What were your grandparents    names?  My grandfather on my father   s side was Cornelius and Margaret Wedel  Gossen. On my mother   s side it was John and Lizzie Wiens Stobbe .  What is their history?  Well, it   s a long history. (Laughter) I have it all written down here if you  want to ask me a few questions. Where they come from? My grandfather  was born in 1884 in Shardau, South Russia. He moved to Alexandrova  and lived there until immigration to the United States in 1899. The  hundred-year exemption from the military was nearly over so their  parents decided to leave Russia for the US. The ocean trip took twelve  days. He and his parents lived in Aldridge, Kansas, for one year and then  moved to Oklahoma. Since this was to be his home, he quickly learned  the English language, and as a fifteen-year-old, he moved though the  school grades to the fourth grade in four months. His father died after  only three days of illness from pneumonia, leaving John as the oldest  son and caretaker of mother and siblings. He married Lizzie Wiens on  March 3, 1908. That was my maternal grandpa and grandma. He was  voted as a minister at the Corn MB  Mennonite Brethren  Church in  1924 and was ordained as assistant pastor of the church in Corn MB, and  had that for ten years.  My paternal grandfather, Cornelius Gossen, was born in 1868 in  Waldheim, Russia, and moved to Tashkent, Asian Turkestan together  with ninety other families. They arrived there in 1880. Tashkent was the  capital of Turkestan. The governor promised the people twenty-five  years of military exemption and each family to receive twenty-five acres  of land. Whatever their acreage was, I don   t know how big that was.  During this time, Grandma Gossen   s family, Wedel, also moved to  Tashkent because several families had just been burned to death by a  Russian terrorist movement. She had five years of schooling. In 1882,  they moved from Tashkent to Alma-Ata. Life here was very hard at first.  Grandpa tells of making one thousand bricks to build a new house and  barn, and he was only about twelve years old at that time.  In 1883, Cornelius Gossen and Margaret Wedel were married. They had  eight children: four boys and four girls. My grandmother   s siblings were  beginning to immigrate to America, so they decided that they wanted to  come, too. This was during the time of the Bolshevik Revolution. The  Gossens decided to move to America, as well. His parents and siblings  were very against it, and they threatened him with disinheritance.  6  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  Farewell meetings were held, and the family of ten boarded a ship for  America. They landed in Galveston and on to Weatherford and finally to  Corn. Upon landing in Galveston, the family was advised that they  should Americanize their name, and so the spelling was changed to G-O-  S-S-E-N, from G-O-O-S-Z-E-N. After arriving in the US, two more  children were born: my father and another baby girl.  How did they know they wanted to go to Corn?  Because my grandmother had sisters that were already living in Corn.  She told that this afternoon in the meeting, that they went to the end of  the line, and that was at El Reno. Then somehow they got to  Weatherford. I don   t know how they got to Weatherford. It just so  happens that the other speaker that you had to today, Melba Friesen, her  grandmother and my grandmother are sisters. And so her parents went to  Weatherford every day to wait for this Gossen family, and they didn   t  come and didn   t come. They hadn   t gotten the message that they   d be  coming late, so the day that they arrived in Weatherford, the Reimers  were not there. Somebody there could talk German, and they took them  out to the farm. They lived in a tent on the farm northwest of Corn for I  don   t know how long, until they could find a house to rent. They lived in  a tent in Melba   s grandparents    farm place.  Wow.  They took them. That was the sister-in-law. Sisters, they were sisters,  her grandma and my grandma.  I assume all of their correspondence was by mail?  It was, yes.  They didn   t get the letter they were coming.  That   s right, yes.  Wow.  Of course, both families spoke only German, but like I said, my  grandfather, they decided they were going to be Americans. They were  going to learn the English language. I learned to talk only German. I  talked only German until I started grade school. I had to learn the  language.  Do you know how your grandfather went about, in the beginning,  learning English, what his methods were?  7  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  No, I have no idea. That isn   t recorded for me, so I just really don   t  know.  What about you? Did you start learning it once you started school?  We were lucky to have a teacher   my first grade teacher could talk both  languages, so, yes, I just learned it from the other children in school.  Do you remember what your first grade teacher   s name was?  Yes, her name was Goldie Wiens.  So was pretty much everyone around you in Corn, while you were  growing up, Germans from Russia, essentially?  Yes. I think as far as I know there might have been a few from one  family here and there that were not German. Otherwise, I think they  were all   it started out as all Mennonite Brethren families, as far as I  can tell.  Did you have much contact with the Bessie community when you were a  child?  Well, there was a Mennonite church at Bessie also, and, yes, like my  husband, they went to the Bessie church. Of course, we never did. We  just stayed in the Corn church. We had quite a bit of contact with them,  and they intermarried and stuff like that, yes. My best friend went to the  Bessie church.  So your grandparents and parents all spoke German at home, but did  they all end up learning English?  Yes, they all spoke English, but there is another language you   ve  probably heard about, the Low Dutch. We call it Low German. It   s a  dialect, and my parents spoke that. That   s what we called an everyday  language. At that time, it was not a written language. Now they have  even the Low German language translated into the Bible. My parents  talked Low German, but to me they talked the High German language. I  spoke only High German until I got married, and then my husband was a  very Low-German person, and I learned it from him.  Do you know what region their Low German came from?  I can   t answer that.  8  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  That   s okay. (Laughs)  I don   t know because I was going to say it comes from central Germany  somewhere, but I don   t know if that   s true or not. (Laughter) It   s very  similar to the Dutch language, though. Years later, in 1953, I went back  to Germany and lived there for a year with my parents. We sang  together, and we sang in the refugee camps there. Five Mennonite  Brethren Churches in Germany have started from those meetings that we  had.  Wow.  I was a senior in high school then, and so   what were we talking about?  The Low German and how it   s similar to Dutch.  Oh, yes. And so we traveled over there on the Groote Beer was a Dutch  ship. Everything, the menu and everything, was in Dutch, and we could  pretty well get along because it   s very much like our Low German  language.  So you were born in 1935     Yes.     in your farmhouse. What did your father farm, what crops?  My father was just a wheat farmer.  And your mother was a homemaker?  Yes, she was. Of course, in those days, when she lost that baby boy,  nowadays, I don   t think that would   ve happened at all. There was many,  many babies that died in those years. The next ones that came along  were twins, and so then she decided she   d better go to the hospital for  those babies. Didn   t know they were going to be twins.  Oh, wow.  But we were glad that they went to the hospital for them.  Did you grow up nearby your grandparents?  We were about seven or eight miles. I was about two miles from my  Grandparents Gossen and about seven miles from my Grandparents  Stobbe.  9  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  So do you remember hearing many stories growing up of their migration  or their experiences before they arrived?  I don   t remember them telling me, but, like I said, I have a history book  that both my grandparents wrote, and it   s extremely interesting. My  Grandfather Gossen, what makes it so interesting is (and I don   t know  how he could this) he remembered in detail the prices that he paid for  everything as he went along. That makes it so interesting to read. The  hardships that they had is just unbelievable.  Were both of your grandfathers farmers?  They were both famers.  Wheat farmers?  Wheat farmers. They just had their horses, and they broke ground. In  Kansas, the farm that they farmed at first, my maternal grandfather, he  broke the prairie ground. They were wheat farmers, but another thing,  they were also very active in church. I didn   t know this until I read this  history again. My grandfather Gossen had been elected as a pastor in  Russia, also, and the other one was also a pastor. He was elected here in  Corn. That was interesting to me. I did not know that. (Laughs) I don   t  know if you know, but the earlier years of our Mennonite Brethren  Church, one of the rules was you did not smoke. You were not allowed  to smoke. Well, I also learned in this history when I read it that both of  my grandfathers had smoked before they became Christians. (Laughter)  That was interesting to me, too.  Was the church you grew up in conducted in German?  It was conducted in English and German. We had two sermons, and they  were not identical. I mean, each preacher preached his own sermon, and  that   s what my grandfather did for ten years. He gave the German  sermon every Sunday morning, and the other was in the English  language. They had two sermons.  How frequently would you go to church each week?  Oh, we went to church every Sunday, always Sunday morning, Sunday  evening. At that time, they didn   t have programs for the children on  Wednesday night. I remember occasionally going along with my father,  but all they did was kneel to pray. They didn   t have a lot of programs or  these things that they have nowadays for the kids.  10  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  On Sundays after church, did your family have any traditions?  Oh, yes. We always got together. We were always at one of the aunts    or  they were at our place for Sunday meals, huge Sunday dinners. All of  the cousins played together. In fact, today is the anniversary of the  tornado that hit in 1944, and that was on an Easter Sunday. All of us  were together, the Gossen family, all of the cousins, and I remember my  father and the other men said as we were leaving, they said,    Those  clouds don   t look very good.    Sure enough, the tornado came then and  destroyed everything that we had. Our farm was totally leveled out.  What was the effect of the tornado on the community of Corn? Were  there numerous homes destroyed?  Well, it happened five miles south of Corn, so it did not hit the town of  Corn. There were about ten, thirteen farm houses destroyed, maybe. One  life was lost, and that was not from our   it was further south. I don   t  know who that was. It brought the community together because all of the  school kids and everybody came up and helped us clean up our farms. It  was right before harvest time, and they had to clean up all of the debris  out of the fields and so forth.  So where did your family go?  My family, my mom and dad and sisters, we stayed at my grandparents     until they had built a chicken house, first, on the farm. We lived in that  brand new chicken house until the house was built. It sounds terrible, but  it was a brand new building, you see, with concrete floor. One  interesting story about that was that one day the Red Cross lady came  over, and she was sitting there with my dad and mom at the table, and a  hen came in. How she got in, I don   t know. She jumped on the table and  laid an egg right in front of the 4-H lady. (Laughter) So my mom writes  in her history that the lady must have felt like we needed help, we  needed money. (Laughter) At that time, we just did what we had to do,  but when I think back now, my mother had all these little babies. She  had me and three others. Twins were two years old, and my little sister,  the youngest one, was eight months old. To be in all that, lose  everything first of all, and then build that house and stuff like that     Did they lose all their animals?  Yes, we lost everything. Oh, there might have been a cow or two that  was left. I don   t remember that part.  Did your mom sew your clothes?  11  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  She did. She sewed all of our clothes. She sewed all of our, for the  weddings, all the bridesmaids    dresses for all of my sisters. Yes, she was  a good seamstress. One interesting thing, though, my grandmother  Gossen, she was a good seamstress, so my grandmother on the other side  hired her to make her a pretty bonnet. In those days, women had to have  their hair covered. You could not sit in church without a covering. They  were not related. They were just in the same church. Later on, their  children married each other, you see, but one hired the other one to make  her this pretty bonnet, and I still have that in my cedar chest.  Was there cardboard in the bonnet?  No.  Or just fabric?  Just fabric. Very, very lacey. Yes, it   s just very pretty.  What do you remember about laundry?  Laundry. Oh, my goodness  Well, first of all, I remember when my  mother got her first washing machine. It was a little contraption that you  put on the kitchen table, and it just ran a little bit at a time. Before that, I  guess we washed in the wash house outside with   I don   t know what  she did, but I remember having to scrub the twins    diapers for her, help  her out that way. I was just six years old then, six or seven years old.  That part I do remember.  Did your family have a big garden?  We always had a big garden, yes. We did a lot of canning. My mother  was not much into quilt making. She didn   t make quilts until after she  got much older and got into the retirement center in Corn, and then she  started making quilts.  Probably no time.  That   s right. I think that   s right. She was just too busy keeping us  clothed, and she didn   t have time for that.  What are some of your favorite dishes you remember her making?  At that time, it was extremely special to have waffles. We would borrow  a waffle iron from my grandmother. That was just such a really special  thing. Another thing, I don   t know if you all have heard about the  zwieback that we Mennonite women make every Saturday. Still do that.  12  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Every Saturday I bake zwiebacks, except today. I don   t know what we  are going to do this weekend. That is a Russian Mennonite bread, and it  has one round ball at the bottom, and then you put another one that   s  about the size of a golf ball on top of that. It   s a kind of a rich recipe,  made with milk. It   s just a specialty.  If you are going to ask me if there   s anything, any heritage, that we   re  passing on to our children and grandchildren, that is one of them. I have  several grandchildren that are still making the zwiebacks. They just love  them. I have a great-grandson that came over last Sunday for dinner. We  still have big potluck dinners, big dinners at our house. They came over,  and he says,    Grandma, I ate four of your zwiebacks.    That   s four two-bakes.  Zwieback means two-bakes, two of them. It   s one on top of the  other. Then I brought some down here, some roasted zwiebacks. After  they get a little bit stale, then you cut them up and roast them in the oven  for an hour, hour and a half on a real low oven, and they   re toasted.  Those zwiebacks is what our Mennonites used when they tried to leave  Russia. They first went from one city to the other, and it was very, very  hard. These zwiebacks would not spoil because they   re toasted, and that  kept them alive, and also on the ship.  So it   s really an important part of your heritage.  Zwieback is one of the main dishes that we fix. Another one is a mousse.  It   s a fruit pudding, you would say in English now. It   s made out of  either plums or raisins and cherries. Those three are the basic ones. They  still serve that every year when the Corn Bible Academy has their  German meal, German feast. And, of course, then there is the verenika.  The verenika is a dough dumpling with cheese in it. Different families  made it different ways. My husband   s family, they put egg and sugar  inside, in that cheese mixture. My mother didn   t do that. Then we boil  them, and then you fry them a little bit crisp after you boil them, these  dumplings, and then you cover them with a very rich cream onion gravy.  I had that today at lunch. Someone brought a dish.  Yes. Well, they have a verenika casserole.  Oh, okay.  Yes, that   s just   that   s a fake. That   s fake.  Okay. (Laughter)  Yes. I mean, it tastes the same, right.  13  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Some ladies yesterday were talking about the verenika at the restaurant  in Corn.  Right.  What was this restaurant?  Well, they   ve served verenika all through the years. Everybody that buys  the restaurant also makes that German meal. I don   t know whether this  new one (we are getting a new one coming in there now again) whether  he   s going to do that or not. Up until then, we   ve always had a special  Saturday night verenika dinner.  There was also another dish today that they had there that   s called  bierocks. That is a hamburger meat with cabbage, and then you put  dough around it, and you bake it. That was also very, very common. My  husband has overeaten on pasta because in those days, they we were so  extremely poor, and they made lots of kilka. Now, the German name for  kilka is also these noodles. But the way I knew it was it was just flour  and egg and water or something, make it into little balls and boil it, and  then you put your cream gravy on there because you always had the  eggs, you always had the flour on the farm. You ground your own wheat  to make the flour and so forth. That was something that people had  because they were so poor. They couldn   t afford anything. So my  husband has just overeaten all of those things. (Laughter) The year that I  was going to start school, they transferred our country school to the Corn  school, so I never got to go to a country school.  What was the country school called?  The country school was called Grandview.  Grandview.  Grandview. In fact, there was numerous people here today that attended  Grandview School. Yes, there   s a couple of them. The real poor  people   like my husband has told stories that what he got to take to  school was a slice of bread with   when they butchered the hogs, they  would grind up some meat, and then they   d render that in these big iron  pots. They were called a grapen, grapen, mille grapen. (Laughs) I don   t  even know what it would be called in English, but that   s the German  word for it. They would render out this ground-up meat, and then the  lard from that, that was left when they separated it and ran it through the  sieve, that lard had a little flavoring of the meat. It was just plain lard,  but it had the flavoring of the meat. That   s what these kids would take to  school, spread on their bread with sugar. Lard and sugar on the bread.  14  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  A. Franz  Wilson  A. Franz  J. Franz  Kept them alive.  They still do that in   I had some of that in Austria recently.  Did you really?  They said,    This is more of a country dish,    but it was good. (Laughs)  Yes, yes. I lived in Austria for about six months.  Oh, really? What town?  Linz.  Okay. I was in Vienna.  You were in Vienna?  Yes. So you started school in Corn at the school. What was the school  there like? Was it very big?  Yes, it was quite big because in those days   well, by then, all the  country schools had already consolidated in Corn. I remember my class  had to be split into two rooms because there was so many.  That was for the first grade?  No, that was later on, like in seventh and eighth grade.  How many kids   was it first through twelfth grades in the same school?  Yes, first through twelfth.  Did you already know most of those kids just from the community and  church?  Yes, from church, from church, yes. At that time, there was only one  church in Corn. Then, later on, the Baptist church opened.  They have about fifteen hundred people at the Christmas Eve programs.  Really?  In our little church.  Yes, that church had   well, we had about a seven hundred membership  15  Wilson  J. Franz  A. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  at that time, and the Christmas Eve program was the biggest night of the  year. We   d have to make candy sacks for about fourteen, fifteen hundred  people.  Oh, my goodness. What was the population of Corn?  It   s never been more than     Oh, it was probably seven, eight hundred at that time.  So tell me about the Christmas program. What would that involve?  That was just a   they   d bring a great big tree from out in the country. It  was huge, way up. They decorated that on the day before Christmas Eve.  Then the program was every Sunday school class just did their own  pantomimes or songs or readings and so forth. And then the highlight  was always handing out the candy sacks. There used to be lots of candy  and an apple and an orange. We still do that. That   s one thing we can   t  give up. That   s a tradition that we have kept to this day. (Laughs)  Is singing a big part of the church?  It is a big part of our church. It   s a very big part of my family. My  grandfather in Russia was a choir director. Later on, I was a choir  director, then my son was a choir director in Corn. In fact, I directed the  church choir and the ladies choir and senior choir all through many  years. Then, like I told you, I sang with my parents, and we made a  record back then. I still have that. I still have some brand new records  that have never been played from that. We went to Hobart and cut that  record.  What did you call yourselves?  It was the Gossen Trio. Now my sisters and I, we all have different  names, but we sing together, and we sing at nursing homes and senior  places like this, and banquets and stuff. We still call ourselves the  Gossen Sisters. We cut a CD last summer     Really? (Laughter)     which was really fun. We sang old, old songs. It   s called The Classic  Inspiration Songs by the Gossen Sisters or something like that.  Is any of that in German?  We sang one song in German, yes. We thought we had to. We dedicated  16  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  that to our parents because they taught us to sing. My mother played  piano and guitar. I played piano and guitar, and in Germany I taught  myself to play the accordion because I needed to play for the meetings  there. So we dedicated that to them. For them, we thought we   d put on  one German song, even though people can   t understand it anymore.  (Laughs)  Did you say you were fifteen when your family went to Germany to sing?  I was seventeen at that time.  Okay.  Yes, I had just graduated from Corn Bible Academy, and our Mennonite  Brethren mission board asked my parents to go with an evangelist and  be the singing group with them. My dad didn   t ask me. He just said,     You   re going,    so I did. I went there, and they took my youngest sister.  She was four. Then the other three stayed home for a whole year with  my aunt and uncle.  A whole year?  They left them behind, yes.  Did you tour throughout Germany?  We just mostly lived in   we lived in Neuwied am Rhein in Germany,  and then we lived in Linz, Austria. In both of those places what we did  was we sang at the refugee camps. A lot of these were Mennonites that  had come out of Romania and Russia and Poland, so they were the same  people that we were. Out of that, now we have five Mennonite Brethren  churches over there for those meetings.  Wow. That was in 1952?  Fifty-two and fifty-three. No, fifty-three and fifty-four.  Did you graduate high school from Corn?  I graduated from Corn Bible Academy in    53. That   s a high school  degree.  Okay.  Right. Then after, as soon as I got back from that, then I got married  right away because I was engaged when I left, and we had four children.  17  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Then my husband was killed in a traffic accident when he was thirty-six  years old. Our four children and I moved to Corn, and I enrolled in  Southwestern State University and was going to go   I was in special  education. Then after I had gone there for three years, then this guy  came along. He had lost his wife to cancer. He came along and just  asked me to go out and have coffee with him. That developed so fast that  in about six weeks we got married. (Laughter) I was so overwhelmed  with everything, I couldn   t study anymore. I quit school. Couldn   t pass  my grades. (Laughs) We   ve been married thirty-seven years now.  And you live in Corn.  We live in Corn. We built a new house after we were married. He had  two children, and I had four, so we have six children. I have eighteen  grandchildren and eighteen great-grandchildren and several step-grandchildren.  Do many of them live around this area?  I would say half. We had a family gathering last Sunday, and we had  twenty-two people there. There are some in Lincoln, Nebraska; Wichita,  Kansas; and Minneapolis, Minnesota. I am very lucky to have   they   re  very close. We   re a very close family. Our grandsons in Minnesota call  us often. Well, we have kids all over. That   s a long story. (Laughter)  You mentioned passing on the tradition of the zwieback.  Yes.  Are there other recipes in particular that they are interested in learning?  No. As a gift, I have given my favorite recipes to my granddaughters     That is wonderful.     in a cookbook. Wrote them out, handwritten.  Wow   I wanted them to have my handwriting, besides just the recipes. There  are special things. Like on the waffles, we make a sweet pudding. It   s  made out of milk, and the only thing different from a vanilla pudding is  that you don   t put the eggs in it. It   s just like a white sauce, sweet sauce,  with vanilla. That   s how we eat our waffles. Then, of course, we always  put fresh fruit over that.  18  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  A. Franz  J. Franz  A. Franz  J. Franz  A. Franz  J. Franz  Wilson  A. Franz  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  A. Franz  Is that for breakfast, or do you eat it     No, that   s for supper     Okay. (Laughter)     together with sausage or bacon or something like that, yes. Let   s see.  What else would there be? There   s another     I want to add one thing.  Okay.  As we grew up   we don   t marry out of the German people. That was  brought home through my folks.  Yes.  When we wanted to date   we lived two miles west of Colony, and I  knew most of the people. That   s one thing I   d always hear my folks     they didn   t want us to date (we called them at that time) English people.  Yes, Englische.  Really?  Yes.  Yes. You were not allowed to marry outside the church. In fact, I have  real good girlfriends   if the guys were from the community but if they  were not members of the church   my girlfriend was put out of church.  She was excommunicated.  Oh, my goodness.  Yes, but that has gone by the wayside because all of our children now     I mean, we have Baptists, we have Catholic, we have all denominations  in our family. There   s two things we don   t talk about around the dinner  table: one is politics, and the other is religion. (Laughter) We don   t do  that.  Do any of your children speak German?  None.  None.  19  J. Franz  A. Franz  J. Franz  A. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  A. Franz  J. Franz  A. Franz  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  No, I am sorry about that. I have children that are musical. Like I said,  my son is   in fact, right now, I think he is directing the choir at First  Baptist Church because that director is ill or something like that, in  Weatherford, big First Baptist Church.  We had a very bad experience in World War II because our  grandparents   we were the German people, and we were fighting  Germany. When I was just like eighteen years old, we   d go to town, like  to Cordell. Those kids over there, we would walk down the street, and  they   d holler across the street to us, and they   d say,    What do you damn  Dutches want here?    We had to go through that because of the heritage.  Because of war, yes.  Yes.  Were any of your family members involved in the war?  That   s the main reason why they all moved over to the United States,  because of the military.  I lost a brother in the war, but he died from a tonsil operation. My other  brother went all through Germany and France.  We   ve had quite a few people from our church that served in the war.  Then there was also the other option that you could be a conscientious  objector. My first husband and I went to Denver and worked in the  hospitals there. Our parents told us,    Get that over with before you settle  down into farming here and get settled in,    because we would be  drafted. So we just volunteered and did that for two years.  Instead of going into the service.  Yes.  Have you been in touch with many Germans from Russia outside of this  area?  Outside of this area?  Yes.  Well, our whole church conference. I am very heavily involved with our  church conference. Have been all my life, and they   re all basically  Germans from Russia.  20  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Tanya  Finchum  J. Franz  Finchum  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  Okay.  Yes. Like California has one big church, and Kansas has a great big  Mennonite Brethren Church. Well, they   re not the biggest. Like he said,  they   re not the largest church anymore now, and ours sure isn   t because  it   s dwindled down to, like, last Sunday, it was 145 people in our church  in Corn. It   s really gone down. The young people can   t find work there.  They all move away. But, oh, yes.  Did it seem like the experience of growing up in this community was  much different than other Germans from Russia?  Basically all the same. All the same foods, the same   the funeral  suppers are always the same. The zwiebacks and the meat and cheese  and coffee. We have a very close relationship with all of our other  people, Fairview, Enid, everywhere.  Do you have any other traditions that you passed on?  Well, I   m sure a lot of people do this. I know we always had the  Christmas caroling where all the young people on Christmas Eve, after  that big program, they   d have like four or five groups that would go out,  and they   d sing all night long to all the different people out in the  country. That was a highlight of everybody   s life because that   s where  the boyfriends and girlfriends could ride with each other and stay out all  night. (Laughs) Yes, that   s one tradition.  Did you play certain games?  Well, we had the all the traditional old games like Handy Over, and I  don   t know. I   ve forgotten all of those games. I don   t remember them  anymore.  What other holidays were celebrated?  In those days, we always had the First, Second, and Third Holiday of  Christmas. Ersten, zweiten, und dritten Weihnachten. I think that   s not  quite right, but anyway, the First, Second, and Third Holiday, and they  would celebrate all of them. Also, Good Friday was a special day. You  did not work. You had a service on Good Friday. You always have a  service on Easter, of course, and Easter Sunday evening, as well, which  has all gone by the wayside now, too, in our churches.  Was December 5 celebrated, Nikolaustag?  21  J. Franz  A. Franz  Wilson  A. Franz  J. Franz  Wilson  A. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  A. Franz  J. Franz  A. Franz  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  No.  As I remember, (I was told this by many guys) our standard in our  community was much higher than the communities around Corn. This  one guy that made loans on farms told me one time that he would loan  money to the Corn community a hundred dollars an acre more than he  would to the surrounding areas because of the honesty that was prevalent  in those days. That has never left me. So we were held to a higher  standard than the communities around, and I am not saying that the  communities around us wasn   t any good. That was just the     The general perception?  Yes.  Yes.  That   s something to be proud of, for sure.  It is. It is, yes.  Did the community come together for harvesting and various things to  help out on each other   s farms?  Oh, yes.  A lot. Oh, yes.  They would put up big tents for weddings. All the women got together,  and they baked the zwiebacks (you had to have tubs and tubs of  zwiebacks for the weddings) and the cakes. Another thing that I forgot to  mention is that we always had a huge tent for revival meetings every  summer, and those revival meetings would last, sometimes they would  go for a month or more.  Every night.  Yes, every night.  Wow.  Nowadays, we think we   re so busy. Those farmers, they didn   t have the  machinery that we have now. They just had this little   well, first of all,  in my memory, we just had the pull-type combines with the tractor in  front. You know that they hadn   t harvested a lot of wheat during a day,  22  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  A. Franz  J. Franz  A. Franz  Wilson  A. Franz  Wilson  A. Franz  J. Franz  but men had time to come to revival meetings in the summertime. Then  we had the church conferences where the whole United States and  Canada Mennonite Brethren Churches would get together, and that was  a huge celebration. There was huge, huge tents that they put up.  How would you handle the heat? Would you go swimming or eat ice  cream? (Laughs)  We didn   t know any better. We just didn   t know any different. It was  extremely hot. I have often said,    How did my grandmother do it? How  did she do it?    She had one little bitty fan, in my memory. Earlier, she  didn   t have nothing, I   m sure. They had no air conditioning, nothing. I  remember one time it was 114 degrees, and all our chickens died, it was  so terribly hot. I was thinking, too, my mother, right after the tornado,  with the little babies and stuff, we had none of those appliances, good  things that we have now.  Did you hear many stories of the dust around the time you were born?  Dust Bowl? I haven   t heard as many as what I   ve read about. I love to  read all that old history stuff. They all say about this huge black dust  cloud that came over.  It was terrible. I went through it.  Yes, he   s ten years older than I am, so he lived through some of that  more than I did. Remembers it better.  It was just like a thunderstorm coming up. It was dark. You couldn   t see,  and it was mid-afternoon. Oh, it was   the    30s were terrible.  And you were living in Bessie at that time, or Colony?  No, I was there, two miles west of Colony. It was just awful. I mean, the  government came around and would pay my folks   it was so dry, so  there was no feed around. They would come by, and they would shoot  some of our cows and stuff and pay us for them because we couldn   t  afford to feed them.  Do you remember what they thought about that?  Oh, they hated it terrible because that was, really, if you get down to the  bottom line, it was against their religion. Then they allowed us to  butcher them for the meat.  They did?  23  A. Franz  Wilson  A. Franz  Wilson  A. Franz  J. Franz  A. Franz  Wilson  A. Franz  Wilson  A. Franz  J. Franz  A. Franz  Wilson  A. Franz  Wilson  A. Franz  Yes. My kids, if I tell them all of those stories, they don   t want to   they  can   t fathom that.  Do you feel like that led to a mistrust of the government?  Well, it did to some extent. Yes, it did.  Do you remember there being too many rabbits, and having     Oh, my  Oh, yes  (Laughter) I always tell this story that my oldest  brother, Milton, was a hunter. I said that he could shoot a jackrabbit     he   d shoot them through the eyes, running. That   s how good of a shot he  was. (Laughter) Oh, yes, we lived on young jackrabbits and cottontails  in winter all the time. My brother went out and shot them.  His family was very poor, very poor at that time.  Yes, we never went hungry, but we were very poor.  Was your family Germans from Russia?  Yes.  Do you know about how they came to this area, your grandparents?  Well, my mother, she came   they landed in south Texas. She was in     Galveston, in Galveston.  Yes, in Galveston. In Galveston, they had the big flood or whatever they  had. She lost a sister in that. From there, they came to Roosevelt, and  they had a commune, kind of, there of the German people. From there,  they came to Corn. My dad, again, they landed in New York and went to  the Dakotas. From the Dakotas, they came into Kansas. My dad and  mom got married in Grandma and Grandpa Remple   s chicken barn.  (Laughter)  How many brothers and sisters did you have?  I had three brothers and one sister, and I   m the only one alive.  Were you born on your farm, west of Colony?  Yes.  24  J. Franz  A. Franz  J. Franz  A. Franz  J. Franz  A. Franz  Wilson  A. Franz  Wilson  A. Franz  J. Franz  A. Franz  J. Franz  A. Franz  Wilson  A. Franz  J. Franz  Wilson  A. Franz  No, no. You were born in Kansas.  No, no. I was born in Kansas. I was two years old.  They came with horses and a wagon, and it took them a week, maybe.  Two weeks.  Two weeks to get here from Kansas.  Yes, I was two years old, so I have lived in the Corn area for eighty-four  years.  Did they have family here? Is that what brought them to Corn?  Yes. Well, my mother lived here. She was born southeast of Corn. She  came from a big family, and my dad did, too.  Did they meet in Kansas?  I was told that they met at a church singing convention at one time.  It   s a mystery. It is a little of a mystery because his mother was engaged  to a different man, and then all of a sudden here comes this Mr. Franz,  and she marries him. So he doesn   t know, and I have never found out,  either, what happened, how that turned out.  I have not a very good background. I could tell you stories you wouldn   t  even believe.  He had so much alcoholism in his family.  Oh, my, yes.  Is alcohol looked upon poorly in the Mennonite community?  Oh, yes.  Yes. Very much. Very bad. Yes.  Were your parents Mennonites?  Yes. Okay, there   s different kinds of Mennonites. General Conference  Mennonites and Mennonite Brethren. My dad was General Conference.  In Kansas, that was very strong in the area that he came in from, close to  Hutch inson . At Buhler is where they lived. Four miles west of Buhler  25  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  A. Franz  J. Franz  A. Franz  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  A. Franz  Wilson  A. Franz  J. Franz  A. Franz  Wilson  A. Franz  is where I was born.  In those days, when we joined the church we had to promise and sign a  paper about what we would not do. Smoking and drinking was one of  them. (Laughter)  What about dancing?  No, we couldn   t dance.  Oh, boy  (Laughter)  Couldn   t play cards.  No   My father would not let me go to basketball games. I could not play  basketball. Later on, when my sisters were in high school, then it wasn   t  a sin anymore, and they played basketball. (Laughs)  How old were you when you had to sign this?  Well, when I joined the church, ten years old. I joined the church at age  ten.  Did they keep all of those forms on record somewhere?  Unless it burned with the church.  The Franz name is very well known in all of Washita County. My  brother and I played ball in 1942 and    43. In my last two years in high  school we played seventy-five games, and we lost three.  Wow.  We had a very good team. Still, now, if you meet some people in town  and if she tells them    Franz,    they will ask,    Are you related to the  Franz boys?    That was us     That was the Franz brothers, yes. (Laughter)     that played ball. I have a grandson that played professional football.  Really?  Todd Franz. He lives in Oklahoma City now. He played six and half  26  Wilson  A. Franz  Wilson  A. Franz  Wilson  A. Franz  J. Franz  A. Franz  J. Franz  A. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  J. Franz  Wilson  years.  For who? What team?  He played for the Green Bay Packers. Well, he was drafted by New  Orleans, the Saints. Then he went from there to the Washington  Redskins, and then he ended up with the Green Bay Packers.  What did you do after high school?  Me? I farmed.  Wheat?  Yes.  Cattle.  I miss some of my younger days. I had a chance to go to OU to play  basketball. The war was on, and I had to stay home to farm, and then I  got married.  You had to farm for   he had to help his dad farm.  Yes, so I missed some of them, but I   ve had a good life, a good life. God  has been good to us.  Well, is there anything else you can think of that you   d like to share?  I don   t think so. I can   t think of anything. We   ve covered quite a bit,  don   t you think?  I do. (Laughter) Well, I want to thank you for talking with me, again.  Enjoyed it.  It   s been great. Thank you.  -------  -------  
