 Little Thunder My name is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is Wednesday May 25,  2016. I   m interviewing Charles Chapman for the Oklahoma Native Artist  project, sponsored by the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at  Oklahoma State University. We are at Charles   s home in Pawnee,  Oklahoma. Charles, Pawnee artists have played a pretty big role on the  Oklahoma Native art scene and you   re no exception. You   ve won numerous  awards at Red Earth, Trail of Tears, and other major art shows. You were  honored as Featured Artist at Tulsa Indian Art Festival, and your work was  a mainstay in many Indian art calendars. I understand you set aside your  painting for a while for health reasons, but you   re about to pick it up again.  Thank you for taking the time to talk with me.  Chapman All right.  Little Thunder Where were you born and where did you grow up?  Chapman I was born in Pawnee, Oklahoma, at the Indian Hospital out there when it  was still going. I grew up right here.  Little Thunder What did your folks do for a living?  Chapman Well, my dad was a carpenter and a farmer. This is the old home place.  After the folks passed away, my brother started buying my brothers and  sisters out. Well, I wound up buying him out. I kept it together except for  about ten acres over here that they petitioned off for three houses.  Little Thunder Oh yeah. It   s a beautiful, beautiful place.  Chapman I   ve been working on it, trying to make it pretty.  Little Thunder How many brothers and sisters did you have?  5  Chapman There were eleven of us. (Laughs)  Little Thunder Where did you fall?  Chapman I   m second to the last. My little sister Linda, she   s the last one.  Little Thunder How about your mom?  Chapman Well, she was a farmer lady.  Little Thunder Ah.  Chapman A good one. She made good fry bread and everything. When she cooked, it  was good. She canned everything. You know how it was in the old days.  Little Thunder Right, right. What was your relationship with your grandparents on either  side?  Chapman You know what? I never knew them. They were passed on before I realized,  I guess, I   d never seen them.  Little Thunder How important was Pawnee culture and language for you growing up?  Chapman The first nine years of my life, when we lived out here on the farm with  Mom and Dad, we kind of lived the old Indian way. Dad knew all that old  stuff. My dad, they took him off a camp creek. He had braids down to here.  Couldn   t speak a word of English. Took him and a bunch of other boys up to  Carlisle Indian School. When they got up there, they ran away. They made it  all the way back home. They were just kids, twelve, thirteen years old.  Anyway, I was always interested in the customs and things they were doing.  The dances and everything. Really I didn   t think about it my whole life until  I got back from Vietnam and started painting. Then, I started studying the  Pawnee tribe and I started painting the history. I   ve been doing that now  for   dang, I   ve been on the road for twenty-five, thirty years, I think. Way  back in the    80s was when I started showing. Like I say, I was painting  history of the Pawnee Tribe. If that kind of answers   . You could stop me  and tell me. (Laughs)  Little Thunder I was wondering, what other creative influences did you have in your  family?  Chapman It was just me. I   ve always been able to draw. None of the rest of them ever  done anything like that. When I was a little bitty guy, over there on the floor,  or when I got big enough to walk around, I could draw and make it look like  an animal. I was little bitty. Once I come up  the dog barks  (shut up)     6  come up through high school, I won all the shows. The little art shows.  (Shut up, Flag.)  Little Thunder So even in elementary school, were teachers noticing that you had a talent  for art?  Chapman Uh-huh. Let   s see. I went to the Indian school     Little Thunder Okay.  Chapman    and I was in the fourth grade. I always kind of laugh about it, but Ms.  Trysdale, I was at the chalkboard, I was supposed to be doing math or  something. It was around Thanksgiving and I was drawing a turkey on the  chalkboard. Boy, she jumped down my throat and got me. She said   what   d  she say? Something about I couldn   t draw my way out of a paper bag. I  always wondered, I wish she was alive to see me now.  Little Thunder Not exactly encouraging.  Chapman No, huh-uh. From there, I went to the     Little Thunder Was that Pawnee Indian School? Was that what you were talking about?  Chapman Yeah. When it closed, I was in the fourth grade and they sent us up town, to  the town school. From the fifth grade on, every time we had a little art show,  they had art classes, which I never had before.  Little Thunder Wow.  Chapman We   d get to draw with watercolors and things. Man, I could outdraw any of  them. I won all of them, even in grade school. We just had another year left  there. But then, when I got in high school, they didn   t have art. So it kind of  went by the wayside until I came back from Vietnam. You want me tell you  about who helped me get started?  Little Thunder Absolutely.  Chapman I got married. I was married. I was living out on the ranch out there at Skidi.  My brother owned a hundred and sixty acres out there. I was kind of with  him on   I was breaking horses and making money, me and my wife. Well, I  started painting. I taught myself how to paint.  Little Thunder And you really hadn   t picked up paint since high school at that point?  Chapman No. I was scared of it, really. But I was pretty good. I was taking my  paintings up to Fairfax to the horse sale, and I was selling them, not for a  7  whole lot, or I   d trade them for a colt. I gathered up (I bet you I had forty  some horses that we were raising), and I   d break them, take them back.  Make money. Anyway, my nephew, Richard Teeter, and his wife Leanna     Rich knew about this   he said,    Charlie, why don   t you take them paintings  and go to an art show?    I said,    What art show?    (I didn   t even know they  had art shows.) He said,    Now, if I get you lined up to go to one, will you  go?    I said,    Yeah, I   ll go, see what it   s about.    So he got me lined up  somehow. The first show I went to was down at Anadarko.  Little Thunder Oh, the Expo? The Indian Expo?  Chapman I guess that was what it was. I   d never been down there. I   ll be danged if I  didn   t win First Place in the oil division, first rattle out of the box.  Little Thunder Now, when you first started doing these paintings that you were taking to the  horse sales and stuff     Chapman Uh-huh.  Little Thunder    were they in watercolor or were they in oil from the beginning?  Chapman Nope, they were oil. I   ve always painted in oil.  Little Thunder Okay. It   s not easy to paint in oil.  Chapman And teach yourself. It   s pretty rough. But I went along there   it took about  six years or so before     Little Thunder What did it feel like to win that First Place at Anadarko?  Chapman We was happy. (Laughs) Oh     Little Thunder It had a little prize money, too, right?  Chapman Yeah, I was working. I was bringing home, back then, only about  300 a  week. We got down there and won the show and sold it. I didn   t sell that  painting there, but I sold another one there for more money. I think I got   1500 or  1800 out of it. The first time. Boy, I thought that was really good.  Little Thunder Wow.  Chapman I was,    Baby, we   re going.     Little Thunder That was good. Now     Chapman That   s how it all started.  8  Little Thunder Were you doing Indian subject matter when you were trading paintings for  horses? Or were you doing horses?  Chapman I was doing     Little Thunder Or were you doing both?  Chapman I was doing both cowboy and Indian paintings. I still do some cowboys. Not  many. Probably I ought to do more.  Little Thunder Do those Indian cowboy paintings.  Chapman I got locked in, me and Rich. Like I say, he   s the one that lined me up down  there. He got this whole ball rolling. Then I started studying. I started  painting these old ceremonies, painting the Indians how they really looked  back then. It wasn   t no Hollywood stuff, and my paintings took off. I had a  story with them that told about them. That was the deal. Once I started that, I  had to have them stories because that   s what everybody asked about.     What   s this? Why are they doing this?    I explained it and that   s what  helped me the most.  Little Thunder You mentioned, I think, in an article I read that you looked at a lot of  Remington and Russell, too. You studied those guys for a bit.  Chapman Yeah, I did that when I was trying to learn.  Little Thunder When you were trying to learn technique?  Chapman I said,    Look at this.    You get overwhelmed by what they could do. But  yeah, I practiced. Don   t like to tell people that. I had it right up, there,  looking. Boy.  Little Thunder That   s how artists learn, though. They learn by reproducing and trying to  figure out how it was done.  Chapman Uh-huh.  Little Thunder How about Brummett Echohawk? Had you seen any of his work?  Chapman Yeah. I knew Brummett. I   ve known Brumett all my life. Him and my  brother, they was raised together.  Little Thunder I know that some Native artists, when they tried to do a more realistic, what  you call western style, more realistic style, sometimes they would meet with  some criticism. I don   t know if that was the same response you encountered?  9  Chapman You know, as far as I   m concerned, even way back when I was little  drawing people, animals, I always   I could hit it. Half of this painting is  drawing. You   ve got to be able to get everything in proportion. Then, you  got to know what you   re painting about. That story I was telling you.  You   ve got to go through there and study it and research and get everything  right, or you will get criticized, I guarantee you. You got to keep on top.  Yes, sir. I   m going to tell you something that happened. I was showing up in  Denver. I had a painting there and I bet you there was twenty people  standing around there because they liked to hear me talk about them. I was  talking about this one. I forget what it was about now, but I was telling the  people. There was one guy in the back. He said,    That   s wrong.    I said,     What do you mean, that   s wrong?    He said,    I study Indians.    What he was  talking about is something that my dad wrote down on paper, my dad knew.  So I gave him a book. I said,    Here. Go read that.    He went over there and  read it. He came back and he put that book down and walked off. I sold  about fifteen prints on account of him. That   s what   ll happen at a show a lot  of times. If you   re not, if you are not right with it.  Little Thunder That is a great story. (Laughter) You won another award, another big  award at the Trail of Tears show, I think, in 1986.  Chapman Uh-huh, yeah.  Little Thunder Do you remember what the subject was on that one?  Chapman You know, it   s been a long time ago.  Little Thunder But it was Pawnee? Was it Pawnee subject matter?  Chapman Yeah, that   s all I paint.  Little Thunder That   s all you do.  Chapman It had to do with the bear, Bear Doctor. I had a Bear Doctor, and I don   t  remember all of it, but I remember in the smoke, I had the smoke coming  up, and went into it like a bear.  Little Thunder Neat. You   re really well known for your portraits, too.  Chapman Uh-huh.  Little Thunder I wonder what attracts you to painting people   s faces?  Chapman It   s just easy for me. Like when you read about the doctors, they   ll tell you  how they painted their face. A lot of times, I   ll just do a portrait without  10  doing the whole   everything they wear and putting the color on them. Like  if he was, we   ll say, a Beaver Doctor in the story, where this beaver came to  the doctor. It took him around. No, it took him around, but the bank where  the water was, was blue. In the first ceremonies that the Pawnees have in the  spring, when they go in the mud lodge, they all paint blue. Every one of  them. I   ll paint that face.  Then, I   ll paint the whole, or have him dancing in the Doctor Dance. Excuse  me. I paint the doctors. That   s real interesting. Studying about the doctors  and how they got their medicine and how they used it. It was real. They  healed. The doctors paint different than the warriors.  Little Thunder Right.  Chapman So you have to   both the war societies painted different. You had to know  what war society you were talking about because some of them painted all  black, all white, all red. They have a society called the Young Dog. They  could paint anyway they wanted. Just make up their own deals.  Little Thunder Right. You did a lot of horses, too, I think, and you kept horses for a while?  Chapman That   s right down my alley. I raised horses all my life.  Little Thunder Since you got horses for your first paintings, too.  Chapman Uh-huh.  Little Thunder Is that helpful when you   re painting a scene, painting warriors on  horseback, and you   ve got horses and you can go out there and     Chapman You know what? I have never used, I   ve never painted from a picture.  Little Thunder You just knew.  Chapman I do it in my head, right on the canvas back there. You got to correct. You   re  always correcting to get that horse just right and the man just right. Because  his size to the horse has got to be right. It   s a lot of correction on it,  sometimes. Sometimes, it takes me years to get it right. I have a painting  back there a long time. I can have a painting that I   ve had there for six years  that keeps whipping me. I   ll try and I   ll try and I   ll try and I know it   s not  right, so I just put it up. Then there   s times that I can be laying there in bed  at night, thinking about it, and get up and put that picture on the easel and  know exactly what I was doing wrong. It   ll just flow together and I could  finish it. Ain   t that funny how     Little Thunder Yeah.  11  Chapman    How a painting will do that to you? Whoop you. (Laughter)  Little Thunder Right. Sometimes the business side of art is sort of the hardest to figure out.  How did you know how to approach that?  Chapman Just selling and everything. I think it was about the second or third year, I  was showing over at Tulsa. Ole Woody Crumbo was there, and he came  over and he seen my paintings. He said,    Young man, let me tell you  something. You   re the first one, so far, that   s painting with oil that   s  painting your history and doing it the right way.    I got to talking with him     he got to talking   and he said,    Charlie, tell you what you got to do. You  got to sell yourself. He said,    When them people come in your booth, don   t  just sit there. You get up and you talk to them. Talk to them about anything.  It don   t have to be about that artwork. Let them know you.    He said,    You   ll  sell your paintings. The paintings will sell theirselves. With what you got  with the history and the stories with them.    He said,    You   ll go a long way.     By George, he was right. I listened to him. Because when somebody comes  in my booth, I   m up talking. It works. The more these little Indians need to  learn that. When you go out there and you just sit behind that desk, you  won   t sell. You got to get up and present yourself. That is how I make it.  Little Thunder Great advice. Great to get it from Woody Crumbo, too.  Chapman Yeah.  Little Thunder That compliment.  Chapman He used to have a studio out in Cimarron, New Mexico. Every time I   d go  that way, I   d stop and stay with him. I had Carmen with me, my daughter.  She was little. I took her to all the shows with me and the ladies took care of  her. But we   d always stop at Woody   s and stay overnight. Cut out again.  Little Thunder How neat.  Chapman He was a good old man. I really liked him. What was I going to do? I went  out to Cimarron   let   s see. How   d that happen? I think I did a show there  and then I went on to California. As I was coming back, I was going to trade  originals with him and by dang, if he didn   t pass away before I got back  there. I didn   t know it, but he had a whole bunch of originals oils at  Gilcrease  Museum .  Gilcrease  bought half of them, anyway, when   Crumbo  was the artist in residence over there.  Little Thunder Right, right. Wow.  Chapman Oh yeah, he was a good one. He   d keep my head to the grindstone.  12  Little Thunder What is a funny travel story you might be able to share?  Chapman Funny what?  Little Thunder A funny travel story?  Chapman Travel? Gee, I don   t know. You should have asked me a long time ago. Let  me think about it. (Laughter)  Little Thunder Well, if it comes to you, we will put it in. What   s one of the best compliments  that you have received on your work? Might have been what Woody said.  One of the best compliments you gotten     Chapman What Woody said about it. You know, just keep up doing what I was doing.  Little Thunder What   s the hardest painting you ever did? The hardest one to do?  Chapman Let   s see. I don   t know one that   s really hard, but that eagle back there,  putting them feathers on that eagle and getting them just right, I think that  was hard. I ain   t never going to paint another eagle.  Little Thunder Really time intensive?  Chapman Yeah, it really was. It took me a long time to paint it. I finally, finally got it  done. (Laughter)  Little Thunder What about commissions? Did you ever take commissions?  Chapman I did a few times. I don   t like to do that. They always want to hurry you. An  artist, you can   t hurry them. They have to be in the mood, or I do. I got to be  in the mood. When it   s there, I can do real good work. But if I   m forcing  myself to hurry up and finish for somebody that I took a commission   from ? No, I quit that. I paint them for me now. If they want them, they  can buy them.  Little Thunder You used to have quite a bit of work at the Pawnee Arts Center in  Nebraska?  Chapman Yeah, there   s a little place up there. I forget the name of it now.  Little Thunder Is it Thunderbird  Gallery ?  Chapman No, It   s a little bitty town called Brigadoon, or Briga-something. Anyway,  they took some of my prints up there. I don   t have prints out like all the  other guys.  13  Little Thunder Okay.  Chapman That   s probably the only place right now     Little Thunder Okay.  Chapman    that I have any artwork out. Usually when I quit painting, they come here.  Little Thunder That   s great.  Chapman That   s one good place I found that does pay you and give you commission.  There   s been other places where I left artwork and they were lost. They  closed up shop and took the artwork with them somewhere.  Little Thunder That   s terrible. You have made a few prints, right? Did you work with the  gallery to print?  Chapman No.  Little Thunder Did you print on your own?  Chapman I printed all mine on my own. I got thirty some prints.  Little Thunder Wow.  Chapman Like thirty-three. Then I have, right here lately, these gicl  es they call them.  Prints on canvas. I like that. I   ve got about probably eight of them. I like it  because I can order like ten and not have to order the whole shooting match  and have to have a place to store it and everything. It   s real handy.  Little Thunder The color reproduction is nicer in the canvas.  Chapman Yeah, it looks like a real oil when you get them stretched. They   re nice.  Little Thunder Have you ever tried your hand at sculpture or three-dimensional?  Chapman Never have, never have. All I   ve ever done is just painted. That takes  enough of my time. (Laughs) Takes all of it, really.  Little Thunder They have the Pawnee Arts Association here for a while. Were you involved  with it a little bit?  Chapman Yeah, I was with them a while. They was trying to get it going real good. I  don   t even know what they   re doing, anymore, if it   s even there. I don   t  know.  14  Little Thunder Yeah, I don   t think they are super active right now.  Chapman Mr. Berry when he used to have that show up there, we all went up there and  showed   I think it was the Fourth of July. But when he passed away, I quit  going. He was a good friend of mine.  Little Thunder Some of the younger Pawnee artists like Rusty Diamond, they   ve mentioned  that they take your advice on doing research. What kinds of research are  important to do?  Chapman Well, you got to go back to, you got to find   there   s books on the Pawnees.  You just have to get in there and read what the old ones said, like my dad.  He used to translate for the old doctors. The old fellows, anyway, they  couldn   t speak English. What he writes down, you can use it as the truth.  There   s a lot of times, fellows come from like New York or somewhere and  didn   t go to them old fellows in the right way. Them old guys, they would  lie to them and they would write it down. So got to know what author and  stuff to believe. What that does, that takes reading a whole bunch of books.  Reading what it says, and eventually you   ll find out the truth.  Little Thunder Figure out the reliable ones.  Chapman Yeah.  Little Thunder With all the Pawnee bands, and there   s a lot of complexity     besides the fact that Native people get stereotyped, tribes get stereotyped by  Hollywood. How have you tried to counter that with your painting?  Chapman I paint truth. That   s all you can do. I know they have movies and things and  that depends on who they get to tell them about the Pawnees and how they  did it and everything. I see different families around here think different  ways. You know how Indians are.  Little Thunder Yeah.  Chapman So   .  Little Thunder What changes have you noticed from the 1980s, when you started really  going great guns, to today in terms of Native art? What changes have you  observed?  Chapman You know, when I started painting these Indians the way it said in the book,  I was over there with Bill Rabbit and them in Tulsa. I was selling them  paintings, originals. (I forgot   I lost my train of thought because I was  trying to think about over there. )What did you ask me?  15  Little Thunder What changes you noticed     Chapman What I noticed was after I started painting the real thing, other guys started  studying their tribe and learning more about their tribe and painting them the  way that tribe did it.  Little Thunder Going from pan-Indian to their tribally specific     Chapman Yeah. I made them study. Had to learn about their tribe. Because a lot of  times, they   ll go to a show, there   d be a painting there, all different colors.  You   d walk up and you ask them what it means. Didn   t mean a thing. It   s  just a pretty painting. Then, later on, the same fellow started coming with  historical stuff. That   s good. That   s a good thing because they learned about  their own tribe.  Little Thunder Right. In 1990, you probably remember the newer version of the Indians  Arts and Crafts Act was passed, requiring proof of enrollment or your tribe  had to certify that you could paint that particular tribe. How did you feel  about that and what was its impact, in your view?  Chapman I just went along with it. They said you had to have your degree of blood.  Each tribe is different, getting in a show, as long as you had that   what do  they call it?  Little Thunder CDIB.  Certificate of Degree of Indian Blood   Chapman Yeah. You present that, then you could show. It didn   t bother me much. I  never thought about it much.  Little Thunder What would you tell a young Native artist starting out? What would be your  advice?  Chapman You know what? I   d have to look at it and see how much talent he had. First  thing you   ve got to be able to do is draw. If everything is out of proportion, I  would have him get a picture and have him try to transfer it on paper. Have  him practice drawing. You   ve got it half licked if you can draw that. You   re  drawing a person and you have everything in proportion   the eyes, nose,  ears. Then you start, after you can draw, then you start putting things on it.  That   s a whole another story because it   ll scare you. It did me. If I   d had a  teacher, maybe not. But I taught myself, and I was a little skittish to really  get it. Then I learned that if you make a mistake in oil, you just let it dry and  go over it. (Laughs) And that? When I learned that, I took off. Because I  thought it had to be perfect the first time but it don   t. (Laughs)  Little Thunder How had your subject matter changed over the years?  16  Chapman Really hasn   t. I still paint the same stuff. I read the stories, then I visualize it  in my head and what I think it would look like. Then I go in on the canvas  and start drawing. Start drawing till I get everything just right. But it all  comes out of here. That   s the way I do it.  Little Thunder How about your use of color? Has that changed over the years?  Chapman I still use bright colors; I like bright colors. That   s one thing Woody Crumbo  would tell me. He said,    Charlie, the colors you use, once you get down the  road a ways and people get to know you, they   re going to know you by the  paintings, the colors you use in them and everything.    Sometimes I try to  kind of mellow it out, and it works on some of them. Most of them, I  don   t   I just go ahead.  Little Thunder Let those bright colors loose.  Chapman Uh-huh.  Little Thunder You explained when you paint, you always sketch directly on the canvas  first.  Chapman Yeah. Yeah, I went through all that where you put it on paper and do that  transfer. That was just too much. What I do, I just get me some paint out, a  little thinner, and a little bitty brush. Then, I start drawing till I get it  balanced and everything. Then I start painting on them.  Little Thunder What is your creative process, once you get an idea? Do you write it down  in a notebook or do you just go straight to     Chapman It   s all right here. I can see it. I guess you can call it seeing it, but I can  visualize what it   s going to look like. Then, when I   m painting them, I   ll  have them all on. Everybody else, they   ll be half done. Everybody else   ll  come and say,    Boy, that   s real pretty.    I   ll say,    I ain   t even done with this  yet. You wait until I get done.    Boy, I   ll paint and paint. I don   t know why.  It   ll just jump out at you. Put the brush down or you   ll ruin it. You   ll  overpaint. You got to quit. Just knowing that helped. Knowing when to quit.  I done that a lot of times. I kept painting. I messed the whole thing up. I   d  have to put it aside and wait like I told you, wake up one night and get it out  where I can finish. (Laughs)  Little Thunder Do you work on   because you do sometimes have to put things down, do  you work on several paintings simultaneously?  Chapman Back when I was showing real hard, I had probably twenty paintings, at  least, going at one time. Because I   d start painting until it got wet, what I  17  call wet. I   d put it back and get the other one. I was in a hurry. It   s when  they was pushing me to get enough paintings to go again, like within two  weeks. I   d get the next one down, then the next one. I   d stay up. Oh, I   d get  maybe two, three hours of sleep, at most. And get back after it. I mean, day-after-  day-after-day. All of a sudden, they   d all come together. There I was.  I   d have twenty new pieces to take.  Little Thunder Oh my gosh.  Chapman That   s the way it does with me. Just keep after it. (Laughter)  Little Thunder What   s maybe the most fun place you ever traveled to? The most fun show  you ever did?  Chapman I had fun at that first show, that my wife was with me, down at Anadarko.  Because all the artists got out there after the show was over. Jeanie Bales  and her husband, and the banker, and them, and they had kidneys.  Little Thunder Oh.  Chapman Over there.  Little Thunder Raw kidney?  Chapman Out there, drinking beer and eating kidney. I liked that. But we had fun  down there.  Little Thunder Yes. Fun. What would you say has been one of the highpoints of your career  so far?  Chapman You mean, showing?  Little Thunder Uh-huh. Or maybe just meeting somebody. Whatever was a high point of  your career.  Chapman Dang, I don   t know. Never thought of it.  Little Thunder Or maybe an award that you are especially proud of?  Chapman I don   t know. Probably the show at Tulsa.  Little Thunder Being the featured artist?  Chapman When I was the featured artist over there with all of them. That was pretty  good. Meeting ole what   s his name, that movie star? Forget his name now.  But he was over there.  18  Little Thunder What movie was     Chapman He was in that, I think, they were policeman or firemen or something. I wish  I could remember his name.  Little Thunder Not Adam Beach?  Chapman No. I can   t think of the name. Anyhow, I was fooling around with him. We  had fun.  Little Thunder Fun. (Laughs) What   s been one of the low points in your career?  Chapman When I lost my wife. Because I quit there for a while. I lost her to lupus. I  had the little baby. Carmen was just two. I had to start raising her. But once  I got back painting, it was me and her till she graduated from high school.  Little Thunder She was a show baby?  Chapman We   d finish up there at Crow Fair. That was in August. I was wanting to go  to Sturgis  Oklahoma , but I had to get her back to start school. Yeah. We  had a good time together.  Little Thunder How many shows did you do? You must have done     Chapman Everyone I could get to.  Little Thunder    almost ten a year? Maybe more than that?  Chapman Yep.  Little Thunder That   s a lot of production.  Chapman It   s a lot of    Hurry it up, boy, and get it done.    Yeah.  Little Thunder What   s the biggest painting that you have ever done?  Chapman I bought a canvas for a big one, but I never did get to stretch it. I still got it  down there. Right now, I don   t have   I got to paint back there where my  machine is for my dialysis. I got everything set up right there, but I can   t  paint a very big one. There   s a pretty good-sized one in that middle room  that I   ll show you.  Little Thunder We   ll take a picture of it.  Chapman It   s good size.  19  Little Thunder Is that the eagle painting?  Chapman No, it   s in the middle room.  Little Thunder Okay.  Chapman But I   d like to paint more great big ones, really. Just haven   t done it. I   ll get  around to it, though.  Little Thunder Is there anything else you would like to add before we take a look at your  paintings?  Chapman I don   t know. (Laughs) You   re the boss.  Little Thunder If you think of it, we   ll talk about it. We   ll pause for a minute and get ready  to look at some of your work.  Chapman Okay.  Little Thunder You ready to tell us about this piece behind you?  Chapman I don   t remember the stories on some of them, it   s been so long.  Little Thunder Okay. Do you remember the title on this one?  Chapman I don   t know what the title on it is. Now, this belongs to a little girl down in  Alabama.  20  Little Thunder Oh.  Chapman She moved and I guess she must have hit it because the paint cracked. They  sent it back to me to fix it.  Little Thunder To fix it.  Chapman What this is about, in the old days, them Pawnees, the women, they would  go out and they would dig a place   I forget   they call it a cache, I think,  where they would dig down and dig it out, like this, to put their beans and  pumpkin and corn bread in there. Then they would cover it with logs and  dirt. They would be the only ones that knew where that was at. When they  came back from being off somewhere, they would have something they  could go to. Get corn, beans, and everything to eat. That   s what they   re  doing here. This is a parfleche right here. Meat. Then they got corn and  stuff. Whatever they   d put in there. They   d put it in layers and it would last  a long time, let me tell you. See my sign? Called the Vault of the Heavens?  Line down the middle is the Breath of Heaven.  Little Thunder Oh.  Chapman That has to do with the buffalo. A fellow up in Nebraska was building a barn  when he dozed off and he uncovered one of these pits. My dad and a couple  other older Indians went up there. Dad got down in there. He was moving  things out. The meat was in a parfleche and had that insignia on it. Then,  Dad and them, they ate everything but the meat. It was over a hundred years  old. The meat was the only thing that wasn   t any good. But then, my dad  translated for a book called The Lost Universe. It was a hardback at the time.  They used that insignia on the front of the book. I took it for me, since my  dad handed out that parfleche with it on it. Yeah. That   s what that   s about  right there.  Little Thunder I see.  Chapman Kind of an older style.  Little Thunder For your artist remarque, for your artist signature? Let   s talk about your  signature little bit. How did you come up with it?  Chapman Just like     Little Thunder Just like you told me      Chapman That was on the parfleche.  21  Little Thunder Okay, from that. That   s what I thought you were saying.  Chapman That my dad handed out and I took it as that.  Little Thunder Sometimes it   s hard to figure out where to put your signature, or how to  work it into the painting without it being too much. That   s really neat.  Chapman Yeah, you   ve got to leave a place for it, for that signature.  Little Thunder Okay, we   re looking at one of your gicl  es here. It was reproduced in a  calendar, I guess. Did you remember the title on this?  Chapman Let   s see. I don   t know if this one was or not.  Little Thunder Okay.  Chapman It might not have been. Or it might have been in the calendar. It   s been so  long.  Little Thunder What can you tell us about it?  Chapman This is one of the pieces I was   I studied and read through the book. It tells  me how they wore different things and why they wore it. This has to do with  the feather. In this painting, this fellow, he   s called Three Coup. The tribe,  22  when the fellow went out and he touched the enemy, that was better than  killing them because you got up close. If you did that once, you got one  feather, slant-wise. Twice, you   d have feathers slant-wise, either direction.  Then, the third time, the third coup is a crow feather. Straight up. Then after  this, the four, fives on like that is when they started their calumet, you know.  That   s what this one   s about. He   s called Three Coup.  Little Thunder Three Coup. Neat. How about titles? Are they very important to you? Do  they come easy? Or are they hard to     Chapman They come along with the reading of what I   m doing. The title of most of  the paintings, they   re in there when you read and you decide to paint  something. The title will go along with it.  Little Thunder Okay, here   s another gicl  e. What can you tell us about this one?  Chapman If I remember right, I think this is called Bringing in the Buffalo Ponies.  Little Thunder Nice looking horses.  Chapman Before they went out to hunt buffalo, they had their own ponies. They had  buffalo ponies, then they had war ponies. I am pretty sure I titled this, The  Buffalo Ponies. You can see by the horses that I draw, I   m pretty good at  horses. And people. That   s what this is. It   s bringing in the buffalo ponies.  Then I painted this horse here. In our tribe, if you have a horse, if he was  solid red or beige and he had a solid white face like this horse right here,  these kind of horses are known as give away horses. In our tribe, that would  be like a man   you show your stature when you do something like that. You  23  giving a horse away, it   s like giving somebody a million dollars, back in the  old days. That   s what these kind of horses were that had these solid  white  faces .  Little Thunder They were special.  Chapman Yeah.  Little Thunder For give away.  Chapman You don   t get one probably but every fifty years or so, one   ll come out like  that. A colt.  Little Thunder What did they want in their buffalo horses? What kind of qualities did they  want?  Chapman They wanted a good running horse, a stout horse. What they would do a lot  of times, they had these   I call them mung beans. They   d smash them up,  and just before they   d go out, or even at war, when they was going into  battle, they would give that horse some of it. And them horses would start  dancing. Make them high. Like a person.  Little Thunder Make them fearless.  Chapman Make them ready, yeah.  Little Thunder Wow.  Chapman That horse will run right up there and get the job done.  Little Thunder Neat. Well, Charles thank you very much for your time today. It   s been great  visiting with you.  Chapman All right.  -------  -------   
