 Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  My name is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is Sunday, March 18,  2012. I   m interviewing Harvey Pratt for the Oklahoma Native Artists  Project sponsored by the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at  Oklahoma State University. We   re at Harvey   s home in the country  within Oklahoma City. Harvey, you   re a Cheyenne Arapaho tribal  member, one of the leading forensic artists in the country. You   re also  an artist best known for your paintings, although you also do sculpture.  Thank you for taking the time to talk with me.  Thank you, Julie.  Where were you born, and where did you grow up?  I was born in El Reno, Oklahoma, in 1941. I was born in a residence.  I   m the sixth of seven children. I attended school in El Reno until I went  to St. Patrick   s Indian Mission in Anadarko, and I finished high school  there.  Your brother, Charlie Pratt, is a well-known sculptor. Where do you  guys come in the sequence?  Well, growing up in El Reno, obviously, Charles was a very talented  man, and I always followed him. School teachers would say,    Oh,  you   re Charlie   s little brother. Are you as good as he is?    (Laughter) So  that kind of made me want to be as good as Charlie and try to follow his  footsteps.  He was the older brother.  Yes, he was the oldest. They always,    Can you draw? Can you do these  things?    I thought,    Well, yes, I can.    Really, I always remember my  first grade teacher, Mrs. Jones. I can remember her encouraging me  5  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  because she saw that I had some kind of talent, some kind of raw talent.  She encouraged me. Then I remember a Mrs. Hurdy in elementary  school. She also encouraged me, and then a Mrs. Wyatt all through sixth  grade, so I had those women kind of prompt me and stay after me and  encourage me. Even though I didn   t realize it, they had a big impact on  my life.  They saw that you got access to drawing materials and things. Did you  have things at home, as well?  No, I did not. If I did anything, it was by accident if I did some  drawings. I remember doing drawings, but I didn   t pursue anything like  that at home. We were too busy playing in the river and hunting and  doing stuff, so I didn   t pursue a lot of things like that growing up. Even  though as I got into junior high in El Reno, I still had that same stigma  of,    Oh, you   re Charlie Pratt   s little brother. Can you draw?    I always  had that.  When we went to St. Patrick   s, I really didn   t pay a lot of attention to it.  I doodled and did things like that. A priest there by the name of Father  Edward Bach saw some of my drawings that I was doing, just  unschooled, no classes. We had no art classes. I was just doing stuff. He  said,    Well, can you do this?    and he gave me a few little projects to do.  Then he bought me some paintbrushes and some paints and some  pencils. He did some things for me that made me kind of pursue those  avenues.  Then he brought Susie Peters out. He brought Susie Peters out to St.  Patrick   s and had her look at some of my doodlings and some of my  drawings and things like that. I had painted the Crucifixion, and I made  everybody Indians. I made them all Indians. She said,    Obviously, he  has some talent.    I didn   t have any idea who Susie Peters was. I had not  the slightest idea. (Laughter) St. Patrick   s, they had all of those Kiowa  Five guys in their school. All of those paintings were up in the attic.  Bach was interested in that, so we gathered up stuff. We found Carl  Sweezys. We found a lot of Carl Sweezys. We found  Stephen   Mopopes, just a lot of paintings.  That kind of influenced me, looking at that style of art. That flat style  influenced me a great deal. I sold my first painting while I was still in  high school of that Crucifixion. A lady in Midwest City came out there  and bought my first painting. I thought,    Wow, ninety bucks  Ninety  dollars     (Laughs)  That   s wonderful.  6  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Yes, and I thought,    Hey, maybe I could make some money.    (Laughter)  Now, Susie Peters not only advocated for Native artists and got them  with people who could further promote their work, but she occasionally  sold pieces, too. But you don   t know if it was through her influence or  simply how this woman got word of your work?  I do not. I do not. I   m sure it was through Father Bach, but it came from  one of those avenues. Years later, her house was hit by a crashed jet and  just burned everything down.  Wow. That   s an amazing story about recovering the artwork, too, and  seeing this neglected work and helping Father Bach, sort of. That  probably was a tremendous experience.  There was a lot of art. See, Charles went to his senior year at St.  Patrick   s, and Charles had some idea about that. He gathered all of that  artwork up. There was still a lot of it up there. There were buffalos and  all kinds   everything was up there in that attic on the fourth floor. We  used to go up there and mill around. There was a casket up there. We   d  go up there and play around. All of this art was up there, and I had no  idea who these guys were until later.  I had some paintings there, and I painted the  Kateri  Tekakwitha, who  is a patron saint. I did a six-foot painting of her on a board that we used,  and it ended up in the attic. Then Jack Davis recovered it and took it  home, and he had it in his house. I had it nailed on my wall, reversed,  and I hung tools on it. (Laughs) I was moving from that house, and Jack  saw it and said,    What are you doing with that?    I said,    Well, take it.     He still has it somewhere. I painted it in probably    59,    58, something  like that.  Now, were you pretty influenced by your maternal grandfather?  Yes, absolutely. He got us interested in sculpting. We didn   t have a lot  of toys, so we had clay. We had clay, or he had river mud or whatever,  just different things. He would show us how to make things and animals.  I can remember in kindergarten, when I was in school at kindergarten in  Wichita, Kansas, I mostly lived with Laura Birdwoman and my  grandfather. My mother worked in Wichita a couple years, so I would go  up there and would ride the train back and forth with my grandfather. He  would take us to the river, and we would sculpt and do things like that. I  remember some kid saying   we were making people, and they said,     You put legs on that man.    The rest of them never put legs on it, but I  put legs on this guy. I always remember that for some reason. I don   t  know why. (Laughter) Put legs on a piece of sculpture. We sculpted as  7  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  long as I was little. That   s what we played with. I made cowboys and  Indians and animals.  Now, after high school what did you do?  I went into the Marine Corps, and I continued to draw and do things like  that. I designed several company logos and platoon logos and things like  that. Did a few little things like that while I was in the Marine Corps.  Then I got out and     How many years were you in?  Three years. Three years. I served one year in Vietnam. I got out, and I  started drawing again because I remembered I made that ninety dollars. I  remembered that, so I started drawing. By then, Charles was doing some  things, so I kind of     Was he showing with any galleries yet?  Yes, he was. There was a gallery at Classen Circle. I can   t remember the  name of it, but it was an antique store, and it was a gallery. I did a  couple little paintings, and they took them, and they started selling some  stuff. I can remember I was in that gallery with Kelly Haney, and I  remember some of the things he was doing. I was still doing flat art, you  know, that non-dimensional, just flat art.  Just outlining?  Yes, and I did that for a long time because that   s what I was familiar  with. That   s what I had seen from everybody. Then I got acquainted  with Doc Tate  Nevaquaya  and started meeting a lot of other artists and  started doing some shows. So I started to evolve a little bit, started to  change a little bit, kind of in between realism and flat art, got in that area  that a lot of guys are moving through. I was influenced by Nevaquaya,  and I still was influenced by those other artists.  My sister was married to Bill Topahote, who was a Kiowa artist. I used  to watch him paint, so I was influenced by several different people  besides those old artists, and Carl Sweezy and  Woody  Crumbo and  those guys,  Woody  Big Bow, all those kind of guys, Acee Blue Eagle.  I remember the glass pitchers and the drinking glasses that were sold at  the gas stations. All those things influenced me.  I had no formal training. Had no formal training at all. I thought when I  got out of the Marine Corps and went to college that I wanted to be an  artist. I took a couple of art classes. The instructor, he   d take my  8  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  artwork, and he would just tear me up.    Now, see this painting here?  Don   t do this      Where were you?  At Edmond.  Edmond, okay, University of Central Oklahoma.  Yes. That instructor would just tear me up.    Don   t do this  See what he   s  doing here?    I thought,    Well, obviously, I can   t be an artist,    so I quit. I  changed. Ended up in law enforcement with a law enforcement degree,  but it took me a while. I was already painting by then, though, and  changed my degree to law enforcement. By then I was selling a few  items at that gallery there in Oklahoma City. Then Doris Littrell     Charles had a little store there at that time in south Oklahoma City, and  so I had some things in there. I think Doris eventually asked me to bring  some things to her, and so I started showing with Doris Littrell for quite  a while, and the Art Market. I used to go to the Tulsa Art Market and do  a lot of shows with them. Got acquainted with a lot of different artists. I  just kind of took a little bit from everybody. I saw what somebody was  doing, and they were being successful, so I kind of followed that around.  I   m just a big copier. I copy.  It   s hard to come back from that. Other artists have had that experience,  too, of someone being so critical of your work that you almost want to  put it down. It sounds like you were fortunate that your brother wouldn   t  let you, and you just had to do it anyway.  Yes, it was a release. I really enjoyed it. I enjoyed it more than I  probably was selling. I was just fortunate enough that I did sell some  things, and I became acquainted with a lot of people. I had already been  painting a while when I saw Merlin  Little Thunder    s things. The first  piece I remember of his was this cowboy leaning up against a wall with  his leg up, and had a hat on and a striped shirt. I always remembered that  piece. I said,    Wow  That is really good.    I liked his style and what he  was doing.  I looked at a lot of Rabbit, Bill Rabbit, and a lot of different people. I  saw some sculpting, and Charles was doing some sculpting. I just tried  everything. I tried sculpting. I tried jewelry making. I tried welding,  burned all my clothes up. Just burned my clothes up trying to weld   (Laughter) I said,    I can   t weld.    Burned my shoelaces, had holes in all  my clothes. Charles was just laughing at me, trying to teach me to weld,  but I couldn   t weld.  9  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  But when you got your law enforcement degree, did you know you were  going to go in as a forensic artist?  No, absolutely not.  How did that come about?  By that time, I was with the Midwest City Police Department, and I had  already had a few little shows right there in town. Had a few little  shows, and I really didn   t do a lot of Indian art at Midwest City. I copied  a lot of other paintings.  More western?  Classical. No, really wasn   t even western, just some classical stuff. I  didn   t even know what I was doing. I was watercoloring, and then I did  some oils. I had no idea what I was doing. The techniques, I had no idea  about the techniques and just had to fight my way through it and make a  lot of mistakes.  Figured out how to manipulate watercolor and how to manipulate oil  painting. I had no instructions. I just knew that I had a passion, that I  wanted to do it. I stumbled through, made a lot of mistakes. Guys would  say,    You did what with that? Wait, how did you do that?    (Laughter) I  just figured out what would work. I   d use things like lighter fluid and  just all kind of crazy things.  Then I eventually evolved from watercolors to oil and then went to  acrylics and found that acrylics was a lot faster. It dried quicker. You   d  have to wait forever for oils to dry, and so it was just an evolvement for  me, stumble through and find the best way. Then I started visiting with  artists and asking them questions, and they would tell me things,    Well,  you can do this and you do that.    It   s been a struggle for me, really,  because I had no formal training.  So you were working for the Midwest  City  police force, and an  opening comes about for a forensic artist?  Well, no it didn   t. We had a killing. In fact, there was about seven or  eight killings in the metro area. They were drive-bys. We didn   t call  them drive-bys in those days. They were home invasions, and we didn   t  call them home invasions. A guy was robbing people and shooting them.  I mean, he was just literally executing them. Drive down the street, shoot  them, jump out and rob them, and jump in the car and drive off.  We had several in Midwest City. One of the detectives came up to me  10  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  and said,    This lady       it   s Christmastime, and he said,    Her husband  was killed when he answered the door.    They killed him, and when she  ran down the hall, they shot her in the face. She was in the hospital, and  they said,    We don   t think she   s going to make it.    He said,    Do you  think you could go over there and make a drawing with her?    I said,     Well, sure.     Just like everything else I   ve ever done, I just stumbled through it. I had  no idea the technique or anything, but I made a drawing based on what  she told me. They did a neighborhood because someone had seen a car  that matched, and they were doing a neighborhood. They knocked on a  door and showed this young girl the drawing, and she said,    You got  him. That   s my husband.    He was like seventeen or eighteen years old,  and she was like sixteen. They were glue sniffers, and they were robbing  people, robbing and killing them.  So your first forensics sketch, you got the guy.  Was a success, yes   What year was this, Harvey?  That was probably about    67,    68, somewhere in there. I can   t even  remember the name of the guy, honestly. A guy told me the other day.  He remembered that case and told me the name, and it just escapes me. I  don   t remember anymore. If I had not been successful that time, I   d  probably have never done another one, but I   ve done probably five  thousand drawings all over the country.  Once that happened, then word sort of got out?  Yes. People started coming to me saying,    Hey, can you come do this?  Can you come do this?    A lot of the things in forensic art   I won   t say a  lot, but several substantial things are things that I developed for law  enforcement that was not being done.  Can you give an example or two?  Well, the interview techniques. My interview techniques are more in-depth  than anybody else   s, even to this day. I developed soft tissue  reconstruction, which was not being done on unidentified human  remains. I developed that technique. I advanced the composite art,  changed it from composite art to witness description art in interviews.  The photography that we did on unidentified bodies was terrible. We  made changes in all of that, in photographing unidentified bodies and  human remains.  11  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Just to pick up on this transition from composite to witness description,  for those of us that aren   t as familiar with the field, can you explain  what that is?  Well, initially, when we do art like that, trying to determine what  someone looks like, we ask questions about eyes, lips, nose, hair, shapes  of the face, ears, hairstyle. You go through that whole process, and that   s  why they say that   s a composite of facial characteristics. A lot of people  still use that term, but I use the term    witness description drawing    as  opposed to a composite because we talk about all the compositive things  and put them together. My interview techniques are more in-depth than  most people because we can have a face that is very similar, but maybe  the body   s different or the type of hair they have. We changed things  from, instead of just saying    brown hair,    we have the variations of hair.  You   re trying to get a more whole picture, holistic.  Yes, we try to make them think. That   s part of the problem is we don   t  make our witnesses think about things enough. We let them get away  with things.    He was between twenty and thirty.    Well, I don   t let them  do that, see. And hairstyles, if they   re white or black or Native American  or Hispanic. If he   s a white person,    What area would you say he   s  from? Scandinavia, Germany       You make people say,    Oh, well, he   s  Scandinavian,    or,    He   s biracial.    See, my interviews are more in-depth.  I make people work. I don   t let them get away with just saying,     He   s a white guy.       He was maybe twenty to thirty, about 5   9.    You   re  chunky, you   re powerful, you   re soft, fat, all those little things that make  a person different.  Which is sort of what an artist would be noticing anyway. That   s kind of  what an artist would notice.  Yes, so you have to make witnesses better. You have to make them  better. Once you go to court, they   re more organized. They   re more  confident, and that   s what I try to do. Then I   m able to give you, an  investigator, this information, not only a drawing but you have other  things about them. That helps them.  If you   re interviewing people, like a serial murder case, and you have  several suspects, you have a composite, but you also have physical  characteristics. You can look at somebody, and you can talk about  mannerisms, mannerisms and what people do under stress. Under stress,  they might do this, do things, bite his lip. (Gestures) You get him in a  room, and you start talking to him and say,    Oh, he   s doing the same  thing.     12  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  So there   s a lot of little things that I   ve developed that are helpful to  investigators in the art besides the drawing and besides skull  reconstructions and age progressions and witness description drawings  and soft tissue reconstructions. I like to feel like and hope that I   ve had a  contribution to those things that were not being done before.  After you had been doing this a certain amount of years, did you just  officially go to work for the OSBI full time, or have you always been  available as they need someone to do it?  When I was at Midwest City, I was a detective. I was doing the  composites, and OSBI was in a transition. They were starting to grow.  They were starting to develop into a bigger agency and new buildings. It  just so happened that the chief of Midwest City hired me as a patrolman,  now was a director of OSBI, and they were looking for minorities. I had  just gotten my degree, and at that point he said,    You have to have a  degree to work for OSBI as an investigator.    Once I got my degree, they  came and asked me to join them. I thought,    Man, I get to work the  whole state.    They hired me as a narcotics officer, and I worked  narcotics for four years.  Were you the first Native person they had hired?  That I   m aware of, yes, first guy. Now, there could   ve been somebody a  long time ago. I looked at some old photographs, and there was a guy  that looked like he could have been part Indian. They weren   t a very big  agency. I had been with OSBI a couple of years, and we did the David  Hall investigation, Governor David Hall. He was after the agency  because we were investigating him. He was going to fire the last ten  guys hired, and I was one of those guys that was going to get fired. I  thought,    I   ve made a terrible mistake here.    (Laughter) I even took a  cut in pay to go to work for OSBI, but I wanted to work a bigger area.  They knew that I did art, so they let me do witness descriptions and  things like that. I didn   t do skull reconstructions at that point because I  was really leery about handling human remains. I think that   s just based  on my culture. Those old people talk about handling certain things and  religious articles, body, so I was always skeptical of doing that. After a  while, I said,    Man, I really want to do that. I really want to reconstruct a  human being and get them identified.     Fortunately, I   ve been really lucky because I would try those areas and I  would be successful. So it just kind of perked me up, kept me going into  doing those kind of things and evolving. I said,    I can do this better.     Unidentified bodies, I used to draw and try to fix them up with a pencil.  13  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Then I decided I could do that with an airbrush. I learned how to  airbrush photographs on unidentified bodies, so that changed the whole  technique of how we photographed a body. We took the distortion out of  the face. We washed them. We closed their mouth. We did a lot of  things that we never did before. Before, they would go to the morgue,  and the body would be just terrible. They   d photograph and leave, and  you   d say,    We can   t see nothing.     Again, you   re kind of thinking like an artist. It   s your background as an  artist that   s giving you some of these insights that let you develop these  techniques.  Yes, absolutely. No one was doing it. Just like everything else, there was  no one doing it. I just said,    Well, hell, no one told me I couldn   t do  that,    and so you end up doing it. (Laughter) They   d say,    Well, that  works. That made a deal.    The guys said,    Well, nobody did that.  There   s nobody ever done that before.    I think it   s just the whole  concept of me growing up and not having the formal training about  something but having a passion for something and figuring it out, and  it   s working.  Just like Charles always told me. When Charles started welding   he  said he welded for three years, and he did some great pieces of sculpture.  One day, he went to the weld shop and said,    I need some welding  rods,    and the guy said,    You need some flux?    Charles said,    Flux?  What   s flux?    He said,    Well, you   ve got to have flux to weld.    Charles  said,    I   ve been welding for three years. I   ve never used flux.    But he  just had that touch. He had that magic touch.  I remember that story. (Laughs)  That was a great story. I just thought that.    Flux? What   s flux?     (Laughter)  You see, and I can understand now why you see this as a whole  continuum. You explained that you   ve always been doing your art  simultaneously while working in this very specialized area. When you  first got with Doris Littrell   s gallery, was that the first art gallery that  handled your work on a more professional basis?  Well, that gallery at Classen Circle, they handled me, but Doris, I think,  really helped me the most. Doris Littrell really helped me the most.  In what ways?  She encouraged me, and she promoted my work, and she pushed it and  14  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  sold it.  Did you get entered in some out-of-state shows?  Yes, she would take my art, and I didn   t even have to go. She would  send it to Gallup and different places. She   d say,    Oh, you won. You  won again.    (Laughter) I would just say,    Wow, I didn   t even have to  go, and I won something over there.    She did a lot. Doris Littrell did a  lot for me. Doris Littrell did a lot for me.  What was one of the early awards that was especially exciting for you?  I did a show in Anadarko, and     During Indian Fair, was it, at their art show?  Yes, but they had a special show. They had a special deal. I did the  cover for the  Anadarko Indian  Exposition one time. I did the back  page. I thought of spirits, and that   s what I called them. I had all these  Indian men, four guys on horseback, and the men were naked. They  were on horseback, and they were kind of riding through the clouds. I  had this woman come up to me, and she just jumped all over me. She  said,    What are you doing?    (Laughter) You couldn   t see anything, but  she said,    You   ve got to be true to what   s going on.    I said,    These are  just spirits.    She said,    You have to pay attention to what you   re doing.     She got after me pretty good.  Was she involved with the show in any way?  No, no, she was just an Indian woman.  Just a passerby. Just an Indian woman, one of those older Indian  women. (Laughs)  Got after me. Same like when they used to get after you because  someone would try to paint something with a Native American church or  peyote or something. I never did that because I saw them chew people  out and get after them for doing that, so I never did do that, but I   ve been  in a gallery when people will come in there and get after somebody. She  got after me on that. I said,    I have to do more research,    so I started  reading and looking at things and looking at magazines and catalogs and  seeing styles. That criticism, once again, made me do something about it  instead of just drawing. Now I try to be more specific about tribes, and I  don   t try to mix them up. I just try to be more specific about detail, and  it was all because that lady got after me for making those naked Indians.  15  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Those spirits. (Laughs)  Yes.  So you kind of moved from what had been an intertribal focus to being  more tribally specific.  Yes.  What were some of your themes, your early subject matter, early on?  Mostly horses, guys on horseback, kind of warrior-type stuff. I had that  kind of that mentality. Then it changed again to more of a cultural  environment, cultural, family art, people, and it wasn   t so much focused  on war, battle, stuff like that. I still do that, but it broadened me out a  little bit. It made me expand into some other areas because I didn   t  know. I didn   t know about certain styles. I had my own concept about  certain things. I painted war dancers and stuff like that. Now I do things  that have a historical value and research.  I buy books. One of my downfalls is I buy books. (Laughter) I buy  books, and, man, I   ll go somewhere   I   ve got a library in there that   s  just full of books. I got books there. I got books in the back bedroom. I  got books upstairs. I got books everywhere. I got stacks of books over by  the bed when I read at night, just looking at stuff, seeing people and  what they   re doing and how they did it, what they dressed in certain time  periods.  Were you already supporting a family then, too?  Yes.  Okay. So you   ve got a few economic pressures, too, although you   re  wanting to really     Yes, but my art was kind of the gravy. If I sold something, that was  always something I could use that money to do   Charles always taught  me, he said,    Harvey, you   ve got to put your money back into what  you   re doing. You can   t just go buy that car. You can   t go buy that gun.  You need to put part of your money back into your art.     Charles taught me a lot of things that I probably would not have done  because no one ever told me these things. When you grow up without a  father (my grandfather taught me a lot of things) you   re lost a lot of  times because there   s no one there to tell you that you can   t do that.     You   re not supposed to do that. You need to behave.     16  Little Thunder  Even though those old people told us all those things, those things came  back to me as I got older, and I realized,    Oh, that   s what they meant.  That   s what she   s talking about.    Aunt Laura would say   we   d go to  bed, and she   d say,    Put your shoes under the bed.    I said,    Why?    She  said,    You might have to get up and run.    I thought,    What would I run  to? We   re living in   where would I run to?     As I got older and thought about that, they were being raided in the  middle of the night. A lot of times, they would jump and run with no  moccasins. She said,    You need to have your shoes. You might have to  run.    Now it dawned on me, that   s what she talks about, born in the  1870s. They grew up, and they heard those stories and said,    We had to  run with no shoes on.       Well, put your shoes there. You   ve got your  shoes.     Things like that you never thought about. Call your name in the middle  of the night, and you   ll say,    Aunt Laura, we   re all here.    She   d be out  on the porch, hollering our names. She   d say,    I   m calling your spirit  in.    I thought,    Calling my spirit in? What are you calling my spirit in  for?    Later, as you got older, it was like, golly, how sweet is that, that  she   s thinking about my spirit and bringing us in at night so something  don   t get us, something don   t capture your spirit at night in the dark.  There   s a lot of little things like that that I have to recall and think about,  say,    That   s what that meant. That   s what that means.    I   m blessed in a  lot of ways that I heard those kind of stories.  I think of a story. When we were little and we would get hurt, they   d  say,    Indian boys don   t cry. You don   t cry. You only cry when your  heart is hurt but not if you get hit in the head with something. You don   t  cry. You make the sound of the bear.    (Laughter) See, all the little white  kids in baseball would hit a rock and hit you in the head, and instead of  crying, we would be saying things like,    Honksh  Honksh     They   d look  around and say,    What are you doing? What is that?       That   s the sound  of the bear. That   s what the mama bear does. She makes that sound.     So we all made that sound. You forget about that until late one night,  you   re sitting there, and you stub your toe. I used to get stung by  scorpions. I   d say that instead of something else.    Honksh.    I told that  story at the Veterans meeting one time, and Gordon Yellowman thought  that was pretty interesting. He hadn   t heard that story. There   s a lot of  little things like that that make you culturally think about things, and you  want to paint those kind of things.  When did you first do your first print?  17  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  In those days, in the early    80s, prints were, man, I mean it was  expensive to me because you   re raising a family, and you   re trying to  make it. You   re paying the house payment, car payments, and all sorts of  stuff, and they want four thousand dollars to do a series of prints. I had  to save my money to do a print. The first good print I did   and I waited.  I did several pieces of art until I thought I really had one. It was called  Winter Visitors. It was a bunch of Indians on horseback, coming through  the snow out of the trees. That was my first print.  Then I did a couple of pen and inks that I sold. I sold those pen and inks  for ten dollars apiece. I saw them on eBay about a year ago, and I did  two of them. A set of cowboys and a set of Indians. I saw them sold on  eBay for  250 apiece. I was selling them for ten dollars when I first  started selling them, (Laughter) and they were framed. They   re all out of  print. They   re gone. I don   t have them anymore. People ask me about  them all the time. So it was the Winter Visitors and those medicine  warriors and those cowboys, and the cowboys was myself and three  other OSBI agents, but I put them on horseback.  You started experimenting with sculpture in the mid-   80s. Do you want  to just tell us a little bit about your first attempt at sculpture in a sort of  big way?  Actually, I always had clay and was always doing something. I fired  some pieces out of ceramic when I was at Midwest City at the police  department. I made some sculptures out of clay, and I took them to a  foundry and had them fired, and they turned out. I didn   t sell them. I  didn   t sell those first pieces. I just kept them.  Were they figures?  Yes, they were busts, people. I did several of those, and I didn   t try to  sell them. Then later on, I thought,    Well, I think I   m going to make  one.    I made a full-sized piece out of ceramic and dried it for like three  months to let it all dry out and make sure it had no bubbles in it, all them  stories. To me, it was huge. It was probably twenty inches tall, this big,  (Gestures) and I took it to the foundry. I struggled with it, now, for three  months. They put it in there, and it exploded, (Laughter) just exploded  because I left an air bubble in it. I thought,    Well, I   m not doing that  anymore.     I got to visiting around and started messing with the clay. I went down to  Scissortail Foundries in south Oklahoma City and hung around there a  little while and visited with a couple of them ol    boys there. They  showed me some tricks. Charles was doing some things by then, so I  kind of bootlegged some stuff there. They said,    We   ll fire it for you,  18  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  but you   ve got to clean it up.    So I did all the foundry work myself,  which cut my price. I thought,    Boy, if I can ever afford to do this, I   m  not doing this foundry work.    It is dirty, hard work, grinding and  polishing and welding. I said,    That   s just more work than   .    I ended  up doing several pieces like that, and fortunately I sold them.  I like sculpting. I like to sculpt. I chain sawed. I chain sawed because it  was something I thought I   d like to try to do, and I wanted to experiment  with it. I chain sawed. I used a regular chain saw. A regular chain saw   My first original piece is right around the corner there. (Gestures)  Yes, you have some beautiful collaborative sculptures, too, I guess,  chain saw sculptures you did with your son.  Yes, exactly. Later on, I figured out there   s an artist   s blade that you use.  You don   t use this great big round thing, you know. Then I ended up  getting some grinders. Once again, I didn   t know what I was doing. I  just wanted to do it, and I did it so hard because there was no one there  to tell me to do it and how to do it. I just did everything the hard way. I  did everything the hard way. (Laughter)  When you and Charlie have shared booths, which I   ve seen you do at  Red Earth a number of times over the years, has he ever gotten an idea  for a sculpture from one of your paintings or vice versa, or from one of  his sculptures, have you gotten an idea?  Well, I   m sure we probably have, but we probably didn   t tell one  another.    I like that idea, but I don   t want you to know that I stole your  idea.    (Laughter) But yes, there   s several things that Charles did that I  would kind of change and make it mine. I think we all do that. I think we  all do. I think we all see something and change it a little bit and make it  yours. You   re influenced by all these people around you.  Doc Tate Nevaquaya, he influenced me a great deal, and things that  other artists did, Troy Anderson. Just a lot of guys just really, really  influence you. Guys that you were growing up with influenced you. You  saw what they were doing. You liked what they did, so you incorporated  it. You saw the success they were having, so you evolve. If you don   t  evolve, if you don   t adapt, you   re destined to be in that same spot you  started at, so you   ve got evolve and adapt with just almost anything you  do.  Have you had a show at Southern Plains Indian Museum?  Yes, I have. Yes, I did a one-man show there, and I   ve had some things  there.  19  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Was it in the    90s? Do you remember?  No, it was in the, probably 2007, 2008.  Oh, okay.  I   m the Chairman of the National Indian Arts and Crafts Board. I   m the  chairman. I   ve been there a year and something now.  It   s a four-year term, isn   t it?  Yes.  Great.  Yes, I was on the board, and then all of a sudden, they said,    Well,  you   re the chairman.    I said,    What?    (Laughter) It ended up I   m the  chairman of that. I said,    Okay. You   ve got to help me because I   ve just  only been here less than a year. You   ve got to help me out.    She said,     Oh, we   ll help you.     Now, in 2007, that was also when you were Red Earth Honored One,  wasn   t it?  That was in 2005, I was the Red Earth Honored One.  Two thousand five.  Yes.  How did you feel? What was the impact of that on your   .  My brother was a Red Earth Honored One before that. We were the first  brother team to make that. We were the first ones. There was all sorts of  guys honored that influenced me. Allan Houser, I did a show with Allan  Houser one time in Chicago, with Charlie and Allan Houser. I   ve got a  picture of us up there. Doug Hyde. All those guys. I was just a beginner,  but they treated me so well. They helped me, and they showed me  things.  Allan Houser was always so kind to me. He always called me by my  name. I thought,    Man, this guy   I   m dust on his moccasins, and he  calls,    Hey, Harvey, how you doing?       Always made me feel good about  that, Allan Houser did, and Doug Hyde. Charles took me all over. Once  Charles was running around, he   d say,    Come on, go with me.    We   d go  20  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  to Colorado. He took me to a lot of shows.  You did quite a bit of traveling together.  We did a lot of shows together, Charlie and I, early on. I   d take off from  work, and we   d go for a weekend. I   d be so thrilled because I   d make  four hundred dollars. Charles would make two thousand, and I   d make  four hundred dollars. I   d think,    Man, I am on top of the world.    The  Red Earth thing, I was surprised that I got that because I was competing  with Mike Larsen. Mike Larsen was up for it that same time, and I  thought,    Well, hell, I   m never going to get this. Mike Larsen will get  this.     I was just kind of like I   m standing in a corner like it wasn   t no big deal.  I   m whistling Dixie. It   s not going to happen, you know. (Laughter)  When they called my name, I almost fell. I was just shocked, really  honored. I am stunned that they picked me instead of Mike Larsen. It  was a great honor for me. It was a great honor for me because there was  a lot of guys there that I really admired. It goes way back, you know,  goes back a long ways, that were Honored Ones.  In 1991, the Indian Arts and Crafts Act was passed, requiring  certification or proof of tribal membership. I was wondering if you  remember the kind of impact it had on artists and galleries at that time.  I thought that they were going to stop people from plagiarizing and from  taking art, calling it Indian art, and not being Indian art coming from  other countries, guys that are very talented, but they   re just copying and  selling it. I was so happy that happened, that that impacted and saved us  local artists from people that were doing art and saying they   re Indians.  To me, that had a great deal of influence. I felt like there was somebody  out there that was going to help us, going to take care of us.  I can remember there was a lot of stuff coming in from Mexico and from  the Philippines and from Korea and Taiwan. I thought,    This ain   t right.  This aint fair.    But when that started to happen I felt like there was  somebody there to help us, protect us. Someone   s there. We   re just not  on our own.  To me, that meant a lot. Maybe I didn   t really understand it, but I still  felt like there was somebody there that we can turn to when someone   s  standing there next to you and they   re selling something that looks just  like these jewelers make, and they   re selling it at half the price or less. It  looks just like what these guys are doing.  So much of the art business is that business part. I know that Gina  21  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder   Pratt  is a great help to you. What is her role in the art business?  Oh, Gina is my manager. She saves me. (Laughter) Gina takes care of  me. She catalogs everything. She photographs everything. That   s stuff  that I wasn   t doing prior to Gina. I did very little cataloging, but Gina  photographs everything. She catalogs it. We price it. She made me a  businessman. She turned me into a business instead of just something  that I would do. She turned it into a business, gave me a lot more  exposure, created websites for me, just took care of me, did a lot of  things that I wouldn   t do or didn   t think about doing or didn   t care about  doing. She turned me into a businessman as far as my art goes.  Would you say that now most of your artwork is sold through galleries  and your home? Is it kind of split between the two? Are shows more  important, or all three?  I think really all three. Our website, we sell off the website. That   s  another avenue for us that we didn   t have. We sell things on the website,  that market that we hadn   t reached before, whether it be a print or we  can offer them giclees at different sizes on paper or on canvas. We ship.  It   s created a source of income for us that we didn   t have before, and  Gina did that for me. Gina did that.  I don   t do a lot of gallery shows. I do some galleries, but I don   t do a lot  because I can   t produce in volume. I had to make a decision at one point  in my career:    Do I want to be an artist, or do I want to be a policeman?  What is more stable for me?    So I cut back on some things, cut back on  some galleries, but the website has opened up another market for me.  We do very few shows. I do very few shows. We do some local  galleries, and every now and then I   ll send to a gallery somewhere else. I  do a lot of law enforcement stuff now. Actually, I started doing a lot of  western stuff for law enforcement on the websites, so I   ve kind of  diversified. I do some sculpting, some designs.  Exploring more western subject matter.  Yes because that   s a source for us with law enforcement. We did the  Oklahoma centennial blanket, and that opened a lot of doors for us,  selling the blanket and the Oklahoma plate. All those little things that  Gina did for me, that she did for me, I wouldn   t have done. I wouldn   t  have marketed them like that. I wouldn   t have done it. I would have just  put it in a gallery and said,    Oh, well. Who cares? I might sell one here  and one there.    The computer age exploded for us.  Did Frankoma  Pottery  approach you about the Oklahoma plate, or did  you submit a proposal?  22  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  I submitted a proposal to the Centennial Commission. Same with the  blanket and the plate. They wondered if I was going to send it overseas,  and I wouldn   t do it. I said I wouldn   t do it.    It   s Oklahoma. I   m going  to give it to Frankoma. We   ll do it here in Oklahoma.    The same with     it was last year. We   re a law enforcement family. Gina and my boys are  policemen, or were policemen or agents. We invented a tool to take  pistols apart, so we patented it. We did a lot of things. We market that.  Interesting.  It opened up another door, being inventive and creative and having to  stumble your way through things. We did that, once again, when we  invented the tool to take Glock pistols, Smith and Wessons,  Diamondbacks, Tauruses, Sig  Sauer s. This tool, if you have a certain  device, this tool takes it apart for you, so we   re marketing that.  We   ve got websites for that, and those things would   ve never happened  if it hadn   t been for my wife, Gina. I just wouldn   t have done it. I said,     Well, who cares? I don   t care.    It   s been a business adventure. Once  again, we didn   t know what we were doing, but we   re in it. We are deep  in it, and we   ve got a lot of money involved in it. We   re just bumping  our heads, but we   re going ahead.  That   s neat. That   s an important contribution in a different way. I   d like  to talk a little bit about your techniques, artistic techniques, and  philosophy, etcetera. In terms of painting, you still paint primarily in  acrylics.  Yes.  On board or canvas is still kind of your primary format.  Both, paper or canvas. It just depends. I may not paint for a week, and  then all of a sudden, I   m sitting there watching TV or doing something,  and I   m doodling, and something comes to me. My style that I paint  depends on where I   m going with it. It depends on where I   m going with  it. I painted murals at OSBI. I   ve got a thirty-seven-foot mural at OSBI  about the history of the OSBI.  I didn   t realize that. When did you do that one?  I did that over a period of time in the last seven years. I designed the  OSBI badge, their anniversary badge, their flag, lapel pins. My little  brother and I got a whipping for painting on the walls when we were  kids, drawing on the walls. (Laughter) I can remember my brother-in-  23  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  law whipping my little brother, and I told him,    You can   t do that to us      I took him by the hand, and we left the house. I said,    Well, I   m going  home,    and they were plumb across town. I was probably four, maybe  four. Now I get to paint on the walls, and nobody spanks us. (Laughter)  Not only that, it   s very appreciated. (Laughs)  Nobody spanks us. Acrylics is probably, right now, my choice, but every  now and then I think,    I   d like to do a watercolor.    I do some  watercolor, still, occasionally. Just depending on what   if you start  experimenting and all of a sudden it looks good, you just stay in that  particular style. Don   t try to change it because that   s what came out of it,  so I just stay right there. Someone will say,    That don   t even look like  yours.    I say,    Well, I don   t know. It   s mine.    It   s not what you would  think would be mine because it   s different, and that   s just the way it is.  You   ve kind of explained how your style has changed from that flat style.  How about your use of color? How has that changed, do you think?  Well, to give you an example: white. I used to just put white on. Then I  found out later on that white is not just white. White is a lot of stuff.  Then I noticed that Doc Tate always put a little white in every color that  he used. He told me that. He said,    I put a little white in everything,  everything.    So I did that for a while.  I used to buy stuff right straight out of the tube, but then I discovered I  could blend things. Once again, it   s just by listening to other guys tell  me little tricks and secrets that I learned and would try it and see if that  would work for me, how to build up washes and make it turn into  something instead of trying to be real muddy. Sometimes you get so  overworked and muddy, so I would build with acrylics.  Gina gets after me because I   ll do a painting, I   ll just do something, and,     Oh, I don   t like that.    Instead of throwing that canvas away, I   ll take it  in there, and I   ll soak it in water and scrape it off. She   ll say,    What are  you doing? That canvas, just throw it away     It   s because I   m a  tightwad. I am so stingy. I say,    Well, no, I can make that work. I can  make that work.    (Laughter)  Really, I don   t know whether I   m stingy or not or a tightwad, but I   ll  say,    I know I can fix that.    She said,    Will you quit trying to fix  everything and just go pay somebody to do that?    Well, something   s  wrong. I can fix it up.    Go pay somebody to do that. Go get somebody  else to do that.    I think,    Oh, I can do that.    (Laughter) She   s always  after me about it.  24  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Colors, to me, it depends on how it starts to develop, how it starts to  grow, whatever I   m doing. If I   m painting and all of a sudden it looks  good, and I just stay with that, then everything is like that. That   s kind of  the way it is. Sometimes it   ll start some way, and then the second subject  is better than the first, so I go back and change the first to the second. It  just kind of depends on how things develop for me because I   m still just  kind of hunting and searching and trying to develop something.  I really don   t think that I have a particular style because it   ll change.  Some people might look at some things and say,    That   s Harvey Pratt,     but I don   t think I   m like that. I think I change. I look at that Pawnee  Killer Not Afraid of Pawnee. That painting to me is different from that  other painting I did there. You could look at that and say,    That   s not  even nothing like that.    I think I   m still always looking and searching  and changing and trying to develop and adapt.  You   ve done different themes over the years, and I remember you doing  some Little People paintings.  Yes, I like Little People stories. I   ve heard them all my life. My older  brother, Otto, is between me and Charles. We lived on a river. When we  grew up in El Reno, we could walk one block away, and we   re in a  pasture. Then another mile and a half, we   re on the river. Growing up, I  can remember my little brother, Tony, we went with our older brothers,  and we carried all the game that they killed. I can remember Tony  carrying a jack rabbit, and it   s dragging the ground. That   s how small he  was. That   s how small he was, but he had to be with everybody. He said,     I can do whatever they can do,    the littlest guy.  We carried the game. We   re out there, and we would stay on the river  for four or five days. Nobody worried about us. If my kids didn   t come  home one night, I would be terrified, but we lived out on that river for  days at a time, eating what we hunted and building fires and just staying  out there. Grandpa and Aunt Laura,    That   s okay. That   s okay,    because  that   s the way they did, probably, a long time ago. If  Gina   s  gone more  than a couple of hours, and she   s out here roaming around on this 120  acres, I   m picking up the cell phone.    Where are you? Where are you?     (Laughter) I think about how we did when we were growing up. Nobody  worried about it, didn   t lock the doors, never locked the doors at the  house. People would just walk in.  I remember my grandpa was being interviewed by the Smithsonian. I   ve  got it over there. I found it, and I ordered it. He   s talking, and you can  hear the screen door banging,    Bang  Bang,    in the background. You  can hear that train whistle going by. I remember that. I don   t know how I  got off on that.  25  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Different subjects. Bigfoot is another theme in your work.  Yes, it is. Interesting. Interesting. By then, Gina had me on a website,  and I was getting like a thousand hits a day, something like that on my  website, about a thousand hits a day, sometimes even more. Anyway,  this guy called me up and said,    I   ve got a project.    He didn   t come right  out and tell me, but I could see him kind of fishing around. He said,    I  can see that you   re a Native American artist, and you   re a police officer,  and you do forensic art.    Eventually, he said,    I   m a researcher for  Bigfoot, and we   re looking for Sasquatch.     They called him Sasquatch and Bigfoot. Indians called him all sorts of  things. All the tribes have. Since then, I   ve learned a lot about him.  He said,    I want you to come to California and interview some people  that saw Bigfoot.    I said,    Okay.    He quoted me a price, and I said,     That   s fine, but my assistant   s got to come with me.    He said,    Okay.     My assistant was Gina. He paid for everything. We spent a week up  there, and I interviewed, what, thirty people. Did thirty drawings from  people. I always thought Bigfoot was going to be gorilla-looking, and he  didn   t. He looked human most of the time. Then you hear these stories.  They were all in their culture. It   s in their culture, and they had all  different names for him.  We had a good time. We went to Oregon, Washington, Minnesota,  California, Idaho. After I   d been doing it about two months, he said  something to me, and I said,    You know what? I   d have done this for  nothing. This is so much fun. I would have done this for nothing.    He  said,    Well, why didn   t you tell me that before? You could have told me  that before.    (Laughter) He comes out. He comes and spends some time  with us. He   s writes, and he   s doing some other books, and I consult  with him.  And he   s used some of your pieces as illustrations, too?  Yes, I did two books with him. I did two books. I did a lot of  illustrations for him and interviews, and I liked to gave him some  credibility. It changed the perspective of how people perceived what  Bigfoot or the Biped was. We did this research and found stories of him  that went back into the 1870s. We found a painting done by Silver  Moon, a Kiowa, that he did in the mid-   70s of Bigfoot in 1870. We  found that picture.  Actually, Sherman  Chaddlesone  gave it to me. Since then, I   ve picked  up artifacts and things like that and some great stories. I think we   re  going to Canada to interview some people in a village way up in Canada  26  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  that have been bothered by Bigfoot. Have some great stories about it.  It   s been a good adventure, eye-opening. When you can find cave  drawings of Bigfoot that are seven thousand years old, it   s not just  something that happened recently. It   s been around a long time. You  think back, and I think of Indians talking. They would say that  something was patting on the tipi or scratching on the tipi. You don   t go  out in the woods at certain times.  A long time ago, they would go somewhere and sing songs as they   re  traveling, trail songs, and do all sorts of things like that. They say it   s to  keep the ghosts away and keep the spirits away, and then you read these  things about Bigfoot and what he does now. He pats on people   s tents  while they   re camping, and he follows them. It   s the same that I heard. I  said,    Wow, Bigfoot could   ve been doing that.    Indians will just say it   s  a spirit, but it   s him. He   s prowling around doing stuff, teasing you,  messing with you. It   s been a good story.  How about humor? How important a role does that play in your work?  I think you have to have some humor about what you do, and laugh  about not only your mistakes but try to depict things that were funny.  My grandpa told me, he said,    Oh, Grandson, white people are funny.     He said,    When I was growing up, white man would carry a little rag  around in his pocket and blow his nose in it, fold it up, and put it back in  his pocket. He   d save it. We thought that was so silly that they would do  that, that they would blow their nose and put it back in their pocket.    He  said,    That was a funny story to us. We always laughed about that.    He  said,    And then they built these little houses in the back of their homes.  They   d go in there, and they saved that in those little outhouses, save  that. We thought that the white man was a funny man.    (Laughter)  You think about it. Why not? Why wouldn   t you think that kind of  humor? That   s totally different from the way they did. He said,    Oh,  they save all that stuff.    I think that   s kind of funny. You hear some  funny stories, so you try to paint some things like that and remember  that. You need to be able to laugh a little bit about different things.  How important are titles to your work?  You know what? That   s a good thing. A lot of guys that I remember  when I first started painting, they never titled their stuff. They would just  paint something, then a collector would come and say,    What is this?    I  did that very same thing when I first started. I wouldn   t title things, and  they would ask you questions. I hadn   t given it that big of thought  because I hadn   t learned to do specific things and to paint certain issues.  I just painted a guy on a horse or something.  27  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Now I have a reason for doing something. After a while, I learned to title  everything. It makes a big difference when someone comes up to you  and says,    What   s this about?    You can tell them what it means, what  it   s doing. I think that   s really important. That means a lot when people  know what it   s supposed to be about, what   s your painting, and what the  story is.  I know a lot of guys didn   t do that. Lots of guys didn   t do that. That  slowly evolved when you started doing shows and people coming up and  asking you,    What is this about?    You have to learn and say,    Well,  that   s the title,    so I always try to have a title and a little story with  everything that I do. It   s important.  Do you keep track of your ideas in a notebook or sketchbook?  Sometimes. Sometimes I have a little idea, and I   ll sketch around. I   ve  got little sketches everywhere, you know, different things. I wish I had  done that. I wish I had kept a little book. My son does that. My son  keeps everything in a sketchbook, all his designs. Whatever he does,  he   s got it all. I   ve regretted that I have not done that. I think if I had the  opportunity to start over or to go back and do something, I think I  would   ve done that. I would   ve tried to have kept all of that in a book.  I did ledger art for   I still do ledger art. I painted on buffalo hides and  elk hides. I kept one book, 1863 to1880, and I painted in it at that time  those dates, so you can see evolvement and changes. I didn   t tear it up. I  didn   t tear it up. I kept it all in one book, in a ledger book. I said,    One  of these days, even though I   m depicting things from a long time ago,  my paintings now are going to be like those old paintings were.  Somewhere there   s going to have some historical value to it.     So, you see, I tried to change it, how people evolved over that twenty  years. I kept it all together instead of tearing it up and selling them  individually. I sold it all in one book, signed it, and put it on a thing in  there and did some little sketches in the back of it. I wish I   d have kept a  book that I had, that I can say,    Let me think of that. I   ll maybe do a  little quick sketch.    But it   s all in that one big volume. I   ve regretted that  many times. I wish I   d have done that.  Do you have a creative routine, per se, or is it just when you get that  opportunity to sit down and sketch or paint?  It comes from something that triggers something in you. It could be out  walking around. It could be something that you see on TV, or someone  says something that brings back a memory or a thought that I can see an  28  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  incident in my mind that I say,    Oh, I need to paint that. That   s a good  story. That   s a good idea.     It comes from people talking, and it makes you think of something, or  they   ll tell you a nice story. Sometimes it   s just out there walking  around, and you see something that you say,    Well, I can see someone  coming through there,    and so that   s what you do. Someone tells you a  nice story. To me, it can come from anywhere, anytime, and anything. It  can turn into a real quick sketch, and, man, I just get up and go over  there and start doing something. She   ll say,    What are you doing?        Well, I   ve got an idea,    and just     Do you sketch first before you paint, or do you just paint directly?  Not always. Sometimes it   s just, man, I   ve got to do it right then. It   s  right there, and I   ve got to, you know. If it   s a project I   m thinking  about, I do a lot of studying, reading, and looking. I have to kind of build  on it, but if it   s something spontaneous, man, I   m there. I   m there until  two o   clock or back up at six o   clock, and I   ve got to be doing it. I   ll get  up some mornings and come down here. Before I even turn the coffee  on, I   m over there doing something. Or all of a sudden at ten o   clock at  night, boom, I   m over there. Something just happens.  Looking back on your career so far, what was a turning point for you  when you could   ve gone one way but you chose to go another?  There was a point in my career as an artist, a Native American artist, that  I was really pretty successful. I was doing a lot of stuff, and I was in a  lot of galleries. It was starting to take more and more of my time away  from my career as a law enforcement officer. I could see that I was  doing a lot more, and I was really pretty successful. At that point, I had  to make a decision.    Do I want to do this? Am I ready? I can do this  when I retire.    That was my thought.    I need to go ahead and be able to  retire, and then I can do this artwork.     So I started cutting back because it was consuming me, taking a lot of  my time. I still had law enforcement stuff to do. There was a time that I  made a conscious decision to do one thing or another, but my rationale  was,    I can do this when I retire. I can still do it in the evenings, but I  can do this full-time when I retire.    I just made that decision.  The thing of it is, see, my last twenty years with the Oklahoma State  Bureau of Investigation has just been forensic art. That   s all I do. I don   t  do anything else unless I want to. I can get involved in homicides or  whatever, rapes, and do a little bit, but I can walk away because I   m not  a case agent. I can go in, and I do one little part, and that   s make a  29  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  drawing or reconstruct somebody or that sort of stuff, then I   m through.  Go to the next one. You, as an investigator, you   re stuck with that case  for years, maybe. Maybe years. I can do cold cases. I do a lot of cold  cases, but I just do a portion. So I do art every day. Sometimes I come  home and I don   t want to do art because I   ve been doing it all day.  What   s been one of the low points of either side of your art, either the  forensic or the fine art?  I don   t know if I   ve had a low point, really. I think when you can   t do  what you want to do, I think that   s   I get frustrated when I can   t do  what I see here, what I want to do, and I can   t get there because I don   t  have the training to do it. I know what I want, but I don   t know how to  get there. I think that   s probably the frustration I have in art, not only in  forensic art but in my Native American art. My paintings that I do or a  sculpting that I do, I had no formal training. I think that is frustrating for  me. A lot of times, I think I wish I had the opportunity to go to an art  school and learn something because I   ve taken from a lot of different  artists, but I   ve never really developed a style.  I said that earlier. I   ve never really developed a style. I think I do a lot of  different things. It   s not one style. I think if you go to a school, you  might develop a style because someone teaches you to do a certain way.  I   ve had a lot of teachers. I   ve had lots of them. I   ve had all the artists,  the Carl Sweezys and the Mopopes, and I   ve had the Nevaquayas, and  I   ve had the Merlin Little Thunders, and I   ve had the Charlie Pratts and  the Rabbits and the Andersons. I   ve had a lot of different guys.  I looked at their stuff. Crumbos, you know. Allan Houser. Allan Houser,  when I was just a kid, I saw his stuff, and I said,    Wow     Looked at  those at the Southern Plains Museum, and I looked at his art in books.  I   ve been influenced. I   ve never had an art teacher that molded me to a  certain type of person. I   ve been influenced by so many different people.  What   s been one of the high points?  Man, you know what? In forensics art when you identify somebody as a  killer   I   ve done forensic art and identified a lot of unidentified bodies  that have led the arrest of people. I   ve identified abducted children. I   ve  aged them through age progressions, and I   ve identified them. We   ve  found them. I   ve identified unknown bodies. In the art field, I think  that   s why I stayed at OSBI and do that, because I get so much job  satisfaction out of doing that, just that one portion that solves the case.  I   ll tell you, I met a forensic artist, and she said,    Oh, I   ve got three  people on death row.    I said,    Wow.    I got to thinking about that, and I  30  Little Thunder  G. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  quit counting at a hundred that I   ve helped put on death row, killers,  murderers, rapists. I just quit counting. I got to a certain point. I said,    I  don   t even think about it anymore.     I   ve done so many serial murder cases. Ted Bundy. I did the I-5 Killer, I  did Dennis Rader, the BTK Killer. I did Joe Fisher. I did a whole bunch  of serial murder cases, so my highlights are great. I have great job  satisfaction with that, and the art field is just the idea that I get to paint  my culture. I   ve been rewarded. I   ve won awards. I   ve been named Red  Earth Honored One. I feel blessed. I feel blessed about a lot of things,  about what I   ve done in my life. I have a wonderful wife. Blessed.  Is there anything we forgot to talk about before we take a look at your  paintings?  No.  Gina says no, (Laughter) so we   re just going to take a moment and look  at three examples of your work.  I   ve got the Little People painting in there on the wall. It   s all Little  People in it. It   s called When Little People Danced for Kills His Enemy  First.  Okay. Well, we   re ready to go on this one.  This is The Bear Healer. You   ll see the medicine man standing here and  this person that is ill, and his family are all right here with him. The  medicine man is doctoring him, and he called the healer. He called the  spirit, his helper, to come help, and he came out of those embers and  materialized. Nobody sees him, but the medicine man sees him in terms  that he   s going to help him heal this man that   s laying here. He   s laying  on a bed of cedar and sweet grass, and his medicine bag is laying there.  This is acrylic on canvas?  It   s acrylic.  All right, thank you.  (Referring to Sandman sculpture) About thirty-five. He was five foot  seven, weighed about 140 pounds. He had a broken arm, right here. His  armbands, he had tubular armbands, brass sprung wire, big wire, about  as big as your finger, wrapped around his arm there. He broke his arm  right here, and they cut it off of him in pieces, but they cut it in such a  way that they could save it. They put those armbands on him when he  31  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  was real young, and as he grew they wouldn   t come off, so they were on  him all the time. He had a dent right here in his forehead. Had a dent  right there. (Gestures) It wasn   t a fracture, but you know when you get  an abscess  when  you get hit real hard? That happened to my leg. I got  hit, and it abscessed, and it deformed the bone. That   s what he had.  Somebody hit him in his head, but not hard enough to fracture. They  don   t know how he died.  Now, this is your forensic reconstruction?  Yes, this is Sandman. His body was found on Wolf Creek, up by  Woodward. He was found in    72. They traced him back to the battle  between the Cheyennes and the Arapahos and the Kiowas and the  Comanches when the Cheyennes moved the arrows against them. He  was killed up there.  My great-great-grandfather, White Thunder, who was an arrow keeper,  was also killed in that battle. He gave up his life because as an arrow  keeper, the Bow Strings come to him the year before and wanted him to  renew the arrows so they could go on an adventure. He wouldn   t do it,  so they whipped him with their quirts. He did the ceremony, and he told  them,    It   s not going to be good,    and they all got killed. They all got  killed. So he had gotten killed at that battle at Wolf Creek when they  fought with the Kiowas and Comanches. He gave up his life then. Then  we found this guy, and it   s a skull reconstruction. I   ve got the copy of  the earrings back there in storage that I probably should have put them  on there. He   s a nice-looking man. He   s about thirty five years old, five  foot seven, 140 pounds, 145 pounds.  That   s amazing. All right, and the title of this one?  This is When the Little People Danced for He Kills His Enemy First.  That   s my brother   s name, Kills His Enemy First. You see these Little  People. Some of them are in transition of disappearing, and some of  them are in transition of changing into something else. I put a little  Bigfoot in there and some amphibian people and some people changing  into flying creatures, the magic that is going on. There   s spiders  crawling on their arms, and one guy has blue eyes. Their feathers are  flying because of the medicine. Kills His Enemy First is singing there,  and they   ve got his eyes closed, and all of this is going on around him.  Yes, that   s neat. Again, acrylic on     Acrylic. I did this painting (Referring to another painting) because I was  with some people and they were talking about how flat and ugly  Oklahoma was. I said,    That   s really not true. The Creator made this  32  Little Thunder  H. Pratt  country, and we   ve got mountains, and we   ve got flat plains.    So I  thought,    I   m going to do a painting of this Indian that   s out riding on  that flat country.    He   s riding up there by himself, and he gets off his  horse and stops to look at how beautiful that flat rolling hills are in  Oklahoma. That   s what he   s doing. He   s stopped, and he   s admiring the  handiwork of the Creator.  That   s why I did this painting, because the guys were talking about how  ugly Oklahoma was, being flat. I said,    That   s beautiful country.    When  I walk through Cheyenne, Oklahoma, and up in that way, I love that  rolling hills up there. Why people think that   s ugly, I   ll never know, but  that   s why I did this one. This guy just got off his horse and stopped and  was amazed at the beauty of the land.  Well, thank you so much for this time, Harvey.  Oh, thank you for coming. I didn   t think I   d talk very much. (Laughter)  -------  -------  
