 Myers and I   m with the Oklahoma State University  Library. Today is April 16, 2012. I   m in Tulsa, Oklahoma, meeting at  OSU-Tulsa with Roy Michael. I   ll be interviewing Roy today as part of  the Spotlighting Oklahoma oral history series of the Oklahoma Oral  History Research Program. Thank you for meeting here, today.  Thank you.  Roy, can you tell me a little bit about your family and what your  childhood was like?  Well, my dad worked in the oil field. He was a gauger for Texaco. My  mother was a housewife. I just went to school until I finished high  school, there in Sapulpa. Then I went away one year to college.  So it was just you and your folks? Did you have any brothers or sisters?  I had a brother, but he went to the Oklahoma Military Academy.  I see. Where was Oklahoma Military Academy?  Claremore.  Claremore, at that time. That   s where Rogers State University is now,  right?  Yes. Yes.  What was school like for you there in Sapulpa, growing up?  It was a lot of fun.  5  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  A lot of fun?  When you look back on it, yes. (Laughter)  How so? What was fun about it?  Well, I was in the band and we used to take trips, bus trips and all that.  What instrument did you play?  Drums.  Drums. Like the big old kettle drums?  No, just a regular snare drum. (Laughs)  Well, good. Did you participate in any sports in high school?  No, I didn   t. I got torn up early trying to play football, so I didn   t.  (Laughs)  I see. So you say you went to a year of college after you finished high  school?  Yes, I went up to Parkville, Missouri.  Parkville. What school was that?  It   s a Presbyterian college.  I see. What kind of work did you do before you entered the service, or  did you? Were you just a student when you entered?  Well, about the only work   well, I worked from when I was eleven  because all the guys were gone in World War II. No, but the best job I  ever had, I was working for the Texas Production Company down in  Paul   s Valley when I got activated to go to Korea.  Oh, okay. Let   s step back a little bit. You said you had jobs since you  were eleven years old. What kind of jobs did you have?  I worked in a service station, in JC Penney   s, in a printing company  cleaning presses, just odds and ends.  All kinds of things. Was that by necessity or was that by choice?  6  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  By choice.  So you were working down in Paul   s Valley when you were activated.  What were you doing in Paul   s Valley, again?  Working for Texaco Production Company.  That   s an oil field service company?  Texaco.  Oh, for Texaco.  Yes, Texaco Incorporated. Yes, my dad worked for them over forty  years.  What were you doing down there for Texaco?  Mowing grass and cleaning up after a flood and stuff like that.  You say you had gotten activated. You were in the   ?  I was in the Tulsa Marine Reserves. My best friend I went to school  with, he and his brother were   his brother was in the second war and he  was still in the reserves. So, my friend talked me into joining the Tulsa  Reserves.  What was your friend   s name?  Tom Gish.  Tom Gish, okay. So he was in the reserves already, and he talked you  into jumping in there with him?  Yes. Make some extra easy money. (Laughter)  How old were you when you joined up?  Eighteen.  So you could join on your own. You didn   t have to have your parents  sign for you.  No.  No. What were the marine reserves like at that time?  7  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Well, we   d go to two-week summer camp every year at Pendleton. We   d  train right there in Tulsa at the Reserve Center and have classes, and  that   s about it.  Where was that Reserve Center at, do you remember?  It used to be on the fairgrounds at Fifteenth and   just across the street  from the ballpark.  Gotcha. That was that big stone   it   s still there. The building is still  there, as far as the stone structure. Is that right?  That   s right.  Sandstone, that   s what it was. A big sandstone building. So you joined  up in the marine reserves when you were eighteen. What year was that?  Forty-eight, I think. Or early    49, I   m not real sure. I   d have to look at  my DD214. (Laughter)  What was the general feeling about, I guess, for society toward the  military at the time? I know there had been a big draw down.  Well, I came from kind of a military family. My dad was in World War  I, and my brother was in World War II. So, I belonged to some  organizations like Sons of the American Legion and things like that,  where it   s your patriotic duty.  So was that your primary or your secondary idea when you were  growing up, the marine reserves, Patriotic duty? Because you   d already  said it was some pretty easy money as far as that goes.  Well, it wasn   t too much money, either. (Laughter) I don   t know. I just  kind of liked the close order drill at a young age.  So you were just kind of called to it, if you will, right?  Right.  Okay. So can you tell me anything about your life, I guess, there at the  end of World War II? Do you remember much about that time?  I was in junior high school.  How was that?  8  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  It was during the war and things were tight. Gas rationing and food  rationing and everything. But I don   t remember much about it.  You say your brother served in World War II?  In the last part. Yes, sir.  Where was he at, do you know?  He was in Germany.  In tanks, or   ?  No, he was in constabulary.  What exactly is that?  Well, he flew   he was the photographer that flew in the L5s and took  pictures of the enemy lines.  So you joined up with the marine reserves when you were eighteen, and  it was your buddy who had kind of instigated that.  Talked me into it, that   s right. (Laughter)  What do you recall about your first days in the marine reserves?  Oh, the first day, it was   I liked the marine reserves. It was when we  got   after they activated us, and we all went to Camp Pendleton, some  of those rough tough sergeants, been there all their lives, we were kind  of scared to death of them. (Laughter) Until we got used to them.  When were you activated? Do you remember what date?  I think it was July 31st, or something like that, of 1950.  Nineteen-fifty, okay. So you went to Pendleton. You say you didn   t go to  boot camp, is that right?  I never did go to boot camp. No, they needed a bunch of hot bodies and  there was a lot of us that skipped boot.  Okay, so your summer camp training from 1948 to 1950, that accounted  for your boot camp?  9  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Yes, sir. We worked off ships, down nets and landing craft, taking  mountains and you know     Sure, and that was at Pendleton?  At Pendleton.  How long were you there at Pendleton before you shipped out?  About two weeks. From July 31st, I was in Paul   s Valley, Oklahoma.  Then we went by train from Tulsa to Camp Pendleton. Then we trained  about two weeks and went aboard a ship at San Diego and shipped out  for Japan. We went to Kobe, Japan and loaded our   stored our sea bags  in a warehouse there and combat loaded and hit the beach, Inchon  Landing, September 15th. So that   s not much time.  Not at all. What kind of boats did you take over when you headed out  from San Diego?  APA  attack transport ships , general ship, yes.  How was that trip over? That was a couple weeks?  Couple of weeks, yes. We went through two typhoons, too.  Oh, no kidding   Yes, it gets pretty rough out there. (Laughter) But it didn   t bother me,  then. But now, if I go aboard a ship and it just rocks a little bit, I get a  little bit woozy at the stomach. (Laughter)  So on the ship heading over, how many were there, to a berth? How  many soldiers?  Whew  We were down about six, seven decks and they had bunks  stacked about eight high. They had us stuffed in. (Laughter)  Eight high.  It seemed like six or eight.  I   ve talked to a few other folks   sleep with your sea bag between your  legs, in the rack, that sort of thing?  For a pillow, yes. (Laughter)  10  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Okay. Was there any training or anything like that, like continuing  training that you did?  Aboard ship?  Yes.  We trained all the way over, yes.  What kind of training did you do on the ship heading over there?  Well, mostly strategy and field stripping your weapons, tactics and all  this kind of stuff.  How much of the day would be taken up with training while you were on  the boat heading over?  Oh, say six or seven hours.  Who was doing all the training at that time?  The lieutenant.  How did you guys entertain yourselves while you were heading over  there on the boats?  Played cribbage.  Cribbage?  Yes.  Okay. (Laughs) That   s a card game, right?  No, you   ve got a peg board and you got that   I don   t even know how to  play it now, it   s been so long. (Laughs)  I think my dad actually built those cribbage boards, if I   m not mistaken.  Yes, you get points and you can move your peg     Did you see any entertainers or anything like that?  No.  I talked to a fellow a while back who said they showed up somewhere  11  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  and Bob Hope had left the day before, or something like that.  We made the Wonsan Landing and the Bob Hope Show was at Wonsan.  The reason we got in so late was the harbor was mined, and we had to sit  off for ten days in a good ole back and forth, waiting for them to clear  the harbor. By that time, the ground troops had moved up and let Bob  Hope move in. I didn   t see him, though.  Okay. (Laughs)  Now, they put us down to   well, first when we left Japan, we hit Inchon  and went across and captured Seoul again. They brought the army up  and replaced us, and we went back aboard LSTs. Then that   s when we  went up to Wonsan.  Okay. So Inchon, that was the initial kind of left hook and then that took  you up to     That was, yes.  That took you up to Seoul, is that right?  Yes, the North Koreans had pushed what little troops they had down  through Pusan, the Pusan perimeter. We went into Inchon, and we were  supposed to be able to cut them off and then push them together.  How did that go when you got to Inchon and then into Seoul? What was  that like for you?  It   s a different kind of living because you   re living in a hole in the  ground just like an animal and trying to survive. They liked to fight at  night, so you moved all day and only got half a night   s sleep. Other than  that, I was glad to get aboard the LST. (Laughs) Had a hot coffee and we  had sleeping bags that we could sleep on deck.  Oh, out on the top deck?  Yes.  I see. That was when you got done at Seoul and you were pulling back,  heading around to Wonsan?  Wonsan, yes. As soon as we hit Wonsan, they put us on flatcars on a  train and took us south to Kojo. We got in a pretty good firefight down  there.  12  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  In Kojo?  Yes.  How did that go? About what day was that, do you remember?  I have no idea.  Probably late October, early November, something like that?  November, probably.  So how did that firefight start, down in Kojo?  Well, they were   actually, I was in Able Company and these North  Koreans, or whoever they were, came from the south and they wiped out  half the B Company, killed them in their sleeping bags. They then came  up and attacked our hill. They only killed one of our guys, but the rest of  them pushed them back down the hill.  How long did that firefight go on?  Oh, about thirty minutes.  That was during the evening time or night time?  It was night time. Yes, they sneak around at night. (Laughs)  Had they blown the bugles and whistles and all that before they  attacked?  I think they do that every time they   d attack. You knew when they were  coming and you could smell the garlic, too. (Laughs)  That was from what they ate?  Sir?  Was that from what they were eating, the garlic?  The garlic they ate, yes. If you moved in an area where they were, you  could really smell the garlic. Just had a different smell. When you  started smelling that, you better pay attention.  Well, what was your military job, your MOS  Military Occupational  Specialty , while you were in?  13  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Rifleman.  Rifleman, okay.  Three-eleven, I think.  Three-eleven, yes, okay.  I started out as a BAR  Browning Automatic Rifle -man. Then I ended  up, later on, as fire team leader.  You might explain what a BAR-man is for us.  Well, BAR is a Browning Automatic Rifle. It   ll fire single shots, semi,  or full automatic. But if you fire a full automatic when you get in a  firefight, you   re shooting at flashes. If you fire an automatic and you   ve  got a tracer every fifth round, they   re going to start shoving the ammo  back at you.  They   re going to see your tracer coming at them, be able to pick you out.  Yes, and then you can watch their tracers coming right at you. (Laughs)  So, I always fired semi-automatic.  Okay. A lot of people don   t know that tracers are different colors.  They   ve got a red nose.  They   ve got a red nose?  Yes.  That was on ours or on theirs?  On ours.  On ours, okay.  Yes, on our ammo, you   d put every fifth round you put in would be a  tracer.  Did they have different colored tracers for theirs? Were theirs green,  or   ?  I have no idea. I never got that far. (Laughter)  14  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  In your time over there, do you remember or recall anything that was  particularly humorous or unusual about your time there in Korea?  Not really.  Not really. Nothing humorous, nothing unusual?  No, it was just cold, and we didn   t really have the equipment for the cold  weather. They finally issued snow packs and parkas and those real good  sleeping bags.  Those mummy-type sleeping bags you get in cold weather?  Yes, sir.  How did they issue those cold packs to you?  I don   t remember.  What can you tell me about the unit you were with when you were in  Korea?  Well, actually, I was in Able Company, but all I worried about was the  third platoon, the three squads. This Tom Gish that talked me into  getting into marine reserves, he ended up in the platoon with me. He got  shot, oh, about eight or nine days after we made Inchon and went back  to the States.  Okay. So he survived being shot and made it back to the States?  Oh, yes, he just kind of   went through his helmet and grazed his skull.  (Laughter) Scared him to death.  I   ll bet. So, you were in Able Company. Do you remember your  battalion, was it like the two-seven or   ?  First Battalion, First, First, First and First.  Okay, that makes it easy to remember. (Laughs)  Yes, I was the Able Company, Third Platoon, Second Squad, Second  Fire Team.  So when you came around to Wonsan, you cleared the harbor. You guys  were able to get on, you said, flatcars and head out from there?  15  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Yes, took us on Amtraks, then put us on a flatcar train and took us south  to Kojo.  So from Kojo, where did you go from there?  We loaded on a train and went back to Wonsan and then worked our  way up to the Hill 1081, which was by the Funchilin Pass, or whatever  the name of that is. They had a bridge that had been blown out at the  pass.  That was the Treadway Bridge?  Yes. So, our objective was to take 1081, Hill 1081. And it overlooked  the pass, so we could protect it. It was in a blizzard and it was snowing.  We went up the first part of the mountain and our captain, Captain  Barrow, he was in China prior to coming to Korea. He was later  commandant of the marine corps, too. He heard the Chinese talking, and  so he just bedded us down right there until the next morning, and then  we attacked the crest of the mountain.  That was on Hill 1081?  Ten eighty-one.  Do you remember what that day was, or what the date was?  I didn   t ever know what the date was or where we were going. I just  followed my fire team leader, whatever he said.  So that would have been, probably, a couple of days after Thanksgiving,  I   m sure?  Yes, we did. We had, supposedly, a hot meal. But by the time you got it  and got ready to eat, it was frozen.  As far as the hot meals, did they ship those up in melmac canisters or  were you getting the C-rations?  No, it   s a field kitchen right with us. But mostly, we ate C-rations.  How were the C-rations? How   d they treat you?  If that   s all you got to eat, it   d tastes pretty good. (Laughter)  What was your favorite meal out of the C-rations?  16  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Weenie Beanies. (Laughs) And lima beans were the worst.  Oh, my gosh. Somebody a while back was talking about you   d get a pack  of cigarettes with the C-rations back then?  Yes, sir.  How many   was it like a short pack or   ?  I think there was just four cigarettes. Every once in a while, they   d bring  up cases of cartons of cigarettes, all different brands. After everybody  picked out what they wanted, the Chesterfields would still be there.  (Laughter) I remember that. Yes, but aboard ship or base, cigarettes  were just a dollar a carton, ten cents a pack compared to five dollars a  pack, now.  Good grief. Was it your platoon that was headed up to Hill 1081 there  and took that hill?  We took that hill, yes. Pushed the Chinese off the backside, and I think  Baker Company was there to   Baker and Charlie, they were on two  different sides. We called, like I said, it was snowing, and we called an  air strike in, but the planes couldn   t get out so we went ahead and took  the mountain. The next day, here those planes come in. They killed one  or two of the guys until we got our panels out.  What kind of panels? Just for people who don   t know     We carried air panels in different colors for different days. Yes, when  you start getting strafed, you get those out fast. (Laughs)  And that   s so the guys can see from the air that there are friendlies in  the area, right?  Yes. They probably got on the radio and told them that, too.  I   m sure. So they came in that next     They were navy pilots.  In corps    airs, or   ?  No, they were something else.  Prop planes?  17  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Yes, they   re all props. Those jets, when they   d come in, they   d have to  put full flaps to slow them up enough to strafe. That   s the way it seemed  to me. But yes, we stayed on 1081 for three, four, five days. They   d  already started moving from Chosin Reservoir, moving out to Hamhung.  I get those two mixed up   Hungnam     Oh, Hungnam, yes.     to the port city. Yes, everybody would just file in the back of the  column until we all got out of there. I turned in, and everybody had  frozen hands and feet. I turned in to sickbay, and I don   t remember a  thing after that, until I ended up in South Korea in Masan. I don   t know,  just lost a few days there.  What happened that took you to sickbay?  Frozen feet. Had black toes and     Okay. It would have been frostbite from that?  Yes.  What was your outcome on that? Were they able to fix you up or did you  lose any toes?  No, I didn   t lose any toes. I do draw 40 percent for frozen hands and  feet. Well, all total, counting PTSD  Post-traumatic Stress Disorder  and  unemployability and all that, I draw 100 percent.  So you guys sat on the hill there for four or five days at 1081. How  often     And watched the troops coming out.  Did you get any North Koreans or Chinese that far south at 1081 that  were trying to push over after you   d initially pushed them back?  I   d say we pushed almost a division off of 1081.  Just on that first day?  Yes, they were all over. Then we had to fight our way out. They had us  surrounded. (Laughs)  So when you were fighting your way out, you guys were the last ones to  18  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  kind of fall into line and move out, is that right? Or one of the last units  to fall out?  One of the last, yes.  So how was that moving out in that direction, back south?  Well, it was in the mountains and the roads weren   t very much. We  walked all the way out.  How wide were those roads, do you think?  Ten feet. (Laughs) That   s about it.  About wide enough for a vehicle to go up it or down it, right?  Yes, sir.  Just so that people who read this kind of get an idea, if you   re standing  on the road, what   s the angle of the road?  Well, it   s straight down this way and it comes up and then it goes back  up the other side. (Gestures)  Okay, so you   ve got probably, what, a thirty-five degree angle or forty     well, thirty-five to thirty degree angle going up and then down on the  other side, as well?  Yes, sir. Yes.  And you said the Chinese would come at you as you were moving out.  Were they attacking during the daytime?  Well, no, it was just snipers in the hills. Which, by that time, we didn   t  care. We didn   t even hide from them.  So you were on 1081 long enough, did they set up any warming tents or  anything like that for you guys?  Not up there.  When you sat up on top of that hill, did you just dig in?  The Chinese had bunkers up there. The one I was in had a fallen tree and  then it was   there were   the bunker I was assigned to, there was three  dead Chinese, we assumed. They were frozen stiff. My squad leader  19  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  protected me with his rifle and I pulled the first one out and slid him  down the mountain, and I pulled the second one out and slid him down  the mountain. When I got a hold of the third one, he sat up and was still  alive, gurgling and    So, nothing we could do for him. But that was  scary. (Laughs)  Did you put him down the mountain, or they just   ?  Yes.  But he   d been shot or he   d been     Yes, my fire team leader went ahead and shot him because there was  nothing we could do for him up there.  So you took their position over. Did you have an assigned field of fire  that you were watching that entire time?  Up on the hill?  Yes.  Yes.  As far as a compass goes, where would you say you were at? From like  360 to   ?  I think I was on the south side.  Were you on the south side?  Yes because Funchilin Pass, or whatever that was, was on the other side  of the mountain. Yes, Hill 1081 kind of came up and went straight  across and then it turned when it went way up on top.  Were you up on the very top or just down on the lower portion?  No, we had to fight our way up to the top, but we took all the top of the  mountain.  Okay, and that   s where that position was that you were able to work out  of.  Yes, sir. But it was still thirty degrees below zero.  Thirty degrees below, yes.  20  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  It was cold.  You say every night the Chinese would kind of battle back toward you  while you were on 1081, there, Hill 1081?  No, they never re-attacked us.  They just kind of fell back into the hillsides from there?  I don   t know where they went, but they were gone. (Laughs)  They were gone. So you didn   t have very much resistance there for that  three or four days, five days you were there on 1081?  Not after we took the hill. We lost quite a few men taking that hill.  How many do you think you lost?  Half of us.  How many would that be, just for number   s sake? There   d be three  platoons, right?  There   d be three platoons, yes. Probably thirty or forty guys wounded or  killed or something.  Did you get any reinforcements after those folks were killed?  Not until we got shipped down south. When we went to Masan, they  replenished the guys.  So no replacements on the hill.  No.  You just had to stand fast with what you had.  We got a replacement in Wonsan. That was the first replacement that  came to Korea. Then when we got back down to Masan, they gave us  some more troops.  Do you keep in touch with any of the guys that were there with you, after  the war?  Like I say, I belonged to Able, First Marines. They have a reunion every  21  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  year some place in the United States. Next year is going to be Virginia.  Last year it was in New Orleans. We try to go West Coast once, central  United States and East Coast. So, you know, if people can   t afford to  travel, they can at least make one out of three.  I see. So you keep in touch with the guys in that fashion?  Yes, most of my friends are dead, though. My fire team leader and like  Tom Gish, he   s dead. He was my best friend. I knew a bunch   we had a  bunch of reserves from Tucson, and I knew a bunch of them and  corresponded with them, but they   ve since died.  I see. I see.  But that   s about all I know about North Korea and Chosin.  Were you awarded any medals or citations?  Well, I got a Purple Heart, a letter of accommodation with the Combat V  and Korean Service Medal with five battle stars. Then a bunch of them, I  don   t even know what they are.  So once you got back, you were at the     Got a Presidential Unit Citation from the United States and also from  South Korea.  I see. That was for the war, itself, or for that battle?  For the war, itself.  The Korean government had those trips that they would host for soldiers  who were there     I never went on one.  Never took advantage of that. Why not? Just not have the time?  I didn   t much care about going over there again. Have you seen pictures  of Seoul the way it is now?  I have.  It looks like New York City.  It does. It does.  22  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  When I was there, we either blew it down or burned it down. There  wasn   t much left. It was just rubble.  What kind of stress or pressure do you think you felt, either then or  afterwards, from your military service?  That   s a hard question. I know it makes a difference. I think if I   d never  gone over there, I would have been a different person than going over  there for a year and coming out.  How so? How did it make you different?  I can   t explain that. It   s just what psychologists have told me.  Make you a little bit more aware of your surroundings, I guess?  It makes you pay attention. It makes you nervous. I was going to tell you  something else, but I forgot. (Laughs)  About the stress or the psychologists?  Oh, yes, PTSD.  What about that? Tell me a little about that.  It   s just   any combat veteran who goes through all that probably ends  up   just like in Afghanistan. All those guys, they   re a different person  than when they left.  Do you think it made you angry or regretful?  No, I   ve never thought about that. But I turned twenty in Inchon when  we came back to go board the LSTs. No, I was just glad to get rotated  home and come home on a ship. Went to Treasure Island and went home  for a month, then they told me I could have any duty station I wanted,  and they assigned me to Key West, Florida. (Laughter)  How was that duty?  It was a spit shine outfit for Harry S. Truman.  Explain to us what a spit shine outfit is.  You had to stay sharp and keep all your clothes ironed and medals  polished. I was in a drum and bugle corps down there.  23  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Okay. That was for Truman?  Well, Harry S. Truman had a little White House down there and a yacht  and I don   t know what all. He   s the only president I ever shook hands  with. He came aboard a base.  Is there anything special you did for good luck or anything you carried  with you for good luck?  No.  I haven   t really encountered a whole lot of guys who have.  I didn   t even think about it. (Laughter) I know we were scared all the  time.  Sure. How about a journal? Did you carry a journal or keep a diary or  anything?  No.  Write letters home to anybody?  Once in a while, yes.  Did you get any letters while you were there in Korea?  I got a few, yes.  Who from?  My parents and a girlfriend.  Okay. She mail you regularly?  No, she   d just now and then. Then when I got home, she was engaged to  marry somebody else, so. (Laughter)  Isn   t that the way it always works out?  That   s right. Out of sight and out of mind.  Where were you when the war ended, when the Korean War ended?  I hate to say this, but after I got home and went down to Key West,  24  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Michael  Myers  Florida, I completely forgot about the Korean War. Didn   t keep up with  it or anything.  Sure. Just tried to distance yourself from it, do you think?  I think. Just forget it.  Sure.  I went over there, I weighed 215 pounds. When I came home, I weighed  175. So climbing those hills, that   ll take it off of you.  That   s for sure.  Tell you what, let   s end this, will you?  Okay.  Yeah because I   m getting the shakes.  I understand. Is there anything else you might want to talk about prior to  ending it?  Not that I can think of.  Anything to say to any of the current veterans, the younger guys in these  current wars?  I don   t know whether I   m allowed to say this, but I don   t think our  government is doing as much for them as they should about their  medical and PTSD. A lot of them have really a lot of trouble.  That   s the truth. Well, Roy, I appreciate you coming and talking with me  today. I certainly do and I want to thank you for your service.  All right, thank you, sir.  You   re welcome.  -------  -------  
