 Wilson  Bray  Today is April 10, 2012. My name is Latasha Wilson and I   m with the  Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at Oklahoma State  University Library. I am in Pampa, Texas today at the Woody Guthrie  Folk Music Center, which is in the former Harris Drug Store. I   m  visiting with Thelma Bray, and I really appreciate you having me here  today and giving me a tour of the facility.  Delighted to have you here.  Would you mind, starting out, let   s talk a little bit about you and your  past. When and where were you born?  I was born in 1923 in New Mexico, a little country town. My family  moved to Pampa. My mother and dad and four children. I have a twin  sister. So when we came to Pampa, it was in 1932. I   ve been in this town  for a long, long time. But in college years, going to college, during  World War II years, my husband was in the service, so I went overseas.  Then my husband died and I moved back to Pampa, so basically that   s  the story.  How did you come here in 1932?  It was Depression years and my dad had a mercantile store in this little  town, Hollene, New Mexico. People couldn   t afford to pay their bills  and we had relatives that lived here in Pampa, so that was a logical time  to come and it was a good place to move to.  Did your family have a car?  Yes, did have a car. Our dad always managed to have a car. He worked  at a refinery, Danciger Refinery here, that was on the east side of town.  It   s not there, now.  5  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  So did you all live in town?  Yes. It may have been a small house, but there were four children and  our mother and dad, so we did fine.  What were your parents    names?  Gladys and Verna Osborn, O-S-B-O-R-N, Osborn. I have a twin sister,  Velma, and I   m Thelma. We had a brother and a sister, Juanita and  Kenneth.  So did you start to school in Pampa or had you started in New Mexico?  No, we started in New Mexico. When we came to Pampa, we were in  the fourth grade.  So how was it moving into town?  No problem.  Did you make friends pretty quickly?  Well, we had each other. My sister and I had each other. I don   t  remember that it was so hard to make friends. It just came naturally, I  guess.  And was the town    You said you moved because of the Depression. Was  it doing better here?  Oil was discovered in Pampa in 1925. Pampa was a boom town,  actually. It was doing well. Our dad worked at a refinery. So maybe  other places were affected, but Pampa was prospering.  Do you remember about how many people lived here, then?  No, I don   t remember. Our population did reach thirty thousand, but it   s  down now.  What are some things you did for entertainment when you were growing  up in Pampa?  I don   t remember. (Laughter) That was a long time ago. I remember our  dad took us to the movies and things like that, but as for entertainment,  just home and school, basically.  6  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  So there was a theater?  Yes, we had right downtown, now, it has burned down since. The  Lenora Theater was a real fine facility. In fact, the picture of it is right  over there. Right in downtown Pampa. Well, there were two other movie  places here in town at that time. I remember we went to shows and went  to school.  Did you know any members of the Guthrie family when you were young?  No.  Would you come to Harris Drug Store?  No, it wasn   t even established until    Let me see. I   ll have to think a  minute. Okay, when Woody came, it was    He came in 1929. It was  here, then, so it was here, but we didn   t come here.  When did you graduate from high school?  1940, Pampa High School.  Do you remember how many were in your class?  No, not at all.  What did you do then?  We went to school. Well, my twin sister and I, we graduated the same  year. We didn   t go to school the next year. We worked, but the next year  we went to college, West Texas State University at Canyon. That was in  1941. So we were freshmen in 1941 and I don   t know if you remember  what happened then, but Pearl Harbor was attacked, and that changed  everybody   s lives, I think. The man that I finally married was a  freshman at West Texas when we were. Our dad had told us that instead  of going back to college, he thought we should get involved in the war  effort. So we didn   t go back the second year. My husband (we weren   t  married then) he enrolled as a sophomore at West Texas State, but then  he went into the service. So he went to Air Force training. He flew a B-  17 during the war, but he went to trainer plane bases for that training.  As for what my sister and I did, worked one year after college, then we  went to a radio school and learned whatever they were teaching in Sayre,  Oklahoma. Got a job here at the Pampa Army Air Base. The Pampa  officials applied to the government to establish an air base here in  Pampa to train pilots for the war. This is World War II. So there were  7  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  job openings there, so my sister and I got a job out there at the air base.  Then after that, we went on, went to college at Oklahoma City  University. At that time, my husband and I had gotten married, but he  was in the service and went overseas. Then after he was overseas for a  while, families could go over and so I did get to go over. We lived in  Germany for a while.  Where in Germany?  Erlangen. I   m not sure if that   s how you pronounce it, and Bad Wiessee,  on down close to Munich and one a little further north. He was an  adjutant at the air bases at that time. Anyway, I got pregnant, if you   re  getting all the details, so we had to come back to the states. They didn   t  want the pregnant women to be on the ship after six months of  pregnancy. We hadn   t even been in Germany but for seven months, so  my husband and I were on a ship with a bunch of other families, the  wives pregnant, coming back to the states. Then when we came back to  the states, he enrolled to go to school at Texas University in Austin and  our little twin boys were born here in Pampa. Then we moved to Austin  where he went to school. So, I   ve told you a bunch.  That   s great.  But then my husband died several years ago, so. No longer here.  Anyway, he worked at a bank here in Pampa for a while. Then during  the Korean War, he went back in and he was stationed in    Okay, we  were in Gulfport, Mississippi for a while. Where in the world     (Laughter) Anyway, he was flying transport planes. Great Falls,  Montana. And when he was coming back to Pampa, he was killed in a  car accident and that was 1951, so that was a long time ago.  I was  pregnant when my husband died. Our daughter was born six months  later.   Wow. So when did you move back here?  We moved back when our boys were born after we got back from  Germany. Our little twin boys were born after we got back from  Germany. We were here and then after my husband died, we were back  here, so.  So early fifties?  Yes.  And you haven   t left since then?  8  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  I have no intention of leaving. Pampa is important. There is so much to  do here. I   m involved in a lot more than this Woody Guthrie Center. I  don   t know if you   re familiar with the Freedom Museum, our military  museum here. I   ve got a book over there, I   ll show you. If you go down  Hobart Street, you   ll see around that museum a lot of military  equipment. So I   m involved in a lot of things here in town. Because we  worked at the air base during World War II, that group started a reunion  association, which started a military museum, which is what this is all  about.  Wow. Are there any other things in Pampa you   re involved with?  Outdoor Sculpture Foundation. I used to be president of Pampa Garden  Club and we helped with the development of the park system. At that  time, decided that Pampa needed some outdoor sculpture in the parks. I  had started working with the city in establishing hike and bike trails  through the    See, we have a creek running through Pampa, a logical  place for hike and bike trails in Pampa. So we started the hike and bike  trail, then we needed sculpture. Established the hike and bike trail and  organized the Outdoor Sculpture Foundation. If you   ve seen the musical  notes    Have you seen Woody Guthrie   s,    This Land is Your Land,     hundred-fifty foot long metal sculpture?  No, not yet.  I don   t have anything here to show you, but that was one of the first  pieces that was put up.  You helped with that?  I was chairman of the event that was involving all these people to do all  these different things, so yes.  Well, when did you first think that Pampa needed to commemorate  Woody Guthrie?  When Joe Klein   s book came out. I think 1980. It was later that I was  reading it, but I was reading Joe Klein   s book, Woody Guthrie Alive, and  a friend of mine had received some information from a friend of hers  who was a teacher at a university down close to Austin. He had written a  paper about Woody Guthrie. So this friend, Glenna Lea Miller and I,  were talking one day and comparing notes. I was talking about the  Woody Guthrie book I read and she was talking about the information  that she had, and we decided we   re going to start doing something about  this. We decided that it was time Pampa acknowledged the fact that  Woody Guthrie had lived here. So in 1991, we got things moving.  9  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  And what was your first step?  Our first step was   I   ve got this all in writing, so you   ll have it in  something that you   re reading, but we had a meeting at the Chamber of  Commerce office building, I think it was, and invited different people to  come. Told them what we were wanting to do, invited them to  participate, and when you read the booklet I gave you, we didn   t get  much response from them. But within the first year, we had our first  reunion. We were calling it Pampa   s Tribute to Woody Guthrie. So our  first Pampa   s Tribute to Woody Guthrie was in 1992. We were working  on it in 1991. At that time, a lot of the Guthrie family members came.  Harold Leventhal came and quite a few others. Mary Jo  Guthrie  was  helping because she was providing the names we needed for all this, so  it was a great event. Mary Jennings came, Matt Jennings came, Harold  Leventhal and Mary Jo of course. Anne Guthrie came. So that was our  first year.  And was there live music, or what all did it consist of?  The musicians, well, Matt Jennings was a musician. Yes, there was live  music. The musical notes that I told you had been finished, I think by  that time, we had a dedication of that    Oh, there   s just so much to tell  you.  In the very beginning, you had a few challenges. How did you overcome  these or continue on?  As for the challenges, the first meeting that we had at the Chamber of  Commerce office, one of the men that wasn   t invited to come. I knew  him, he was a member of my church. He stood up and said,    Woody was  an Atheist and a communist.    So that was our first confrontation. Then  when we appeared before the City Commission asking that a street be  named the Woody Guthrie Street, we also had that same sort of  response. These people stand up and say,    Woody Guthrie was an  Atheist. Pampa doesn   t want somebody like that to have a street named  after him.    This same thing happened when we tried to add, for this  centennial event that we just had, we wanted to name the three and four  hundred blocks of South Russell Street, right back of our property right  here, on the street where Woody and Mary had lived    There are no  houses there, no businesses there. We wanted to name those two blocks  Woody Guthrie Street. We could not even get permission from the city  fathers to do that. Somebody had approached them and said that Woody  didn   t deserve it. Even this year, when the whole world is  acknowledging Woody   s contribution to America through music and so  forth.  10  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Anyway, we couldn   t even get permission to name those two blocks the  Woody Guthrie Street. But they did say you could name it Woody  Guthrie Memorial Road and we had only one little sign that could say  that. So Pampa has been supportive in so many ways, but when it came  to city officials, they   re afraid of one loudmouthed objector and didn   t  want to be confronted. Anyway, we   re proud of what   s happened this  year. Nora Guthrie came, Bob Santelli came, Arlo Guthrie did a concert  at the MK Brown Auditorium this year.  And when was Harris Drug converted to the Woody Guthrie Folk Music  Center?  I don   t remember exactly. We first started in 1992, so it was probably     2003, see, we had to buy the building first. The building wasn   t available  at first, so after we were able to buy the building and start raising  money    I have it in writing, but I can   t remember. About 2003,  probably.  How did you go about raising money for all this?  It   s been a struggle. You   d think that musical events would bring a lot of  people. When Pete Seeger came to do a concert, we had a beans and  cornbread supper. Different things, you know. Anne Guthrie said that  when Woody came to their house, she always liked beans and cornbread,  so that seemed like the traditional thing to do. There   s a big old barn  here east of town where we had that event. So things like that to raise  money.  Do you feel like many people in the town have contributed money, or is  it generally from people outside the area?  No, Pampa has been real supportive. It   s just a few obnoxious objectors.  But basically    Well, you know we have our jam sessions here  regularly. Twice a month at least. So we have musicians that come to  play and we have audiences that come to listen. So they enjoy being  here.  And here in the Woody Guthrie Folk Music Center, the walls are  covered with articles and memorabilia and photographs documenting  some of Woody   s life and what has happened since his death. How have  you gathered all this together? Have you been the one researching all  this?  You stay focused. Some people provide things, but I have more time I  guess than some people.  11  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  (Laughs) Well it   s wonderful that you have compiled all this together  and made it easy for people to come in and read and learn so much.  Have there been many things about Woody that you   ve learned in more  recent years that have   ?  The important thing is to read everything we can find about Woody and  I want other people to read it, too. Now I need to give you some more  information. John Forrester used to live here. He was on the Chamber of  Commerce Tourism Committee, and he was instrumental in helping us  get this building. He was instrumental in restoring the front as it was  originally. He   s moved away, since. So we don   t have some of the  original people that were so helpful. There   s a lot more than just me  that   s been working.  We walked through the back yard area and there were some really neat  things out there. Can you tell us about the train tracks?  One of our members, June Thomas, who has died since, went to the  Santa Fe Depot right here in town, one block from where we are right  now, and said,    Woody Guthrie used to ride the rails. We need some  railroad tracks down at our Woody Guthrie Center.    She had to have  been very persuasive because they brought some big equipment over  here and brought the rail road tracks over and installed them on our  property. Now we have pictures of high school students walking the  rails, enjoying it. So that   s important, too.  The location, here, of the drug store, will you explain what   s in the  area?  Okay, first though. The streets here in Pampa in, oh goodness, what  year? Anyway, our streets are paved with bricks, downtown Pampa,  which includes the street in front of Harris Drug Store. The man who   s  paved the streets with bricks was an Indian, well known for his work  that he did. So we   re proud of the streets in front of our building. But  also to the north one block are the railroad tracks. So Woody was  tempted to head out on the railroad tracks just because it was one block  away. One block to the south is Highway 60. That was tempting to  Woody to head out. Anyway, we did get Highway 60 named the Woody  Guthrie Memorial Highway. I don   t know if you know that or not, so.  Did that happen in the early nineties also, when all this was starting to  form?  It didn   t happen by itself. It was when the Woody Guthrie family  members were coming originally, probably in the 1990s when we started  12  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  writing letters and asking the family members to sign the letters to the  highway department saying Woody Guthrie walked the highways, road  the highways, deserves to have a highway named for him. So we went  through the process of you have to get permission from the county  commissioners where the highway would go through and so forth. It  took time, but we got it done. Then also, we did get the Woody Guthrie  postage stamp. So when the Guthrie family members were coming we   d  have a letter ready for everybody to sign saying Woody deserves a  postage stamp. I don   t know if anybody is familiar with that or not, but it  was because Guthrie family members and friends were all supportive  over the years.  So all these commemorative events have taken a lot of effort.  But it   s important. It   s important for Pampa. It   s important to keep  Woody   s life and accomplishments before the public. And it   s also  important to provide a place for musicians to come and play, not just  Woody Guthrie songs, but we do have jam sessions regularly and the  audience members, it   s as important for them to come as it is for the  musicians. So it   s been good.  Why else do you think it   s important for Pampa to have this here?  It fills the need for entertainment, a place to go. Some of the people that  come down here, this may be more important to some than others, but at  least if you enjoy music, it   s nice to be able to come here and hear the  musicians.  And you   ve had people stop in from all over the United States and all  over the world, I   m sure.  Right. It   s amazing. Woody is recognized, well, even for this centennial  celebration, when you look at the website and they show all the different  places, all the countries where Woody is being recognized during this  centennial, you see how broad his reach was.  What about the Woody Guthrie Inn?  That   s right across the street from the Woody Guthrie Center. That   s a  house where Shorty Harris lived for twenty-five years when he was here.  Shorty Harris owned the Harris Drug and lived in that house. I   m sure he  owned it at that time for twenty-five years. When it came up for sale  after we got our Woody Guthrie Center and the house came up for sale,  Reed Echols, one of our board members, the treasurer actually, bought  the house and had it restored and now she has a sign out front saying  Woody Guthrie Inn. So some people who are supposed to be coming to  13  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  our Woody Guthrie Center stop at her place thinking that   s where the  event is, but that   s not open very often. She allows it to be used for  special occasions. But it   s right across the street.  Then at the Woody Guthrie Tributes every year, will you tell a little bit  more about what goes on?  We have grounds behind our property here, a vacant lot. A tent is   now  this is for outside musicians. A tent is set up and chairs and picnic tables  and so forth around for people to be picking in the tent area. Anybody  that wants to can bring their own outdoor camping facilities and camp  out there. We do have hotels available for people who come for the  annual event. Reed does allow some people to stay in her place, the  Woody Guthrie Inn, occasionally, but we do have good hotel facilities  here in town.  How many people generally come to the tribute?  Oh, goodness, I don   t know how you    Well, hopefully if we have three  hundred, that   s a good number, I think. It depends on the different events  that we have.  And that   s generally held when?  October the third, Woody died, so we try to hold to that    See, Okemah  has July the fourteenth, which is Woody   s birth date. So we can   t go  with that. So October is a good time here in Pampa, weather wise. So we  try to stay with October the third, if it comes on a weekend, for our  annual event.  You have published a book, Reflections, about this whole experience.  Yes.  When did you finish that book?  That was in 1990. I probably published it in 1990 or maybe 1991.  Anyway, my memory is getting worse and too many years are creeping  in here. But the book tells about everything that happened just getting  ready for the event, everybody who came, and about Woody   s life.  Everything we think people should know about Woody Guthrie. And  Pete Seeger, when he saw the book, he said I needed to do a condensed  version of the book and leave out a lot of the Pampa local stuff. Do a  condensed version and add Woody   s songs and a few more pictures. So I  did the second book, Reflections, Condensed Version, thanks to Pete   s  suggestions, which is a lot better. Then I have another book that I   ve put  14  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  together for the centennial.  What was your inspiration initially to get that first book together? It  takes a lot of work.  The story needed to be told and I wanted it told, so you just have to work  at it, that   s all.  You start out that book with a letter Woody wrote to his first niece.  Yes. It was Anne Guthrie   s baby. Anne and Roy had two daughters.  Maryanne, is her name. After the baby was born, Woody wrote a letter  to that baby. It was about seven or eight or nine pages, I can   t remember  exactly. When I was putting the book together, Anne Guthrie gave me a  copy of that letter. It had to be in this book, it   s so important, it   s the first  thing in the book that I put together, Reflections. The interesting thing is,  after the book was published and sold in a place in Oklahoma City, a  man in Tulsa saw the book, bought it, read the letter Woody wrote to  that little niece and the man wrote to me and said,    Woody wrote a letter  to my grandmother when she was a baby.    So he sent us a copy of that  letter. So these are two special letters that we know that Woody wrote to  two little babies. They are very inspirational. But basically, the thing that  was important was that Anne Guthrie gave us a copy of that letter to put  in that book.  That   s really neat. Who knows, if this man had not seen this book with  the letter featured, he might never have said anything to anyone about  the letter he had.  Yeah, so we don   t even have any idea how many more times Woody  wrote  letters to people . But when you look at Woody   s writing,  Woody   s printing, all so uniform. He used to say that his dad  encouraged him to write well, and so his dad encouraged him in a lot of  ways. But you can see it in his writings for sure.  Another interesting thing you have here at the museum is an exhibit  about the Dust Bowl and when it hit Pampa. Can you talk a little bit  about that?  April 1935, the great dust storm that hit the Great Plains, including  Texas, Colorado, Oklahoma, Kansas probably    Woody was here in  Pampa at the time, so he wrote some songs that memorialized that dust  storm. We have an exhibit here at the center about the dust storm. I have  a lot of other pictures that people have donated about the dust storm that  we have on exhibit from time to time. This one that we have, we have a  real fine hotel here in Pampa that was one of the original buildings in  15  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  town, the Schneider Hotel. A woman that was married to the Schneider  son at the time gave us some pictures and some curtains that were  hanging in the Schneider Hotel when that dust storm hit. So we have this  special lace curtain here with our dust bowl exhibit telling about how the  housekeeper, her staff had to take down a hundred lace curtains off the  windows after the dust storm. So we have that exhibit, which was real  special.  And you were living in Pampa at the time, too.  Yes.  And you said your...  My twin sister remembers the dust storm, I do not remember it. But her  memory is better than mine, but we can read enough about it to know  that it was pretty bad.  Are there any other particular exhibits here that you would like to speak  about? There   s a lot. (Laughs)  Well, what we have just tells about Woody   s family and friends and the  fact that The Pampa News has been good about publishing    David  Bowser with The Pampa News has been with us from almost the very  beginning, writing the stories, taking the pictures. In fact, one picture  that he took the first year is with Mary Jo, Woody   s sister, and Mary  Jennings, Woody   s first wife, standing side by side right here in Pampa,  Texas. We wouldn   t have that story if it hadn   t been for Pampa News  and David Bowser taking the picture and writing the story. So a lot of  these pictures are very important because they tell our history. It  wouldn   t be possible without the local support of the local media.  How did you come about the drug store space over here, that exhibit?  The corner? In Woody   s life, an old typewriter, if you read very much  about him, he was always typing. An old typewriter was very important  in his life, a guitar was real important in his life, books were real  important in his life, so we have a little table here at the front of the  building in the corner with this little table, this old typewriter on it and  some books nearby, the guitar nearby. But the neat thing that makes it all  the more special is we have the words of Studs Terkel rolled into that  typewriter so you can read what Studs Terkel had to say when Woody  Guthrie and some of his friends stopped off to stay overnight at their  place  in Chicago . He was telling me about, Woody had gone  somewhere that evening and when he came back he started typing. Studs  Terkel said he could hear his Royal Typewriter going clickity-clack and  16  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  knew Woody was there. The next morning, he got up and found all these  pages that Woody had typed, telling about the events of the night before.  So that little corner exhibit, and then pictures of Woody Guthrie behind  in that corner. All of those are    That   s an important exhibit to me.  Definitely. Then you have a counter, like what would be found in a drug  store     The back bar, the upper part of the bar and then the counter in front, we  were trying to replace the one that was here originally, but we weren   t  able to. What we have here is, it was in a bar on East Fredrick here in  Pampa. June Thomas, the one that   s gotten some other things for us,  knew about the bar and said,    The city is going to be tearing that  building down, you better go over and get the bar.    So some of our  board members got permission, got an old trailer and went over and  loaded this in. That   s got to be fourteen foot long at least, I   m not sure,  probably longer than that. It looks like mahogany. It   s beautiful. It   s  three pieces, and so they loaded it on the trailer and brought it over.  Scrubbed it and cleaned it up. So that   s one more thing that we have. It  was important. But our display cases are important to have, too, so we  were able to get those at different times.  And this space actually was two different establishments back when  Woody was here.  Yes. It was the Harris Drug Building. One side did have the Harris Drug  Store in it. The other side was a barber shop. So this twenty-five foot  front of this building had a wall down the full length of the building, so  each side was twelve and a half foot wide. Twelve and a half foot for the  barber shop, twelve and a half foot for the Harris Drug Store. That  doesn   t sound very wide, but it worked well. So when we finally got  here, most of the wall had been removed down the center. One twenty-five  foot wide width now for the Harris Drug Store. So we have more  room.  And the back closet     We have two rooms in the back. One, we are wanting to establish a  really special media room. It takes money and somebody with the ability  to create what we need back there. But on one side    There   s two back  rooms. One, we   ve had cabinets built, a coffee area and so forth and then  the other side, the media room.  And what   s special about that location of the media room?  The media room, the door that goes into it has got to be the door that  17  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Bray  Wilson  Woody Guthrie walked through. Sometimes when I read the story about  him, you read that Woody says,    I found a beat up old guitar in the back  of the building.    Well, that right there, that room, that door is in the back  of the building. So we figure Woody walked through that door and  found that old beat up guitar. I don   t think he always says beat up,  maybe somebody else says that, but. Anyway, we do know that Woody  was in this building, he did walk through that door, and it   s important for  us to restore it as much as possible the way it was.  And this year is what would have been Woody Guthrie   s hundredth  birthday year. So there are things going on around the world. And to  kick it off, in March, you had a special event here in Pampa?  Bob Santelli with the Grammy Museum in Los Angeles came to Pampa  last year and told us that this event was going to be taking place. So he  did come and Nora came, but also Arlo Guthrie was here for a concert at  our MK Brown Auditorium. We have real good auditorium facilities  here. So Arlo was there for the show, Nora Guthrie was here and Nora  and her husband and Bob Santelli. So that was the kickoff, Pampa   s part  of the centennial celebration. But Bob Santelli had been here several  months before that. Appeared at the Chamber of Commerce luncheon  one day to tell them what the centennial celebration was all about. So  it   s been important that Pampa is one of the focuses of this celebration  because Woody was here.  And at that event, they gave you something for the museum? The  plaque?  Oh, this was on stage of the MK Brown Auditorium after Arlo  performed. Nora Guthrie and Bob Santelli were on the stage, asked me  to come up on the stage and they presented us with a plaque. It is similar  to the one that was given to Mary Jo, evidently, in Tulsa, telling all  about    It   s a plaque about Woody   s time in Pampa, wording. It   s a real  large, cast iron, probably, real heavy. We will mount it on two polls out  front. We do have a historical marker on one side of our building out  front and this plaque will be on the other side to stand out front. It was  nice to be able to receive that when Arlo Guthrie was here and Nora was  here.  Well, I   m very impressed with all that you have going on here in Pampa.  It   s really incredible and important for history.  It is.  Is there anything else we haven   t talked about that we should cover?  18  Bray  Wilson  Bray  We   re just grateful to you for coming.  Well I   m so glad I could, it   s really wonderful. Thank you for talking  with me.  Appreciate you being here.  -------  -------  
