 Simpson  Lee  Today is May 27, 2011. My name is Lynne Simpson, and I am on the  faculty of the Oklahoma State University Library. I am in Boley,  Oklahoma to interview Mr. David Lee as part of the Oklahoma Oral  History Research Program   s Spotlighting Oklahoma Oral History  Project, and our topic today is Boley, Oklahoma. Thank you for meeting  with us.  Thank you for inviting me.  Would you tell us when and where you were born?  I was born about twelve miles west of here in Okemah, Oklahoma. I was  delivered by my Uncle   s father Hobart Sanders, who was the local  physician. He was on the medical staff over at the hospital over in  Okemah. He delivered most of my cousins and relatives in my  generation. We always joked that my parents probably got the family  discount.  Would you talk a little bit about your youth and where you grew up?  Well, I grew up here in Boley. Even though I was born over there in  Okemah, I grew up here in Boley. Spent eighteen years of my life here,  until I moved away to go to college. Basically I went through the public  school system here in Boley; Boley grade school, Boley High School,  just spent my whole early life here in Boley.  Would you talk about your educational background and your teachers  and your school?  Well, the difficult part about going to school in Boley is that my older  siblings went to school here, and my aunts and uncle and my father also  5  Simpson  Lee  Finchum  Lee  Finchum  Simpson  Lee  Simpson  Lee  went through the same school. So my older siblings actually had some of  the same teachers, so I say it was difficult because whatever  expectations or standards that my early relatives set, I was held to those  same standards. Well, it wasn   t that much of a challenge, but it was just  interesting that we all were educated in the same public school system  and some of us had the same teachers.  Where did you go to college?  I left here and went to Oklahoma State University. It was an extended  college career at Oklahoma State, but I ended up finishing with a  Bachelor of Science degree in economics.  In what year?  1987.  Class of    87. Okay.  Could you describe your family? Your siblings, your extended family  here in Boley?  Well, my family got here in about 1932 after the Boley Bank had been  robbed and closed. My great-grandfather, Forest Anderson, bought the  Boley Bank and reopened it maybe a year or two later. My grandfather  was the person who became the president of the bank, and so my family  got here in about 1933 or    34. Again, my two aunts and my dad and my  uncle all were educated in the Boley Public Schools, and my uncle also  raised his family in Boley. My two aunts moved away, and so I was  raised around three other siblings and about six cousins, along with an  uncle and an aunt. And my grandmother and grandfather, of course,  lived here too, and so we were all a fairly close-knit family. I spent a lot  of time at my grandparents    home, because I was the youngest. So while  they were all in school, I spent a lot of time at my grandparents    growing  up. Some of my other cousins were being baby-sat, I guess, by my  grandparents, and so we spent a lot of time together.  Can you talk about Earlsboro?  Originally, my ancestors got to Oklahoma in about 1907. My great-grandfather  migrated here from North Carolina and landed in Earlsboro,  Oklahoma. My great-grandfather, Forest Anderson, came here for better  opportunities and started out as a sharecropper, and the land where he  was sharecropping came up for sale. It was five hundred dollars, and he  kept  thining  about how he was going to come up the five hundred  dollars. Then his wife, my great-grandmother at the time, said,    If you  6  Simpson  Lee  Simpson  Lee  really want this land, why don   t you go in the kitchen and count up all  the money we   ve been saving and see how much is in there.    They  counted it up and it was five hundred and thirty-five dollars, and so he  ended up buying this land in Earlsboro, Oklahoma.  Maybe a few years later, they discovered oil on the land, and my great-grandfather  was pretty business savvy as far as agriculture and money.  When they discovered oil, he was smart enough to keep the mineral  rights to maybe two or three oil wells that were dug on his land, which  eventually made him a millionaire. He was real big on education and  helping the community, and he actually built a school over in Earlsboro  for the black children, because the black children weren   t allowed to go  to the public schools until they were integrated later.  He built a school over in Earlsboro, and he also sent his three daughters  to the University of Illinois in Champaign-Urbana for them to get an  education. All the men stayed and worked on the land, but the women  went to college. I think one of them became a teacher, and I don   t know  if the other two got degrees because they ended up getting married.  My grandmother met my grandfather while she was in school, and so  they eventually came back to Oklahoma, because in 1932 the Boley  Bank was robbed, and the president, D.J. Turner was actually shot and  killed by one of Pretty Boy Floyd   s gang. Because my great-grandfather  had money, he tried to do the town a favor by buying the bank, and he  paid off all the depositors so nobody really lost any money because of  the robbery. He asked my grandfather to come back to Boley, and since  he was college-educated, asked him if he would run the bank for him,  and so that   s how my family got to Boley. (Laughs)  Thank you. Where else have you lived other than Boley?  I left Boley in 1980 after graduating from Boley High School and went  to Oklahoma State University, so I   ve lived in Stillwater, Oklahoma. I  left Stillwater after I graduated, moved to Houston, Texas. I lived in  Houston for about eight and a half years. Then I ended up in Seattle,  Washington, when I left Houston, to go to grad school. I moved to  Seattle, and I   ve been there ever since.  What is your profession and how did you choose it?  My profession   I don   t know that I chose it, it kind of chose me.  Basically, my background is public health professional and a licensed  social worker. I worked in banking when I was in Stillwater. I worked  for Stillwater National Bank, and then when I went to Houston, I worked  for North Houston Bank. For some reason, working in business, in the  7  Simpson  Lee  Simpson  Lee  Simpson  Lee  corporate area, just didn   t quite suit me. Work had to have more  meaning for me, and so I ended up working in the social service area,  Department of Human Services in Houston, which led me to graduate  school. I got my master   s in social work and got my master   s in public  health, and so I worked for a medical education organization. We  provide medical training to physicians and nurses at the University of  Washington, and I guess the profession chose me, in a way.  What is your earliest memory of Boley?  My earliest memory of Boley, I remember a lady named Ms. Starks, and  she was sort of a babysitter for me, in addition to my grandparents, but  she was sort of a babysitter because both my parents worked when I was  coming up. My father ran a company called Smokaroma, and my mother  worked up at Boley, it was the Boley Training School at the time, for  delinquent boys. Now it   s a state prison, but she would take care of me,  and I remember one time, they slaughtered a hog. For some reason, we  were outside and she was cleaning the chitterlings. There was a water  faucet in her yard, and so she would fill the chitterlings up. We call them  chitlins, I guess. If you buy them in the store, it   s just    chitterlings.    But  she was outdoors cleaning the chitterlings and putting them up to the  water hose and filling them with water and then taking them like this  (gesturing) and shaking them up like you would a water balloon, I guess,  and then cleaning them out. I just remember how bad the outdoors  smelled when she was doing that, and that was one of my earliest  memories.  Did you ever eat chitlins after that?  Oh, yeah. (Laughs) They were always a delicacy, especially around  holidays like Christmas and Thanksgiving. My mother grew up in  Chicago, so she was not a big chitterling fan, but my grandmother and  my neighbors would cook them. So we would always get them from  other people, but not from my mother.  What is your fondest memory of Boley?  I don   t know, I guess it   s sort of a general memory of, you know, being  a child and having the freedom to sort of come and go as you wanted. As  I mentioned, my mother grew up in Chicago, and when we went to  Chicago every year to visit my maternal grandmother, how stifling it  was because we couldn   t leave the house. You would hear gunshots at  night, actually. She lived in a part of Chicago that was fairly rough at  that time. So I appreciate my childhood now because, you know, in  Boley, we weren   t confined to a house all the time because of gunshots  or anything. We were allowed to sort of roam.  8  Simpson  Lee  Simpson  Lee  Simpson  Lee  I liked to say that the policing was done by the women of the town.  (Laughs) That everybody   s mother was sort of looking out for you, that,  if you misbehaved, somebody would report it back to your mother. You  had a lot of freedom, and people were always looking out for you  whether you were their child or not. It   s kind of a general memory of  what it was like growing up here, and just being able to explore the  outdoors and the wooded areas around here, the ponds and biking  around town and just sort of being a child and not having to worry about  violence or anything.  Would you describe the house you lived in in Boley?  We lived in several houses in Boley, but I remember one big house that  we lived in that it wasn   t really our house. My parents were renting it,  but it was a huge house. It had a basement, it had a first floor and it had  an upstairs, and the people that owned the house actually stored their  own furniture or belongings up in the second floor. We weren   t  supposed to go up there, but we always did, but we pretty much lived on  the first floor. It was a wood frame house, but I just remember that that  was a big house, and it   s no longer there.  It was    70 or    71, my father built us a house, which is actually still  standing. I just remember that process where, you know, we were all  excited, we were building a house. We pretty much visited every day to  see, not much changes in house construction from day to day, but just  watching that process of building a brand new home. It was fairly  modern at that time, and it   s relatively modern now. Those are the only  two houses that I remember living in.  What was your neighborhood like, and do you remember any of your  neighbors?  We lived across the street from a family named the Fishers, and we lived  across the street from a family, the Lou Grand family. We all played  together and rode bicycles and we ate at each other   s homes. So, I mean,  the neighborhoods in Boley don   t vary from area to area very much. The  whole town is kind of considered a neighborhood. It   s not like where I  live in Seattle where one neighborhood might be mostly condos, and  then the other area might be single family homes. Boley is pretty  homogeneous, in a way.  Were your neighbors people who were from Boley originally, like your  father was?  In my generation, most people that lived in Boley were people who were  9  Simpson  Lee  Simpson  Lee  Simpson  Lee  descendents from early settlers. I think my family was a relatively new  family by Boley standards. Most people were from families that had  been in Boley pretty much from its inception in about 1903 or 1907. So  in a way we were a relatively new family, even though, you know, when  I came along, we weren   t so new anymore.  Right, the    30s was new compared to the people who were statehood  people.  Right.  How would you describe Boley today as compared to when you were  growing up, and what brought about the changes?  Boley is very different now than it was when I was growing up. There  just seemed like there was so much here when I grew up. A lot of our  activities were centered around the public schools. I remember we had a  state championship basketball team, and so all of our activities were  about going to basketball tournaments. There were always things going  on, homecomings at the school, the big rodeo. I just remember a lot of  stuff going on in Boley when I was growing up, and again, a lot of it was  centered around the public school activities and sports.  Now, it seems like there   s hardly anything that   s going on, other than the  rodeo, which still exists. I get here about once or twice a year mostly  because my parents were living here, but they   re both deceased now, but  I get here maybe once or twice a year. Of course, the school   s gone and  when you really look at the town, it looks really deserted now.  I just remember, particularly Saturday nights, it seemed like people from  Tulsa and Oklahoma City came to Boley on the weekends to sort of  hang out. You know, it was a place where people could drink,  unfortunately, drink a lot, or just drink and party and hang out and not  get into trouble. People were sort of looking out for you, and you didn   t  have to worry about getting into legal trouble with the police or  whatever. The town would be packed on Saturday night. It would be  wall to wall cars from one end of town, by the highway, to the other end  of town. We sort of drove up and down Main Street on Saturday night,  and it would just be filled with people on the weekends and very vibrant.  Now that only happens on Memorial Day weekend, or rodeo weekend,  but I remember that as a teenager. So that   s very different now.  Who makes up the Boley community now?  Most of the people that make up the Boley community now are elderly  people, people who are pretty much retired. I don   t know that there are  10  Simpson  Lee  Simpson  Lee  Simpson  that many younger people that live in Boley, because there are very few  job opportunities here. There are a few, like the state prison, the Boley  adult homes. I think most of the population has gotten older and many of  the folks are retired, and the school is gone. Younger people are going to  outlying areas to school. That   s pretty much all that   s left.  What were some of the major organizations in the town, and how did  they contribute to the community?  When I was growing up, the biggest organization was the Boley  Chamber of Commerce. I was actually one of the youngest officers of  the Boley Chamber of Commerce when I was in, I think it was junior  high. I forgot what position I held, but my father actually got me  involved in Boley civics at a very early age. In fact, I remember when  Mr. Ashley, he was the school superintendent, L.G. Ashley was running  for county commissioner, and my father, he was a big promoter of Boley  politics, and we helped Mr. Ashley   s campaign. I remember my father  taking me along with him and Mr. Ashley to all these outlying areas in  the county to post,    Vote for Mr. Ashley    signs. So I got involved in  Boley civics and politics at a very early age.  Boley Chamber of Commerce and the town of Boley were very active  when I was coming up, because the Boley Chamber of Commerce, at  that time, was the organization that sponsored the Boley rodeo. I think  now they   ve sort of handed it off to private individuals to sponsor. Boley  Chamber of Commerce has pretty much always been the biggest civic  organization here, but there have been other organizations like the  Ladies Industrial Club, the Self Culture Club, these were all  organizations that were part of the national movement for colored  women. They were fairly active, and at one time, Boley housed the  Masonic temple for black Masons in the area, and it was a two-story  building, actually, one story of the building still exists, but the Masons  were a big organization in Boley. It was a little bit before my time. Well,  a lot before my time, but the Masons were a big organization, and  Masons came around from all areas to congregate in Boley for their  annual conferences and whatnot.  Did they stay in the hotels and bring a lot of revenue to the town when  that happened?  There were several hotels in Boley at that time. They stayed in the  hotels. I don   t really think they had much of a choice. They couldn   t stay  in other hotels that were not black-owned, because of segregation. They  brought revenue. They brought a lot of exposure to the town.  Who were the town   s leaders, and how did they help to determine the  11  Lee  Simpson  Lee  Simpson  Lee  Simpson  direction of the town?  Some of the early Boley leaders were T.M. Haynes. He was the most  well-known, because he was one of the founders of the town. They  advertised this town nationally to draw in blacks from the South because  this is a place where they could escape Jim Crow laws and govern  themselves, and they had their own electric company. They were very  self-sufficient. That   s the early history of Boley. Mostly during my time,  there was Mr. McCormick, Mr. Langston McCormick, who was actually  the sheriff that shot and killed one of the members of Pretty Boy Floyd   s  gang. Actually, that was H.C. McCormick, but Mr. Langston  McCormick was the town policeman.  I also remember that Sam Wilcox was the mayor for most of the time  that I was living here. I don   t know, he was probably the mayor for  about twenty or thirty years, which I say for most of the time, it seems  like a long time. Then Mr. Ashley was probably one of the town leaders,  because he was the superintendent of the public schools. And probably  my grandfather, who was part of the school board. My grandfather was  Maurice W. Lee, Sr., and he started a manufacturing company here in  Boley called. It was actually M.W. Lee Manufacturing, which evolved  into what   s called today Smokaroma. My father and my uncle, my father  was Maurice Lee, Jr., and my uncle was Forest Lee, and they eventually  joined my grandfather   s company and manufactured restaurant  equipment, which they market internationally. So those were probably  some of the leaders during my time in Boley that I recall.  Who are the leaders now?  The leaders now would probably be Henrietta Hicks, Mary Joan  Matthews. I   m probably missing some folks, because I don   t live here  now. Those are the two that come to mind right away.  Are there people that have connections to Boley but have left to make  their mark in the world that come to mind when you think of people  who   ve left Boley and made a mark?  Most people leave Boley for other opportunities. To leave a mark, I  don   t know any specific people offhand. I mean, we all have made a  mark in our own way. I don   t know that any of us have become famous,  internationally famous. Probably one or two, but I   m not really  remembering.  And what did people do for a living maybe forty years ago compared to  today?  12  Lee  Simpson  Lee  Finchum  Lee  Forty years ago, most people in Boley either worked for the State  Training School for Boys or they worked for the Boley Public School  System, or they worked with my family   s company called Smokaroma. I  think the Boley Training School probably employed about, I would  guess like two or three hundred people. The public schools probably  employed about fifty and my father   s company employed maybe about  twenty or thirty people. There were also people that worked, that  commuted daily to Oklahoma City and worked at Tinker Air Force Base  and other places. Maybe some commuted over to Shawnee, but you  could pretty much be self-sufficient here working either with those three  that I named earlier.  Walk us through the town of Boley as it was and describe the different  businesses and buildings that we would see along the street.  Well, at the end of the street when you first enter into Boley is  McCormick   s place. Basically it consisted of a gas station, a hotel and a  restaurant. I think even at one point there was a dry cleaners during my  time here in Boley. Further up the street you would see Atlas Service  Station, which is still in existence. It   s the local gas station, and then  there was always Kees Department Store. Kees Department Store was  about in the middle of downtown Boley, where he sold dried goods,  clothing, socks, underwear. Pretty much any dry good need. That was  there for most of the time that I was here in Boley, and there were a lot  of other businesses. A nightclub, another night club at the end of town  called The End Zone, which were pretty popular, and they drew people  from around the surrounding counties on the weekends, and there was a  grocery store.  Pretty much all of them are gone now except for maybe one or two that I  named. Boley has its own water system, which was actually in  development when I was growing up here, and has been in existence for  the last forty years, I believe. Prior to that, most people were on water  wells and had outdoor bathrooms. But it   s probably been here a lot  longer, because I don   t recall using an outdoor bathroom when I was  growing up in any of the homes that we lived in.  Was there a movie theater downtown during your time here?  I think at one time Boley may have had a movie theater. It had a lot of  other businesses that were here but were gone when I was coming up.  There was no movie theater when I came up. We never really had any  fast food restaurants, which was kind of nice, because we always got  home cooked food. If we wanted fast food, we had to drive twelve miles  either to the east or to the west. I remember hearing one lady that moved  here from Tennessee talking about the nice thing about Boley is it  13  Simpson  Lee  Simpson  Lee  Simpson  Lee  doesn   t have fast food, because to eat you have to cook, and so if you   re  cooking, you   re probably going to eat a lot better quality food.  Do you have memories of county fairs or other local sporting events?  You know, I remember 4-H in high school, and we would compete with  the other county students in 4-H as far as crafts and some people raised  farm animals. There was always 4-H, and a lot of the students from  Boley High School participated in 4-H and also a county fair. I  remember that we were very competitive students, even though we were  a small town, and Boley being a black community, we were  marginalized in a way, but we were always very competitive, and our  basketball team was state champions. In some of the state fairs in 4-H,  we were very creative and a lot of us would win first place or second  place. Even though Boley, in a way, was marginalized and had fewer  resources than some of the surrounding communities, we were all pretty  competitive and creative people.  What was the role of the church and various churches as you were  growing up?  I always said that Boley probably had more churches than it had people,  at one time. (Laughs) It seemed that way to me. You know, as a part of  the Boley Chamber of Commerce, I actually participated in putting  together a little newsletter that we had for a while, and I remember one  project of going around and photographing all of the churches in Boley,  and I think I came up with twenty-eight. So if you divide five hundred,  at Boley   I   m estimating a population of about five hundred when I was  coming up. When you divide five hundred by twenty-eight you come up  with a ratio, and you can see that Boley probably had a lot of churches  compared to its population, and most of the churches were pretty active.  There was pretty much every denomination, I think, except Catholic.  People from Louisiana tended to be of Catholic faith, and they went  outside of Boley.  The churches were pretty big deals when they had homecomings,  because people that had moved away came back for the weekend to do  pastor appreciation and homecoming events. Churches were always the  place for funerals, and those were always big deals. I just remember  when it came to church I always associated church with food because  there was always a lot of food surrounding church events. (Laughs)  What are the special food traditions you remember growing up?  Some of the food traditions were collard greens. Greens were like a  staple, and even to this day, I cook greens myself because just the  14  Simpson  Lee  Simpson  Lee  Simpson  Lee  fragrance always reminds me of home. Cornbread, fried chicken, yams  were always a big deal around events and celebrations or funerals or  whatnot. On special occasions like Christmas and Thanksgiving,  chitterlings were a big part of those celebrations. Chitterlings weren   t  something that, I don   t think I could eat on a daily basis or regularly, but  they were always nice to have on the holidays.  I remember one of my neighbors, Geneva Wilcox, used to cook greens,  and she would always put poke salad in them, because poke salad grows  wild around here. My father used to tell me,    Well, you know poke salad  is poisonous.    And I always thought,    Well, why are we eating it?    But I  learned later that whatever poison or whatever it had, or if it had any at  all or not, I don   t know, that it was miniscule after it was cooked. Miss  Wilcox would always mix poke salad with her greens and put egg yolks  in it, and I always remember that. It was really good.  What other community traditions are celebrated today?  I think Boley celebrates Martin Luther King Day. They celebrate  Juneteenth. Those are still big celebrations here. I live in Seattle, in the  Northwest, and I spend a lot of time trying to explain to people what  Juneteenth is. (Laughs) Most people in the Great Northwest don   t know  what Juneteenth is, but there are some people that I   ve learned over the  years that have smaller Juneteenth celebrations in the Northwest, but  Juneteenth was always a big deal, and I guess still is. We didn   t really  know early on in life what Juneteenth was really about until I grew up  later and lived in Texas, where it   s an even bigger deal, learned what  Juneteenth was. And I think that   s a big deal in Boley. I think, of course,  the Boley rodeo is a big deal, even though it   s surrounding Memorial  Day, but it   s not really to celebrate a holiday. It   s just a big deal around  that holiday.  How long has the Boley rodeo been in practice?  I think the Boley rodeo has been going on probably, some people say a  hundred years. I don   t know. It   s been going on most of my life, and I   m  forty-nine now. So it   s been going on for at least forty-nine or fifty  years, and some people, I think, have said it   s been going on for a lot  longer, maybe even a hundred years.  Were there other traditions that were celebrated when you were a youth  as compared to now?  Our high school had a homecoming celebration every year where we had  a basketball game with another little town, but everyone who graduated  from Boley High School came. Well, I say everybody, but a lot of  15  Simpson  Lee  people who graduated from Boley High School came home that  weekend and it was just a big deal. We even went out and all bought  new outfits for that weekend. Easter was always a big weekend. We  would get new outfits for Easter, which was centered around our church.  My family pretty much grew up around Ward Chapel AME Church here  in Boley, which my grandfather helped rebuild after it burned down, and  so Easter was a big deal. Also around Easter there was a big Easter egg  hunt out at our rodeo ground, and I think they still do that, but it was a  big deal. Christmas was a big deal. The Chamber of Commerce would  buy Christmas decorations and put them up and down Boley Main  Street, and we would always drive around the different areas of town to  see the other people   s Christmas lights. So yeah, there were a lot of little  traditions that I don   t know if a lot of them exist anymore, because  there   s just not the number of people here anymore.  What were the interactions like with the neighboring towns in Okfuskee  County?  The neighboring towns were always accommodating. I always  wondered, it seemed like we were always going to shop in Okemah and  Prague, but Prague and Okemah were never coming to Boley to shop.  That   s probably why the businesses in Boley didn   t survive, because for  whatever   well, it was mostly having to do with race that we were sort  of forced to go to these outlying towns. Since they had more resources  than Boley, they didn   t need to come to Boley to buy things.  As far as our treatment, people were fairly accommodating, and I don   t  remember really any racial problems as a child. But I heard the stories  from my father and the other older people in the town about how when  they went to like Okemah or Prague, if they wanted to buy food, they  always had to go to the back of the restaurant to get whatever food they  were ordering. They couldn   t go in the restaurant. Okemah also had a  movie theater, and always, my father used to tell me,    You know, we  had to sit in the balcony. We couldn   t sit like on the bottom floor,     which didn   t make any sense to me, because if I was in the balcony and I  was angry about having to be there, I would be throwing things.  (Laughs) So being down at the bottom wasn   t really a good position to  be in.  But those were the stories that I heard about Boley. I think in its earlier  days, there was a lot of racial tension, but during my time, of course  integration had already happened by that time. Our basketball teams  were competing with the other towns. I   m simplifying it, but I realize  that there was probably some understanding that we had our place, but  as a child, I just didn   t really have a grasp of it.  16  Simpson  Lee  Simpson  Lee  Simpson  Lee  Talk a little about the role of the Boys    Home, and what became the  correctional facility.  I   m not sure when the Boley Training School for Delinquent Boys     actually, it was the Boley Training School for Negro Boys when it first  started. I   m not sure when it came along, but it came along as a place to  put negro boys, because people were segregated by race at that time.  There were a lot of people here in Boley that worked there and depended  on it for survival. My mother worked there and retired there after thirty-three  years, but I do remember a lot of people, and it was sort of, it was a  big deal here. I also remember Mr. James. He was the barber up there,  and my mother would always take me up there to get my hair cut. Even  though I didn   t live at Boley Training School, my mother took me there  to get my haircuts.  Boley is a pretty open and welcoming town. I don   t think that residents  see people as outsiders. They welcome you, and so when the training  school was there, they actually allowed some of the boys from the Boys     Home to attend the public schools in Boley, and they were allowed a lot  of freedom whereas they may not have been allowed that freedom  elsewhere. I don   t know, but there was a lot of interaction between the  boys that were up at the training school and the general community,  which was probably very good for them.  What was your religion growing up and which church did you attend?  My family pretty much attended Ward Chapel AME Church, and AME  is a Methodist denomination, a protestant denomination. So my  grandfather was a member of the AME church, but my grandmother  went to the Baptist church. I always like to think that I was a closeted  Baptist, because the AME church in my opinion, at least ours, was pretty  dry and boring, and I always saw the Baptist people, the Baptist church  as being pretty vibrant. So I always thought of myself as a closeted  Baptist. (Laughter)  What traditions from Boley have you preserved even when you   re in  Seattle?  One of the traditions, I think, is the food. (Laughs) Living in the  Northwest, there isn   t a whole lot of southern foods. I sort of had to  create that environment for myself, so I learned to cook collard greens.  I   ve learned to fry chicken. I   ve learned to cook a lot of southern dishes.  I live in a small condo, and when I have friends over, it   s usually like a  handful of people at a time, but when people hear that I   m having people  over, everybody wants to come because they know that my food is really  17  Finchum  Lee  Simpson  Lee  Simpson  Lee  Simpson  Lee  good. They don   t get the opportunity to eat a lot of southern foods. So I  think that that   s probably one of my biggest traditions from Boley is  mostly the food.  And what   s your specialty?  My specialty is collard greens. Probably two specialties, collard greens  and fried chicken. When I   m invited to events or like social gatherings,  they always say,    Can you bring collard greens?    (Laughs) And in fact, I  think I cooked collard greens last weekend and took them to a gathering,  and before I left they were all gone.  Wow. So what meat do you use? Do you use pork or smoked turkey?  In my collard greens, people always say,    The secret ingredient is our  ham hocks,    but I tend to go with the ham shanks, because the ham  shanks have more meat on them. To me, ham hocks are just mostly  gristle, but I cook them with pork shanks, and so by the time they   ve  cooked, then the meat has sort of fallen off of the bone and mixed in  with the greens. Sometimes I   ll use turkey. I find that people in Seattle  are very health conscious, and so some people don   t eat pork. Some  people don   t eat meat, and so I substitute turkey necks sometimes for my  pork shanks.  Were there any other special family traditions that you grew up with?  Family traditions. The holidays were always a big deal in our family.  Thanksgiving, Christmas, and even when I moved away, I generally  came back for the holidays. Again, I think food is a big part of the Boley  culture. Barbecue, but our family traditions were a lot of food around the  holidays, and the holidays were times when most of us came back  together. My siblings, most of us had moved away, and we all came  back for holidays. And my cousins would come back for holidays. Those  were most of our family traditions, about people being together for  holidays.  Were there any craft traditions that you remember your family did? Your  mom   s from Chicago, did she still belong to the quilting and all of that?  When I was growing up, my mom was a part of a bridge club, and most  of the women in the town were my teachers or associated in other ways.  They weren   t just her friends or a part of her social club, they were also  my teacher or our pastor   s wife or whatever. But they would get together  and they would rotate different people   s houses. Bridge at my mom   s  house one month, bridge at the next lady   s house one month, and they  also did this with a game called po-ke-no.  18  Simpson  Lee  Simpson  Lee  I remember when Mom hosted the bridge club or the po-ke-no group,  they got to use the nice part of the house and the living room and the  dining room. I was not supposed to go in that part of the house, but I  knew that Mom prepared a lot of good foods. I would take a peek every  now and then and I was shocked one day. I would see my teachers  drinking alcohol and smoking cigarettes, and I   m like,    Oh my God  I  can   t believe Miss so-and-so is having a cocktail and smoking a  cigarette,    because that wasn   t my image of my teachers in school. They  were very professional and they had to live, I don   t know if they had to,  but they carried themselves to a higher standard around their students,  but when Mom had these bridge clubs and the po-ke-no, it was a  different story. It was like all the ladies let their hair down.  Did your family ever play any of those games, or did they have any other  activities that they enjoyed together?  My dad and his buddies played poker, and they drank scotch when they  played poker and smoked cigarettes. I learned how to play poker from  my father and his brother and Mr. Wilcox, and Mr. Morgan. They had a  little poker group, and so I learned how to play poker with them. I don   t  know if I should be saying this, because I was underage, but my job was  to make the cocktails. I learned a little trick. They didn   t allow me to  drink, of course, but if they put me in charge of making cocktails that I  learned at some point that if I made their drinks a little bit stronger it  correlated with me winning more money at poker. So I learned that, and  they loved their scotch, and so that was my job growing up, along with  my peers. I had two other running buddies about my age and we learned  that the more alcohol, the more money we won.  What other kinds of entertainment could be found in Boley when you  were growing up?  Yeah, we should get away from the bad habits. (Laughs) We did a lot of  fishing in Boley, and I really remember going to some of the different  ponds and fishing and catch little bass about the size of my hand. The  thing about fishing is that whatever you catch, you also have to clean.  And I learned how to clean fish growing up and actually, we would take  them and batter them and fry them up, and some of the neighbors  hunted. My father wasn   t much of a hunter, but I would also go with the  Lou Grand family who lived next door, and they would go possum  hunting or whatnot. It was at night, and I went a couple of times. I don   t  know that hunting was really my forte, but I think fishing was the  biggest activity around Boley, just kind of a leisure activity. Most of the  younger folks had bicycles. A lot of us had bicycles, and we rode our  bikes around town.  19  Simpson  Lee  Simpson  Lee  Simpson  What world events had the biggest impact on you growing up, and did  any of them affect your family or the community of Boley?  There were some world events that probably impacted Boley fairly  negatively, like economic events where people have to move away to  survive, but there are also some political events that probably impacted  Boley, like desegregation. I don   t know, I think Boley kind of existed  because of segregation, that blacks came to Boley for freedom and to  escape the negative impact of racism. So in a way, even though  desegregation was probably a good thing, it probably impacted Boley  negatively because there was not that incentive. People didn   t have to  come to Boley anymore. They could live wherever they wanted to live.  So a positive event actually probably impacted Boley fairly negatively.  How did you learn about Boley history and black history in Oklahoma,  like the Tulsa Race Riot?  I think the difference between history classes in Boley were that  Oklahoma history was black history. When I went to Oklahoma State  University, we had a separate history class. We had a separate black  history class. There was black history and there was Oklahoma history  and there was U.S. history and world history and so on and so forth, but  in Boley High School, there was just Oklahoma History, which black  history was a part of that. Even though our history books had small  sections of African American history in it, there were always other  extended discussions in class about black achievements, Boley history.  There was also oral history from family members and other people about  how Boley came about, and like Bill Pickett inventing bulldogging.  Those weren   t things that were really talked about in the textbooks, but  those came about through oral history. Like my great-grandfather who  was a millionaire in Earlsboro, Oklahoma, I kind of got that through oral  history, and then later in life had to really go investigate that myself.  I don   t think this state really values the impact that African Americans  have had on this state. Even the fact that Oklahoma at one time was  being considered to be a black state, and all the different African  American towns that exist. That history, I think it   s there and it   s been  told minimally, but I don   t think it   s really been captured the way that  I   ve heard about it through oral history and about Langston and Taft and  Clearview and about how these places came about.  You   re in the process of doing a documentary about your family. Would  you tell us a little about it?  20  Lee  I   m in the process of doing a documentary about my great-grandfather,  my maternal great-grandfather. My grandmother   s father, Forest  Anderson, who moved to Oklahoma in 1907 from Shelby, North  Carolina. We always had family reunions at the old house just outside of  Earlsboro, Oklahoma. It was a brick home, fairly modern for the time. I  think it was built probably in the    30s or    40s, and we spent a lot of time  there because my great-aunt and my grandmother, my great-aunt lived  there and my great-uncle. My great-grandfather died before I was born,  so I never really had a chance to meet him, but he moved to Oklahoma  for farming opportunities and brought his family here for farming and  started out sharecropping. At some point he decided that he wanted to  own the land. He was a pretty smart man, even though he never had any  formal education and pretty much worked from the age of seven. He was  pretty business savvy, and he probably knew that it was more to his  benefit to own the land than to work on it for somebody else.  So when the land came up for sale, he made the decision that he wanted  to buy it, but he wasn   t sure that he had the money. And you couldn   t  really go to a bank and get a loan back in those days, especially if you  were African American. He saved most of the money that he had earned  through taking crops to the market and selling and whatnot. The land  came up for sale. They wanted five hundred for it and when he and his  wife counted up the money that they had saved, it was five hundred and  thirty-five dollars   just enough to buy the land. So he bought the land  and maybe a few years later, they discovered oil on the land and the  revenues from the oil over time made him a millionaire. He was featured  in Ebony magazine in 1949 as one of the ten richest negros in America.  So the documentary is basically about this story about how someone  who was the son of a former slave got to be a millionaire, and I really  never thought much about this story growing up. I knew we went to this  house in Earlsboro all the time for family reunions and to visit relatives  and there were oil wells on the land and we would, as kids, go hang out  around the oil wells and ride the tractors. I would hear my aunts and  uncle and dad say things like,    Yeah, great-grandpa was a       well, it  was their grandfather. They would say,    Grandpa was a millionaire,     and I   m like,    Huh?    I didn   t really have a grasp of the magnitude of  what this meant, and as I got older, I became very interested in family  history. This was the piece of family history that I thought,    You know,  this is a big deal. This is not documented anywhere.    I got the history  passed on to me by my relatives, and it needs to be documented.  I   m the type of person that rather than saying,    Somebody needs to do  this,    I did it, or I   m doing it myself. I went back to Shelby, North  Carolina to dig through court records. I found a lot of land records where  my great-grandfather owned land in North Carolina. He became sort of  21  Simpson  Lee  the banker for blacks and the educator, or the person who provided  education opportunities for blacks in the area. He built a school over in  Earlsboro for students, mostly black and Indian students. Indians  couldn   t go to public schools either. He bought the bank in Boley after it  got robbed.  I remember one story that one of my cousins told. She   s my first cousin  once removed, so she was Forest Anderson   s granddaughter. She told  me the story that she remembered people coming up in trucks and would  go in the house and do business with grandpa. She was just a child, and  she was like,    What   s going on here?    She found out later that these  were people in the neighborhood, they were mostly Native American  people, black people, going to talk to Grandpa for loans. So he would  loan money to people, to people who couldn   t get loans from traditional  areas like banks or whatever. They would put up land or some type of  asset for collateral. He got rich, but it wasn   t like he just didn   t share it  with people or provide opportunities.  At one point, his farm housed maybe a hundred people, and during the  Depression a lot of black people didn   t have jobs or a place to live or  eat. He housed all these people, to work on the farm, and so these folks  were working, having a place to live, were eating regularly, and so it  was a big deal. I was just shocked that no one had told this story. I   ve  actually captured a lot of information on film, spoken to relatives,  spoken to people who, actually who are still living that knew him and  I   m putting it together. It   ll probably be a thirty minute to an hour  documentary at some point.  Well, thank you. What is it about Boley that keeps the connection alive  for people who used to live here?  Well, for people who used to live here, the thing that keeps the  connection alive is this is home, basically. And not only that, I think  most of us realized as we got older that this was a unique opportunity  that even though when you go to the big city, people are like,    You grew  up in the country?    But this was a unique experience. It   s like, I grew up  in an all black town with a rich history, and I don   t know that many  people can say that. A lot of people in Oklahoma, African Americans  probably can that grew up in some of the smaller towns around here, or  even have connections, but I just think that it was a unique opportunity.  Well, it wasn   t an opportunity. It was an experience, because I didn   t  choose to grow up here. It just happened because this is where my  parents were. So it was a unique experience, and I tell people about it  and they go,    Oh, wow.     I always like to say I experienced the world backwards. Most people  22  Simpson  Lee  Simpson  Lee  Simpson  Lee  Simpson  Lee  Simpson  Lee  grow up in mixed communities, white and black or Native American and  Hispanic, and I grew up in a community that was black first and then  had to experience the world, backwards, I guess. And that was fine, but  it   s a very unique experience. I believe that people my age and people  who came from Boley understand that now. Even though we may not  have understood that at the time when we were growing up, it   s very  clear to us that growing up here was a unique experience.  How do you think having that kind of experience affected those of you  who graduated from high school in Boley and went on to make your  fortune elsewhere?  (Laughs) Make our fortune. I think it was very challenging for me  leaving Boley and going to a state university because I never thought of  myself as a minority growing up in Boley. So when I left Boley to go to  a state university, the awareness of the fact that I was a racial minority  was very apparent to me. (Laughs) I mean, it was a fine experience, but  my awareness shifted. That growing up in Boley, everybody was the  same class-wise and race-wise, but leaving Boley I realized that I was  different in a lot of ways. I was different. There were different classes of  people and a lot of different races, and the race that I happened to be in  was not well represented at the larger level, and so that was a little bit of  an adjustment, trying to navigate those waters.  What do you think is the most important thing that people should know  about Boley?  I think the most important thing that people should know about Boley is  why it came to be. Again, it was a place where people came to escape  the hardships of life. That   s what   s special about Boley is its history. So  I think people really should understand how this came to be. Our society  is different now, but Boley sort of represents what it used to be like.  How would you like to be remembered?  How would I like to be remembered?  And do you think you   d ever return to Boley after you retire?  That   s not a fair question. (Laughter)  Okay, well you   re not obligated to answer it.  I   ll answer it. Let me think of the question again. How would I like to be  remembered? I don   t know that I would like to be remembered in a  different way than anybody else. I mean, at Boley we were all pretty  23  Simpson  Lee  much the same. I probably have aspirations on a larger scale the way my  life is about how I would like to be remembered, but as far as Boley, I  guess in a way maybe, I don   t know. (Laughs) I haven   t really thought  about   that   s a tough question.  I don   t know if I   ll ever come back to Boley. The only way I could see  coming back, and this is not to say that Boley is a bad place, it   s just that  Boley doesn   t have all of the opportunities that it had growing up. I  mean, it was a great place to grow up and now that I   ve gotten out into  life, I realize there   s a lot of other opportunities in the world, and Boley  just doesn   t offer them. So I don   t know that I   ll ever come back to live.  If I do, it   ll probably be in retirement.  Well, thank you very much for meeting with us today, Mr. Lee. We hope  you have a good time while you   re visiting for the rodeo.  Thank you.  -------  -------  
