 Paustenbaugh  Matthews  It is Friday November 19, 2010, and I   m here at the OSU Library. This  is Jennifer Paustenbaugh with Glenna Matthews and we are here to talk  about Angie Debo. Thank you so much for agreeing to participate in an  interview.  My pleasure.  Actually, I   m glad it   s a pleasure for you because it   s really a pleasure  for me to get to sit down and talk with you about this. I wanted to ask  you the first question to sort of set the context for today   s interview. This  goes way back in time, but tell me a little bit about your background and  how you ended up at Oklahoma State University in 1978.  I started college when I was only sixteen, and then I dropped out to get  married. My educational trajectory was extremely unusual for someone  who wound up getting a doctorate. I had a year and a half at Pomona  College, and then I dropped out to get married. I had one quarter at  Denver University, one semester at UCLA, UC extension credits, UC  correspondence credits, and then I finally attended San Jose State for  three years. It took me fourteen years to get a BA. So when I entered  Stanford, which is still miraculous as I think about it, because I was  competing with people in my year at Stanford who had gone through in  a very traditional way and came from elite universities: Johns Hopkins,  Yale, Stanford itself. I was ten years older than all my classmates. When  I had first started at Pomona, I was more interested in a good time than  studying hard, and there   s nothing like life to teach you to be very hard  working.  So I finished up my doctorate, and the job market sent me to Stillwater. I  was newly divorced, my children were both in college at this point, and  it was extremely difficult for me because I   d never lived alone in my  life. All of a sudden I   m more than a thousand miles from anyone I knew  5  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  particularly well. I did, over time, form a very close circle of friends in  Stillwater with whom I   m still close, even though I don   t live here any  longer. But I think one thing that drew me to Angie was that I was  looking for Oklahoma-specific projects. My dissertation had been on  San Jose and the Great Depression. I researched that because I was at  Stanford, I didn   t have to travel to conduct that research, I had kids in  school, but when I got here, I was very much looking for Oklahoma-specific  projects.  My first project was about Oklahoma coal miners in Krebs, and that led  to an article in Labor History. So then when I began to hear about  Angie, it really piqued my interest because I was a historian of women,  and my mentor at Stanford was one of the real pioneers in the field. So  when I heard that there was this woman historian who was so  productive, but whose life had been anything but conventional, it really  piqued my curiosity. So that   s kind of setting the stage.  So how did you end up becoming acquainted with Angie?  There are a few things that really set the thing in motion. A professor in  the history department, a colleague, Doug Hale, came to my house for  dinner. We had a visiting scholar, actually a Californian who had studied  Oklahoma, her name is Sheila Manes, and Doug had kindly driven  Sheila out to visit Angie. Then I had the two of them over to my house  for dinner, and they were just full of how wonderful Angie was. This  would have been probably 1979 or 1980. That set a train of thought  going in my mind. Then in 1980, the library here, the Edmon Low  Library, had a ninetieth birthday party for her and a reception. I shook  her hand and I thought oh, she seemed    she had a twinkle in her eye.  Of course, I didn   t know her at all, but I kept hearing more and more  about the wonderful things she had done. Then my mentor at Stanford,  Carl Degler, told me   apparently I can   t remember exactly the point at  which I mentioned that I had been thinking about trying to do something  about Angie, but he told me,    Oh, we all really admired her books when  I was in graduate school.    He said that they speculated that they didn   t  know whether Angie was a male or a female name, and there weren   t  that many women publishing history, so they just assumed she was a  man.  Really?  Yes. They knew her books well, they just didn   t know she was a woman.  So that encouraged me. And then one night, I was at a dinner party at the  Webers, Gloria Valencia-Weber and Bob Weber, and Earl and Bernice  Mitchell were there also. Both the Mitchells and the Webers knew Angie  very well, primarily through their work in the ACLU. I know you   ve  6  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  talked to Gloria, and Gloria probably told you about all the times she  and Angie worked together and so on. A light bulb went off. I can   t even  remember who thought of this first, whether it was myself or Gloria, but  it just seemed like for my dissertation, which was about the Great  Depression in San Jose, I had done quite a bit of oral history  interviewing and here are people who know Angie, which I did not, and  it   s difficult to approach a ninety-year-old person for interviewing  purposes, and just,    Oh, wow, this could really work.    We have  complementary skills here. So then Gloria and I, and again I have no  idea who wrote the grant, I can   t remember that, but the two of us were  co-PIs, co-principal investigators, on a grant from the Oklahoma  Foundation for the Humanities  now the Oklahoma Humanities  Council . We got a thousand dollars and we paid ourselves nothing, but  that paid for Aletha Rogers to come along with us and do professional  quality taping. Then the challenge became to convince Angie.  So you got the grant before you had actually gotten her agreement to  participate in the project?  That   s my recollection, although I could be mistaken. I think that we had  confidence that somehow or another we were going to talk her into it.  So what were her initial objections to the idea?  She was a very proud woman and she did not want to be portrayed as an  enfeebled old lady. And so, again, my recollection is that we went at  least four times, just trying to get her to be comfortable with us and  comfortable with the idea. Then, as I recall, what we were talking about  is her master   s thesis at the University of Chicago. One of us said  something about,    Well, could you tell us a little bit about your master   s  thesis?    which was published, which was quite unusual actually to have  it published. It was published I think within a year. Then she launched  into this long, exquisitely detailed description. It was right after the  League of Nations Treaty had failed before the U.S. Senate, and so the  whole issue of isolationism was front and center in American politics.  She studied the whole issue around George Washington   s farewell  speech, no entangling alliances and so on. She proceeded to tell us about  various treaties, and so somewhere in the process of this explanation on  her part, either Gloria or I or both of us said,    You   re busted. You can   t  tell us that you   re too feeble to be interviewed. You just gave us an  exquisitely detailed, beautifully remembered account of something you  wrote in the early twenties.     That   s really astonishing, isn   t it?  Yes  And then as I recall, she was kind of sheepish and,    Well yeah,  7  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  maybe you   re right.    So she agreed at that point to cooperate and her  stipulation was that if she became tired, we would quit immediately,  which was reasonable because she was then in her nineties. She would  sometimes, very abruptly say,    I   m tired, this is it.    But it was never  within less than a half hour. It was always enough to make it worth our  while to go there. She knew herself well enough that if she felt that she  was on the verge of becoming vague or losing her incredible command,  she stopped so there is not a single moment of the interview that I  recollect, and I presume you   ve listened to them     To some of them, yes.  She   s incredibly well-spoken and eloquent, and so we at no point ever  took advantage of an    enfeebled    old lady. She was in command, we  respected her wishes, and she acquitted herself unbelievably well.  Was your goal when you wrote the grant to end up with a program on  public radio? That was always the goal?  Yes, because when you get money from the  Oklahoma  Foundation for  the Humanities, there has to be a public component. I still am astonished  at how farsighted we were in our planning, that we didn   t just go and  stick any old tape recorder in front of her, because what we got proved  to be of the quality that was required for public radio. Then I believe  some of it was used as voiceover in the documentary. So we got very  high quality tape, and we knew we had to have something that was not  just documentation, but really performance quality.  I believe your project went over a period of four years, is that correct?  Yes.  How did you know when you had reached the end of the project?  I think we reached the end of the project when    I could only interview  her until I got this wonderful grant myself, an ACLS  American Council  of Learned Societies  grant to write my first book, and so I left in the fall  of    82. I believe then Gloria carried on some interviews without me, but  the radio programs had already been edited. So one or the other of us  kept on    but I don   t think I ever went back with a tape recorder after I  got that grant; I think Gloria may have. So it   s not like the well could  run dry. I mean, she always had interesting things to say. And let me  also say that there were many times that I went to see her without a tape  recorder where we had incredibly memorable conversations, which I, if  you don   t mind, since they are not documented any place else I   ll  describe.  8  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  Oh, that would be wonderful.  One of the wonderful times, by this point, Gloria, of course you are  aware, went to Harvard Law School, so we did it together and then  Gloria went on her own when I had my ACLS grant. Then Gloria started  Harvard Law School, so then I went a few times, but without a tape  recorder. On my birthday, it would have been in 1984, I decided that I  wanted to celebrate my birthday with Angie. I took a group of fellow  women academics, because I thought it would be fun to have   this is the  peer group that Angie never had, of women academics. The others were  Dorothy Schrader, who is still in the foreign language department here,  the late Etta Perkins who did Russian history, and a woman who is at  OU, Martha and I can   t remember her last name, but she did English  history.  We dropped by the home in Marshall, and as I recall we went on to have  dinner in Enid, but what was really remarkable was when she met Etta  and she was introduced as someone who did Russian history, Angie said,     Russian history  I   ve been interested in Russia ever since I was in high  school. You see, it was right after the Russian Revolution of 1905 and  everybody was wondering what was going to happen next in Russia. In  high school debate we had a topic on    will Russia become a free and  liberal society?       And she started laughing, just giggling, she said,    And  I took the affirmative.    (Laughs) And you know, she went into this  whole long riff about something that had happened so  long ago , the  dawn of the Twentieth Century. It was such a privileged experience to  have conversations of this nature.  And then another time I had decided that I was just too homesick for  California. I was the only child of aging parents and they were both in  California, so I was going to give up my tenure and leave. I went to see  Angie and I said,    Angie, as much as you love Oklahoma, that   s how  much I love California and I just have to be there.    And she said,    Oh,  California. The most I know about California is the years    59-   64.    And  of course, I thought she meant the free speech movement, the dawn of  the    60s, but she meant 1859. The reason she knew so much about it was  that her grandfather had gone to California in those years and had  regaled her with tales of crossing the plains. She told me that he had left  for California from Illinois. I thought a minute and I said,    Oh, well if he  was in Illinois and left in 1859, then he must have been there during the  Lincoln-Douglas debates.    And she said,    Oh, yes, yes.    I said,    Well  did he go to one of the Lincoln-Douglas debates?    And she said,    Yes, I  think he intended to go, but it didn   t work out. Somebody was a no show  or some such.    I   m sitting there pinching myself because here   s  somebody who has    I   m getting second hand of something that  happened, you know, it seems frozen in time and not something that  9  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  Paustenbaugh  somebody would have almost living memories of.  She told me her grandfather never talked about the Indians, it was  always tribe specific. Then she told me that she loved a book by George  Stewart called The California Trail. She got out the book and we looked  at it, and we were trying to figure out how her grandfather, what route he  might have taken, and she lent me that book. Every night, as I drove  across to go home, I sat in a motel and read that book. When I got home  and finished the book, I mailed it back to her. But it was such a  wonderful experience of kind of completing the circles that, you know,  here   s something that her grandfather had done and I almost felt like I  was reliving an experience with her as the medium. So I had some  absolutely fantastic conversations with her, which were not recorded, but  I am grateful for the opportunity to share these memories because now  they can be part of the public record.  How remarkable. I was struck yesterday by something that you said in  your presentation at the luncheon before the statue dedication when you  said,    I can remember explaining to my historian friends in other parts  of the country that it was if someone who had been at Jamestown or  Plymouth was able to get a PhD in history and write on the basis of  having survived the starving times as well as having professional  experience.    So what you just described     Yes, that   s what made it so remarkable to me that she had herself, or via  her grandfather, was so much in touch with what seemed to me remote  aspects of our national experience and yet, this is what I so loved about  the interviews. She could put her personal experiences in a much greater  context than most people can because of how she thought so deeply  about American history generally.  Yesterday after the event, the film was shown again. I attended because I  was hoping to meet some people from Marshall. I was sharing with the  audience that after we did the radio programs, I just could hardly wait to  play them for people. When I got back, I would go to California in the  summer to see my family and so on. I played them for my parents who  were mightily impressed, and then I played them for Carl Degler. I just  felt like it was such a privilege for me and I really wanted other people,  particularly people who cared about history, to have a similar  experience. I remember Carl Degler saying,    I   d like to think I   d be that  eloquent when I   m her age.    Her eloquence came through on the radio  programs. It was pretty astonishing.  So was he impressed by anything else besides her eloquence since he  was the one who had given you early encouragement?  10  Matthews  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  Oh, he just thought it was a wonderful project, but I remember him in  particular talking about the eloquence. He and his wife had me over for  dinner and I literally was like this evangelist, I had these radio tapes that  I took everywhere and I played them for people, you know. (Laughs)  That   s really nice to think about.  Well, it was just thrilling for me as a historian to have found somebody.  It was like listening to American history talking. It was like listening to  Cleo, the muse of history holding forth, though she was very modest, she  didn   t pontificate. I have a very enthusiastic personality as various  people have pointed out along the way. So then, while I was on this  grant, I was researching a book, my first book, which is called Just a  Housewife. I was in Chicago, New York, Washington, but the longest  time in the Boston area so that I could use the Schlesinger Library at  Cambridge. I had met this woman who, coincidentally her name is  Deborah Gardner. She happened to be the cousin of my closest friend at  Stanford, so we had heard about one another, and we happened to be  sitting next to each other at a brown bag lunch. She started telling me  who she was and I said,    I know who you are. You   re Dave   s cousin.     She said,    Oh, I   ve heard about you, too.    So I invited her over. I was in  this garret. I was staying in this home in Brookline, Massachusetts. I was  on the third floor and it was not well heated, and so when I say that it  was a garret, I mean, we wrapped ourselves in blankets. I played the  radio tapes for her and she said,    Glenna, we   ve got to make a movie  about this woman.    Then she took the radio tapes to New York. She  knew Barbara Abrash and that   s what got the ball rolling.  I   m assuming that Barbara contacted you first. What was your reaction?  Oh, I remember Barbara saying,    Would there be good visuals?    And I  said,    Oh yes, because her home is just a period piece and her brother  made some of the furniture and it   s just an exquisite, what should I say,  it   s like you   re going into a house museum almost. I mean, it   s not  fancy, but it   s just of a piece and it tells you something about life in a  small town in Oklahoma probably in the 1930s. If you want to picture  the wide open spaces of the west in the small town of Marshall       I was  very enthusiastic about that too, the visuals would be very good.  So then at some point, I apparently contacted Gloria and then Gloria  really did the heavy lifting as far as writing the next grant, though I was  listed on it, Gloria did all the work. I think we got  5,000 and then   38,500 or something like that. Though my name was on it, Gloria did  the work. So again, we made a wonderful team because I was doing this  travelling and I was meeting people in New York, but she was on the  ground in Oklahoma to write the grant for the Foundation for the  11  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  Paustenbaugh  Humanities.  Trying to keep things rolling there.  Yes.  So did you have any concern given that it had taken you four visits, or at  least four visits, to get Angie to agree to the audio interviews that she  might balk at having a film crew come to Marshall?  Well, that wasn   t really my concern, because it wasn   t up to me to talk  her into it. It had been up to Gloria and me to talk her into the first  instance, but she told me, and again it   s good to get this documented.  She said,    Glenna, you might wonder why I   ve cooperated with the film  and then also with the portrait.    She said,    It   s not vanity. It   s that, no  author ever set pen to paper that didn   t want his or her books to be read,  and I feel that this film is going to give my books a wider circulation,  and that   s deeply gratifying to me.    At the time she had told me that I  had never written a book, but now I understand, yes. I mean, you know  you   re not going to make a lot of money; you just like to have some  impact on the discourse. You   d like your books to become part of the  record and so on and if they just sit there, and it has nothing to do with  money really, you just want people to discuss them. So I understood at  the time, but now that I   ve written books myself, I understand in a  deeper way. I think by that time, the project had taken on enough life of  its own and she could see that this was going to be good for the  readership of her books, so I believe, I mean she said it in so many  words, but I think that it makes a lot of sense.  Let me attempt to backtrack a little bit. You talked about taking the radio  programs around, the recordings of them and then playing them for  people, but they aired on KOSU and then they were picked up on the  public radio networks and broadcast in other locations, so other than  the feedback that you got immediately from people as you personally sat  there with the recording of it and listened to them and then your meeting  with Deborah Gardner, what other type of feedback did you get about  the radio programs?  I can   t remember very much, but again, it   s like when you publish a  book, sometimes its years before you    and then you find out that  somebody or other, their life was changed because of something they  read. I can   t remember getting feedback from the public radio programs,  but that may be    Of course, I left Oklahoma fairly soon after they were  aired, so that might be an explanation.  As an author of a number of books yourself, did it ever occur to you to  12  Matthews  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  be the one to write the definitive biography of Angie Debo   s life?  It did. But I felt very strongly that, and I discussed it with Barbara  Abrash too, our producer of the film, I loved her too much.  It would be hard to be critical.  I could not. And Barbara said,    Both of you deserve better,    and I  thought that was a good way of putting it. I love Shirley Leckie   s  biography. Shirley is deeply admiring, but she is able to be critical and  you can   t write hagiography and have it taken seriously, but I would  have been incapable of writing anything but hagiography. But I feel  thrilled that Gloria and I created this body of documentation that has  enhanced the biographical writings of others.  Well I think to me, one of the most striking contributions about it is that  it makes her accessible, and it makes her work somewhat more  accessible because she   s not an easy person to read in the sense that, if  you   re looking for something that would be entertaining or a light read  or something that you   re not going to have to devote a lot of intellectual  energy to absorbing, she   s not the person for you if you   re not willing to  do that.  Well, and I think she had a rich emotional and personal life, but that too  was unconventional and so she could be stereotyped as a spinster stuck  away in a small town. But then when you find out how much Marshall  loved her and how much she loved Marshall and all the different things  that    I mean, travelling around the world as much as she did and so on.  She had a remarkable life, but I think our oral history has helped give a  fuller picture of the human being than could have been possible to  stereotype her. And one of the things that came to me, I mean the early  generations   I gave a lot of thought because as we were doing this  project, there had been so few women historians up until about 1970.  There was a generation in the early Twentieth Century of women who  taught at the women   s colleges, not so many at the co-educational  institutions, but then that number was dwindling after the war, even at  the women   s colleges. There   s a lot of historical study now of the lives  of the women who were at the women   s colleges. They mostly had a  pretty good community, but those few women who did teach at co-educational  institutions were often very isolated, very lacking a  community, difficult at that point to marry and so they often did have  extremely spartan emotional lives, not through faults of their own, but  because they lacked a natural community. When I started reading about  some of the research on women academics of her cohort and what some  of them had to go through, I really believe that there were gains as well  as losses in her unusual professional life.  13  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  What did you learn from Angie that you weren   t expecting to learn?  Oh, there were a lot of things. One of the times she chided me, I have to  bring up. I   m not sure whether this made it onto the tape, but I was  talking about growing up in Marshall and coming from the Bay Area I  had all the prejudices that anyone would likely have. I said something  like,    Oh those rural teachers must have been       I don   t think I used the  word pathetic, but    they must not have been very inspiring    and she just  bristled. She said,    They walked in glory among us. They represented  the life of the mind.    No one was going to patronize those teachers.  Do you think that was in part because she had been one of those  teachers?  Probably, but I think more strongly, here she is, this little girl in this  really isolated rural area and then these teachers who had read and who  had ideas and I think they must have just represented a whole world. I  think that   s why she said    they walked in glory among us.    When I was  saying this it made me think of, you probably know Larry McMurtry   s  wonderful essay about Angie? He says that one of her books came his  way and he realized that people in his area could write books and that  opened up a world to him and I think those rural teachers must have  done that for her. I think that was the moment at which I got it that  Marshall    that   s one of the things I learned from her, not to just assume  that Marshall was a God forsaken rural outpost, but a community that  enriched her life from start to finish. And of course, I was so impressed  that as she got to be an enfeebled old woman, not enfeebled mentally,  but obviously physically, that this small town cared for her in so many  ways. Bringing her food, and I think Gloria was the one that told me that  a team went through her house and tried to remove any obstacles to safe  independent living and I mean it was a model of how to live quasi-independently,  but with a support group and she had that because of  Marshall. She didn   t have to go into a nursing home, whereas a lot of  people aren   t so fortunate.  Right. She was very fortunate in that regard. You left Oklahoma in 1986,  is that right?  Actually it was in December of    84.  Since then, how has what you learned from Angie or her scholarly work  informed your teaching or your own research?  (Laughs) That   s a huge question. Her books are beautifully written and  while her books aren   t lollipop type reading, she modeled writing  scholarly books that ordinary people could read with profit, that   s one.  14  But mostly it was that she kept her    I mean what inspired me the most  with Angie, academia and I   m sure a lot of other professions, but  academia is the one that I know the most, is populated with a lot of  people who, I used to hear my colleagues and I   m sure they weren   t  unique, but it   s like,    Oh, I didn   t get that grant. Well pooh-ey, why  should I try hard?    or,    I didn   t get the raise I should have gotten,    and  here   s a woman who got the short end of the stick professionally and  was absolutely undeterred. The whole idea that she could go home to  Marshall, teach in rural schools, which she had done without a PhD,  without all the accolades that she had won, and instead of saying,    Well,  life wasn   t fair to me and I   m not going to try anymore,    which people  do. People defeat themselves that way. She just was so motivated to tell  the story of the injustice to Indians that she was undeterred by things that  would crush a lot of people.  One issue that Gloria and I discussed and I can   t remember whether we  wrote about it or not, Gloria and I co-authored an essay that was in the  newsletter of the Organization of American Historians, but she had  talked so positively about her life choices and then when I discovered  these desperate letters in the OU Library where she was writing to her  mentor saying,    Help, help, I   m starving to death     not literally, but,     I   m desperate. Help     there was such a disjunction, such a disconnect  between the letters that she wrote and the pictures that she   s painting of     I made positive choices.    I mean, my interpretation was not that she   s  willfully distorting, but that that was part of her survival technique is to  just move on and think ultimately this was positive and therefore I   m  going to depict it in terms of a positive choice.  There was a particularly low moment in my life. I had been teaching as a  visiting associate professor in the women   s studies department at  Berkeley and this woman had been chair who seemed to have a high  opinion of me and then she stepped down or was replaced as chair, I am  not privy to what was going on, but I had been scheduled and in fact did  teach, it was the fall of 1993, in that department. The first day that I was  going to teach, the new chair of the department took me out to lunch just  before my first class and she said,    Well, it   s a new regime, we   re not a  charitable institution. We   re not going to keep on employing you just  because it   s convenient for you,    or words to that effect. It was just  incredibly brutal and particularly since I was about to go and teach a  class. This is just a really terrible thing to do to someone who is about to  go and teach. And I looked at her and I said,    Well my role model is  Angie Debo. (Laughs) She had things like this happen to her and she  kept right on writing.    And I said,    She published her ninth book when  she was in her eighties.    I didn   t go,    Pshhh,    but in essence that   s what  I said. I didn   t say,    Take your job and shove it,    I finished out the term,  but it was extremely unpleasant and painful. But I just said,    This is  15  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  what I   m going to do. I   m going to keep on writing and you ain   t  discouraging me, lady.    I specifically invoked Angie. It was like she was  my talisman.  And that would have been a really difficult situation to handle had you  not had that role model.  Absolutely. She was completely my role model and I don   t think I   m  going to reach her total, but I   m working on my sixth book now and I   ve  taken her as my inspiration. Role model isn   t strong enough. It   s not just  that she wrote the books, it   s the attitude that well you lick your wounds  for awhile, but you don   t let this kind of garbage get you down very long  because it will interfere with the main business at hand, which is, you  have things you want to say and fortunately a way to say them.  One time, one of my friends said,    Glenna, for you, visiting Angie was  like going to church,    which is not far from the truth because it was like  the values that are the most important to me, she was the most wonderful  embodiment of those values that I have met in my life. I   m sure she had  all kinds of flaws and this is why I couldn   t have written the biography  because it would have been too painful to me to go through the  documentation. (Laughs) What? She   s not perfect ?  (Laughter) That would   ve been so disappointing.  If you love somebody, you   ve got to be able to handle the fact that  they   re not perfect. By her late years, in fact, what I said yesterday to  this group just on the spur of the moment, people were asking me about  the film and this one man asked me if there were any unresolved  conflicts around her work and I said that insofar as the Oklahoma history  part, I   m not an expert there and I can   t really speak to that. I know that  she had conflicts professionally with Muriel Wright, and Patti Loughlin  is the one who is the expert on that. But I said,    When I knew her,    and I  just thought about it and I said,    It was as if she was in a state of grace,  because she had such a capacity    I mean when she was housebound,  she would tell you that it was a privilege to look out the window and see  the beautiful sights that she saw out her window.    Then she told me at  least twice that   and she also modeled, who knows whether any of us is  going to live to be ninety-eight, but she certainly modeled how to handle  extreme old age because she said to me,    Glenna, there   s a point to  getting old and feeble like I am because then you find out how good  other people can be to you.    So when I say that she represented a lot of  the values I hold most dear, that   s part of it, too. I   m sure she had all  kinds of    She had to use a walker, she certainly saw her physical  capacity diminishing and probably her ability to focus for any length of  time, but she didn   t whine. She was obviously not a whining person.  16  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  I know that this has been so long ago, but did you return for her  memorial service?  No, I didn   t. I was unable to, but I   d love to talk about my last trip there.  That would be great.  Well, I should talk about the Award for Scholarly Distinction and     Was that your last trip there?  Just before that. The way that came about, there   s a wonderful,  wonderful scholar of French history, Natalie Davis. She was at  Princeton. I had heard her, she   s a dynamo. She  recently received the  Holberg Award, a big award from the Norwegian  government. She   s a  heroine in France, but in the    70s, she was one of the few women, senior  women, because the whole wave of getting women into the academy  was of such recent vintage that she was one of the most senior women  around. I had heard her and I knew that she was a dynamo, and since I  was the only woman historian on the faculty, I was the only woman in  the social sciences with a tenure track position for a while, and I wanted  my male colleagues to see what a high powered woman was all about.  So I called her. One of my former students had gotten on a committee  that allocated university lecturing funds, so I think we had  500 to bring  her to campus. I called her and I said,    We   d like to invite you to  Stillwater from Princeton.       Oh, well I don   t know that I could do that.     I said,    Oh, we really need you.    And she said,    I go up to see Chan  Dr.  Chandler Davis .    Her husband taught at Toronto. She said,    I fly from  Princeton to Toronto almost every weekend. How far out of the way is  Oklahoma?    And believe it or not, I said,    Oh, it   s almost on the way.     God love her.  And so she flew to Tulsa, and I think I picked her up and took her there.  This was right at the time the Angie project was starting. So I told her  about the Angie project, I told her all the things that I was doing to not  feel too overwhelmed by homesickness, because I was also talking in  rural towns around the state and finding that very gratifying. I have a  map of Oklahoma that I put a dot for all the small towns. I   ve talked in  Woodward near the panhandle, Miami on the northeast corner, Wright  City in the southeast corner, and I still have to go some place like  Lawton. That   s the uncovered territory. But I told her all this.  Then the next time I encountered her was at the Schlesinger Library, she  was being honored there, and the film project had been launched. I saw  her and I said,    Oh, let me tell you,    and Professor Davis wrote a book  called The Return of Martin Guerre, which was made into a commercial  17  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  movie, the French equivalent of a Hollywood movie. I said,    You   re not  the only one that   s working on a movie.    I told her about Angie. So then  she got up and she was given some award at the Schlesinger Library and  she talked about her involvement and she said, to this audience,    And  my friend and colleague Glenna Matthews is working on a movie about  Angie Debo, and blah, blah, blah.    I mean, she was so generous, so we  kind of kept in touch. Somewhere along the line, she saw a rough cut of  the film because she maintained an interest and couldn   t have been more  generous to me in terms of giving me encouragement and so on. She  once said to me, I ran into her at some kind of a conference and she said,     Glenna, you   re my role model because you   re not letting yourself feel  sorry for yourself, you   re trying to do what you can in Oklahoma, going  to the small towns and so on.    And between Natalie Davis and Angie, I  was pretty well    I would lie there and think, Natalie Davis    role model  can   t get discouraged.  Then Natalie Davis became the second woman president of the  American Historical Association. The first one had been a woman  named Nellie Nielson during World War II when all the men were gone.  So effectively she was the first president in a time when women were  beginning to take their positions in the profession and she decided that  Angie should be nominated for the Award for Scholarly Distinction. She  contacted me and she said,    Glenna, I need you to organize a letter  writing campaign.    And so I did. I contacted people in the field of Indian  History to write letters saying that this was appropriate. So that   s how  that came about. And then I contacted Angie once it was definite and she  asked me to receive the award in her honor.  What a great story.  Isn   t it?  I wondered how that had come to take place and how wonderful that she  could receive    I don   t know if it was a requirement of the award that  the person be a living person, but how wonderful that she was alive to  receive it and to know that her work had received that recognition.  Then in December of that year, I came to Oklahoma and I happened to  have broken my foot earlier, and so I was in some kind of a boot. I drove  out to see her and we chatted, and I just remember holding hands. I said,     Angie, I love you very much,    and she said,    Well I love you oceans.     That was before cell phones and I left and I drove far enough to find a  pay phone and I called my daughter. I was just sobbing, because I was  so moved. And I told her about this conversation, and I was just crying  and crying and crying. My daughter said,    Well Mom, maybe when you  are in your nineties, someone will discover you.    (Laughter) At the time  18  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  I thought, Oh my god, do I have to wait until I   m in my nineties? But it  was quite lovely. Then I did receive the award on her behalf and I gave  it to David Baird, who brought it back to Oklahoma, and then of course  as you know, Governor Bellmon delivered it. Then she died in her sleep  a few weeks after that. If you put this in a novel, people would say it  strains belief. It was just such a perfect way to end a beautiful life. To  have the governor of her beloved Oklahoma personally deliver this  award.  It is a remarkable story and it   s really fitting too because she was such a  remarkable person.  I think that I   ve asked you largely all of the questions that I had planned  to ask you, but I just wonder if there are other things that you wanted to  tell me about that I didn   t ask you about? I feel like you have really  richly enhanced this by sharing some of the things that you wanted to  make sure were documented in some way.  It occurs to me that another part of the story is that Angie had her  difficulties, of course, because of the Great Depression, and because of  just blatant gender discrimination, but by the time our project was going,  there was another issue. Gender discrimination, I think, might have  played   well I   m not even sure that it did, but what did play a role was a  terrible academic job market. So in the early    80s, an organization  formed in New York called the Institute for Research in History. I don   t  know whether Barbara Abrash talked about that, but it was a group of  independent scholars. It   s no longer in existence, but they were trying to  come up with some kind of institutional framework. Some women who  did have academic employment, and men were part of it to kind of  provide haven for, the idea is, well, you might have to have a day job to  support yourself, but you can still have your connection with the  academic world and with scholarship and so on. So of course, Angie was  a perfect patron saint for an independent scholars group.  Deborah Gardener was very active in the Institute for Research in  History, and I can   t remember who, at what point, there might have been  a fiscal agent for some of the grants, but a lot of the energy. I mean, this  is why the film took off so quickly, I think. Deborah wanted the story to  be told because it was so inspiring that this woman had published so  much without a regular academic appointment. And of course, it   s so  remarkable to me still that that initial, my playing the radio tape for  Deborah took place in January. She went down to New York with the  radio tape and lent it to Barbara. Barbara may have told you about  Martha Sandlin, knowing someone who   s a director from Oklahoma. At  this point it kind of left my control, other than the fact that Gloria was  grant writing.  19  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  Well lo and behold, by April of that year, there was a film crew in  Oklahoma, and we did not yet have any money in hand. So these New  Yorkers, on their own dime, went to Oklahoma to film because they  wanted to film Angie in the Prairie City Parade. I was just blown away  by that. I mean, I was so moved by that, but again, at the time I first  encountered Angie, I was not an independent scholar. I think I had the  courage to become an independent scholar in large part because of  Angie, because she proved that you didn   t have to do things the  conventional way. And then I certainly had personally a lot of  discouraging experiences with the academic job market, but as they say,     Keep your eyes on the prize.     But another dear friend of mine, a woman named Karen Offen, who  didn   t materially have really anything to do with the film, but just to tell  you how inspiring Angie was, Karen and I are almost exactly the same  age. I had my children first and then went back to graduate school.  Karen went straight through and got her PhD from Stanford and then  had children, and I still don   t know how many academic jobs she may or  may not have applied for, but she is a married woman and her husband  has quite a good job, so she   s had this amazing career of publishing in  French history without an academic job. She and I have been quite close  over the years because we   ve had really parallel situations, and Karen  travels all over the world lecturing on European feminism and so on.  Well, while this was going on, in the early stages of the Angie project,  we had gotten together over the years just to buck each other up, and I  was telling her about Angie. She had tears just streaming down her face.  I mean, it is so important to so many people that this woman was able to  do what she did in the face of so much discouragement. And I mean, it  was coupled with the Great Depression, and so I think that   s part of why  so many people sprang into action right away to get this film told is that  we all needed to know, in the face of a terrible academic job market, that  it need not be fatal to our lives as historians. That needs to be part of the  record.  It   s so interesting to me how her story resonates with so many people.  Yes. And then another thing I wanted to be sure and tell you is that I  don   t know whether Gloria had this experience, but both of our names  are on the film as principle consultants. But after the film aired, there  was a period where I heard from people around the country. I remember  some woman calling me from Ohio and saying her daughter was so  inspired and various of my friends, I showed the film then; I have seen  it, I think, maybe sixty-five times. But I showed it to classes repeatedly  and my students loved it. I happened to be a visiting associate professor  20  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  Paustenbaugh  at Stanford the fall of 1988, and so the department at Stanford was  thrilled about it. They were just thrilled. In fact, I was teaching at  Stanford when I flew back to Washington for the premiere at the  National Museum of Women in the Arts. And then we showed it to the  Pacific branch of the American Historical Association I think in 1989,  and people were thrilled. One of my close friends is a gentleman named  Bob Cherny who teaches at San Francisco State University, and so far as  I know, he shows it every term to his historiography class, and has since  the get-go. So, just an enormous number of people really resonated to  the film.  Well we need to know about some of those people so we can make sure  that if we have DVDs that aren   t earmarked for someone that people like  that that are actively using the material can have a more modern copy.  Well, I e-mailed Bob Adelia   s  Adelia Hansen  picture of Angie   s  gravestone, which I   m planning to go and see this afternoon,    Historian  discover the truth and publish it.    And he said,    Oh, I   ll fold this into my  presentation.    And he arranged for me to come and show the film to a  group at San Francisco State, and I remember one of his colleagues, we  had a discussion afterwards, and the question came up about her  personal life, and you know, did she have a love life. One of Bob   s  colleagues said,    Well I know there was at least one person who loved  her deeply.    And he pointed to me. Of course, it   s probably in the tape,  and I did finally summon the courage to ask her about, these are the  things I wanted to make sure are part of the record, but of course women  in her cohort, just so few of them thought that they could combine  marriage and family with academic achievement. When we asked her if  she had ever had a boyfriend, as I recall, she said,    Well, there was so-and-  so,    and then it turned out it was in the third grade. And she told us  that she gently discouraged any interest, because she was so intent on  her life of scholarship and writing, and it just wasn   t seen as possible.  And in fact, it   s still darn difficult.  It is.  So it   s not that it was, you know, I   m certainly not wanting to criticize  her choices, but that question has come up sometimes, and I do think, as  I alluded earlier, that she had a very rich emotional life because of her  community involvement. But anyhow, Bob is my friend that I know for  sure shows the film the most regularly, but I did hear from people  around the country when the film was on air, and that was fun.  I   m sure it was. I   d imagine that that whole process was like giving birth  to a child in some ways, that you have so much invested in that. I hadn   t  really seen the film since we did the  Oklahoma  Literary Landmark  21  Matthews  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  dedication here in 2004, and watching it again, as we   ve started to try to  prepare material for a website so the teachers will be able to easily  integrate it into their classrooms, and that will be tied to the Oklahoma  PASS curriculum, which seems to be just an essential thing if you want  something that isn   t part of the textbook to actually be used in the class,  I was just shocked that twenty-two years later, the film is every bit as  relevant as it was when it was made. A lot of things don   t really stand  the test of time that well.  It   s a beautifully made film, and I think the end of it, where she talks  about dedicating her life to integrity and service, I mean, I pretty much  cry every time I see that because I just think it   s so moving. One other  moment, did Barbara tell you about any of the difficulties of getting the  film made?  Well, a few of them, but not in any great detail.  There was a point at which, as it happens with documentary films, just  before they signed the contract with WGBH, did she talk about that?  Judy Crichton?  I asked her how the film had come to Judy   s attention.  And she certainly knows more about that than I but my input into that  whole process was that they didn   t have money to pay the editor, whose  name was Mona Davis, and who obviously did a beautiful job, and  WGBH didn   t want to have the thing proceed unless they had the  cooperation of Mona, and Mona didn   t want to cooperate until she got  paid, and there was no money to pay her until they got the money from  WGBH, so it was a complete standoff. This was in the summer of 1987.  So I took  1000 out of my savings account and mailed it to Mona, and  well, I can   t remember just how the sequence went, but Mona was  calling me collect and telling me about her dental problems, and so I  took  1000 and mailed it to her. This would   ve been August of    87, I  was going to see my parents in Southern California. I   m an only child,  they were totally devoted, they lived through the Depression, they were  very frugal, and so I pulled up and I said,    Hi. Your only child has come  to see you. Some unusual things are going to start happening. We   re  going to start getting collect calls from a stranger demanding money.    I  said,    We   re going to accept the collect calls, and I want you to send her   500.    And they did.  Wow.  And one other friend of mine sent her  250. So then that bridged the  gap, and particularly given that it wasn   t just me, it was my parents,  22  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  Paustenbaugh  whose names were Glen and Alberta Ingles, and I think their standing up  like that should be part of the public record, because this violated every  instinct of their being to give money to a stranger. But my father had  exchanged letters with Angie, and I have a copy of The Rise and Fall of  the Choctaw Republic that she signed    To Glenna   s parents.    My father  wrote her to tell her that he had briefly lived in a sod house in South  Dakota, and so they had a lovely correspondence. And then my father  found out that Bill Moyers was from Marshall, Texas, and so my father  wrote to Bill Moyers and said he wanted Bill Moyers to know about his  daughter   s involvement with this project that involved a woman from  Marshall, Oklahoma, and I have a nice note that Bill Moyers wrote back  to my dad. So my folks were very involved in the project, to the point  that they were willing to, on my say so, send what   I mean, they  quibbled about, my mother was of the generation where she would drive  to three stores to get the best break on a can of peas or something, so it  was pretty amazing that they dipped into their pockets, and I   m very  proud of their generosity.  I saw a letter that was in the correspondence file signed by Martha. It  wasn   t clear who it was addressed to, but it was about sort of the whole  standoff with getting the film made and having to pay somebody, and the  work couldn   t proceed, and she said,    I just don   t see a way forward,  and we   ve promised too many people that this film will be made. We  have to figure some way out of this.    So what you   ve told me really  helps flesh out that letter and understand it.  And then I came to Oklahoma, I mean, I   ve come back. It   s interesting  because I am a Californian through and through, but I   ve come back  many times over the years, because I love my friends and obviously, as I  was saying the other night at dinner, any state that produces Angie has  something going. So maybe it was 1988, or even later in the year in  1987, because my first book came out about the same time, in the  summer of    87, and I came and had a book party here in Stillwater. I  drove down to Oklahoma City and met with Pete Caldwell of the  Oklahoma Foundation for the Humanities, and I said,    I just want you to  know you have not put your money down a rat hole. We are going to  find a way to get this to happen, and I am pledging myself to the fullest  extent I can that this is going to happen.    And he was both surprised and  pleased. I think they assumed that when I moved out of the state that I  had kind of washed my hands of worrying about it, but you know, I was  a signatory to those grants, and that   s too much money to have invested  to have it all blow up. So I have no idea, I mean, there may have been  other people that did what I did, so I   m not going to say that I   m the only  one, but my parents came through.  That   s great. Was there anything else that     23  Matthews  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  Paustenbaugh  Matthews  Paustenbaugh  I think those are the things that I wanted to cover.  Well thank you so much for your willingness to do this, and also for  coming back to be part of this whole statue dedication event. I thought it  was a wonderful day yesterday.  Oh, it was a peak day, and again, I cannot believe how beautiful the  event was. I cannot believe all the planning, I mean, the menu was  beautiful. The table decorations with the pictures of Angie as a young  girl. The cookies that had the imprint of the medallion. I mean, all the  speeches were, nobody tried to hog the spotlight, and they were additive.  They weren   t redundant. It was absolutely magnificent, and I just loved  the statue. I think that the sculptor, Phyllis Mantik, really captured  Angie   s idealism, and that   s what made all of us love her so much.  That   s right. And I loved it that when Hugh O   Neill saw it before it had  gone to the foundry, that he said,    Oh, that   s Angie.     And he knew her really well.  And from a time when that   s what she would   ve looked like.  Yes. Well I   m glad, I mean, another one of my motives in the part I  played is that there are so few representations of men or women, but  more women, of extreme age of a positive nature in our culture, and I  love it in the film that there   s this old woman silhouetted in speaking,  and she just looks beautiful. Because I think when you live a life like  Angie, you know, her goodness was written on her face. And I love the  fact that the portrait in the State Capitol in the film portrayed a woman  of very advanced years so positively. And I love it that now we see the  young Angie. I mean, I think it   s great that both of them are being  commemorated like this. I wouldn   t have missed it for the world.  Well good. We   re glad you didn   t have to miss it either. Thank you so  much.  -------  -------   
