 Larson  Goeringer  Okay, today is April 9, 2011. My name is Mary Larson, and I   m here  with Mr. Eldon Goeringer, and we   re going to talk a little bit about his  family history. His family is Russian German, and we   re going to be  doing this for the Germans from Russia project, as part of the  Spotlighting Oklahoma series of interviews. Mr. Goeringer, thank you so  much for agreeing to be involved today, and could you please start by  giving me your full name and letting me know when and where you were  born?  I   m Eldon Gene Goeringer. I was born in Clinton, Oklahoma. After  birth, I was raised on a farm east of here on my granddaddy   s place. My  folks bought a place out west of town here, and I   ve been out there until  graduation. Then I went to school for several years and come back to the  farm in 1982  1984  after my dad had passed away.  How far out of Bessie was your     We were six miles west.  Six miles west. Okay, now, what were your parents    names?  My father   s name was Ruben  Eldin Ervin  Goeringer and my mother   s  name was   she went by Edna Neoma Goeringer. Her maiden name was  Weter.  And when and where were they born?  My dad was born at home on a farm east of here, three-and-a-half miles  east of here. My mother, as far as I know, was born at home on the farm  where she lived at. That was two, three miles east and back north a mile-and-  a-half.  5  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Okay, and how many brothers and sisters do you have?  I   ve got two sisters, both still presently living. My older sister lives in  Oklahoma City, and my younger sister lives out here half-a-mile west of  town.  So they all stuck pretty much to the general area.  Yes.  Now, both your mother   s and father   s sides of the family were Germans  from Russia, right?  Yes, as far as my knowledge is, yes.  Okay, do you know, did their families come to Oklahoma together at  about the same? Did they come in a group at about the same time, or did  they come separately?  I think they come in at separate times for the same reasons, economic  reasons and family reasons, so that they could raise a family without a  lot of restrictions.  Now, I guess let   s deal with your mother   s side first and then your  father   s side.  Okay.  Do you know when they left Russia? Well, where were they in Russia,  first of all?  I really don   t have that background history on that part of the family. For  some reason or other, it wasn   t ever brought together. There are some  that have been traced back to some Weters in the Pennsylvania area, but  I haven   t really researched it that much. My mother did quite a bit of  research in that area, and I never really paid much attention to it, like  most kids. (Laughs)  There are some in the Minnesota area, as well, that are related. My  grandmother, several years ago before she passed away, she had went  and visited several of them. They   re strung out from the East Coast to,  presently, here in Oklahoma. She had several brothers and sisters. My  grandmother was a Rose.  My mother  was raised on what they used to  call the Neicely place. It was a farm that they had rented and was living  on at the time. So it   s kind of a mixture, (Laughs) so to say. As to the  families and how they got together, I think it probably would be social  6  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  networking, what it was at that time, was personal communications with  each other, (Laughs) not the social networking we see today with our  children.  Right, but it probably would have been through the church or     Through the church and probably   my daddy and his brothers and my  dad   s family was all musically inclined.  Oh, we   ll have to talk about that. (Laughs)  I don   t know a lot about that, but the thing about it was they were all  musically inclined, and they had a band, and they played a lot of times  for social events in the community.  What did your dad play?  He played anything they let him get a hold of. He played the trumpet in  the band here at this church, and he had first chair in the Clinton band  along with his   it would   ve been his uncle. Dad had first chair, and he  played the trumpet as a child. Then he also  that  he could play the  clarinet. He wanted to play sax, but his sister wouldn   t let him have it to  learn to play it. (Laughs) And he played the fiddle, and he also played  the harmonica. He had a lot of things that he was involved with at the  musical end of it. He wanted to be a musician, but he said it didn   t pay  enough so he went to farming. (Laughs)  Sorry, as both a musician, myself, and as a farm kid, I understand the  irony of that statement.  Well, you know, some people wouldn   t understand.  Now, with your father   s side of the family, do you know where they were  from in Russia?  Yes, I do have a little information on that part of it. I didn   t really mark  that on the pages here.  I just didn   t know if you   d heard stories growing up about     Not really as far as that. The only story that I can remember is my  granddad was young enough and had all the shots when they come into  the New York area, in the New York port. They gave a smallpox shot or  vaccination. Instead of letting that take place, well, he wiped it off so it  wasn   t effective. (Laughs)  7  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  So your grandfather was the first one on your grandfather   s family so  that was probably his parents, and his siblings were the first ones to  come over on your dad   s side, and they came through New York.  Yes.  Okay. And where did they settle after they came through New York. Do  you know?  I think they come by the same way that legend is describing, from the  Kansas area and then back into Oklahoma. They settled   actually, two-and-  a-half miles east of here is the family farm. It   s still in the family.  And your grandfather was one of the folks that settled here.  One of the siblings that came over. Of course, they had large families at  that time. They needed the families to make this country work, as far as  farming.  And so everybody was a farmer in the family at that point?  At that point, yes, because most of them, still at home at that point yet.  Of course, my great-grandfather, he seen to it that each of them got a  education, or allotted the same amount of funds for education, or  whatever at the time. The ones that wanted to farm, he gave them a farm,  and the others that wanted to go to school, why, he seen to it they had  funds to go to school with.  So that was your grandfather   s generation?  My great-grandfather.  Okay, but for your grandfather and his siblings.  For my grandfather   s siblings.  And at that time, that would   ve been something, wouldn   t it?  Was a big responsibility. As far as I remember, that   s basically what he  had done for as many of his children that he could at the time.  Do you know when your grandfather was born?  No, but I know when he died. He died in 1949, August 18, same day that  my little sister was born.  8  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Do you know if he was in his seventies or eighties or     Well, depending on his birth     Sorry. I   m thinking it was remarkable that your great-grandfather was     Okay,  yah, my great-granddad was born in 1869 and died on August 18,  1949, the same day that my baby sister was born. Good math would  have made him seventy, no, eighty years old .  Right. And we can fill that in later.  It was in the 1800s, and he was a young man. My great-grandfather was  an educator in Russia. He came to this country, and he still was an  educator, but he also helped start this faith community. In fact, they met  in his home to start with until the group got big enough where they  couldn   t house the families that was coming to the faith community.  They built the church, actually, across the road here from this one  originally, and in    43, or something like that, they built this church here.  This part we   re sitting in is an add-on.  And for the people that will be listening to this later, we   re at Peace  Lutheran Church outside of Bessie so they have some context for that.  Do you remember any stories, besides the smallpox shot, of your  grandfather   s trip over to the US? Did you ever hear anything about     Well, my grandfather, himself   of course, at that time the farming was  done with horses, and I guess he was a well-learned horse man. He  broke a lot of horses for different people in the community. He passed, I  think, what you   d call   he was a real cowboy at the time. (Laughs)  So more of the cowboy side than the farmer side.  Well, it   s kind of hard to separate for the simple reason that the horses  were used for stock purposes if they needed to be, but they were also  used for teams. He helped put together teams and made sure that they  worked together. Of course, you know, horses are like people. One of  them will be lazy and let the other one do all the work if they   ll allow it.  (Laughs)  Now, do you know if your family first came to this area when it first  opened up, or if they waited a few years and had friends down here?  They were some of the first into the area. In fact, some of the history that  was in The Beacon that you may have had a copy of is the family was  involved in the second wave that they showed there, that Mr. Beth put  9  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  together.  Okay. I   ll put this to the side and maybe copy it before we     Yes, we can do that.  Now, for this general area, did the Lutherans tend to stick next to each  other farm-wise, and the Mennonites, or was it more of a mixed group,  and the churches just sorted everybody out?  Well, it was not really a closed community, but it really is because of  transportation. There really wasn   t a lot of out. I mean, there was cross  marriages between the Mennonites and the Lutherans, but basically  speaking, it was pretty closed. In other words, they mention a name. I  said,    Well, I   m related to them.    It   s by marriage by way of cousins or  intermarriage. Really not related in the bloodline but in marriage and  through cousins and one thing or another. It   s just basically the way a lot  of these smaller communities existed, and most of them have went on to  bigger and better things. All of them live in the city now, of course.  Well, that   s something I   m going to ask about a little later on, about  keeping cultural ties once folks move away from their small towns and  their churches. I guess we can talk about that right now. Do you think  people have been able to keep some of the things that have been  culturally important, or do they find communities in the city or     Well, they still have the family ties here, but a lot of times when they left  here, they would continue their families    ties here. If an individual from  this community would move into that community where the other person  was at, somewhere close, well, they usually more or less congregated as  a group. In other words, if they become a member of a particular church  up there, they say,    Well, I   m a member of such and such church,    and  they   d seek out each other in that way and a lot of times joined the same  faith community. Sometimes it didn   t happen that way, but there was a  lot of times with some of the first people that moved out, in order to  keep family relations and ties, that   s basically the way I seen it happen.  And a couple of people have mentioned that, too, you know, moving into  Oklahoma City, but they knew so and so from where they grew up so  they shared an apartment with her or something like that.  Relationships were maintained.  It sounds like these were very close-knit communities.  Yes, they were. I   d say they were. Still pretty close-knit.  10  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Yes, it seems that way. Now, you mentioned that your folks met through  social ties. What were the stories that you heard from your parents  about what they   d do for fun in their generation, or what you saw them  doing for a social life as you got older?  Well, most of the time, the front porch was a good place (Laughs), but  most of the time it was usually all the marriages that had taken place,  there   s a shivaree. There was alcohol present and usually pop, and all the  families, both sides, came together to celebrate that marriage. Usually  today, now, probably the only time we celebrate is whenever we have  somebody die. We get to see most of the family, but families grow apart  by distance and relationships, and that   s basically what   s happening.  Now with the shivarees, have you been   were they still doing those  when you were     Well, yes, a couple of my uncles whenever they got married, they was  having the shivarees.  For folks that haven   t run into those before, can you give a little better  description of those, or as much as you feel free to?  Okay, well, basically a shivaree was taken place usually at a parent   s  house or an uncle   s house of one of the married couples. At that point,  most of the people would gather down the road from the point of origin  where the shivaree is to take place, and they would come into the family  and to the area, and they   d make all kinds of racket. (Laughs)  Pots and pans and everything else. (Laughs)  Anybody that could hold a shotgun up in the air or whatever, just all  kinds of racket, whatever they could find to make racket with. Other  times the families or somebody would go get the members and bring it  to a house that had been prepared with lights out, and all cars tried to  park out of sight, but it was celebration of a union between a man and a  wife.  Sort of a not-quite-a-surprise surprise party.  True. (Laughter)  So how long did they do those that you remember growing up? I mean,  when was the last one you remember seeing?  Last one I was to was one of my uncle   s, and he   s the last one in the  11  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  family that was married. The one prior had shivaree, too. I   ve got vague  memories of the last one who   s old enough to remember it a lot better.  Do you remember about how old you might   ve been? I   m just trying to  think what year it might   ve been.  Probably about ten or twelve years old.  Okay. Now, you mentioned that most of your family was in farming     Right.     for the first couple generations. Did people tend to, with the  educations did they tend to, stay in farming? Did they do other things,  too? Did they farm and teach?  Well, it depends on when the children was born. My dad, he wanted to  go to high school, but he never did get the opportunity. By the time he  got the opportunity, why, he was old enough to where he didn   t feel that  he wanted to be harassed by the community of younger ones, (Laughter)  you know, peer pressure. He had an eighth-grade education, and it  served him well. I mean, he did well with it. Mother had the opportunity  to complete high school education in Clinton. She finished up on one of  the schools here in the local community at the time, and then she went  over to Clinton and stayed with a family there and got her high school  education. She was pretty much interested in clothing and making  apparel, because most of the dresses she and my sisters wore, she   d  made.  So a really good seamstress.  Well, yes, and she designed a lot of the clothes. She   d take a piece of  newspaper and cut out a pattern.  Very fashion-forward, then. (Laughter)  Well, she knew how to make it fit and work like she wanted it to work.  I was going to say, was part of that, do you think, from being a small  town, wanting to keep up with some of the styles, or was it just that she  was really creative and had these ideas that she wanted to get out?  She liked the art of fashion, and she worked with it to the advantage of a  lot of people. In fact, she   d remake a suit for me. During the time after  they got married was right after World War II, so there wasn   t a lot of  extra material around. So Granddad would have an old suit, why, she   d  12  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  take it and refab it and build me a suit out of it or make a suit out of it.  It   s just a matter of economy and the ability to know how to make it  work.  That   s no small skill.  Yes it is.  So once you grew up, what did you go into?  Well, I was going to farm, but there wasn   t enough property available at  the time. I decided to go into diesel mechanics so I went to Oklahoma  State  Tech in Okmulgee, Oklahoma, in diesel mechanics. I was  employed at a place in Oklahoma City that used to be Diesel Power  Company, and the company was and still is in sales and service for the  GM family of diesel engine and Allison transmission which are a  separate division of GM family. It was located over on Eastern in  Oklahoma City. The Morton family out of Shreveport purchased it  during the time I was employed by them and the name was changed to  United Engines which is now located on West Reno in Oklahoma City .  I was employed with them on their west side location there in Oklahoma  City. I worked for Joe Brown Company and met my wife in Ardmore.  Joe Brown Company. I had left United Engines and went down there  with one of the boys that went down there in management. I went with  him and met my wife down at Ardmore. We moved back to Oklahoma  City and raised a family pretty much there and out here. Basically, it   s  treated me well, the profession has. I get real tickled at people that say  that you   ve got to do such and such and such to a piece of equipment. I  say,    Okay.    I   ll go along with them because, you know, knowing the  ins and outs of most equipment, they fail to understand that I probably  know as much about it as they do, only in a little different manner.  (Laughs)  That   s a handy skill to have, too, if you   re on a farm, is that sort of     Yes it is, and it served me well.  Now, we were talking a little bit about social life. As far as your  growing-up days, can you tell me a little bit what it was like growing up  around here?  Was no real eventful things that I know of that ever really happened.  Just basically went to grade school and high school. Of course, the thing,  that does remind me. We was living in the Bessie Community, and  everything that had taken place was in the Bessie Community. We  wound up being in the Braithwaite area which closed their school and  13  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  wound up Burns Flat school district. Of course, that happened the year  that I was supposed to start school. (Laughs)  Okay, so where did you go to grade school, then?  I went to Burns Flat.  Burns Flat, okay.  There was actually Black School  named after a family named Black   that I would   ve been a member of  that student body, if it had not  consolidated with the Burns Flat School district . Black School was a  was  located  half-a-mile east and half-a-mile north  from our house .   The location of   Black School,  I think, is still marked by an  old  cistern and the foundation of the schoolhouse is still there.  Going to  Burns Flat School  was one of those things, of going into a place where  you know  no one or  nobody. That   s the only thing I remember about  grade school, the first grade, is that I went to school, and I knew not a  soul there. (Laughs)  How far away was that from     It was eight miles from home. (Laughs)  Did you go by bus at the time?  Yes, yes.  You mentioned the Black School. Was there a big African American  population?  No,  Black was the last name of the family that lived on the property .  Oh, okay. I got it. Well, now, how big was your school when you were  going to Burns Flat?  Well, we went from a population of eighth grade, eight to thirty. Clinton  Sherman Air Force Base reopened, and we got a lot of military  personnel in. We had a growth population within a year with no funds to  expand so you were cramped in a small schoolhouse that was made to  house, say, probably, comfortably a population of a couple hundred  students and went to a population of almost five hundred students. In  fact, they were up to six hundred-some-odd students, at one time. Then,  of course, before I graduated they started closing the base up. They had  built onto the high school area, and they had built Will Rogers Grade  School, and then they built another grade school area. They was having  14  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  as many as seventy to a hundred students in the early education grades,  and so they built grade schools. They didn   t do a lot with the high  schools, because it kind of stayed little. Graduated with a class of   I  think it was thirty-eight when I graduated.  Okay, now, was that Burns Flat, too?  At Burns Flat, yes.  I didn   t know if the high school was in Burns Flat. A lot of folks were in  a smaller school.  Well, actually, I graduated out of the same building that I started the first  grade in.  Okay. Consistency.  But in between time, they built two other grade schools. My little sister,  she wound up in both grade schools at two different times, because they  closed for summer season and the population increased so they had to  move some of the classes to another school building.  So even in the same family, you could be in different buildings, based on  how you     Well, it   s kind of like they do nowadays. I mean, if you   ve got a child  that   s in the first through the third grade, they go to this school. If  they   re in the fourth through the eighth grade, they go to this school. If  they   re ninth through twelfth grade, they go to another school. Wasn   t  any different then, except it was in a community of probably less than a  mile between the buildings.  Now, we talked a little bit about what you remember your folks doing for  fun, but what did you and your friends do, growing up, for fun? What  was your main entertainment?  Go to a movie, possibly, or take the vehicle, go drag Main. (Laughs)  That hasn   t changed, I guess.  No, I don   t think so.  Not in small towns. (Laughs)  It   s basically your social network. It   s the only way you get to see your  friends, to be able to communicate. Instead of gathering at somebody   s  15  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  house where there   s a parent always there to supervise, you   d meet on a  parking lot someplace and visit.  Were there any hangouts in town, like a soda shop or something, that  were really popular for that?  At times, depending on which community you went to. Living where I  lived at, I had actually four communities that I visited. (Laughs)  So which ones would those have been?  Well, you had Burns Flat, basically a school. Then, of course, did a little  bit of association with some people from the Dill City area, and then the  Cordell area, and then the Clinton area. Since we was a member of the  Clinton church, I had quite a bit of dealings with some of the people of  the same age I was, in the Clinton area.  Before we move on from this, what   s your most vivid memory from your  school days?  Glad to get out. (Laughter)  Fair enough. How involved were your parents in the Russian German  community?  As far as the family part, they were involved with family, but other than  with organizations or anything, they really were not involved.  Just sort of the church, probably?  The church, and through family reunions and that type thing.  Did you do a lot of family reunions that you remember?  Well, there were several of them. We had one in Cordell at one time, and  the biggest part of Gottlieb   s family was there, plus their spouses and all  my cousins, first, second, third, fourth cousins.  That must have been quite a crew.  It was. It was probably about sixty people.  That   s pretty impressive.  I   ve got a picture of it, but I don   t know just exactly where it   s at. May  be one in this book, even. Big bunch of people there.  16  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  When you were growing up, do you remember any, besides family  gatherings, any particular German celebrations or events or anything  that your family participated in that was kind of a regular     Well, we used to go to the pioneer celebrations that was held in the  community. Of course, it rotated through Clinton, Cordell, Hammon,  and Elk City, I think, were the communities that it worked through. And  of course, once every four years it would be in Clinton or Cordell. In  other words, it may be that it was always a year between a local event or  one of the other communities.  And those would   I was going to say, kind of like big founders day  events?  Yes, big founders day events. Of course, usually went to the parade, and,  I don   t know. Usually due to the economics, we didn   t usually go out  and eat or anything. We   d just go to the parade and visit with people. Go  to the house, and go to the store and buy lunchmeat and cheese and  bread and have a sandwich.  I was going to say, do a picnic.  Well, basically, yes.  Did you have lots of picnics around here when you were growing up for  church events, or was that something that wasn   t     Not really as far as I   m concerned, picnic. I get them every day when  you   re farming so I don   t really consider a picnic an enjoyable item.  That   s something my father used to say, too.  Well, if I want a picnic, all I have to do is go to the field. I   ll get a  sandwich later if somebody   ll remember me. (Laughter)  Do you think any of the events that you grew up with, even the family  reunions and the pioneer days, are a lot of those things still important  today? Do they still go on?  They   re still going on. I haven   t been to one in several years. When you  start raising a family and things are tight, you try to stay away from the  places where it costs you extra money to be able to make a family grow.  Now, we   ve talked to some other folks, and do you remember your  parents or grandparents talking at all about any problems during World  17  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  War II with any discrimination or any bad feelings with the German  families, or were there so many German families around that it was a  moot point?  Well, they   ve heard of one or two events, but I really wasn   t aware of  the events, the actual happenings, at the time. There was some people  tarred and feathered and run out of town, but it was due to, I think, more  social issue than it was what would you call generational issue as far as  the family, otherwise. Something they did, personally, that got them  removed from the community, basically speaking.  Right, as opposed to anything based on their culture or heritage.  Right. Some nonsense they pulled they shouldn   t have. (Laughs)  Something they did that they oughtn   t.  That   s true.  Now, I   d like to talk a little bit about language. When you were growing  up, did your parents speak German, or did your grandparents, that you  remember?  Well, my great-grandparents were fluent in German, and my  grandparents were fluent in German. I remember that Mrs. Keil used to  come over, her and the one daughter, over at my grandparents   . They  always spoke in German. They didn   t want the young folks to know  what they were saying. Of course, you know, when you get to where  you   re around it a little bit, you start catching and picking up language,  too. Most of the time it was spoken in German, because they didn   t want  you to know what was being said about you. (Laughs)  Well, I   ve always wondered if they did that on purpose so that you   d  start listening to try to learn, (Laughs) if it wasn   t reverse psychology  somewhere.  Sometimes it may have been, but sometimes you don   t need to know  about this. (Laughter)  So your parents     My dad, he could speak German, because he was confirmed in German.  That   s the only thing they had here at the time was German language.  So when this church was started, it would   ve been German speaking.  18  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  It started out in German.  Do you know when they switched over to English?  Well, they still had some German yet when I was probably sixth and  seventh grade. They still had a German service, but it was prevalent  English.  So was the German service in the afternoon, and the English speaking  one in the morning?  Usually the same morning. One followed the other.  Okay.  As far as I remember, one followed the other, because Grandpa would  go to the early service, which was the German service, a lot of times,  and we   d come to the English speaking service. Of course, at the time  when I was a kid, on Sundays we   d go to the grandparents    for Sunday  lunch. That was pretty standard for several years and finally got away  from it after Dad   s kids got a little older. There were some other things  that take precedence over that type thing. Grandparents got to where  they wasn   t able to do it as much as readily as they could.  So that probably evened out at about the same time.  It did. It was a good thing, and it was really a bad thing, too, in a lot of  ways, because you didn   t get the benefit of being with your grandparents  as much.  Did you get a lot of stories and things passed down at those Sunday  dinners, do you think?  Well, they just picked on each other. (Laughter) I remember my uncles  picking on each other. I had four uncles and one aunt. The aunt was the  oldest. Of course, the brothers made up for the difference. They picked  on her. She never did leave herself open to be picked on. (Laughs)  Do you know, with the church here do they still have German services  for special occasions like holidays or     No, they discontinued that several years ago. In fact, oh, it was probably  the late    50s, early    60s, they completely discontinued, or even before  that.  Do you think one of the issues with lost language, is there a pressure to  19  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  assimilate? There were on so many immigrant families, and you folks  were a few generations in, anyway.  Yes. More than anything, I understood they came to a new country, and  they wanted to learn the language that was the language of the country,  not like we   re seeing today with the ethnical groups wanting their  language and their customs instilled. It   s a country that   s designed for  the freedoms of the people, but everything is in English in this country. I  feel that that   s the way that we should keep it unless the whole  population decides to go with Spanish or German. Then we all need to  learn that particular. I don   t feel that the heritage has as much to do with  the language variation as it did with the culture of the communities as  they wanted to progress to where they communicated with all of the  people that live in this country. They didn   t want it segregated that we  see trying to take place today.  Now, one of the things that we found in some of the earlier interviews is  that a lot of people have used food as a way of maintaining cultural ties,  and at a big potluck like this today, you certainly see some of that  happening.  Right.  What kinds of foods do you remember as being really important when  you were growing up?  Well, my favorite was what my grandmother used to make which was  chicken and dressing, and potatoes in a roast pan. (Laughs)  Which isn   t particularly German, but is very tasty.  Well, her particular dressing was made with homemade bread,  crumbled, dried, and then had sour cream and onions. What else? It was  rather tasty.  Sounds good. (Laughs)  You know, she had five children besides her and granddad, and that was  seven. Then, of course, you added another spouse or two in there so she  was feeding anywhere from ten to twelve people every Sunday.  That   s no small feat.  She needed something that she could prepare ahead of time and be ready  to serve whenever everybody assembled at the table.  20  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Were there particular dishes that you remember that were made for  special occasions?  Yes, she had a lot of things that she made special. Of course, my mother  picked up on a lot of them. One of the things that I remember, she used  to make a cherry pie with a tapioca base. I always liked it. Of course, it   s  got whipped cream on top of it. There wasn   t anything fattening about it  at all. (Laughs)  No, nothing. (Laughs) Were there any occasions when your father might  cook for something, or was that your mom   s     The only time my dad would cook was whenever it was outside on the  grill. Mother did most all the cooking. Most of the time the cooking that  I learned was from her, and she had picked up and learned to make most  of the German dishes that my dad liked.  What were some of those that you remember?  Well, I don   t know what they was called. K  seringel was one of them,  and one of them was cabbage pies. Basically, cabbage pies was cabbage,  shredded, with hamburger meat and onions mixed with it, and folded  into a fried pie, and drop it in and deep fry it.  That   s sort of like a bierock, sort of?  Yes, yes. Very good. One of the other dishes was a cottage cheese  dumpling. It was basically built the same way that the bierocks were, but  it had a cottage cheese laid in the center and then dumpling dough folded  together. Then it had bread crumbs, sour cream, and onions on it, and it  was layered.  Wow. Sounds like you have some good family recipes. (Laughs) I hope  you   re contributing some of those to the cookbook, because     Well, I don   t think my wife ever learned to make them.  It does sound good.  I tried to get her to learn them, but she never did learn them.  Aw, that   s too bad. Did anyone in your family make beer or wine that  you remember?  No, if they did it was   my great-granddad did, but he had trouble  keeping the boys out of it so I don   t know (Laughter) how much of it he  21  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  got to keep, himself, to drink.  How about sausages or cheese? Did anybody     No, sausages, usually when they   d come together   I remember  butchering whenever I was a kid. My granddad and my dad and a couple  of my uncles would usually help. We   d butcher as many as five hogs in  a day and let them hang overnight, then cut them up the next day as  much as you could, because it was hot or getting warm. You had to work  with them to get to where you processed and put them in the freezer.  That was a pretty good feat. We picked five of them, scrape them, gut  them, and lay them out.  And you   d make the sausage about the same time?  Well, yes, you usually ground the sausage at the same time, take the fat  and make your lard for your cooking oil.  Who was responsible for cleaning out the sausage casings?  My dad usually cleaned the intestines for the casings.  Now, are there any other aspects that we haven   t talked about that you  think are important in shaping your identity as a descendent of Germans  from Russia? What do you think was the most important part?  Well, on my grandmother   s side, her dad was killed by cattle rustlers.  Henry and my  grand mother, Christine, were the only children. My   great- grandmother  re married, and they had four more stepchildren. I  believe it was four more. But their cattle come up missing, and  my  great-grandfather  and Mr. Cook had gone to look for the  missing   cattle. They both had cattle, and all of them were missing. They went to  look for them, and they found them  in the possession of rustlers . The  rustlers  had taken the cattle and shot my great-grandfather and Mr.  Cook because they came upon the rustlers who were surprised by their  presence and my great-grandfather and Mr. Cook were shot by them.   Where did this happen?  A mile north of here. In fact, my great-granddad established this farm  right across the road here.  Was it your mom   s side?  It was my grandmother on my dad   s side.  22  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  On your dad   s side. Okay. So that was her father that was killed by the  cattle rustlers.  The rustlers come from out there by the Rock Church, the Zion Lutheran  Church.  Were they local folks?  Yes.  Families are probably still around.  Some of the family is still around, yes.  What happened back in the day when something like that happened?  Well, they investigated it, but they didn   t have any way to actually know  who done it at the time. I mean, time will tell, you know. Eventually it  all comes to light.  What year would that have been? I   m just trying to think how long they  might   ve been here at that point.  Oh, about the 1900s, the first of the 1900s. In fact, before that because  he died October 18 of 1895.  Okay. What was his name, again?  It was Johannes Phillip Frick. That   s J-O-H-A-N-N. Phillip W. P. on the  end, and F-R-I-C-K.  Yes, I   m just wondering. That would be something interesting to follow  up with newspaper accounts.  Yes, it probably would, but I don   t know how much newspaper there  was at the time. It was a new community, and it   s hard to account for  anything other than by what   s been spoken or what   s been kept in the  family history.  And that   s why we do these interviews. (Laughs) Do you have any other  stories like that from the family that     Well, not that I really know the facts on. There   s some others about  some ornery uncles, of course. They would be interesting, but I don   t  think I   ll go there.  23  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Larson  Goeringer  Okay. (Laughter) I was going to say, none that you   re at liberty to tell,  huh?  Well, their children may not appreciate me, but we share a lot of times at  family reunions. (Laughs)  Is there anything that we haven   t touched on that you   d like to talk  about, or anything you think we   ve missed?  Not that I   m aware of at the moment.  Okay, well, thank you so much for your time. We really appreciate it.  Well, thank you so much.  We   ll be back in touch.  Okay.  -------  -------  
