 Finchum  Today is January 13th, 2011. My name is Tanya Finchum. I   m with  Oklahoma State University Library, with the oral history department,  and I   m in Bartlesville, Oklahoma today to speak with Frances Gardner.  Frances is a long time member of the Oklahoma Home and Community  Educators. I understand you were the fair superintendent here, for quite  a few years.  I still am.  And you still are? Okay. Thank you for having me in your home today.  You   re welcome.  Let   s start by having you tell a little bit about when and where you were  born and a little bit about your childhood. Then we   ll move forward.  I was born eight miles southeast of Ponca City in Osage County on May  21, 1918.  And did you have brothers and sisters?  I had one brother. He had muscular dystrophy and died at an early age.  He had pneumonia and I had a sister younger than me, seven years  younger than me.  Did you live on a farm?  Yes. We had 160 acres and my father raised grain. We milked cows,  raised chickens.  And what was some of your particular chores?  5  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gather the eggs, shut the chickens up, get the cows in to milk.  Did you have to kill any chickens or did someone else do that?  I never killed a chicken.  The 160 acres, did your father get that as part of the land run or a little  later?  No, he run in the land run, but he didn   t get any land.  And where had he come from?  He was born in Ohio.  And your mother?  My mother was born in Kansas.  And they both braved the land run and came on into Oklahoma?  Yes.  And you graduated from high school in     Burbank, Oklahoma.  And that would have been in 1939, right?  I think it was 1939.  So you lived through the Depression.  Yes.  Anything in particular you remember from that time period?  Well we had a big orchard and I had to pick cherries (Laughs), which  my mother said,    Now go up a little higher.    And I said,    Oh, I   m afraid  I   ll fall out.    But I   d go up there and get the cherries and we also let  people come in and pick their own cherries because we had such a big  orchard. We had apples and pears, peaches, grapes.  You don   t see too much of that today in Oklahoma. So you had to water  a lot, I guess.  6  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  No, we didn   t have to water. We just had a pump. That   s all we had was  a pump.  And your dad raised cattle and corn or     Well he had cattle, yes. And grain like alfalfa   a lot of alfalfa, but sedan  grass and kaffir corn and stuff like that.  And what did you do for fun back then?  Well, when it rained I had a pair of stilts, I think that   s what they called  it way back when, and I   d get on those and walk out in the water. Then  when my brother   they got some kind of a wheel thing that we had and  he wasn   t able to work it, but I   d take that thing. We had a hill and I   d  pull it up on top of that hill and I   d get on that thing and go flying down.  Then we   d get up on top of the barrel and I   d walk on the barrel. I could  take a barrel and walk on it and just go every place.  Made your own fun, then.  And then we had a tree down at the creek that we had a swing over, that  we   d go down and swam. We also had a pond that all the neighbor kids  would come up and go swimming in the pond.  Was it as hot during the summer as it is now here?  Yes.  Well back in high school were you involved with like 4-H and different  things?  Yeah, I was involved in 4-H from the very beginning.  Third or fourth grade? I   m not sure how early they start.  Well, I think you had to be at least five years old, I think, or maybe older  back then. I don   t remember, but I won a trip. That was one of the nicest  things that happened to me while I was growing up, too. I won a trip to  Chicago to the National 4-H Congress up there and I have a picture in  the bedroom and I   ll show it to you later. It   s about like that  Gardner  motions about three feet  that they took up there. I have a picture of the  banquet that we had up there too, but I can   t find the banquet  photo .  It   s out on the ranch.  And that would have been in the    30s?  7  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  It was in    39, I think there   s a thing on the picture in there that says it  was taken in    39.  That was a big trip for a     It was sponsored by the Santa Fe Railroad Company. I went up with the  Santa Fe.  Went on the train?  Yes.  That must have been fun, too, and a little scary.  Well, all by myself going to a big city. I had never been out of Ponca  City and my folks took me to the train that morning. I met the train and  the supervisor who was to meet me at the train.  The supervisor  took  me and put me where I belonged and we had good supervision while we  were gone.  And how long were you there?  I think probably   it seemed to me like a week, but we surely were not  there that long.  Well how had you got interested in 4-H to begin with?  The home economist at Pawhuska, her name was Sarah D. Atwood and  she was the one that actually got me started in 4-H. We had a wonderful  teacher who was a leader there at the Peter   s School.  Do you remember what your project was that won the trip for you?  Well I had sewing and one time they gave us, I think it was twenty-five  chickens. We were supposed to raise chickens. I don   t know what  happened. I mean how we got rid of them or something, but anyway we  had twenty-five chickens that was given to us and that was a project.  It may have been Sunday lunch (Laughter)  Well did you quilt much?  Not until I got older. I helped my mother quilt. We did a lot of quilting  after I got older.  So the sewing would have been like aprons or     Yes I did aprons. We just had the same thing. Everybody had made an  8  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  apron and dish towels, stuff like that.  And scarves?  Very simple things, but I mean, it was learning.  They don   t do the sewing very much today.  No, they need to put that back in the program. They really do.  I think the kids would like it. Some would anyway. So once you  graduated from high school in    39, what happened next?  Well, I finally got a job and that was with the theaters in Ponca City and  I was the secretary for the theaters. I counted all the money and took the  money to the bank.  So you would have been doing that bout the time    Gone with the  Wind      no I guess that was later      The Grapes of Wrath   ?  That was during the war     Gone with the Wind    .     Grapes of Wrath    came about that time...  Yes.     too, I think.  Yes, I think we had quite a bit because they had four theaters and a  drive-in.  Really? Well how soon after that did you meet your husband?  Well, he always said he watched me grow up. He was quite a bit older  than I was (Laughs), but he went off to the war. We didn   t get married  until he came back from the war. He was on leave and he was due to go  back overseas, but the war ended and he got to come home.  And so what year did you get married then?     45. 1945.  That   s an interesting time period that you lived through then.  Yeah.  9  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Did you stay in Ponca once you were married?  No, we moved to Kansas City and my husband managed a polo farm up  there. In fact, he played in the American Royal and thirteen won the  American Royal   the first polo match that was in the American Royal,  and won it.  That   s an interesting twist too, huh? So how long did you stay in Kansas  City?  Well, not too long and then we came back. Joe   s brother had a place and  we moved into his home and we stayed there for quite awhile. Then we  went back into the ranching business. We had a ranching operation up at  Cedar Row, Kansas and we raised lots of cattle.  So you stayed in agriculture most of your life, in some way or another.  Yes.  Well when you were growing up, did your mother belong to a  homemaker club?  Yes. She belonged to the Ena club.  Do you remember going with her to any of the meetings?  Yes because they took their children back then to the clubs.  Can you tell us a little bit what a meeting would be like back then?  Well, I talked to this lady last night. In fact, I joined that club after I got  old enough because I didn   t have work. I just hadn   t found a job to go  out and work any place. She said that they had two meetings a month.  One was for demonstrations and she said my name was down where I  demonstrated how to make sandwiches (Laughs). She had the book she  was looking at last night when she was talking to me and said,    You   re  down where you picked the demonstration on making sandwiches.    That  was kind of interesting, I thought. And then the second meeting they had  was all business, she said.  And the county agent would come out and help with one or both?  Yes.  And they kept records like that, what went on at these meetings?  10  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Well I   m sure they did, but nobody seems to know where the records are  at or if they   ve been disposed.  I guess some of them did and some didn   t, I don   t know. If they knew that  you made sandwiches, it has to be written down somewhere.  Well it   s in one of those books, like that green book there.  Oh, the green book.  Referring to a book in the room   It would be in a book similar to that. It was probably handmade, you  know. They probably made their own up.  Well would they have the meeting at your mother   s house?  They went to different homes and had it.  Is that how you got interested in the clubs yourself?  Yes.  And so do you remember when you first joined?  Well, I   m sure I was in my teens.  Okay, and been active ever since.  Yes. Well, not ever since because I worked in-between and I didn   t  belong when I worked. I didn   t go back into Extension until after I  retired.  Okay and that was in what year? Well let   s do the math. You retired  when you were fifty-five     Yes.  So in the    70s   early    70s?  In the    70s.  That   s still twenty-something more years with Extension. How did you  get involved with doing the fairs?  Well, I knew this lady that was a fair superintendent up there. And the  lady quit that was the superintendent of the open-class floral department  and she said,    Would you like to do that Francis?    And I said,    Well, I  11  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  don   t know nothing about, you know, fair stuff like that.       Well, I   ll  help you. It   s nothing.    So I jumped into it and I   ve been doing it ever  since.  I   m not sure what a fair superintendent does, so can you give me a few  examples of what you would have to do?  Well they have different   well like for turf and canning and all different  things, but mine was the open-class. The Extension part of it, they have  a special thing. They have their florals and stuff like that.  So did you have to organize it or     Yes. You entered and then you   d have a judge that would come in and  judge it. You   d put the ribbons on it and then they   d give money and  you   d write checks and distribute the checks.  So would it be your job to find the judges, to line those up?  Well, if nobody volunteered, I usually found the judges for it, yes.  Because I belonged to a garden club and there was always somebody in  the garden club that had the instructions. You had to go to school to be a  judge before you could judge. And they couldn   t be a judge in the same  county that the fair was. If the judge was in Washington County, she  can   t judge the fair at Washington County. She can go over in Osage  County and judge it, but Osage can come over here and judge it.  Did you have to do some of that yourself   going to other counties and  helping them?  No, they asked me to one time, but I told her I wasn   t qualified. I didn   t  have any certificate or anything to do it with. But I think I could judge  because I   ve been there long enough now that I know. The judge now,  she explains all the different things you   ve got to watch for.  And you still do that.  Yes.  That   s a lot of work.  Well, yes. Especially the first three days are a lot of work because  people bring in their entries. Then you judge and you   ve got to put the  ribbons on and all that kind of stuff. The last day is when you disband  everything and be sure the right people get the right checks.  12  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  The fair has changed quite a big over the years hasn   t it?  Yes.  Some of the bigger changes would be what? If you compared some of the  early days to what it is now, what are some of the changes you   ve seen?  Well, I think the way they judge different things has changed, and the  canning.  Is there much of that now?  Well, there   s some. It went down for awhile but last year it was up a  little bit to what it was. My open-class floral department is pretty much  on the even scale. We haven   t gone really down, down and we haven   t  gone really up, up either.  Would that be like planting their garden?  Well sometimes it depends on the weather. That one year when it was so  hot, we did have a pretty good showing, but the weather conditions had a  lot to do with it. We had a real good show this last year, a real good  show.  So you would judge flower arrangements?  Well, I have flower arrangements in my department.  Okay. So a little creativity there, too, then?  Yeah.  If you hear the panting, it   s Cricket, the dog. So as a member of a  homemaker club or Extension when you got back into it, your primary  task was what? When you first got back into it in the    70s, what were  some of the things you were doing?  Well, I was the family chairperson and I got a lot of projects going. In  fact, we had a lot of workshops and we would make booboo bears. We  made thousands of booboo bears and we   d give them to the hospital. At  Christmas time, I think it was eighty-five booboo bears that we gave at  Christmas time. We took them to One-Day Surgery and to the  Emergency Room and Diagnostic Images and there was another one.  All year long we   d distribute the booboo bears to the hospital to give to  the children when they come in and have shots or do stuff like that, and  it helps. We also give them to the older people if they   re kind of  13  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  traumatized or whatever. They liked the booboo bears.  Now what kind of bears were they?  Booboo bears.  And how big are they?  Can I go get one and show it?  Sure. That would be good.  And they usually have a ribbon around their neck.  And you draw on their eyes. So people in the club make them? You don   t  make them all yourself?  Oh no, that   s why we would have those workshops. It   s a group     A whole group.  It   s a group project.  Kind of like the old version style of a quilting bee.  Yes. But we also make Christmas stockings for all the newborns in the  hospital during the month of December. One lady knits the little hats that  go with it. I think we had eighty-five of those this year that we gave to  the hospital. They say during the month of December we have one  hundred babies born in this hospital.  You   re busy then organizing all of that.  And then we have   I   m sorry I don   t have any of this to show you, tooth  fairy pillows. We give the tooth fairy pillows to all the pre-school  children in the Bartlesville School System during Dental Health Month  which is in February and last year I think we gave around eight hundred.  That   s a lot.  A tremendous amount  And let   s see, what else did we give? We made  walker pockets. That didn   t go over too big. They were to put it on their  walkers. They were made out of denim. They were real nice. I took  some to the hospital and they never did call me back for any more.  All of this is sewing.  14  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Yes.  So about how many people are contributing to this? How many people  actually help sew them?  Well, it varies. I mean a lot of the women like to do their own stuff at  home. I   ve got one lady that does most of all her sewing at home. She  said she would rather do it there. When I first started it, actually I think  there was twenty-two or something that would come to the workshops.  Would they have to bring their own sewing machine?  We had sewing machines.  Did you? Okay.  Yes.  Are the ones they use now the programmed ones or are they the more  simple-to-use ones?  Well, we don   t use the ones we used when we first started. A lot of  people bring their own sewing machines. Now, we do have a few that  we own. They bought some new ones. They   re the little portable ones.  They   ve gotten almost too complicated these days, haven   t they?  Yeah, and then for the war, we made those cool ties that they put around  their necks, for soldiers. We made a lot of those and then sent them to  servicemen overseas. And then we made pillows for them, too.  A lot of creativity and busy fingers.  Well they   ve all been good projects and people like to do it.  Is that something you want us to talk about there?  Well I had written up some stuff. I just jotted this down. I had no rhyme  or reason how I did this.  Well, go ahead and share it with us then.  Well, I   d like to say too, it started out as Home Demonstration clubs.  That was the first one we had and then they changed it to Extension  Homemakers and now it   s Oklahoma Home and Community Education.  That   s our name now.  15  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Which one do you like better?  Well, I think home demonstration because that   s what they were doing.  They were teaching people how to can. I know one time I went to  Stillwater to a meeting down there, a yearly thing that they have, and  they had a lot of different demonstrations. They had one on canning and  different things, and I thought it was very interesting. Now they   ve gone  off on different subjects that to me, it   s not as interesting as it was.  There   s so much violence. I think that   s what people have turned to now  is the violence. And there   s fraud and there   s so much abuse in the  homes. I mean, the paper is full of what goes on. It   s terrible here in  Bartlesville, some of the things that come out in the paper. Just recently  that baby they found in the washing machine, and I don   t know how  you   re going to educate people. I don   t know who I want to blame for  that, but it seems to me if they knew that she was on drugs, that  somebody should have been aware of it and taken ahold.  Well, that   s some of what this current division now is, to do family  education more than it is showing them how to do something like  canning or keeping bees or things like that.  It   s just when we grew up, we didn   t have the television and the  communication. We had a telephone and that was about it. We did have  radio later on, but for years we didn   t have anything, just a telephone  and it was a party line. There were eight people on the party line, so  times have changed. I don   t know how to get people educated but  they   ve got to go back to some of the old things that we did.  One thing that they did in my group out there, they made mattresses and  my folks had to go to Fairfax to do it, from Ponca City. We went to  Fairfax to make a mattress. In fact, I   ve still got the mattress out at the  ranch on one of the beds I   ve got out there.  Do you remember them actually doing that?  Yes, yes.  Had to be a pretty big needle, didn   t it?  Well I don   t remember much how it went on, but I remember my folks  going because when one went, they all went. I mean, nobody got left at  home. My brother, my father took him every place that we went. He  never got left or anything.  What kind of car did you father have back then?  16  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Well, we had a Dodge at one time. One of those great big old things and  I think we had a Chevrolet. I remember riding in the buggy when I was  little, too.  So in order to have a mattress, they had to make it themselves?  Yes.  Did they have to supply the cotton or     They had all the supplies.  They just had to show up?  I don   t know where they got the supplies or how they got the supplies,  but they had all the supplies that went with the mattress.  They just had to show up to actually make it.  Yes.  How did they get it back home?  Well, I suppose they poked in the car or something (Laughter).  Or strapped it to the top, maybe?  Maybe, but I don   t remember how we got it back home, but I mean they  got it back there.  Well, there may have been a group that had a truck.  No, we didn   t have a truck.  Somebody in town brought them all?  Daddy had a thing he   d haul cattle and stuff in.  Well, he could have used that.  I don   t remember that, but anyway it got home (Laughs).  Did your house have electricity?  Oh no, oh no. And fact is, the place that my father had, when they  started putting electric in, one was coming from one direction and the  17  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  other was coming from the other direction. We would have never had  electric at that place back then because the companies wouldn   t get so  close together and we were right there in the center. They would come  so far one way and so far the other way, but they wouldn   t connect.  When the folks sold the place, they moved the house out of there and  someplace else. I suppose nowadays they would have put electric to it  but back then it didn   t.  They actually physically moved the house?  Well, somebody bought the house and moved it onto the property that  they had.  I   d like to see that done. It   s got to be an interesting process   moving a  house.  Back then, I don   t I know how they did it. They moved it out of there.  What about water? Did you have indoor plumbing?  We had a pump.  So bath time was in a regular bath tub or did you have a     No, we usually in the summertime put a bathtub on the side of the house,  put water in it, let it heat and take a bath while the water was hot.  One of those round number two   s or three   s or whatever?  Yeah, whatever.  And you would get to go first or last?  Well, I think I got to go first most of the time (Laughs).  In the winter, what would you do?  Put it by the stove.  And heat water that way? Do you remember some of the things your  mother would can?  We canned everything. We canned peaches. We canned tomatoes and  pears, green beans and anything there was to can. We dried a lot of fruit.  We had lots of dried fruit. We   d dried fruit like peaches and apples,  corn. We would have our flour sack full of dried stuff to eat during the  18  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  wintertime.  So she would make pies, I guess?  Yes and I loved that dried corn. That dried corn that we had was always  good.  How would you fix it? Grind it?  Well she would let it soak and get soft and then put it on a stove and just  cook it like you would any corn.  I hadn   t heard that. Did you have a cellar?  Yes, we had a lovely cellar. Daddy built shelves down in it and we put  potatoes and tomatoes that were green down there. We had tomatoes  right up until Christmas time down there. That   s where he put the  separator. We had a separator down in the cellar, so we would have a  warm place down in there. My job was to wash the separator and put it  back together.  Did you do cottage cheese then?  Yes, cottage cheese.  I would think maybe that was something that the clubs would  demonstrate how to do?  Yes.  Make cottage cheese.  I know we   d make it. I think they used a sugar sack to put the curd in  and stuff and hang it on the clothes line to let it dry or drip out in the  summertime. I don   t know what they did in the wintertime.  Did you remember using a pressure cooker?  No, my mother never used a pressure cooker. She used a coldwater bath  and she also learned how to can in an oven. She canned green beans in  an oven and somebody told her how or maybe the Extension did. But  she fixed green beans and canned them in the oven.  Extension may have then.  And they were good and we also made sauerkraut. And fact is I   ve even  19  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  made sauerkraut since I   ve been married.  Did the county agent visit your father much?  No.  Do you remember much about the barn?  Oh yes, if I remember right, it had about four different, I   d call them,  stalls that the horse would be put in and each one of them had a place to  eat. Yeah, that   s what they did. And the cows usually ate outside. We  didn   t have a barn for the cows, but it was the horses that always had a  stall.  In that time period too, how often would you go to town?  Probably on Saturdays.  And Ponca, you said, had movies. Did you remember a particular movie  when you were growing up?  Well there was a western on most of the time and they had a continued  one. You had to go every week to keep up with it. I mean it   d be  continued. I remember that   s one thing we got to do. We   d go to town  and my sister and I would go to the movie.  Well once you were married and moved to Kansas City did you do  anything with Extension while you were there?  No. I joined, but we didn   t live there long enough for me to really get  involved with it.  And then you came back here and you began ranching?  Yes.  Were you doing much with Extension at that time?  No.  They didn   t come out and help answer questions for your husband or  anything at that time?  No, but his folks had a big ranch over by Ponca and he grew up on a  ranch.  20  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  It   s always farming. Somebody   s got to do it, don   t they?  Yes. (Laughs)  So once you came here and you worked for awhile for the city and then  you retired, how did you come to get back into Extension? What brought  you back into it?  Into Extension?  Yes.  Well, my neighbors out there in Okesa, they belonged to it and they kept  after me and after me and so I joined the Extension back then.  In the early    70s, they were still doing demonstrations some? What type  of topics would you have done then?  Well, I know one time we made our own pattern for our body and made  the slacks and stuff. I mean we had a pattern that we could take home  and make     So a tailoring class, then?  Yes. And then one time they had a candy making demonstration for the  whole group and I thought that was neat. Let   s see, what else did they  have? Well, they had upholstery and they had refinished furniture and  they made curtains, draperies. They showed you how to do that.  Did you actually make any for yourself?  No, I didn   t make any for myself. I really wasn   t too much of a  seamstress (Laughs).  More of an organizer.  Well, I could organize. I did some sewing. I did quite a bit of crocheting  and my sister did beautiful knitting. I liked to crochet better and she  liked to knit better. I think that was about it. And I haven't done that for  quite awhile.  And you   ve always been in the right place at the right time for someone  to ask you to do something dealing with Extension.  Yeah.  21  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Someone got you started with the fair.  These projects have been wonderful things. And we   d make the Littlest  Angel dresses for the stillborns at the hospital. I haven   t done that for  quite awhile, but there is some need for that, too.  So you   ve been aware of Extension for at least fifty years, but not all at  one time. So you   ve seen some changes.  Yes.  Good and bad, I guess, but do you want to talk about a couple of those  that may be the biggest changes?  Well, you want to talk about the kitchen?  Sure.  The kitchen has made some drastic changes (Laughter). I understand  years ago, I wasn   t in it then but at one time they killed their chickens on  the outside of the building up there at the fair building and dressed them  to take in, to fry them for their meal that they cooked. They used to cook  for a solid week up there   the Extension did. Now different groups take  it. One group does one time and then some other group   not Extension,  but some other organization  does it . The Extension group itself doesn   t  do it but for one time during whole week.  And they would make fried chicken?  Oh  The fried chicken was delicious. And then they made homemade  rolls and homemade noodles. Well, they still make homemade noodles,  but cream pies   I remember standing on a thing about like that   motions  and standing by the stove stirring the custard for the  homemade pies. And breaking eggs, dividing the eggs to make the  meringue and stuff because they made it from scratch   everything. You  know, it wasn   t prepared. And those pies were out of this world.  And do they do that still?  No.  Do they do fried chicken now?  No.  Just the noodles. Different homemaker clubs would do certain things?  22  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  No. Different people when they worked in the kitchen, they would have  different jobs for different people to do. One of the money making  things that they made their money on is making pie crusts. They make, I  don   t know how many. I want to say a thousand or something. I forgot  what they said they sell, but they make pie crust and dough balls. That   s  how we make our money to spend.  What used to be called homemaker clubs do that?  Yes. County projects. I mean it   s a big county project.  So where would they make these?  At the fair building in the kitchen.  Once a year or throughout the year?  Once a year.  And people would come by or order them?  Well, they put an ad in the paper and get their quota, how many they  think they could get made. And in October, I think, is when they usually  do the pie crust, in the fall so people would have it for their holiday  baking.  Can you freeze them?  Yes.  Yes. I wouldn   t know how to start to make a pie crust.  Well, you need to be around when they do pie crusts.  Sure. I need to come back in October when they   re actually doing this  and watch the production line.  Yeah. It   s something to do. I mean that would be a good     Yeah, I should do that.  And then we have lunch. They usually fix lunch for everybody.  Well do they sell pies at the fair then? Some of these were used for the  fair?  23  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Garnder  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  No, no.  The noodles   do they make those at the fairground, too?  No, they just cook them. They don   t make them to sell. I wish they   d  make them to sell. I think they would do well with that, too.  But they   re made as a big production, too? The noodles are?  Yeah.  Interesting.  And then my mother, during the summer months for the Extension over  there for the Ena club, she did the flower clean up down at the school  house, the Peter   s School where the group was organized. She took care  of the flowers down at that school during the summer months. I call that  a summer project.  Sure.  And then I remember her cutting hair for half of the little kids that were  in that community. That was through Extension, too.  The club   s name was?  Ena. E-N-A.  E-N-A. Okay. Do you have any idea about how many clubs there were  back at that time, when your mother was a member, in that county?  No, I don   t. I think there was probably twenty-two in her group. But I  don   t know how many other clubs. I don   t think there was very many,  but I couldn   t say.  Ponca   that would have been Kay County?  No, Osage.  Osage. Ponca is Kay County though, isn   t it?  Ponca   s Kay County. The river divides Osage and Kay County.  Okay. So you went Oklahoma A M for the annual meetings of the  homemakers?  24  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Yes.  Did you go for 4-H Roundup?  Yes, I   ve been at 4-H Roundup, too.  So you   re familiar with campus then.  I was quite active in 4-H. I guess I was in it as long as I was around to be  in it.  Do you still do some things with 4-H?  Yeah. This is kind of interesting. That lady I talked to last night, the way  the Ena club made their money was by selling chances on quilts and they  also served meals. You know we had so many farm sales way back  when and they prepared the food for the farm sales and that   s how they  made their money for     For one of the projects they might be doing?  For projects. And this is some of the things she told me over the  telephone last night. They donated fifty dollars to Osage County over  here to the fair building, to the Women   s Building. When they were  building the Women   s Building over there, they donated fifty dollars  toward that project they had started. And in the money that they spent,  she said they gave thirty dollars to some girl to go back to Chicago to go  to school. I said,    Well, you know I think that thirty dollars was a  donation to me,    because I went back to Chicago and people donated  money to help with my expenses to go back there. Even though the  Santa Fe Railroad paid for it, there were other organizations that gave  me spending money to spend after I got back there. So I think the thirty  dollars that she was talking about wasn   t to send a girl back to school  there, it was to send me to help with my expenses.  For the National Congress.  And that   s what I put down there.  Back in those days thirty and fifty dollars was a lot.  Oh yeah.  So the fair has a building that   s just for women   s     Yes, they call it the Women   s Building.  25  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  That would be your canning, your sewing?  Yes.  That type of thing?  Well now, I think that goes in the other building. I think the Women   s  Building now, when I was over there, I think they have some flowers in  it. Most of the home demonstration clubs are in that other building that   s  there. They built a new building over there, too, and it   s real nice.  I guess that   s something else that   s changed. The fairgrounds have  improved some     Yes.      over the years, but they   re not as big. Are they?  Well, the building that they built over there is pretty good size. They  have a lot of activity going on in it.  Do as many people still come to the fair?  Well, I think it   s down, but I think Pawhuska had a good showing this  year, or so I   ve been told.  Okay. Just varies county to county?  Yes, uh huh. One thing Washington County did. For an educational tour  we went to Washington D.C. and that was a fun trip.  You get out of the state for a little while.  Yes.  You just stay pretty busy.  Yes, fact is they made two trips to Washington and I went back with  them on both of them. We got to see a lot. We stayed in the 4-H building  up there and they served us meals. They had the tour all planned for us  and they had a tour guide that got on there with us and took us to all  these different places that we had probably never got there, you know,  unless we had a really good tour guide.  So all this hard work through the year pays off when you get to go on a  trip like that?  26  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Yes. And we got to see the president. Oh what was his name, the one  from Georgia?  Oh, Jimmy Carter.  Yes, he came right by our bus. Our bus got to go right on the White  House grounds and here he come walking by. That was quite a thrill.  Him being a farmer, he probably would have talked for a little while.  Well, they shuffled him on. He didn   t stop. They didn   t stop. Anyway  everybody was quite excited that day. And, of course, all the way up and  all the way back they had the trip planned. We didn   t take the same route  back as we had going up, so we got to see a lot of the country. This year  is the first year, ever, that we   ve got a man Extension member.  Really? Not an agricultural agent?  No. He belongs to the Extension group.  Wonder how he   s liking it?  He had the culinary open-class and he   s helped with the fair a lot. Then  his wife was superintendent for the women   s part of it; like the quilts  and the clothing and all that kind of stuff. So anyway, it happened.  And he   s the first.  Yes.  As far as you can remember, he   s the only one?  That   s the first.  He   s the first male member of the OHCE? Is that what you   re saying?  Right?  First male.  First male.  First male to be the council president or whatever they call them.  Okay. And what   s his name?  Don Riley.  27  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Do you have much interaction with the current people who work in  Extension, in the Extension office?  Yeah, I think so.  What type of things do you do for them or with them?  With Don Riley?  Like Janice  Cranor . Well she   s in a different county though.  Yeah.  The Extension educator, do you do anything with them in this county?  Well, I guess she would be a supervisor or whatever you want to call it.  Okay. Does she ever come to your club meetings though?  Yeah, once in a while she comes. Not often, but she comes.  How often does your group meet?  Once a month. We didn   t meet this month because the weather was bad  and they canceled it, but I mean other than that     And where? Where are those meetings held?  Well, mostly in the homes and then sometimes we have it up at Dewey  at the Extension office up there. They have a room up there that you can  have meetings in.  One lady here, she belonged to an extension club and years ago, she  would take her Model-A Ford and go around and gather up people to go  to the meetings and when the weather was bad, she would get the family  tractor and take the tractor with a flat bed or something on the back of it,  loaded them all up and take them to the meetings. And they also owned  a piece of property that they had their meetings in all the time. They   ve  sold it now and disposed of it. They didn   t have any water or anything  and they always had to carry their water in and stuff like that.  Do you remember her doing that? Taking the tractor around?  Well, I   ve been told. I talked to her daughter-in-law this morning and I  said,    Do you have any records of your mother-in-law, you know, some  of the stuff that she did in extension?    I told her what was going to  28  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  happen, and she said that was the main thing that she could remember.  She didn   t have any books or nothing saved on stuff like that. But  anyway she told me about that, so I immediately jotted it down.  They were eager to have each other   s company, too, during that time  period. I mean you were scattered out. The farm   s where scattered out.  Oh yeah. Where my folks lived, there was nobody close to us. We lived  in about the middle part of our 160 acres. We weren   t right at the edge  of any of it. We were right in the middle of it, practically.  And where was the elementary school from your house?  A mile and a half.  Okay and you had to walk to get there or     Well, part of the time I walked, but I had a donkey and I rode a donkey  to school. I also rode a horse to school. And they had a barn at  the  school . At that time, they had a barn for your animals.  They would just stay in there until time to go home?  Yeah and then there was a family that lived north of us and my mother  got him to come down and pick me up. He had a Shetland pony and he  would come and get me in the morning and put me on the back. He   d  take me to school and then he   d bring me back. But one day coming  back, they had fixed the road and they had dug a big thing out and there  was a lot of water in it and he was going to take the horse down to get a  drink of water. Well what did the horse do? He got in and tipped us off  in the water (Laughter). So, anyway     How many were in your class at the elementary school?  Well, I   d say five in my class.  All of them in one room?  One room and there was some awful big boys that went to school there.  They did back then. Maybe it was just me being little, but some of those  big boys (Laughs) would stand up. I wasn   t very big anyway, but they  were quite large. I know one time, they could skate, the winter was bad  and this one young man skated from his house up to school, every day to  school. The ice was that bad.  Harsh winters. They actually had skates. One teacher?  29  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  One teacher. And she   s the one that started hot lunches. They had two  cloak rooms and they took one cloak room and made it into a kitchen.  She had a little, I think it must have been, gasoline stove or something  and she   d make a pot of soup for us every day. She would ask the  parents to give her things to put into the soup to make it. Whatever you  had or whatever she asked for, they tried to make it and she   d throw on a  pot of soup.  That   s something that a home extension   or a home demonstration  person would have been interested in too.  Yes.  Hot lunches for kids.  Yes.  What about holidays?  Well, I think we had a week off during Christmas and probably  Thursday and Friday on Thanksgiving. I don   t remember all these  holidays that they have nowadays. I mean we might have had them, but I  don   t remember being out of school all that much.  Do you remember doing pie suppers?  Oh yes, we had pie suppers and box suppers. Mostly box suppers.  Box suppers.  And I know they   d bid on your box and whoever got it, you had to eat  with them.  Did you do that yourself?  Yes.  That was fun, I would think.  And then at Christmas time, the money that they   d make off of that, they  would buy treats for the kids. Well, I think some grownups got it, too.  We always got a sack full. It   d have nuts in it and it   d have hard candies  and then it had an apple and an orange and stuff like that. That   s what  we would get for Christmas.  That was special too, wasn   t it?  30  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Finchum  Gardner  Yes, very special.  Well, I   ve covered most of my questions for today. Is there anything else  you want to add?  Well, I think you might glance over this real fast, but I   ve probably  covered everything that I had in here. I want you to go back and look at  that picture.  Okay, we will. Thank you for having me today. It   s been a pleasure.  You   re welcome.  -------  -------  
