 Little Thunder. Today is Thursday, April 14,  2016, and I   m interviewing Kiowa-Apache-Gila River-Pima artist  Vanessa Paukeigope Morgan at the Anadarko Public Library in  Anadarko, Oklahoma     V. Jennings Jennings.  Little Thunder Jennings. (Laughs) Of course. Thank you. We are   sponsored by the  Oklahoma Oral History  Research  Program at Oklahoma State  University. Vanessa, you have historic connections to art. Your  grandfather was Stephen Mopope.  V. Jennings Yes.  Little Thunder And you   ve been in this business a long time. You   ve received a  National Heritage Fellowship Award. You   ve won top awards at Santa  Fe Indian Market and Red Earth for your beadwork, but you   re  especially known for your cradleboards, which are featured in various  museum collections and there   s one here at the library. Thank you for  taking the time to talk with me today. Where were you born and where  did you grow up?  V. Jennings I was born in Tempe, Arizona. I   m a product of Relocation. My mother  was a nurse and she traded a part of her education for working for  Indian Health  Services . I was born there in Arizona, and when I was  just a few days old my grandmother came alone on a train and came to  Arizona and brought me home. So this is my only home.  Little Thunder So your grandma raised you over here in Anadarko area?  5  V. Jennings Yes.  Little Thunder You told us a little bit about your mom. Anything you want to share  about your dad?  V. Jennings My dad, he was this big, strong, handsome man. He rodeoed and he got  hurt after one of the rodeos and my mother was his nurse, one of his  nurses. They met and they got married and I was born out there. Like I  said, I was just a few days old and my grandmother came and got me  and brought me back to Oklahoma.  Little Thunder It wasn   t easy to take care of a little infant in those times, either.  V. Jennings No, not during that time. Because you had to   it isn   t like the formula  today. Everything   s ready-made and easy to do because you had to mix  it, mix up the formula. The diapers, they didn   t have the kind of  disposable diapers that they have now. It was really   babies were hard  work.  Little Thunder (Laughter) And you were supposed to be a grandma   s girl.  V. Jennings Well, my mother was out there without really a support system. She  was working, so it was really hard trying to find a babysitter for me.  Her hours were   she worked the three-to-midnight or the midnight-to-eight  o   clock shift. It was really difficult getting up   getting someone  to watch me. It was just easier for my grandmother to come and get me.  If my grandmother had not came and brought me home, I would   ve  been disconnected. I wouldn   t have had a connection to my grandfather,  my grandmother, with her beadworking, and with his painting, and their  singing, their dancing, taking part. I would   ve missed out on all that.  Little Thunder Right. You   ve talked a little bit already now about your exposure to  Kiowa language and culture growing up. Anything you want to add to  that? They gave you a good, strong base.  V. Jennings Oh, it did. I would like to think that I could pass that along to my  children and my grandchildren. Although, my grandchildren, it   s kind  of a tossup. (Laughter) We have this wonderful little grandson, but he  comes walking through the house, and one time he   s blonde, another  time he   s got blue hair. I think last night it was kind of a rust. It   s just  what he called    artistic expression, Grandma.     Little Thunder Right.  V. Jennings I would prefer that he expressed himself by braids and pierced ears, you  know?  6  Little Thunder Different generation. You explained that your grandma, of course, was  doing beadwork. You were exposed to her bead art early. Any other  family members that were an influence?  V. Jennings No, it was just my grandparents. They   with my grandfather, what he  was doing was recording a part of Kiowa culture that doesn   t exist  anymore. At that time there was a really strong influence because of his  uncles. Silver Horn and Ontigh   they were at the beginning of ledger  art. They were recording after the free days onto the reservation. Then  my grandfather, he started his artwork at the end of   I guess it   s the  reservation period. He recorded through World War I, World War II,  Korea, Vietnam, until he passed away in 1974. He was prolific and he  had this really strong work ethic. He would get up. Right after  breakfast, he would start painting. Then he would take a break about  nine o   clock, drink coffee. After his fifteen-minute break, then he   d  start right back in and start working again. He would break for lunch  and then he would work until after ten o   clock at night. He was always,  always   it seemed like everything was a creative process for him.  Little Thunder It was really his calling. He really took it seriously. Yeah. When did you  make your first art of any kind?  V. Jennings (Laughs) He fixed a   he found my missal. It was actually my mother   s  missal and I was drawing flowers. I had this big, humongous print. I  was just now learning how to write my name, Anyway, he has it. He   s  got it. He   s my organizer. He organizes everything and it takes me no  time to pull everything apart and throw it out of order.  Little Thunder Now this is your husband, Carl, that found your missal.  V. Jennings Oh, yes. He   s very patient and he   ll go back in and reorganize. I didn   t  know   when I first started beadworking, I was beading for my  children. I   ve never thought of myself as an artist. I   ve always identified  myself as a traditional woman. I didn   t know that you were supposed to  have a resume. I didn   t know you were supposed to keep copies of your  work. Carl is the one who organized all of that into a resume for me,  and collected all of my articles. He takes care of me. (Laughter)  Little Thunder That   s wonderful. So when did you start beading?  V. Jennings I was just a little girl. One of the first assignments is you pick  Grandma   s beads up. Nothing   s ever wasted. If the beads drop on the  floor, you pick them up. You put them on a string. Nothing was wasted.  So you have this one big jar and there   s all of these beads. They   re all  different sizes and colors. You just   you didn   t waste it. That was your  7  first assignment. My grandmother couldn   t get down and pick stuff off  the floor, so that was your assignment.  Little Thunder How about school? What was school like for you? Did you get any  encouragement for any painting or drawing?  V. Jennings No, no. In fact, I got in trouble with my mother. I used to wear   I went  to school with my hair braided. I wore leggings. I didn   t realize that just  being a traditional woman   I mean it was already   the seed was  already planted. Here again, Carl has these newspaper photographs. I   m  a high school student and you can see me with my long braids, and my  leggings, and I   m walking across out to the parking lot to get in   My  grandfather came and picked me up. He drove me to school and picked  me up. I was comfortable with who I was, with my dark skin, my  painted scalp, my braids. I had these wonderful, wonderful  grandparents. My grandmother wore a cloth dress, and concho belt, and  braids. I had this visual idea of what was expected of a traditional  woman. To me, the prettiest women were like in the agency days. You  could see these beautiful old ladies with their braided hair and their  black string shawls. There was this one old Comanche lady. Her name  was May Weryackwe. I thought she was as pretty as my grandmother.  She had leggings on and she was walking to the agency. I remember  how pretty I thought she was. Just so confident, and beautiful, and  perfectly at ease with being a Comanche woman. The same way with  my grandmother. That identity, that confidence, that was something that  was really important to me. These beautiful, strong women.  Little Thunder That took a lot of courage, too, I think, at your high school graduation  because you were going against the current.  V. Jennings Oh yes.  Little Thunder All the pressures were     V. Jennings It   s human nature for you to be afraid of someone who looks different. I  didn   t realize that just by being who I was, apparently, I scared some  people. (Laughter) But my own grandmother, she had this wonderful  confidence. In the face of death (she was dying from cancer) and she  never told anyone. She just faced it on her own terms.  Little Thunder What did you do after high school? I guess we should say quickly what  school system you were in.  V. Jennings I never had anything more than a high school education. My children, I  was wanting them to be dressed as if my grandmother were right there  beside me, even though I lost her in 1970. I wanted my babies, I wanted  8  them   I was too poor to go and buy beadwork. So I was sitting down  and I was making my own beadwork for them. That   s how I got started.  Then people started coming.    Who made this?       Oh, you made this?  Can you make me a pair?    I just got pulled in to it.  C. Jennings She wants to know what high school you went to?  V. Jennings Oh, I went to school at Lawton High in Lawton  Oklahoma .  Little Thunder Okay, because I was wondering if you were here in Anadarko.  V. Jennings No, no, no, at Lawton High. It was a very large student body. Out of  several hundred in our class, I think there were just three or four of us  that were Indian. I mean, just these two little brown faces in this sea of  white. You just gravitated towards each other.  Little Thunder Right.  C. Jennings Just a minute     Little Thunder This is Carl.  C. Jennings Vanessa   s mother worked in Tempe when she was born. That   s when  she went to live with her grandmother. After Tempe, I think she went to  South Dakota to work as a nurse. From there she came to Talihina   Oklahoma  and worked at the Tuberculosis Center there. Then, she got  a job at the Indian Hospital in Lawton. That   s when Vanessa moved to  Lawton to be with her mother and father.  Little Thunder Okay. That   s how you ended up in     V. Jennings So it was circuitous, a circuitous route.  Little Thunder    in the Lawton High School. Okay, I don   t know if this is after high  school, but I read that you were a cultural advisor for the post office?  Can you tell us that story?  V. Jennings (Laughs) No, the postmaster...  Little Thunder The postmaster?  V. Jennings    is my friend. Whenever they have groups of people who come in to  look at the paintings, he or one of the employees, like Ron, they   ll call  me and they   ll say,    There   s a group of people that are coming in here.  Do you think you could come and talk about your grandfather   s  paintings?       Yes.    I love   I like people. I like visiting and I love  9  talking about his artwork. I like explaining what a wonderful, colorful,  exciting man Steve Mopope was. He was friendly. My grandmother  would get mad at him because he never met a stranger. He was always  visiting. I think that   s what made his artwork so exciting to me. I just  remember this wonderful storyteller. (Laughs) He was so much fun to  be around. He was so much fun to listen to his stories. The kind of life  that he and my grandmother had, they were   my grandmother ran the  farm for him and my grandfather focused on his artwork at the Jacobson  house. She didn   t want him to be distracted by trying to take care of  things at home. That   s what got him in trouble because most people,  they looked at it as if he were being lazy.  They didn   t look at artwork as a career option. Somehow, it wasn   t a  job the way that most people   I mean, they cannot see how art, they  can   t see it as a viable occupation. They just think it   s frivolous and it  isn   t. Like my grandfather, he recorded so much of our culture that no  longer exists. If he and the other members of the Kiowa Five, if they  had not recorded, we wouldn   t have an Indian culture. Do you realize  they were the beginning of what has become a multibillion dollar art  market? Here are these six young people, who when they first were  students at St. Patrick   s, at the Indian mission, the nuns and Susie  Peters, they were able to make an alliance, a friendship, with Dr.  Jacobson   s wife who was French. They were able to secure a position.  Dr. Jacobson gets all the credit, but it was actually Mrs. Jacobson who  helped to secure the positions for Jack Hokeah, Steve Mopope, Spencer  Asah, James Auchiah, and Ms. Smoky. All of that came about because  of Susie Peters and the nuns here at St. Patrick   s Indian mission.  Little Thunder And they got a chance to travel a bit too, globally.  V. Jennings Oh yes. When my grandfather   s uncles, Ahtone and Silver Horn and  Jim Waldo   Jim Waldo was a Carlisle student. Tennyson Berry, who  was Stephen Mopope   s father-in-law, they sat on the business  committee with Quanah Parker. They set the contracts for the MKT, the  Missouri-Kansas-Texas, MKT Railroad. They used that whole train  route as an avenue for sales. They would set up in Parsons, Kansas.  They would go to Chicago. They would go all the way to Denton and  on down into Waco and different places. They would take their dance  clothes, they would give dance presentations and they would sell their  artwork.  Little Thunder So they had that in mind that they were going to help the artists  promote their culture?  V. Jennings Yes, and it was   my grandfather really enjoyed it. Here they were  doing things that were illegal, you know? (Laughter) Because Susie  10  Peters, she was supposed to be teaching them how to can and how to  sew. How to become mainstream American citizens. Here she   s setting  up classes on how to teach all of these different Indians, beadwork  techniques. There again, that must have been an exciting time for her.  She was able to go with her prot  g  s and they would go to Gallup  New  Mexico , they   d go to Santa Fe. She   d take her little charges and they   d  go all over and give dance presentations and then they would sell their  paintings.  Little Thunder So you started out beading for your children.  V. Jennings Yes, that   s how I got my start.  Little Thunder Right, and what was   did you enter any competitions at any point or  did it just start with commissions?  V. Jennings It got started with commissions. Then a friend of mine, we would chit-chat,  and they said,    There   s this wonderful art show here in Santa Fe.  You should apply.       Ah, no, no, no, no.    Anyway, but finally they  talked me into it. When I first started going to Indian market, my booth  fee was seventy-five dollars.  Little Thunder Did you actually go to Indian Market before you did any other shows?  Was that one of your first shows?  V. Jennings Yes.  Little Thunder Wow, the toughest show to get in.  V. Jennings Start at the top. (Laughter)  C. Jennings They didn   t give her a booth. She had to take her tipi and set it up on  the Plaza.  Little Thunder Okay. You were paying for just a place for seventy-five dollars.  V. Jennings Oh my gosh, and I dragged my babies out there. You haven   t lived until  you   ve trucked a whole vanload of tipi poles on those little narrow little  Santa Fe streets. (Laughter) I remember I got turned around and I got  stuck.  C. Jennings At the top of what   s that art road that goes up to the hill?  V. Jennings What is the name of that?  Little Thunder Oh, not Galisteo  Street  is it?  11  V. Jennings No, where all of the     Little Thunder Canyon Road?  V. Jennings Canyon Road. I got stuck at the very end and I remember     Little Thunder It   s so narrow.  V. Jennings    I just busted out crying. I was tired and my babies were hungry and  they were exhausted. I got stuck up there and I could not get turned  around. This nice man (I have no idea who he was) he jumped in the  truck and backed me up, and turned me around, and got me pointed  down, so I was able to make it to the Plaza. But I thought, oh my gosh.     Now, hindsight,    Boy, that was a dumb idea.    (Laughs)  Little Thunder That   s a great story.  V. Jennings Who would   ve thought? I was dragging my babies and we were setting  up on the Plaza. My goodness, I mean, this was at the very beginning.  There was not, they didn   t have that many policemen on the Plaza at  night. We were fending off all kinds of people, trying to climb under the  tipi, come through the front door. It was crazy. I thought,    Man, no, no,  no, no.     Little Thunder Now what kinds of   did you have beaded medallions, or moccasins?  What kinds of things were you selling? Had you already tried     V. Jennings This is the thing with my grandmother. You didn   t do just one thing.  Traditional women, you did cradles, you did leggings, you did dresses.  That   s what I carried out there to Santa Fe. I was making baby  moccasins. I was making women   s leggings. I was making dresses.  Now, today, people, they specialize. You go to somebody when they  just make medallions. Somebody else just does keychains, somebody  else does just belt buckles. They   re specialized. It wasn   t that way in  our home. You had to learn how to do everything. That meant learning  how to tan hides. That meant   a good woman was able to do  everything. It isn   t like it is now where it   s specialized.  Little Thunder Do you remember when you entered your first competition at Santa Fe?  V. Jennings Out there at Santa Fe. (Laughs)  Little Thunder Do you remember approximately what year and what you entered?  V. Jennings Gosh, Gabe was probably about ten years old.  12  C. Jennings Nineteen eighty to    81.  Little Thunder Around 1981. Did you enter a dress or what did you enter?  V. Jennings I had a painted buffalo robe, I did a buckskin dress, and I did a pair of  green leggings. Traditional old-style work, which is something I still  love doing. I don   t like   I do not like the mirrors and     C. Jennings Rhinestones.  V. Jennings I prefer old-style work.  Little Thunder What category did you win in? With what piece? Maybe you won a  couple.  V. Jennings Yes. I think about 2014, I did a beaded horse mask and a beaded  martingale. I did a cradleboard one year and our little grandson was  little. We went and our little grandson   old people, they really  appreciate good manners. This little boy, I had this cradle and I had  made it out of these larger beads, and I think I called it Rez Baby, the  name of the cradle.  C. Jennings It was yellow and white stripes on one side. And green and white stripes  on the other side.  V. Jennings Our little grandson went and started down the line     C. Jennings No, we saw Emil at the end of the line, so we told Gabe to go shake  hands with Emil Her Many Horses. He went and started shaking hands  with everybody in the line, one by one.  V. Jennings (Laughter) Until he finally got to Emil. And I know Emil was  wondering,    Who is this little Indian boy?     Little Thunder I think it was your horse mask, if I remember, you told me a cute story  about it sold for a good price. And as the Indian grapevine was going,  the price just kept getting bigger and bigger from booth to booth.    You  know Vanessa sold her horse mask? (Laughter) But can you remind us,  because I can   t remember, if you made it for your daughter-in-law?  V. Jennings For our daughter-in-law. I sold it. My children, (when my children were  small), I used to tell them,    If Mama has a chance to sell it, I   ll sell it. I  will make you something else to replace it.     C. Jennings And since then we   ve made that same daughter-in-law, two.  13  Little Thunder She got the second one, is that right?  V. Jennings Oh yes     C. Jennings And the third one.  V. Jennings Our son, he wanted to use the horse mask, and she said,    Oh no, no,     she said. Dad made it for me. I don   t think I should loan it.    He said,     Those are my folks.     Little Thunder (Laughter) Exactly. How about your beaded cradleboards? I   m not sure  how many people were actually doing those when you started. Did you  start out with bigger ones or did you start out miniatures?  V. Jennings I started out with big ones.  Little Thunder That   s what I thought.  V. Jennings There again, I   ve always joked we   re like two little old dinosaurs.  We   re the ones you   re going to come look for at Indian Market. There  isn   t another place for me to sell my work. I don   t belong anywhere  else. All of the other art shows are emulating Indian Market, but they  don   t have the support. They don   t have the quality of volunteers. They  don   t have the     C. Jennings Customers.  V. Jennings    the customers who have the money to be able to   I mean, truly, they  look at this work as an investment. It isn   t just a quick, thrown together  something and then it   s going to be worn out, or it   s going to end up in  a pawn shop. No, it   s a thing   it is substance.  Little Thunder How did you and Carl meet?  V. Jennings We were on the opposite side of the dance arena.  C. Jennings For all our lives. I was from Texas and I   d go down to Dallas and watch  the Blackfeet dance. She would come with the Blackfeet and dance, but  I never met her. All those years we were just   she lives up here on the  Washita River. I   m from a town that   s at the end of the Washita River,  so we went all our lives without meeting each other. Then I came up to  Cache, Oklahoma, and went to a dance and she was there. I was just  sitting in the crowd and there was a woman, Kiowa woman, who  walked by and said,    Those are interesting leggings.    The next year, I  asked somebody who she was. Then that woman told somebody and  that man told her that I was interested. We got to talking after that. I  14  went to dinner with them after the dance and come to find out, this man  that we were having dinner with, him and his wife are from back east  somewhere. He told her he didn   t like me. I was just   I don   t know. I  don   t know   but it was    not a good idea.    But it came to be,  eventually.  Little Thunder (Laughter) In spite of     V. Jennings Be sure and edit that out. (Laughter)  Little Thunder It   s such a good story. Can you talk a little bit about the fellowship that  you got? It was ultimately from the National Endowment for the Arts, I  guess. They give this National Heritage fellowship.  V. Jennings Yes.  C. Jennings First of all, tell her about the woman from OU  University of  Oklahoma  that came to the Apaches and was looking for you.  V. Jennings Emma Hansen.  C. Jennings That   s a good place to start that.  V. Jennings Emma Hansen, Emma Hansen. They were working on this Plains  Apache exhibit. My grandpa, Frankie Redbone, send her to my house.  He told her, he said,    Now you tell her that I sent you.    In other words,  I couldn   t say no. That was my very first, I guess, public commission. I  did a little dress and a little leggings and I made it for my daughter. I  remember I was talking with Bobby Jake and I told him,    You know  what, Bobby? My work is so much better now,    I said.    Why don   t you  let me trade you, let me give you one of my dresses? You give me that  dress back. I don   t want anybody to see how pitiful it looks.    He said,     No, someday you might be famous. I want to tell everybody we have  her very first commission piece in our museum.     Little Thunder And what museum did it go to?  V. Jennings That   s at the Apache Tribal Museum here.  C. Jennings Apache tribe of Oklahoma, the Kiowa/Apaches.  V. Jennings They used to be called the Kiowa/Apache. They just call themselves the  Apache Tribe of Oklahoma now.  Little Thunder Right.  15  V. Jennings They   ve been affiliated with the Kiowas since the Medicine Lodge  Treaty. They   ve always been known as the Kiowa/Apaches. But they   re  not like the Mescalero or the San Carlos. They   re Plains Apache.  Little Thunder So you got that commission for a museum and then this fellowship. How  did you find out about it?  V. Jennings I found out about it through the State Arts Council. The coordinator  said,    The people who are selected, generally, they   re elders. They   re  not young people.    I was floored when I got it.  Little Thunder How old were you, approximately?  C. Jennings It was    89. She was born in    52, so...forties.  V. Jennings Doc Tate, we were up at Red Earth and he said,    I heard you   re a  National Heritage Fellow.    I said,    Yes.    He said,    Oh.    See, we were  the only two living Fellows for years. Then Bruce Caesar and after him  Fred Tsoodle. We were the only Fellows for quite some time.  C. Jennings Oklahoma fellows.  V. Jennings And Georgeann Robinson.  C. Jennings The basket maker or pottery maker?  V. Jennings No.  C. Jennings No? That was somebody from Santa Fe?  Little Thunder Now did the fellowship, did it allow you to do research with a cash  reward?  V. Jennings Yes, you can do     Little Thunder Okay, so it buys you some time to work on, but you don   t necessarily  need to work on a major piece. Or is that part of the project?  V. Jennings No, you can do   what I was doing was research. I was going to   well,  it was the Museum of Natural History. They called it the Attic. Scary,  scary, scary. Oh, my gosh.  Little Thunder Was it DC or New York?  16  V. Jennings In DC, no, it was in DC. It was   the storage was up   you could go  to   what is the name of that? It   s on the border of Spanish Harlem and  Black Harlem. Anyway, in New York.  C. Jennings The Heye Foundation.  V. Jennings Yes. The Heye Foundation. I had no idea, I am a true country mouse.  Oh my gosh, I could not believe the   these people must eat their young  to live in New York and to live in Washington DC. I have to admit,  though, going into the Attic, it isn   t like it is now. They had stuff  stacked, stacked, stacked, one on top of the other. Beautiful,  magnificent Kiowa cradleboards, the rawhide, the covers were being  crushed. That won   t happen now. Everything is state-of-the-art care.  Little Thunder Were there any surprises for you in terms of the research? What you did  discover?  V. Jennings Yes, it was crazy. I didn   t know what I was looking at. It was a horse  mask, but it had wooden slats and then it had buffalo horn. I   ve never  seen that again. I mean, it was so unusual. I knew I saw a Kiowa  cradleboard and it was on brain tanned hide. I remember there were  figures, there were motifs that were beaded on this cover, but it wasn   t a  fully beaded    It was just like these motifs and then these figures. It  was really unusual. I guess it must   ve been about seven years ago, we  started going through   he had organized everything. I knew I saw that.  I knew I saw that cradle. He had it and there it was. He organizes  everything into folders. So maybe these are like figures. Maybe this has  some kind of a floral beaded motif. Everything is organized and labeled.  It   s identified, the collection.  Little Thunder That   s a great resource, research resource, that you have that.  C. Jennings Tell them what the guard told you at the Attic.  V. Jennings (Laughs) He said,    Aren   t you afraid?       Of what?    He said,    I don   t  like going back there.       Why?    He said,    Because I can hear people.     He said somebody called him by name. Anyway, he said,    Where are  you?    They said,    Over here.    He said,    Where?       Over here.    He said,     You mean over here?    And somebody went and slapped him, but there  was nobody there. It was a ghost. Anyway, he said,    Man, I don   t like  that. Those people, they scare me.    Most of them are probably my  relatives. (Laughter) But I never go into the collection without paint. I  mean that is, no, no, no, no. I don   t want anything to follow me home.  No. But I was really surprised. First off, I was telling this man,    You   re  not supposed to follow. When common sense tells you that there isn   t a  17  flesh and blood human being back there      come here.    You   re not  supposed to go and say,    Where are you?       (Laughter)  Little Thunder Goodness. You got a commission also from the International Folk  Museum, I think, in Santa Fe.  V. Jennings Yes.  Little Thunder Could you talk about that, please?  V. Jennings Yes, that was, oh my goodness, that was a long time ago. Also, my son,  Seth, we were both there. He was giving cultural demonstrations. When  I went out there, I met this lady. Sometimes when you meet someone,  they never tell you how important they are? They have that much  confidence that they don   t brag on themselves. They invited me to come  and I could do research and help them to identify the items that I  thought were Kiowa and explain what went into the piece. Then I made  a little girl   s dress. I was making little boy   s clothes, too, about that  same time. I must   ve had nephews, or nieces, or somebody that I was  doing stuff and it fit neatly into this demonstration.  C. Jennings Who was it that talked to you and didn   t tell you who she was?  V. Jennings Oh, she   s retired now. She was at the museum out there, at the     C. Jennings You don   t remember her name?  V. Jennings No.  Little Thunder If you think of it, we can put it in brackets later inside the interview.  V. Jennings Okay. I   m doing good to remember my name.  Little Thunder You mentioned how important it was as a traditional woman to be able  to do a range, whole range of things. I   m just wondering, what is your  favorite thing to work on, to bead?  V. Jennings Cradles. I like doing little girl leggings and moccasins. In fact, I   ve got  a pair of little girl   s leggings cut out this morning and two pairs of little  girl moccasins. We have this cute little granddaughters and then a friend  of ours, this Osage friend, she has a little granddaughter. The little girls,  both of our granddaughters are about the same age, same size, so it   s  fun working on things for them.  Little Thunder Yes. Going back to your cradleboards, you   ve had several featured in  books on Kiowa cradleboards or Southern Plains cradleboards. Can  18  you talk a little bit about the importance of cradleboards for the Kiowa  people?  V. Jennings A man   our world, it   s very much male-dominated. I mean it   s a  warrior society. A man can stand up and he can talk about his war  deeds, but on that same level, that same kind of respect is given to a  woman who can talk about cradleboards because a cradleboard could be  given as a gift. It solidifies family, friendship    It could be at our  Blacklegs Warrior Ceremonial. This is my warrior artist. In order to  honor him, I   ve given away cradleboards. It   s because he never asked  me for anything, but he always does for me. On that same level of  respect, I can turn around and I can give a cradleboard. Not only the  family I   m giving it to, it shows how much respect I have for you, but  also that cradleboard, it   s to honor this wonderful man.  Little Thunder Have you done any judging of beadwork?  V. Jennings (Laughs) No, no, I haven   t. I don   t know that I would be any good at  judging.  Little Thunder Nonetheless, you   ve been in it long enough to   there have been some  changes. It seems like it   s commanding more of a price that reflects  how much time you put into things. A little bit closer than it used to be.  What other changes have you noticed in beadwork circles?  V. Jennings I know that I   m getting slower. (Laughter) It seems like we have to  think more about how to best use our time. I have congestive heart  failure. It seems like I have some big health issues now. It   s really  difficult to do things. It   s difficult to sit. It   s difficult to   it seems like  you need to plan more, you need to think more about the best use of  your time, your talent. Then you have to be brave enough to say,    You  know what? I can   t do this.     Little Thunder Do you have family members that help with hide tanning or are you  actually buying your hides now?  V. Jennings No, he set me up with an account. I use such big amounts that unless  it   s something that we   re going to keep for ourselves, it   s better to go  ahead and purchase it. Like a cradleboard, you can   t get paid for the  amount of time that you have.  C. Jennings We paid for twelve hides, brain tanned hides, a couple years ago. We  got six of them and we     V. Jennings Got cheated.  19  C. Jennings    haven   t seen the rest of them. Now I doubt we ever will. This guy   s  from Montana or somewhere. I didn   t know him. But you can   t be     Little Thunder Yeah you   trust.  C. Jennings Can I say something about the changes in beadwork?  Little Thunder Sure. This is Carl again.  C. Jennings People don   t take the time that it takes to do things well, anymore.  People that are beading moccasins bead with the bigger beads because  they cover more space and fewer designs. The quality   s not there that it  was forty, fifty, sixty years ago. That   s hard to take because you know  the difference if you were beading forty, fifty, sixty years ago. You  don   t want to judge those things because you don   t want to stifle  somebody   s creativity. But they just don   t know what that quality  should look like. It   s difficult to see that. Very few bead workers take  the time that it takes to do a quality thing. There   s a few. There are a  few that really know how to do that, but they   re getting fewer and far  between. There   s one family from up North and all of those girls have  learned to bead from their grandma and their Mama. She learned from  her folks and they do excellent wet work, but I don   t see anybody down  here, not one person that really does the work that     V. Jennings The family that he   s speaking of is Joyce Growing Thunder.  Little Thunder That   s what I was thinking. Let   s talk about your process and your  techniques a little bit. You have used a lot of small beads and such on  medallions and some of your miniature cradleboards. Do you use  antique beads very much, or were you ever into that?  V. Jennings No, we have some.  C. Jennings There   s a few on this little cradle.  V. Jennings We still have some of my grandmother   s. But those are things that you  want to hang on to.  C. Jennings And there   s never enough to do a big project. There   s just small  elements on this cradle that have old beads in it.  Little Thunder Has your use of color or your designs changed at all over the years?  V. Jennings I think it has. Oh gosh, don   t even look at my stuff from long ago. It   s  just awful.  20  Little Thunder I think artists are always hard on themselves that way.  V. Jennings No, no, no. We went to Altus and we were looking at some old  photographs and we were doing some things, and oh my gosh, there  was one of my early dresses, and an early pair of leggings. Oh gosh, I  just wanted to crawl under a rock and hide. It was just     C. Jennings The curator says,    We have a Kiowa dress, but it was made by  somebody   I think her name was Vanessa. But her last name is  Morgan, so it   s probably not the same lady.    I said,    Oh yes, it is.     (Laughter)  Little Thunder What about the relationship between beauty and usability? Is that  important to you? That things that you   ve made     V. Jennings Yes, yes. In Kiowa culture, there   s a very structured class system. The  more highly decorated   you can tell by looking at the person, how  they   re dressed, where they fit in within the Kiowa society. Now see,  that   s such an old idea, too. That has just pretty much gone by the  wayside because now you see things that are happening now that  shouldn   t be happening, but it   s just because of the breakdown in the  culture.  C. Jennings The word for cradleboard illustrates that, in a sideways way, but the  word is aupaugh tope, but the word, aupangh, is a useful tool.  Something that   s used and tope means it   s tied up. The inference is that  this is a useful tool, but it doesn   t become a useful tool until something  is tied up in it. The beadwork on it is obvious, but it   s not mentioned.  Little Thunder Thank you. That   s a good insight to have. What   s your creative process,  Vanessa, from the time you get an idea for a particular thing you want  to make?  C. Jennings First thing she does is we talk about it.    What do you think about this  idea? What do you think about putting this on it? What about this  instead?    Or    I saw something like that.    That takes a couple months.  Then she starts to work on it. All the time we   re talking about this color  or that color.    Let   s do it this way    or    I saw something fun in a  museum. Let   s try to do something like that.     Little Thunder Do you do any preparatory sketching of your designs? Do you ever  sketch out your designs?  V. Jennings No, it seems like each of them, they have a life force of their own. I   m  sure you can sketch it out, but in the end it   s going to decide how it  wants to live.  21  Little Thunder What is your work routine?  V. Jennings I go from lazy to    Hurry up. If you   re hungry, you go fix you a bologna  sandwich, but don   t bother me.    (Laughter)  Little Thunder Do you work on several things simultaneously? Do you switch off  projects?  V. Jennings Yes, we were joking about the stuff in our house. We   ve got lots of  moccasins that are just one side    (Laughs) I said,    This is going to be  fun when I pass away. Our girl   s going to be looking at that.    What was  she doing with this?     C. Jennings She started outlining this cradle a couple years ago. Then it got  changed. Some of that beadwork came off and got changed. We sat  down and about two months ago, she started working on it and finished  it.  Little Thunder Sometimes things need to sit. You need to let them sit and think about  them. Looking back on your career so far, what   s been one of the high  points? Looking back on your time in the Native art markets?  V. Jennings Just how we don   t take ourselves too seriously. I think that comes about  with confidence.  C. Jennings That six-foot-five black transvestite in a gold lame mini skirt telling her  her shoes are pretty. It was pretty fun.  Little Thunder Oh wow, that was in Santa Fe, huh?  C. Jennings No, that was in New York.  Little Thunder That was in New York, wow.  V. Jennings Oh my gosh. This     Little Thunder You were wearing your moccasins?  V. Jennings Yes, he put his hand on my head and told me,    Turn around darling. Let  me look at you.    I felt like an idiot. He  Carl  has gotten the biggest  kick out of that.  C. Jennings There was the bald headed man with the tattoos and the gold toothpick  in his nose at the Budweiser booth next to her booth.  Little Thunder What show was that?  22  V. Jennings That was the Indian Summer Festival up in Milwaukee. I told him,     You   re not going to believe this. It   s a tossup between these men and  women who has the tightest, most sprayed on, black leather pants and  who has the highest heels. The men or the women.    I told him, I said,     You know how you can tell somebody wants to talk to you?    This  man, I couldn   t     C. Jennings They keep following her around.  V. Jennings I couldn   t look at him. He was all tattooed up. He had this thing stuck  through here (his nose) and I was telling Carl,    Man, I am really and  truly too much of a country mouse to be up here. I   m not going to ever  come back up here anymore.     C. Jennings I said,    Well, did he tell you?    She said,    I don   t know. All I could see  was that silver toothpick wiggling around in his nose. I didn   t hear a  word he said.     Little Thunder You do run across some characters. (Laughter)  V. Jennings I know.  Little Thunder You did the Red Earth show for quite a while, right? Or just for a short  period. I can   t remember.  V. Jennings Yes, I was even the Honored One.  Little Thunder Okay, what year was that?  V. Jennings Oh gosh.  C. Jennings Gabe was born so it was, so it was    90.  V. Jennings Oh yeah, Gabe was little. He was mad because Connie Yellowman was  the director and     C. Jennings It was 2004, 2005 or 2006.  V. Jennings Gabe was mad because he didn   t want to dance. Then he got out there  and they were trying to steer him off.  C. Jennings He was dancing in front of us in that big line and he wasn   t dressed. But  that   s okay because he   s our grandson. But he   s dancing six or eight or  ten feet in front of us. The arena director   s trying to get this little kid off  the dance ground and he didn   t know who he was.  23  Little Thunder Not knowing he was family.  C. Jennings Then when he found out they were giving all the Tiny Tots five dollars,  then he wanted to dance. And it was over with.  Little Thunder That   s a nice honor, too  Red Earth Honored One . What   s been one of  the low points of your career so far?  V. Jennings The low point?  C. Jennings You   ve been taken advantage of.  V. Jennings I   ve got quite a few. I   ve got quite a few, which, all it does is it makes  you appreciate the nice things. Then that makes you pretty  philosophical. You say,    You know what? I   m glad you don   t know  everything bad about me.    (Laughter)  Little Thunder Some of your children   will they know how to do a lot of these things?  They   ve always been around it. Are any of them following an art path?  V. Jennings No. They like wearing it, especially our girl. She loves wearing it. I  think that if she, Summer, if she would just sit down and dedicate  herself, I think that she could go a long way. It   s more fun to frolic than  to really have to work hard.  C. Jennings Tell her about Summer going to the Smithsonian last year.  V. Jennings Oh my gosh, she went last year.  C. Jennings The Kiowa tribe.  V. Jennings The Kiowa tribe took her and several young Kiowas. They were going  up there to look at the old Kiowa things, the collections. Lo and behold,  who   I never thought the girl paid attention. Here she was making  some pretty astute observations and explaining    Well, this is why. I  seen my mom do this and I   ve seen them do this and you can tell       Oh  man, I   m proud of her.  C. Jennings To answer your question, I think once we   re gone, all that will come up  and she   ll be able to do it. I think.  V. Jennings Sometimes   that   s something you should never   you shouldn   t just be  judgmental because sometimes you just have to be pragmatic and  realize maybe it will take your death for them to realize how important  this is.  24  Little Thunder What advice would you give to a young Native person who wants to do  the art markets, who wants to bead full time?  V. Jennings I would say,    Don   t wait for someone else to tell you that you can do it.  You have to be able to tell yourself,    I can do this.       The thing that you  should never get tired, though, is you should never get tired of talking.  Little Thunder That   s a big part of it.  V. Jennings Yes, that   s a big part of it. You should never get so discouraged that     Nobody can stop you, but you. When you say,    I can   t do this,    I  promise you, you won   t be able to.  Little Thunder Is there anything else you   d like to add or talk about before we take a  look at your cradleboards?  V. Jennings No, actually, I   m kind of tired.  Little Thunder Okay. All right, we   re going to pause and quickly take a look at those.  Vanessa, can you tell us a little bit about your beaded cradleboard?  V. Jennings This is a doll cradle. At one time a little girl, her full-size cradle had  small doll cradle that went along with it. Of course, collectors found out  how valuable they were so you don   t see many of the dolls with the  full-size boards because you can make more money by separating it.  Little Thunder And this was the one that you worked on and then it was around the  studio for a while. Okay. How about your hide cradleboard here?  25  V. Jennings It   s done out of handmade rawhide and this the brain tanned skin that   s  cut up into the strings. It has sinew that makes the lacing at the bottom.  Little Thunder Not easy to work with. That   s beautiful, too. Thank you so much for  your time today.  V. Jennings Thank you.  -------  -------   
