 Larson  Bergen  Okay, today is April 8, 2011. My name is Mary Larson, and I   m here  with Mr. Zane Bergen in Clinton, Oklahoma. We   re going to be doing an  interview for the Spotlighting Oklahoma project as part of the subseries  on Germans from Russia. Thank you so much for agreeing to do this  today.  Thank you very much. Glad to be here.  Could you please start by telling me your full name and when and where  you were born?  My name is Robert Zane Bergen. I was born at 214 East Key Street in  Weatherford, Oklahoma. My birthday is July 16, 1928. I am the first  person born of John Bergen and my mother Goldie.  When and where were your parents born?  My parents, John Bergen was born southwest of Weatherford,  approximately four miles southwest of Weatherford. He was born in  1901, June 21. My mother was born December 23 in 1907 in  Weatherford, Oklahoma.  Same birthday as my mother.  Is that right?  Very good. (Laughs) How about brothers and sisters?  I have a sister, Bonita, and she, at the present time, is deceased. She was  born in 1931. I have a brother, John. We called him Jack all the time to  not confuse him with my dad. He was born in 1936.  5  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Were all of them born in the Weatherford area?  We were all born in the same house.  Were both your mother and father   s sides of the family Germans from  Russia?  My dad   s side was, but my mother, no. Her ancestry is straight German.  In other words, her great-grandfather came from Germany.  Do you know what region he was from, or     No, I really don   t. Not really.  Okay. Well, on your father   s side, do you know when his family left  Germany for Russia originally?  Well, Grandpa and Great-Grandpa both were Mennonites. They  generally say they were born in south Germany and immigrated to  Holland, and then from Holland they went to the Ukraine in Russia.  Do you know about what year they went to the Ukraine?  I   m not real sure about what year they went to the Ukraine, no. I   m not  sure about that.  Do you know where they were in that area?  In Ukraine? Yes. My granddad, Frank Bergen, was born in Marienthal,  which is a small village, as I recall him saying, roughly ten miles from  Odessa on the Black Sea.  Okay. Did his family stay in that area the whole time they were in  Russia?  They emigrated from that area in 1874. That   s about when the manifesto  that Catherine the Great had with the Czars of Russia that time was just  about up. There was a lot of conflict going on at that time, and so they  immigrated to the United States.  How old was your grandfather at the time? Do you know?  Grandpa was five-years-old when he left there.  Where did they come to in the US?  6  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  They first went to Marion County, Kansas. I think Hillsboro is the  county seat, but I think they lived in a smaller town called Lehigh,  Kansas, which is still in Marion County.  Do you know, when they came from Russia, did they come with other  folks from the same community at about the same time?  About the same time, there were other families, I think, that came with  them. Grandpa never did tell me how they got to Antwerp. They sailed  out of Antwerp, Holland, or Belgium, whichever it is. I can   t recall  exactly, but that   s where they got on the boat to come to the United  States. They did come to New York City. As I understand it, there   s  some of those folks ended up in Galveston, Texas, but they came to New  York City. What was interesting, Grandpa told me the ship was called  the Star of Nevada, and it had paddle wheels on the side, and it took  them sixty days to get across the Atlantic.  That must have been fascinating for a five-year-old.  He said he couldn   t believe the number of kids that were born on that  trip. Everybody wondered what citizen of what country would they be  in. Would they still be called citizens of Russia, or would they be  American citizens, or what would they be? That was a question they  had.  Do you know how that shook out?  (Laughter) I don   t know how that shook out. I don   t know.  Do you remember your grandfather telling any stories about when they  first got to the US and what that was like? The trip to Kansas?  He really didn   t tell stories as such, but he seemed to indicate   he talked  a lot about the railroad. You have to remember, he   s only a five-year-old  kid, but he talked a lot about the trains. It seemed like they must   ve  ridden a train from New York City to Kansas. They even lived on what  was called railroad land when they got there, because other land was not  too available at that time.  What did his family do for a living? Were they farmers?  They were farmers. That was what they were doing.  Mainly wheat, or wheat and cattle?  Basically wheat and cattle.  7  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  When did they come into Oklahoma from Kansas?  See, Great-Grandpa only lived about two years after they got here, and  he had a brother and two sisters when they first got here. When Great-  Grandpa died, then Great-Grandma remarried, and she married a man  named Peter Eichsen. They had six more children between them so my  dad has a lot of   what would you call them? Half-brothers and sisters?  It was amazing the names that they had. It was either Jake or Frank or  Gertrude or Anna. Those were the names of all of them. Some of the  kids had the same names. They were Anna, but they had a different  second name that they went by.  So a lot of them went by their middle names to avoid confusion?  Right.  If you wanted to just call   if you wanted to make sure someone showed  up you called for Anna and took whoever you got. (Laughter)  Great-Grandpa Franz, that   s the way it was on the manifest list. I have a  manifest list of all the passengers that were on the ship. He was known  as Franz or Frank. He   s buried in the Lehigh, Kansas area. Great-  Grandma, after she married Mr. Eichsen, moved to Reedley, California,  back in the    20s. She   s buried in the Reedley cemetery, and I did find  her gravesite.  Where is Reedley?  Reedley is in the San Joaquin Valley, south of Fresno.  Okay, I was going to say I didn   t recognize the name. So they left after  your grandfather was grown, or     They must have, yes, because my granddad Frank was married in 1896,  got married in 1896. In fact, he homesteaded Indian land from the  Cheyenne-Arapaho Reservation. Did that in 1892. Then he married in  1896. Then he had his family. Uncle Isaac first, then Aunt Gertrude, and  then my dad, John, then Theodore, or Ted. We always knew him as Ted.  Then Aunt Marie. Every two years, they had those kiddos. Then my  Aunt Martha came along in 1914.  Where did they all grow up?  They all grew up on the farm southwest of Weatherford.  8  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Okay, so that was about four miles southwest of Weatherford, I think you  said?  Right.  Was there a separate community there, or would folks just come into  Weatherford for everything?  Pretty much just come into Weatherford for everything.  When they came down to Oklahoma, did they come with some of the  folks that they   d known in Kansas or in Russia, or did they just come  down by themselves?  No, there were other people that they had met in Kansas, and, in fact,  they were, in a sense, kind of intermarried. My dad, for example, had  lots of cousins that lived in the same area. In fact, Grandpa Bergen was  known as a Krimmer Mennonite. Krimmer meant that they were from  the Black Sea area, from the Crimea area, as opposed to the Mennonite  Brethren. The Krimmer Mennonites and the Mennonite Brethren didn   t  get along very well, sad to say.  Didn   t always see eye-to-eye.  Basically, if I understood Grandpa right, it was over baptism. Should we  be baptized backwards or frontwards or     The details.  The details. The story is that the Krimmers, the people who believed in  that particular way of baptism, they left the Ukraine area and went on  down to the Black Sea area to live.  Around Odessa?  Yes, down around Odessa in that area.  So were there other Krimmer Mennonites around here, then?  Most of the people that lived where my grandpa homesteaded his land,  most of those people were of the Krimmer Mennonite background.  Was there a church?  Yes, they had a regular little church.  9  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  What was the name?  It was known as Bethel Krimmer Mennonite Church, and they have a  little cemetery there. It was located on a couple acres of land in one  corner of a farm. One of the men donated the property to be used for the  church and for the cemetery. They had a little cemetery that was there,  and it   s still there and still used by some people.  And how far would that have been from where     From where Grandpa lived, it was a mile and a half.  So all right close together.  Kind of in that same area, yes. There were some Friesens and Kroekers  and Bushmans and Schlichling, but basically Friesens and Bushmans,  mostly.  Okay. So most of that community was probably Krimmer Mennonite, or  was it mixed?  It was mixed, but primarily in the early days, it was Krimmer Mennonite  people.  Okay. What was your family doing, like your grandfather, when he got  here? He was still a farmer?  He was farming. He was a farmer. I can   t recall how he got   he never  did say how he got down to Oklahoma, but when the land was free,  Germans-from-Russia people, German people wanted land. You weren   t  a man until you had your land, until you had your farm.  That probably goes back to the way things were in Germany even prior  to the move to Russia. That   s a longstanding     Probably all the way back, yes. It   s very important that you have  property. Of course, when Grandpa got there, he married Maggie  (Margaret) Friesen, and she was always Grandma Maggie.  So were you related to Melba, then?  Melba?  Melba Friesen.  Well, Melba   s husband is my dad   s first cousin so we are related.  10  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Okay, just trying to put all the puzzle pieces together. (Laughter)  We are related. That   s true.  You   re also related to Frances?  Frances is my sister-in-law.  Right. Okay. Just trying to make sure the family trees are branching in  the right order.  That   s right.  Can you tell me, you grew up on the home place too, I guess, there?  Actually, I grew up in Weatherford, and we lived in Weatherford until  1937. Then in 1937, we moved to one of Grandpa   s farms that had a  house on it. One of his other sons, my Uncle Isaac, had lived on that  farm, but they were not happy with the situation, and so they loaded all  their possessions on a train and went to Wyoming.  Do you know why Wyoming, or just there was land out there, or they  knew someone?  It turns out that Uncle Isaac   s wife had relatives that lived in Wyoming  so they said,    Come up there, and we   ll get you situated.     Okay. So you would have gone to school in Weatherford for your first  however many years?  I was supposed to go to a country school, and the country school was  about four-and-a-half miles away. It was called Enterprise School. Since  my dad worked in town, there was no need for us to walk the four-and-a-half  miles to the country school when we could ride to Weatherford so  my dad, for a few years, paid tuition for us to go to Weatherford schools.  So did you start in Weatherford schools, even before you moved?  Yes. Even before we moved.  So you just got to stay in the Weatherford school district.  I just stayed in Weatherford schools.  Socially, did you know a lot of the folks that were going to Enterprise?  11  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  No, didn   t know anybody.  Okay. What did you like best when you were living in town? What did  you like best about Weatherford?  What I liked best about Weatherford was that I always had places to go.  In the summertime, we were only three blocks from the swimming pool.  The town was small enough that you didn   t worry about getting run over  with cars, and you were just pretty free to go. We only lived a block-and-  a-half from the college. I spent a lot of time on the college campus  around in the gyms and different places, football field, whatever. I  always had places to go.  When you were out on the farm, did you largely stay in until your dad  went home from work in the evening?  Right.  So you still got to spend a lot of time hanging around Weatherford.  Right, I did. I had a lot of friends in Weatherford.  What did you like best about living on the farm?  About living on the farm, the best thing that I liked was we had an old  two-story house we lived in. I got to sleep upstairs, and the bottom of  my window was right at floor level. I could lay on the floor, and I could  look out, and I could see   during World War II, for example, we were  about sixty miles or seventy miles from Fort Sill, and we could hear the  cannons boom during the war when they were practicing. You could see  the flashes of light when the shells would explode, and I   d lay there and  watch that.  That must have been a fascinating view.  It really was.  What was the community makeup like, both in Weatherford but then also  out on the farm? You said a little bit about it being, obviously, an  agricultural area. You had some Krimmer Mennonites there, and you  also had other folks, as well.  Well, and then where we lived on this farm that Grandpa got, the man  that owned it, that he got it from, was a Missouri Synod Church of  Christ person. Our neighbor across the road was from my wife   s clan, so  12  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  to speak. They were the Lutheran background people, Germans-from-  Russia people. They had their church, the German Congregational  Church.  Was that in the neighborhood, too?  Well, that was about four miles away, not too far away. Then for my  grandpa   s house, we lived three miles, and so we went back and forth. I  had a little Shetland pony that I could ride, and I spent a lot of time  riding up to Grandma   s house to get zwieback every Saturday. That was  zwieback baking day. She always made some extras for us.  Knew you were coming.  Knew we were coming. All of her cooking for Sunday was done  Saturday because they didn   t believe in cooking on Sunday.  What was your pony   s name?  Bill.  Bill?  (Laughs) Yes.  You always have to ask about those, if there   s a good dog or a good  horse.  Oh, yes. Old Bill, he went lots of miles with me. Sure did.  Besides your grandfather, did you have other   well, and you had your  uncle living   I was just trying to think what other relatives you had  living in the area at the time.  Well, really, other than my grandparents, didn   t have any.  Because your uncle had already moved.  Yes. He was already gone. Right.  Getting back to your school days, what would you say, growing up in  Weatherford, what was your most vivid memory of your school days?  Playing marbles. (Laughs) I really enjoyed playing marbles. Not  bragging, but I happened to be pretty good at it.  13  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  So you had a good collection by the time you     I still have those.  Oh, wonderful.  I have a big half-gallon jar still full of them. But you know there is one  thing I always wanted that I never got was an agate shooter, made out of  agate. You could buy them in the drug store, and they were fifty cents  apiece, but I just couldn   t get fifty cents together to buy one.  Well, that was a lot of money at the time.  Yes. Oh yes. That was when we could go to the picture show for a  nickel.  Ten movies or an agate shooter, and you can   t really win the shooters.  (Laughs) No.  You couldn   t win the shooters.  You couldn   t win because you put those in the ring to shoot out. Oh,  boy.  As you were growing up, what do you remember your parents     generation doing for fun? Visiting or music or hobbies they had?  The thing that we did probably more than anything was play cards. We  played lots of rook, lots of what they call pitch. We played Chinese  checkers, a bunch of checkers, regular checkers. Did lots of that. I  remember my mother always   we always had books to read. I don   t  know where she got them. I remember when our library at school would  have a book sale, I   d buy a bunch of them, and that was one of the things  I really liked to do was read. I still do today. I read a lot.  That comes from being an educator, too. (Laughter) Recognize the value  of a good set of books.  Oh yes. Right.  You mentioned that when you were younger, too, you played marbles.  What else did your generation do? Were there things different from what  your parents liked to do, socially, that     Not a whole lot different because, really, my teen years were in World  14  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  War II, and we lived on the farm. We were always shorthanded with  people to help, and neighbors were shorthanded with people so we did a  lot of help-the-neighbor things, especially the older families where the  young men were drafted into the army and had to help out. Especially  when they got sick or something, we   d go do their chores for them, or  we   d feed their livestock.  So you wouldn   t have had a whole lot of free time, anyway?  Really, in high school, I didn   t have any free time.  And what year did you get out of high school?  Forty-six, 1946. I missed the draft by sixteen days. They quit drafting on  July 1, 1946. I wasn   t eighteen until the following sixteenth of July. In  my high school class, there was only five guys left when it was time to  walk across the stage in May. All the rest of them had been drafted.  Did they let some of them go early if they wanted to?  Yes. As I recall it, a lot of the guys joined the National Guard, and the  National Guard thing got called up. Our unit in Weatherford was called  up for the 45th Division so most of those guys went with the National  Guard. A lot of them did. That was true in the Korean War as well.  Probably one of the saddest times in my life was right after my senior  year in high school. I didn   t have any buddies left to pal around with.  They   d all been drafted?  They were all in the army so that was a real sad time for me.  And by then the war was over.  The war was over, but they were in the army of occupation and did their  two years, whatever it was.  So what did you do right after school once you graduated?  Well, after I finished high school, I worked on the farm. Since my dad  was an implement dealer by then, he was able to get a combine. We  helped all the neighbors, cut their wheat for them, so it was pretty busy.  It was a real busy time. During the war, I worked on a threshing crew. I  was thirteen when I started, and we threshed all kinds of grain, oats,  barley, wheat, and that went most of the summer to do that.  Did they give you time off for harvest season, too, in the fall when you  15  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  were growing up?  Usually, growing up, Dad would stay home from his business in town to  sow wheat until I   d get home from school, and then I   d take over. Then  he   d run to town and make sure that the business got closed and  everything was okay.  Sort of a tag-team effort, thing?  Yes. Yes.  How involved were your parents with the Russian-German community?  Really, hardly at all.  Except for being active in the church, or were they active in the church?  Well, no not really. Grandpa and Grandma were very strict. I think it   s  just like any teenager. The stricter you are, the more they   re going to do  something different so my dad was not a church attender at all. In fact,  he was probably about seventy-five years old when he was saved, when  he sought salvation. He never did go to church. My mother was a very     she had us kids in Sunday School and church every Sunday.  And which church did you go to?  We went to the Congregational Church in Weatherford.  Do you remember any particular German celebrations or events that  your family had when you were growing up? Not necessarily church  related, but just     No, I don   t recall that at all. It was kind of like   Grandpa   s attitude was  that,    We live in America now, and we   re going to be Americans, and  we   re going to forget what was in Russia.    It was getting kind of bad,  and,    We   re going to forget that now.    What they did, they spoke  German at home, their dialect of it. It wasn   t true German, I don   t think,  but it was different. Outside the home, it was English. You speak  English.  So did you learn any German from your grandparents when you were  growing up, or from your parents, even?  Oh, a few things at the table, a few things, a few words, but when I was  on the threshing crew, oh my, I don   t want to remember those words.  (Laughter)  16  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Words you weren   t supposed to learn.  Words I wasn   t supposed to repeat.  Well, I   ve done some interviews with some Italian Americans over the  years, and they talked about during World War II some of the different  kinds of discrimination they faced, and I was wondering if that   s  something     That was true. That was true in our area as well.  Even with the really strong German presence     I remember as a seventh grader, I was called a Kraut-head sometimes,  but I never did get involved in a fight over it. To me, it was a motivating  factor to do better.    I   ll show you that I can make just as good of grades  as you can or better, and I can do this as good as you can.    To me,  instead of being a downgrading thing, it was a motivator to be better. I  really worked at that. I think it did help me to do better.  Did your dad have any trouble with his business at the time, or folks  knew him well enough that it wasn   t an issue?  No. It wasn   t an issue with him, no. He had a good reputation, too. He  was always a good, honest     The community knew him.  Right.  Do you remember particular changes in Weatherford during World War  II, besides the fact that everybody was gone?  I remember that my dad taught a lot of schools for those people that  were still home. He taught farmers how to weld. He taught them how to  tune up their tractors. He taught several schools that type of thing and  how to take an old piece of machinery and adapt it to help the newer  machinery so that they could continue to use their equipment, because  you couldn   t get equipment. You had to keep everything running. I   d go  with him a lot of times and spend time with him. That was the best time  that I had was to spend that time with him, as well, because other than  that, I didn   t see him much.  Because you were at school, and when you came home, you were  working on the farm.  17  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  I was either at school, and, eventually, I got to ride the bus. I would ride  the bus home, and I   d get the cattle in. We milked twenty cows every  morning and night by hand. It just took a lot of time to do that.  Yes, because cows won   t wait.  They had to be milked twice a day, and, of course, we were trying to  produce for the war effort. We even got into the turkey business to  produce turkeys and lots of chickens and make those available.  Were there specific requests for poultry? I mean, there was demand for  that?  Different seasons of the year there was always a big demand for turkeys,  especially in the fall of the year because they were going to send turkeys  to the guys for Thanksgiving and Christmas.  We were talking a little bit about language earlier. When you were  growing up, I guess if you were at the Congregationalist Church, they  probably weren   t doing services in German.  No.  Do you remember your father or your grandfather talking about when  the churches used to have the services in German or when the schools  used to be taught in German?  In Grandpa   s   in the Krimmer Church, they had afternoon services in  German. The morning services were in English simply because there  were people in the neighborhood that would come to the church who  didn   t speak German. They wanted those people to be able to worship  with everybody so they   d have special, what they called, prayer  meetings in the afternoon. A lot of times, those people that would stay  for the afternoon would bring food. They   d have their lunch at the  church, and they   d have their prayer meeting in the afternoon and go  home.  Do you remember how long that went on with the German services?  Well, in my wife   s church, in the German Congregational Church, that  lasted until after World War II, but there were some older men, I  remember, in Zion Church that tried to get it more into more English.  There were some older gentlemen there that,    No, the language in  Heaven is going to be German.     18  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Trying to keep those cultural ties.  Trying to keep those cultural things going. There was quite a bit of, well,  I would say it   s what you today call tradition.    This is the way we did it,  and this is the way we   re going to keep doing it.     Were there a lot of things like that that got passed down from your  grandparents to your parents to you, either in terms of food or     Probably some. I   d say some. My mother, even though my grandmother  on Mother   s side, her name was Kixmiller, which was definitely  German. They didn   t cook like my grandma did on my dad   s side. The  Germans from Russia cooked a little different than the other Germans.  Part of that was because of, I think, the Russian influence.  What were some of the things that you saw that were different on your  dad   s side versus your mom   s?  One was, you know, like, verenikas. The bierocks. My mother learned to  do those things, and she cooked it. But in the beginning, she never did  cook like that when they were first married.  What were some of the things she used to cook that you didn   t see on  your dad   s side?  Of course, she baked a lot of bread, which was the same on both sides,  but probably the fact that we had more things that dealt with vegetables  and beans and things like that, that kind of food.  I guess since we   re talking about food, what kind of foods do you  remember as being important when you were growing up? You  mentioned bread, and, I mean, were there things that you saw a lot?  We ate a lot of foods that weren   t very costly because we were in a  depression, so to speak, and we didn   t buy a whole lot of expensive  foods. We ate a lot of starchy-type foods. I remember Mom used to buy  groceries once a week. Even when we had five in the family, she  wouldn   t spend over five dollars, and then she   d quit buying.  Did you have a family garden?  When we moved to the farm, we had a big garden. We grew lots of  potatoes, and I remember every Saturday morning I had to go down to  the cellar and sort potatoes, get rid of the bad ones. Mother did a lot of  canning, canned lots of meat. We had no refrigeration, no electricity, so  there   s no way to keep the meat unless you can it.  19  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  When did you get electricity out at the farm?  Christmas Eve of 1941 is when we got our electricity.  One thing I   ve found over the years is that people who get electricity  after not having it can always remember when they got it. (Laughs)  Exactly, because it was such a change. Fortunately, my dad, we went to  the state fair, and that was our family vacation, go to the state fair in  Oklahoma City. We went to Montgomery Ward. My dad bought a set of  new tires for the car, we bought two new tires for the tractor, we bought  a new divan for the house, we bought a butane stove, and we bought a  refrigerator. I didn   t know until later, but Dad bought all of that on  credit. (Laughs)  Probably didn   t do that much.  No, right. That was quite an expenditure to do that. It was great.  Do you remember your parents referring to special foods that were  important to them that they had trouble getting?  Always trouble with sugar. We were always short on sugar. That was  highly rationed during World War II. Grandpa taught us how to make  wine, and that required lots of sugar.  That   s one of the things I was going to ask. Did anyone in the family  make wine or beer?  Wine.  Okay, and it sounds like you were involved in that. Where did you get  the grapes?  Well, the grapes we got out of the creeks. Wild grapes.  Like concord?  Yes, they were blue grapes. They were wild, grew wild in the creeks.  We   d go up and down the creeks getting the wild grapes, and that   s what  we used to make wine.  What was the process with your family? How did you     Well, we had some big containers that they fermented the grapes in. I  20  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  can   t remember how long it took, but I remember we had them up in the  attic of the brooder house. Why it was there, I don   t know, but I think  because it was warm there.  For a little more action.  A little more action, right. I remember Dad used to go up and check it  every morning to see how far along it was and so on.  How did you do the pressing? Did you have a little mill or     To get meat, we always butchered our beef or pork. We had a press that  was about, as I remember it, it was about this big around.  About two feet across?  Eighteen inches, something like that. We   d put it in there, and it had a  crank up on top that you   d crank the press down and press all the juice  and stuff out. We used it when we made the wine, and we used it when  we rendered the lard and made cracklings. I just loved that crackling  gravy, was pretty good eating.  Did anyone in the family make sausages or hams?  Grandma Maggie was the one that made the sausage. She   s the one that  cleaned the entrails to make the casing for the sausage, and she   s the one  that put the spices in to make sure that everything was done right.  Grandpa, he was the one that did the head. He always did the brains. He  always took those home, and they had brains and scrambled eggs.  Did you ever do head cheese? Do you know?  I don   t remember that they did. I remember they talked about it, but I  don   t remember the process or anything like that.  So was it always just pork sausage?  Always pork. I remember I had to do the big black kettle, you know, put  the firewood under. When we   d cut the fat up in small pieces, I had a big  wood paddle that I stirred the pot with so it wouldn   t burn the lard. That  was one of my jobs.  Did you have that in the kitchen, or was that out     Well, if we did the butchering at Grandpa and Grandma   s house, they  had what they called the smokehouse. It was a built-in thing. That was  21  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  also where she boiled the water to do the laundry.  You only need one giant kettle.  Yes, big old black kettle. If we did the butchering up there, we used the  same kettle to render the lard, same thing.  You mentioned that you had dairy cows. Did anyone in the family make  cheese?  Yes, Grandma made lots of cottage cheese, sure did. Even my mother  did, too, but the problem was, until we got electricity, it was kind of hard  to keep the cheese very long.  Were there any particular dishes you remember being served on special  occasions, maybe around holidays or birthdays?  I remember in the wintertime, we always had special events. Like in the  fall, Dad and Grandpa would go quail hunting, and we   d have quail  dinners, which was kind of a special thing, or duck. We didn   t raise  ducks, but we shot a few of them on the land. That was special time, and  the turkey time, of course. If we had a big snow, we   d go shoot rabbits,  and we   d have fried rabbit which was different. We didn   t have that  often enough that my brother and sister might enjoy that, but I didn   t  mind it. It was pretty good.  Were there times when your father cooked? I mean, did he     No.  Okay, because some families, whenever some particular dish was made,  the father cooked it. I didn   t know if there was anything like that in your  family.  No, as far as I know, I never saw my dad fix a meal.  Didn   t trust him with the food. (Laughter)  Mom was a stay-at-home mom. She didn   t work out like a lot of people  today.  Well, without electricity, she had enough work to do, working in.  Oh, I don   t know how she got done what she did. In the wintertime  when it was freezing, we   d hang wet clothes on the line, and they   d  freeze dry.  22  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Did you have indoor water at the farm when you were growing up?  No.  Did you have a pump in the kitchen, though?  No.  Had to go outside to get it.  Had to go outside. Well, we had cistern water. Our well water was so  gippy that you couldn   t even drink it. What water we had, we had to  collect rainwater in the cistern or have it hauled out from town so that  we could have good drinking water. Of course, for baths, we had a big  double tub. Put it behind the stove, behind the coal stove or wood stove  so it would be warm, especially in the wintertime. Then in the  summertime, we cleaned out our stock tanks in the spring, and then we   d  kind of take a bath in the stock tank.  Well, it   d be nice and warm. It would be sitting there, solar heat.  Yes, it   d be warmed up during the day. I even went so far as to put me  up in the windmill tower, I had a barrel up there that I   d fill it with water  and let it sit there all day. It   d kind of warm up, and then you   d have a  shower at night.  That   s ingenious. (Laughter)  The youngest of the family always got the first bath. We used the same  water, then the next one, then the next one. Water was very precious in  those days.  Especially if you   re working from a cistern because you   re never sure  how much water you   re going to get.  Right. You had to bet on rains, and a lot of times we   d have to have  water hauled. Then when it did get pretty low, we   d go down in the  cistern and clean it with vinegar water and get all the dirt out of the  bottom and whatever else fell in, got drained in with the water when it  rained because you always had dirt up in the shingles, and all that would  drain down in the water. I don   t remember that any of us got sick. We  had a special bucket that we kept our drinking water in, and it had a  dipper there. Everybody dipped in and drank what they wanted.  You said, I think, you moved out to the farm in    37?  23  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergin  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Yes.  Was it still pretty dry? Were they still coming out of some of the drought  years?  Yes,    37 I think was really the first good wheat year they   d had in  several years.  Yes, I just wondered from the time you were out there, how much, I  mean, if you were still coming off some of those dry years, what it meant  collecting water, but everybody would still have been really aware of  that.  Right, that   s true. In April of    38, I remember we had a blizzard in  western Oklahoma. It snowed for three days, and it froze the wheat, and  we didn   t get a crop in    38. That was a little tough.  What kinds of wheat did you folks grow? You had the winter wheat?  It was winter wheat, yes. A lot of it, the variety was called Turkey Red.  Some of it was called Red Chief, as I remember. Red Chief, Black Hull,  and Wichita. Those are some of them I can remember.  Just to get back to the idea about some of the cultural impacts of your  German-from-Russia heritage, are there any particular aspects of your  life, things that you were brought up with that you really tie to the  cultural identity with Germans from Russia, I mean, either with food or  celebrations or church or anything like that?  Basically, when I was growing up at home, probably the biggest thing  was the food, because as Grandpa said,    We are going to be assimilated  into the American society.    In a sense, I always felt like he was trying to  lose his German identity, because he was so strong about being in  America as opposed to being in Russia. I   m glad they came. I can   t  imagine if I was born in Russia what it would be like. I   ve never been  over there. I   d like to go sometime.  Go see where the family was from.  Yes, maybe see where the family was from. It was a little village  called   did I give it a while ago? Marienthal. I know there   s a town in  Kansas by that name.  Interesting. Do you think it   s some of the same folks?  24  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  I think it probably could be some of the same people that ended up in  western Kansas as opposed to eastern Kansas.  Because Kansas and Nebraska were big areas for that.  They were. They really were.  Is there anything else that you want to talk about that we haven   t  touched on?  I just know that since I   ve been associated with the Germans from  Russia group, I   ve had a deeper interest in knowing. I just wish now that  I would   ve asked more questions when I was growing up with Grandpa.  I had a bigger association with my grandpa on the Bergen side than I did  with my grandfather on the Wonder side. On the Wonder side, my  Grandma Wonder was a child bride, so to speak. She had a three-month-old  son, and seventeen years old came in a one-horse buggy from Iowa  to Weatherford, Oklahoma. She got there in the summer of 1898, and the  train didn   t even come to Weatherford yet. I remember my Grandpa  Bergen telling about hauling kaffir corn, for example, to El Reno  because there was no train, to buy lumber and things like that. When  Grandpa first came to western Oklahoma, there were no trees except in  the creeks. Grass was high as the back of a horse, and everything was  prairie. There were no roads. Roads hadn   t been laid out. It had been  surveyed, but the roads had not been built so when you went, you just  followed trails or just cut through the country. When he first  homesteaded, he lived in what they called a dugout. By the way, I found  a sod plow on an eighty acres that Grandpa used to own that I now own.  By the way, it   s a centennial farm.  You have that now?  Yes. I have that now.  We have some folks doing   Tanya and Juliana, who aren   t here today,  are doing a centennial farm project so they may very well want to talk to  you again about that, too. (Laughter)  Anyway, on a hill there, I found this old sod plow. Whether Grandpa  used it or who used it, it was there. Of course, the wood handles were  gone, but it   s now in the Weatherford Museum. It was to cut sod. It cut  about a foot wide and about that deep. They built that like bricks, stack  them up, made their houses out of it until they could get enough wood.  Grandpa reminded me, he told me several times it hadn   t rained here. It  must have rained somewhere up river because when he   d get to the  crossing over by Hinton, couldn   t get across.    The river was up so I had  25  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  to sit and wait until the river went down.     Which could have been a couple days, or     Couple days, yes. They   d sit there, and then they   d go on to El Reno and  sell their grain and buy lumber or whatever else they needed. They   d  carry it back to Weatherford, because the train hadn   t gotten there yet.  How long did he have the sod house, and do you know where that used  to be on the farm?  Yes.  Is there still any sign of it left?  Not anymore, no.  Sort of weathered out.  Right. About a year after Grandpa and Grandma were married, they had  a one-room house, and it became what was known as the smokehouse.  As time progressed, he built better houses or just added on. When they  moved to Weatherford in 1948, they had a nice home, pretty nice home  that they lived in.  So they came in once they got older, came into town?  Into town, right.  That seems to be the pattern with a lot of farm families. Once you get  older and need to be closer to the doctors and     Right. Something that was kind of interesting to me was when Grandpa  got ready to sell his farm, he wouldn   t sell to nobody in the family. His  reason was that    I do not want anyone feeling like that I cheated  somebody that wanted the farm that didn   t get it so we   ll sell to  somebody that   s not related to us. That   s who I   ll sell it to.    And that   s  the way he did it. In fact, when Grandpa was about sixty-five years old,  he came down to the centennial farm now where we made a lot of prairie  hay. He had to come down to show us how to load the hay wagon. I was  doing that, and he got up on the wagon, and first thing that happened  when the horses moved the wagon, he fell off backwards and broke his  back. We had a doctor across the way over here about a mile away, one  of the Schlistings, who was a bone setter. He learned to set bones. He  wasn   t really a doctor, but he could set bones. He came over and said we  need to move Grandpa home, but we have to put him on a litter. So he  26  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  Larson  Bergen  sent the hired man that was helping load the hay.    Go over to my house.  There   s wood in the barn. Make a litter and bring it over here.    We put  Grandpa on, put the litter on top of the car. I stood on the back bumper,  and the hired man on the front. Mr. Schlisting, drove him home. He set  his back, taped him up. That night, Grandpa had all his family at the foot  of the bed, and he started with the oldest one.    You want this eighty  acres, or do you want three thousand dollars?    Gave everything away he  had except the farm he lived on. The idea was,    No one is going to fight  over what I have.    That was a very strong thing that he had. I   ll never  forget that.  Well, do you have a few more minutes on that that you want to talk  about, or     Well, not really except that the guy did such a good job, Grandpa finally  died when he was eighty-eight years old. (Laughs)  So quite some time later.  (Laughter) About twenty-five years later, he died.  I just want to thank you so much for taking the time to be with us today.  I hope it   s worthy of being put on tape.  Oh, it   s just wonderful. Thank you so much for all of your help, and we  greatly appreciate it.  Yes, you   re welcome. Good.  -------  -------  
