 Little Thunder This is Julie Pearson Little-Thunder. Today is December 16, 2014. I   m  interviewing George Curtis Levi for the Oklahoma Native Artists Project,  sponsored by the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at OSU. We   re  at George   s home in Mustang,  Oklahoma . George, you   re Southern  Cheyenne and part Arapaho and Sioux. You do beadwork and make cultural  items but are best known for your ledger art. You   ve illustrated a couple of  books for Cheyenne children in public schools. You   re one of the artists  whose work is being used as a discussion bridge for this year   s  remembrances of the Sand Creek Massacre. Thank you for taking the time to  talk with me.  Levi Yes.  Little Thunder Where were you born and where did you grow up?  Levi I was born at Clinton Indian Hospital, Clinton, Oklahoma. I grew up  between El Reno, Concho, and Geary.  Little Thunder What did your folks do for a living?  Levi My mother, when I was little, she used to work for the Indian boarding  school. My dad worked for the Cheyenne Arapaho tribes, and he was a  heavy equipment operator. Then my mother was a homemaker.  Little Thunder When she worked, it was at Concho?  Levi Yes, and she also worked at Xerox...  Little Thunder Okay.  Levi    and she was also a substance abuse counselor for the Cheyenne Arapaho  tribes. Now she   s all retired and everything.  5  Little Thunder How many siblings do you have and where do you fall?  Levi I have two sisters, one brother.     I was the second.  Little Thunder What was your relationship with your grandparents on either side of your  family?  Levi My relationship with my grandparents is really, really, really good on my  father   s side. My grandpa   s name was George Levi. He was Arapaho. My  grandmother   s name was Lillian Whitebird Levi, from Watonga, and I  practically grew up with them. My grandparents on my mother   s side, my  grandpa   s name was Floyd Tallbear, and he was from Deer Creek. He died  before I was born. My grandmother   s name on my mother   s was Rose  Homme Greany. She also passed away before I was born. I grew up around  her sisters, Maude Greany Allrunner, and Ella Greany Chouteau, north of El  Reno. Those are practically my grandmothers, grandfolks, too.  Little Thunder What was your exposure to Cheyenne language as a child?  Levi I was pretty much with it; I grew up with it. In fact, my Grandma Lilly she  used to go to OU in the summertime, teach Cheyenne at the Summer  Institute   s Linguistics. Her and all her cousins, her sisters, all went down  there in the   70s,   80s, so I grew up with the Cheyenne language. I also grew  up with the Arapaho language, too, as well. My grandpa, he was fluent in  Arapaho, and whenever his relatives came around they   d all speak. On both  sides I grew up with Cheyenne. My grandmother, like I said, on my dad   s  side and on my mother   s side, they all spoke Cheyenne.  Little Thunder What were some of your artistic influences growing up?  Levi Artistically I grew up, I was influenced   I seen my grandpa Kish Whitebird,  one of grandma   s little brothers, he was a silversmith, and I seen him all the  time. He   d always come stay with us. I seen him doing his silverwork. Then  I also seen my dad   s cousin, his first cousin, Jerome Bushyhead. I grew up  around him all the time. He was always coming to our house, or we   d go see  him. His brother, Henry, my dad   s other cousin, they were both painters.  They did a lot of painting. Beadwork-wise, I seen my mom, my grandmas,  they all, I guess you could say, were master beaders. Also at my grandma   s  place out north of Geary, Melvin Blackman, (he was Arapaho) he would  come down to our place every day and eat lunch with us, my grandma and  grandpa. He   d walk literally five miles every day to come eat lunch or  dinner with my grandparents, and we   d give him a ride home. He always  had his beadwork all the time. All the time, he always had his beadwork.  Then I saw these   my grandpa had a lot of books, and I seen a lot of ledger  art and stuff like that. I was always a really big fan of Carl Sweezy   s work  6  because my grandpa had a couple of pieces when I was growing up. I seen  that all the time.  Little Thunder So what is your first memory, like, of seeing Native art?  Levi My first memory of seeing what the general public sees as Native art, like in  paintings and from Time Life books my grandpa had, had a lot of the old  paintings. I guess the old leather-bound books they put out had the  American Indian series from 1960 to whatever. My grandpa had a lot of  books; he had a lot of artwork. They had a lot of artwork, but basically the  main ones I really remember seeing when I was like five or six years old,  Indian summer school in El Reno, seeing my uncle Jerome come around. He  showed us his art, and he talked to us kids.  Little Thunder What   s your first memory of making art?  Levi My first memory of making art, just being a little kid drawing tipis on paper,  making God   s eyes, drawing GI Joe guys, drawing superheroes, stuff like  that in comic books. I was a typical Indian kid. That   s my first memories.  Little Thunder What were your art experiences in school, in elementary school growing  up?  Levi I drew on anything. Anything  It didn   t matter if it was a schoolbook. I got  in trouble for drawing inside those books. Anything I could draw on I  basically drew on. Then if I could get my hands on crayons or pens or paint,  it didn   t matter. I tried to paint. I never thought I would be an artist; it was  just something that I did. I see my little boy, Harding, he   s nine years old. I  see him doing the same thing I was doing back then.  Little Thunder Did you get a lot of support for your artwork at home or at school?  Levi Not really because I have an older sister named Lisa. She was the artist. She  was the painter. She went to Bacone  College , and she got immersed in all  the art up there. In El Reno she took all the art classes. She did everything.  She won all the awards and stuff like that. I got a little notice because I did a  really, really, cool piece for the VFW poppy Veterans Day thing. I won a  big award one time. I drew a hands up for the ones who gave back when I  was like twelve years old. Other than that, I never really got the exposure.  Little Thunder How about your art background in school, public school, in middle school  or high school? What kind of a base did you     Levi I never really took art, anything like that. I never envisioned myself doing  art. Taking, being taught art, nothing like that. I just literally did it all on my  known. That   s what I did. I never envisioned that I would become an artist  7  or anything like that. If I had time, I wish I did that, but I was always into  athletics and ag and stuff like that, farm boy stuff.  Little Thunder When did you sell your first piece of art?  Levi I   d say like maybe   . Sell my first piece of art. It   s been a long time.  (Laughs) I can   t nail it down. Gosh, I used to do a lot of pieces a long time  ago, beadwork style, maybe like twenty years ago, but that   s it. I can   t  really   I don   t know. I   d say about fifteen, twenty, years ago.  Little Thunder Okay, and when did you begin beading, first begin beading?  Levi I   ve always beaded. Like I said, my mother beaded almost on a constant  basis. She was always beading, making moccasins or pouch sets or  whatever. My grandmas did that. In fact, I used to bead, put things together  like little chokers, little small stuff, and I used to take them with me when  my grandma would be teaching, when I   d go with my grandpa to go visit my  grandma at OU. I   d go to the Sam Noble Museum right there where the old  museum used to be. I   d take my stuff in there, and I   d sell it to them.  Little Thunder You   d sell it?  Levi Yeah, so that   s basically when I sold my first piece of art. I was like ten  years old probably.  Little Thunder So what happens after high school?  Levi I just went out there   . The big part of my life is gone. My grandparents,  they died when I was like a junior or senior in high school. My dad was  working at Concho at the tribes. Somehow he pulled a string, got me a job  out there. I used to work with Melvin Roman Nose. I worked out for the  tribe for a while. I worked for their farm program and stuff like that for a  long time. That was it. I did a lot of athletic stuff. I played a lot of softball. I  traveled all over the United States playing some major fast-pitch, playing  with one of the top teams in the country. I was going all over. I played pretty  much literally year round.  Little Thunder What team?  Levi I used to play for the team called Blackhawks out of Arizona and California,  and I used to go all over. In fact, I   m still playing ball now, so I still go to  California and go all over.  Little Thunder Wow. Did you seek any more formalized training at any point, art training?  8  Levi No, never have, never have. Everything I   ve ever done is self-taught and  give it a whirl. See something that I like, and I try to just get out there and  get my hands on it and go with it. That   s all I did. Never had nobody teach  me how to do anything. Go with it. I   m going to go try it. That   s it. That go-getter  attitude, I guess you could say.  Little Thunder When did you decide you were going to try to make your living doing art?  Levi I   d say maybe twelve years ago, eleven years ago, maybe. I had done some  work. Actually I started selling some things. People seen some of the stuff I  started making. People liked my beadwork, and people liked my rawhide  stuff, and they liked my drawings and paintings. Then, man, it seems it just  snowballed. A lot of people really started liking my stuff. I   d take art with  me, and I   d go everywhere. If I   m going towards Phoenix, I   d stop by the  Heard  Museum  and stop by the gift shop, and they   d buy from me, and  people in California or Santa Fe or wherever. I always carried a bag full of  stuff with me.  Little Thunder Even when you were playing ball?  Levi Yeah, especially like that. A lot of people knew I did art, and they   d come  up to me and say,    Hey, did you bring some of your artwork?    It was word  of mouth. People will say,    Hey, he   s doing some artwork,    or,    He   s doing  this and that.    I   d get a phone call or e-mail or something like that from  people. Me and my wife, Heather, we had our little girl, Helson, and being a  stay-at-home dad, it gave me the opportunity to be a full-time artist. So  that   s what I   ve been doing for the last, going on eleven years.  Little Thunder Right.  Levi Yeah, because she   s going to be eleven in May, so I   ve been doing that full-time  all the time. That   s it.  Little Thunder When you set up to paint when your daughter was little, did she come hang  out with you, too?  Levi (Laughs) Yeah, and my little boy. Yeah, I   d put them in the walkers and  stuff like that. My kids, they grew up around the art, be it in their walkers or  being around, walking around, being toddlers. They know when I   m doing  art; they   re usually quiet. They do not touch any of my art pencils or paints  or any of the framing stuff. Everything   s off limits to them, but they   re  around it all the time. Being around it, they   re also doing it all the time.  Little Thunder That   s great. What was the first Native art show you entered, then,  competitive show?  9  Levi I guess, like, Red Earth. I don   t know how long it   s been. It   s been a while. I  think it was Red Earth for, like, all Natives. Beforehand, I used to go to a set  of different conventions like the National Indian Gaming Association  meetings and stuff like that. I used to set up a booth there, but I think Red  Earth   s probably one the first Indian markets because it was local and just  giving it a whirl.  Little Thunder What was an early award that you feel like   s been kind of important to your  career?  Levi I guess I got First Place in Diverse Arts one time at Red Earth a while back.  It was cool. Got recognized for that, recognition, name in the paper, a little  monetary award. It was cool. It all went right back into the art like it always  does.  Little Thunder How popular was ledger art when you started painting in that format?  Levi It really wasn   t, I guess you could say. There were a few back when I first  started doing ledger art myself. You didn   t see very many people doing it.  The people that were doing it are people that are historically tied to it: the  Cheyennes, the Arapahos, or the Sioux, not like now. There   s people that are  off-tribes, I guess we could say, that have nothing to do historically that are  doing it, a lot of people, some Navajos and other people, Blackfeet, and stuff  like that. They were pictured in our ledger art, but our people taking them  out and killing them and stuff like that. Now they   re doing the art, but there  wasn   t very many doing it back then. There   s people like Frank Sheridan  was doing ledger art, Don Montileaux up north. There   s a Arapaho man  from Wyoming that   s doing it, and I knew Gordon was trying his hand at it  and stuff like that, but not too many.  Little Thunder What distinguishes your approach to ledger art maybe from that of your  peers?  Levi I try not to copy out of a book like a lot of the people do. I go to some of  these art markets, and there   s just a lot of stuff that   s out of a book or  offline. There   s a lot of people out there that don   t know their designs,  whatever. As a Cheyenne, I want any art that I do, want it to be as a  Cheyenne, be seen as a Cheyenne. Like Merlin   s  Little Thunder , I want a  Cheyenne to be able to recognize a Cheyenne   s art. I   m not going to borrow  from some of the other tribes. My art, there   s a story behind each one I try to  do and has to do with being Cheyenne, either being a military side, society  ways, or the family life, or the life of a Cheyenne back then. Even today I  try to do that. As for some of my peers, some of those guys out there doing  ledger art, they   re touching on religious stuff. I am never going to touch that  because that   s sacred to us, but there   s a lot of people that are doing that.  10  There   s some contemporary guys at El Reno that do ledger art that are doing  scenes of Sun Dance and piercings and stuff like that. I don   t touch it  myself. I strive to be unique in my own way. Like I said, I   m not going to  borrow like some people. There   s a lot of people that borrow stuff, because  I   ll do my ledger art and have it in the market. Come down next market, and  I   ll see something that looks exactly like mine. I try not to ever borrow. I  look at my own family   s history or look at our people   s history and I go  from there with it. I don   t want to be like anybody else, ledger-art-wise. I  want to be unique in the stuff I do, the things I do, the scenes I do. I don   t  want to be the generic same old, same old like 99 percent of the ledger art  that is out there now. They   re doing the same stuff. One person does it;  everybody else   ll do it. I don   t want to be like that because I see myself as  Cheyenne, and as a Cheyenne we   re special. That   s the way I see myself. I  don   t want be like everybody else.  Little Thunder Sometimes the hardest part of art is the business aspect. How did you figure  out that part, the pricing of your work, for example?  Levi Let   s see. The business aspect of being an artist, it   s really complex, but at  the same time it   s really simple, going over, making sure I   m keeping good  records. Making sure you got your taxes in order, that   s the main thing.  Building a good (what do you call it, with your people?) your clientele,  yeah, especially with the collectors, staying in touch with them. Like last  week I did this show in Washington, DC, for the Smithsonian, and the  opening night, Friday night, I go back to the motel and check my e-mail. I  got five e-mails from collectors out of New York City. They said,    We were  looking for you, and you   re in DC.    It   s just like that.  It   s staying on top of everything. That   s the main thing, trying not to let  nothing slide and always looking at what market, what   s good, what market  that   s not good, and picking and choosing. That   s the main thing: staying on  top of everything. There   s a lot of aspects to look at business-wise. It took  me years and years and years, and I   m still learning the game, learning how  to deal with all this every time because every market is different. I guess the  economy fluctuates and everything like that. Sometimes I have to raise my  prices. Sometimes I have to drop it. The main thing is making sure I cover  my costs, making sure I have enough money to buy materials and enter the  markets, and motel and everything. It all adds up.  Little Thunder How many markets do you do typically?  Levi Let   s see. I usually do the Heard, do Red Earth, Indian Market Santa Fe, and  the Smithsonian. Those are the main ones I do. I also do Haskell and the  Wichita Indian Art Market. That   s about it, about six markets a year.  Little Thunder Yeah, that   s a lot.  11  Levi Yeah, it is.  Little Thunder What   s the best business advice you   ve gotten either from another artist  or     Levi Best business advice I got from another artist is,    Keep going. Don   t give  up.    That   s basically it. The market   s down, you go look forward. There   s  always going to be somebody else down the line. One of my buddies, his  name   s Gary Roybal, who I shared a booth with, time to time. He   s from  Santa Fe but he lives in  Pueblo of  Isleta. We   re hunting buddies, and we  talk about stuff like that. Don   t give up. That   s the best advice I ever got.  Little Thunder What   s the best compliment you   ve sort of gotten on your artwork?  Levi Best compliment I ever got is just when people look at my art and they start  crying. They look at it, and they start thinking about how Cheyennes lived  back in the day. They say,    Your art is one of kind, different from other  ledger artists, because ledger artists do pretty much the same stuff where  you   re telling the real story.    That   s pretty much the best I ever got. That   s  pretty much like the best compliment to ever get like that. At almost every  market, people will say that, wherever I go to. They   ll look at my art and say  it   s so full of everything, the detail. That   s the way I try to do it. That   s  basically it.  Little Thunder What kinds of gallery representation do you have at the moment?  Levi Gallery-wise, it   s just basically Tribes 131 down there. I have one piece up  there at Pierson   s up there in Tulsa. Nevaquaya Arts up there, they have a  couple pieces of mine. Buffalo Chips Gallery in Billings, Montana, has my  work. Let   s see. In Santa Fe they have some of my work there. They have a  gift shop there in Santa Fe. I think the Heard   s got a piece. The Smithsonian  National Museum of the American Indian, they carry my work. I did have  some work at   there used to be a gallery in Guthrie, but she   s closed down  now. Let me think. Native American Trading Company now in Denver. I  have a couple, two or three pieces, at my buddy   s place up there at Custer  Battlefield Trading Post there at Crow Agency  Montana . My buddy Mike  Thompson, I think he has a couple pieces of my work there. That   s pretty  much it.  Little Thunder You   ve been pretty innovative, I think, in the kinds of paper that you use as a  background for your ledger art, like sheets of music or an old check or  something. Then when you see those images on there, it creates all these  associations. I was wondering what comes first: if you have the image in  mind and you   re then looking for the right paper for it, or vice versa.  12  Levi It basically goes with the paper. The dates, where it   s from, a lot of it does  with the size. I came across a paper out of Montana last year, so I did scenes  basically with, like, what would be Northern Cheyennes. I   ve come across  some paper out of Kansas, Nebraska, Texas, and I did more of the Southern  Cheyenne stuff on that. Some of the checks I come across, if they   re, I like  to say, period, like 1850 to 1870s, I   ll do good scenes on those. Same thing  with the old antique hymnals I come across. With those I will take the song  title, and I would go do a scene according to the titles of those. It just varies,  the dates and the locations of where the ledgers come out of.  Little Thunder One of the misperceptions about flat-style art was that it was easy to do and  it was fast. Sometimes they think that   s also a fast style. That   s a  misperception sometimes about ledger art.  Levi Yeah, a lot of people come up to me,    How long did that take you to make?     That   s a common question I get. Any given market, I get asked about fifty  times a market. It   s telling a story over and over and over. Some pieces, I  guess, if I just want to do a straight black and white drawing, it can be done  in a hour, but most of the pieces take a couple days. Some take weeks; some  take a month. It just depends on how many people I put in there, and the  detail, what kind of scene and whatnot. Especially with the type of paint I  use or the media that I   m using, it varies. I guess some people think that this  2-D art, this flat style, they think it goes fast, but me, I like to put depth into  it myself, backgrounds behind it. I put all that stuff, a lot of stuff into it. It all  takes time, especially with these paints. They bleed. They   ll bleed onto each  other, so I take my time. Takes a lot of time.  Little Thunder You   re talking about watercolor, then?  Levi Watercolors, gouache, some of the watered-downed acrylics I   ll do, or the  specialty India inks. That   s what I   m talking about. They   ll run. Sometimes  I   ve done some basically wet on wet, watercolors on ledger paper. They take  about four or five hours, not too long, but that goes fast. If you   ve got a deal  like that, you do them fast, anyway. It   s a misconception because it   s not  like grabbing crayons and filling it in. Everything I do, I do freehand. I   m  not like a lot of the other artists I know that use tracing, use those machines.  There   s a lot of guys out there that do that. Me, if you   re an artist, do it. Do  it by hand. Don   t use a tracing machine, a projector. There   s a lot of people  that use projectors out there in the ledger art game now. I know it because  they   re just too damn precise, the stuff they do. Hey, if that   s what they  think art is, that   s on them.  Little Thunder You had a solo show at Southern Plains Indian Museum in 2010. What did  that mean to you?  13  Levi That was really, really, really cool when I was contacted about that. It was  good, being a solo show like that because I grew up going there all the time  when I was a kid. My grandma would sell beadwork there, and my mom  would sell beadwork there. We would go down there, and they   d have all  this art up there all the time. It was really big to me because it was my first  solo show and it was funded by the Department of the Interior. They made a  really big deal out of it. It was good. Got a lot of publicity. It was all about  my art, too, so that was a plus. They didn   t just show my paintings. They  showed my rawhide art, and they had my beadwork in there. They had all  different kind of stuff I did, and it was really cool because I could go online  and see it. I could share a link with a bunch of collectors of people that I  knew. It was really cool. It meant a lot to me.  Little Thunder How many pieces did you have in there?  Levi I think I had about four or five beadwork pieces. Had some leggings that I  did, pipe bags, and moccasins that I   d done, full-beaded moccasins. I had   I  want to say eight, ten painted pieces. Then I had some rawhide cases that I  done, flat cases, and cylinder cases. I think there was probably fifteen or so,  fifteen or twenty pieces. It was really good.  Little Thunder That   s a lot of work.  Levi They had it all spread out, yeah. It was really, really good.  Little Thunder What   s something that you feel is sometimes difficult to communicate with  your art?  Levi With my art, some things that   s hard to communicate to people is, like, the  beadwork, the designs. Some of these designs that I use are family designs  we have. They   re in my family. I   ll put those out there. See my grandma, we  look at them like we own them. You go somewhere and see somebody else  using designs, the same designs, later on. That   s kind of hard to  communicate. You want to tell other people, say,    Hey, don   t be using those  designs.    Another thing is like my art, just like the ledger art, every piece is  unique. Each story, everything is different, but I put so much detail into a lot  of my work. Somebody, they   ll ask me,    What   s this, this, this?    I could  spend two or three hours just on one piece. It takes a lot of time to describe  what my meaning is. I could tell them real bluntly, but then they want to  know this, and this, and this, and why, why, why, why. Sometimes I wish I  could tell them,    It   s just a piece of art,    but there   s always a meaning  behind it.  Little Thunder More to it.  14  Levi Sometimes the people that are not around Cheyennes, they don   t know  nothing about Cheyennes, they think I   m making this stuff up. I think that   s  the hardest thing to explain to them. Like ledger art, I tell them that it started  in the 1850s. They want to believe it all started out in Fort Marion 1875,    76.  There   s a lot of stuff out there, you could say. It   s hard to explain to people.  (Laughter)  Little Thunder How much of your business, then, comes from commissions, and how much  comes from booth shows, and how much from galleries, roughly?  Levi I really, really do not rely on galleries that much because I don   t visit the  galleries too much. Commissions, I take commissions, I wouldn   t say all the  time, but I do get a lot of commission work. I   m usually going all the time  with commission work, but I tend to rely on, for majority of my sales, from  markets. I   d say within a week or two weeks after every market, then I   ll  start getting a flurry of e-mails or getting calls.    Do you still have this  piece?       No, I don   t.       Can you replicate a piece like that for me?    It   s like  that.    I should   ve bought it then.    It was like the other day I had this guy e-mail  me from out of Maryland. He said,    I was trying to buy this piece. I  wanted to buy a piece off you, but my girlfriend was right there. Can you  please send it to me?    He said,    I need it overnight. I need it now, by  Friday.    Just like that. I really don   t rely on galleries too much because  when I   m in galleries there   s a competition. There   s so many other twenty,  thirty, forty other artists out there, and there   s always somebody wanting  something. They   ll see something else. Markets are best for me.  Little Thunder Like when he wanted that expedited, mailed real fast, was it because it was  for his girlfriend and she wanted it?  Levi (Laughs) Yeah, that   s why he wanted it.  Little Thunder What a great surprise   Levi He   d come over there, and she   d be in line with him. He   d put that piece  back, and he came by my booth like ten times that one day.  Little Thunder That   s neat. Can you talk a little bit about   you   ve done some illustrations  for Cheyenne children that are in the public school system     Levi Oh, okay.  Little Thunder    Indian Education, I guess.  Levi I think it was in 2007 I seen an advertisement in the tribal paper, or 2008.  Said they were looking for artists. There was a project coming, (I didn   t  know what it was) so I threw my hat in the ring. I had done a lot of work  15  with my bro Funston, Funston Whiteman. He got in touch with me after I  submitted some artwork, pictures and stuff like that. He told me that they  were going to do some books for our kids, our Cheyenne and our Arapaho  kids. He selected me as an artist to do work in the book. Actually he selected  me and my uncle Vernon Bullcoming. He did one piece for one cover for  the Cheyennes, and selected my cousin Brent Learned for the Arapahos.  They gave us everything, what Funston had wrote, and he said go with it and  do some drawings according to all this and that, so I did that. I thought it  was long overdue because they   re saying it   s integrated into the public  school system for our kids out West.  We grew up, we didn   t hear nothing about no Indian. Something like that,  even in Oklahoma history we never heard anything about the Indians. It was  just like,    Boomer Sooner, land run, blah, blah, blah. Let   s celebrate that  manifest destiny,    and stuff like that. I thought it was an excellent idea for it  because our kids need to know who they are. A lot of us grew up, the way  we grew up, we know who we are. There   s a lot of kids out there that don   t,  that are kind of lost out there. It   s good to integrate some of the traditional  stories and some of the language, how to say whatnot in our language and  stuff like that. It   s good to teach these kids, let them hit the ground running  from when they   re little. Happy and proud to be part of it because it needs to  happen. I was talking to Funston about a month ago, and he said they may  be gearing back up to do it again. He wants me back on there again.  Little Thunder Great.  Levi I told him,    Not a problem, sure. Be happy to do that.     Little Thunder So the title was in Cheyenne and Arapaho, I think, maybe not, but Cheyenne  language in the book, as well?  Levi I think so. I think so. They had some stuff in there. Funston went around to  different folks, different elders, and stuff like that, interviewed them and  took the language part. I think he took some stuff out one of the  Reverend   Rudolph Petter books and stuff like that, I think. He did a pretty good job  putting it all together.  Little Thunder You   ve also taught art, I guess, for Cheyenne Arapaho kids during the  summer through the C and A tribe, and also in Busby, Montana.  Levi Yeah.  Little Thunder You want to talk about one or two teaching     Levi Over the years, not only our kids, I   ve done some workshops with our tribal  elders and our youth. One year I went out to the Frisco Center, and I worked  16  with the elder program. I did rawhide work with Cheyenne and Arapaho  designs, explained the designs to them, and, man, we made a lot of stuff.  I   ve done a lot of work with different school kids, different school systems,  Crooked Oaks Schools here in Oklahoma City. I   ve done some work with  Moore Public Schools. I   ve been asked to do work here with Mustang where  my kids go to school at. Done some presentations on Native Americans,  specifically Cheyenne Arapahos. I have done some art classes with our kids,  our Cheyenne Arapaho kids. It   s always something I wanted to do as an  artist, is give back to our kids because we didn   t have that when we was  growing up. It was kind of hard when your parents could barely afford to  feed you sometimes, but now stuff is more readily available for their kids.  The way I see it, kids are like sponges right now at this age.  I did a three-day workshop in Watonga back in July, I believe, or August.  First day, it was ledger art, a whole day of creating ledger art. I told them  how it started amongst the Cheyenne and spread. We did ledger art. I took  old ledger books and took them apart, and they did their own ledger art.  Second day we did rawhide. They made rawhide boxes and cylinder cases  and whatever they wanted, flat cases. Each one of them made about three or  four apiece. Third day we did watercolors the first morning, for the morning,  first half. Second half we did acrylics. Doing stuff, busting stuff out on  canvas and some on watercolor paper. It was awesome  I had twenty-something,  thirty-something kids. I had kids from Seiling, Hammond,  Clinton, Thomas, Deer Creek, Geary, Concho, Watonga, of course,  Kingfisher. Had kids come as far away from Mustang, Norman, Mustang  and Oklahoma City, and they all came together as one, Cheyenne Arapaho  kids learning art.  Then the first weekend in November along with my son, Harding, we  traveled to Montana, to our Northern Cheyenne Res. I did a three-day class  on ledger art at the Northern Cheyenne Tribal School in Busby. There were  evening classes, and I taught the kids. Not only kids, I had adults. I had  grandmothers, moms, dads. They all come in there. They were just soaking  it up. I showed them Northern Cheyenne ledger books, drawings by the  Northern Cheyennes online. Man, these kids, they did some great art. The  plus thing with that when I do the ledger art classes, I also take my mat  cutters. I take foam board. I   ll take sleeves. I   ll cut foam board, like, 11    by  14   , and I   ll cut mats 11    by 14   , and I   ll teach them how to do all that.  Then I   ll teach them how to cut mats, and we   ll mat the art up.  We   ll use acid-free mat, acid-free mat paper, acid-free tape, and we   ll put  them in a sleeve. It   s ready to go, so they can go buy a readymade either 8     by 10    or 11    by 14    readymade frame at Wal-Mart, and they   ll stick them  on the thing. In Montana, I donated a lot of, I spent like  250 of my own  money to buy art supplies, and I just gave it to them. Those kids up there,  they   re ready to enter all their ledger art into their state fairs and all these art  17  contests. Next time I go up there, I told Ann King, (she   s a art teacher there)  I told her I was going to bring some stuff up there because they   re having a  hard time getting funding for their art. In her classroom there   s ceiling tiles  missing, and they don   t   . She thought I had all the fancy stuff just because  I took them stuff I have. I   m working on taking a lot of stuff up there next  time I go back up there.  Little Thunder Wow, that   s wonderful. As I mentioned, you are one of the artists  participating in this art show in conjunction with the Sand Creek  Commemoration. I wondered if you can tell us a little bit about how this  show came about.  Levi Okay. I have a cousin; I have a relative. His name is Bill Tall Bull, Richard  Tall Bull   s son. He lives up there in Denver. He   s one of my relatives. He   s  half Northern Cheyenne, and he   s half Southern Cheyenne. His dad, (we call  him Dopey) he lives up in Ashland. I see his dad all the time. I see Richard.  I see Bill all the time, too, stay in contact on Facebook and phone. So he  called me January, February. We were just talking. He said,    Hey, man, you  know that Sand Creek is coming up here, 150 years. Maybe you ought to do  something about it. You   re a kickass artist. Put some stuff together. You   re a  society man. You know all this background.    I said,    Okay, I   ll be in touch  with you later on.    He said,    Something needs to be done by Cheyennes.  Everything else comes from everybody else.    Long story short, I got in  touch with my relative Brent. Told him, I said,    Hey, man, this year   s 150  years, Sand Creek.    He said,    Well?    I said,    Let   s get some guys together.     He said,    What about Merlin? He   s both of our relatives.    I said,    Yeah,  let   s get Merlin.    He said,    I   ll contact him. Who else, you think?    I said,     There   s a guy out there I know out west named B. J.  Stepp . He   s kind of  rough, but he does some good stuff. He   s got all the talent in the world. We  just need to mold him a little bit.    He said,    All right. Who else?    I said,    I  don   t know. Try to think of somebody else because there   s so many guys out  there.     Little Thunder Right.  Levi So we thought about Nate  Nathan Hart . He says,    He does a little different  media than everything else.    We called around, asked around, and we said,     Let   s do this from our own perspective as Cheyennes or Arapaho and as  descendants.    We all know that art is powerful. Especially if we do  something along those kind of lines, it   s going to really open some eyes for  not only the people in Colorado but our people. We can use that as a tool to  help educate people on a subject that   s been kind of hush-hush for a long  time, especially with those people in Colorado. A lot of people don   t want to  admit what happened. We said,    Might be kind of heavy, some of the stuff  we do. Might not be pretty, but we   re just going to tell a story, give those  people a voice,    because, like we said, everything else came from historians  18  or some experts. We wanted to tell it from our own standpoint because we,  all of us, had folks that lost their life when they got hit up there. We all grew  up (I know I did) hearing stories about the folks that lived and folks that  died up there, our bloodlines.  I went up there. After we had already got the guys together, our core group,  I went up there in May. I had been asked to be head gourd dancer at the  Denver University commencement powwow. They were having a special for  Sand Creek. I went up there with my cousin Max Bear. There   s a John  Evans study group that was going to have a meeting up there. I said,    I   m  going to go up there and tell them what we   re going to do because I know  Gail Ridgely and those guys, Arapahos, are going to be there.    Henry Little  Bird, Arapaho, is from down here. NAGPRA  Native American Graves  Protection and Repatriation Act  guys, Karen Little Coyote, I knew they   re  going to be there, Cheyenne Arapaho reps, and I also knew that little Otto,  my bud, Otto Braided Hair was going to be there. I know him from  ceremonies in Montana. I knew he was going to be there, so I went up there  to tell them. I didn   t ask them for their permission. I went up there and told  them, I said,    I   m a Cheyenne man. I   m a descendent of that thing that  happened. We   re getting men together down there, and we   re going to do an  art project.     I said,    I   m not asking for your permission. I   m telling you what we   re  going to do because we   re going to put it out there. Some people may not  like it, but we   re going to put it out there because it   s going to come from  us.    Otto said,    Yeah,    and those guys,    do it. You guys do what you got to  do. Somebody   s got to tell it.    That   s how it all came together. I was up  there, and I talked with a girl, Anne Amati, worked with DU, and I talked  with Nancy Wadsworth. They   re all affiliated with DU. Brent had talked  with what   s his name up there at Denver Art Museum. It all fell into place.  Somehow they got a little funding for us for that one at Denver Art  Museum, and they   re going to do it again. We   re also looking at   I think we  met a lady with Colorado University last week. She talked about maybe  wanting to have us up there at CU sometime, I guess after this settlement   s  up. It was just a brief encounter. We got to get with Merlin, Brent, and me  together. I don   t know if these other guys are going to pan out.  Little Thunder Right. I know it was very powerful for the audience. I   m thinking it was  probably powerful for you guys, too.  Levi Yeah. When we did the art thing? Yeah, it was. We touched on the art we  did; we touched on subjects that we really touched on. You   ve seen them in  the old ledger drawings. You   ve seen those kind of scenes out there. The art  that we brought out, it made us think about them people that woke up that  morning not knowing that they was going to die, not knowing it was going  to be their last time to wake up. Makes you think about these stories that we  19  heard growing up, about how my grandma   s grandma, running, and this man  picked her up, picked her up, put her on a horse, and rode off with her while  her folks got shot. Brings that reality that you can pick up a book and read  about Sand Creek. Three hundred-plus Cheyennes died there, but the way  they died and how they   to prolong all day, things that happened to them,  how the little kids didn   t know what   s happening to them or what them  people, happened to them. It was hard to put it out there, and it still is. It   s  hard to talk about it. I got choked up when I was talking on it that day. A lot  of people shed tears that day. Same thing, it   s like what happened today over  in Pakistan.  What happened today is the same thing that happened to our people back  then. Those kids woke up today, went to school. Those people came in and  just indiscriminately killed them. Same thing happened 150 years ago to our  people. I guess this exhibit we   re doing is making people think. I think  everybody has to come to their own conclusion about what happened, but  there   s not just going to be pick it up, 300 people died. They   re going to  know how they died, plus at the same time they   re also going to know  there   s people out there that day that did things, got away. They   re also  going to know about Silas Soule because, honestly, I believe that if it wasn   t  for Silas Soule and these other guys not shooting, I probably won   t be here,  Merlin, all of us. There   s a lot of Cheyennes that wouldn   t be here. If those  guys wanted to fire on us, they would   ve probably killed everybody that  day. Stuff like that, not just the evil man,  John  Chivington, but people like  Silas Soule. I did a piece on him, A Man with a Good Heart. Our people  looked up   they honored him up there. The things we did was heavy, but I  think we did it because it needed to be done.  Little Thunder Right. Let   s talk about your creative techniques and process a little more.  You   ve already mentioned some of the media you use for your ledger art,  etcetera, but you   ve done some work with hide as you mentioned. What are  some of the challenges of that and what kinds of     Levi The hides?  Little Thunder Yes.  Levi There   s just so much. (Laughs)  Little Thunder Including getting it, right?  Levi Yeah, I brain tan. I know how to brain tan. I brain tan some stuff.  Little Thunder Oh, you do your own brain tanning?  20  Levi Yeah, I   ll do some of that stuff. In fact, I   ve got a brain-tanned elk hide in  my garage I   m fixing to do some work on. Working with hide   s kind of hard  because it   s porous. Sometimes I paint   you have to rough it up a little bit.  It won   t really stick to it. It   ll kind of flake off or something like that,  especially if I   m dealing with rawhide. It depends on what kind, if I buy  commercial rawhide or if I make my own. It   s still kind of a hard thing to  do. Again, because the paints I have to use, I have to make it really heavy  because sometimes it won   t stick very good.  Little Thunder And it   s acrylic that you   re using?  Levi Yeah, I use acrylics. Mainly when I do the rawhide, I   ll probably use  acrylics, but I also use watercolors, like a Dr. Martin watercolors. I   ll use  those on there, but sometimes I got to rough them up a little bit and make  sure, almost like incise it, the design in, and then come back in,  crosshatching and stuff like that on the rawhide. Some of the hide paintings I  do, it goes on sometimes real good, but sometimes I got to be  careful   because unless I seal it really good, it   ll tend to smear.  Little Thunder In terms of the paper backgrounds that you use, that must be quite a search.  Do you search for the right materials?  Levi Really for the ledger paper I get, I don   t look for it. I don   t. It comes to me  mainly through collectors or people who just show up with it. I got a buddy  out of New Mexico, he   s a Blackfoot guy, and he lives west of   . He   s  always got ledger books. He   ll call me up or e-mail me,    Hey, I   ll be here.  I   ll meet you at Indian Market, and I   m going to bring so and so.    Or he   ll  call me when he   s coming through town.    Hey, I   ve got some stuff. Let   s do  some trading.    Usually I   ll get a call or e-mail. Somebody   ll say,    Hey, I got  a ledger book. I   ve got a couple ledger books. Can you give me one of your  originals?    It   s like that. I   ll give them an original, and they   ll give me two  or three books. I got a buddy named Michael Jordan; he   s a professor down  at Texas Tech. He   s always on the prowl for stuff like that. He   s always  bringing me paper.  Little Thunder That   s great. We haven   t talked about the fact that you like to use Cheyenne  language in the titles of your paintings.  Levi Yeah, I will. A lot of my stuff, if I   m doing women, or men, or like a family-type  scene, I   ll include   . I   ve done a couple pieces say Mo'eheso, Little  Elk. That   s my daughter   s name. Or I   ll put Haa   hae   ameohtse. Walks With  the Wind Woman is my daughter Helson   s name. I   ll put Megehetem.  Meadow Woman. That   s my wife   s name. Or else I   ll put my name or put  somebody else   s, my grandpa   s name or somebody else   s name in there, or  else I   ll put something in Cheyenne. If they   re fighting Pawnees, I   ll put it in  Cheyenne. I   ll put some language in there. That way they   ll know that a  21  Cheyenne did it. If somebody wants to come along and copy my art, they  won   t know when I   m sitting out there.  Whoever   s going to buy it or gets it from me, I tell them exactly what it  means and why I did it, stuff like that, why I put a name on there in  Cheyenne. Everything I do is, my art, it   s all Cheyenne, I try to do, even  though I   m part Arapaho. I   ll get asked to do some Arapaho scenes, and I   m  also part Oglala on my mother   s side. Every now and then I   ll get somebody  who likes my art. They   ll say,    Can you kick out an Oglala scene?    I   ll kick  one out maybe once a year, but mostly it has to do with the Cheyenne.  That   s how I was raised, being around Cheyennes. I want to do Cheyenne  art.  Little Thunder You do a lot of family images. I think that is one thing that makes your work  different.  Levi Yeah, I   ll do the pieces on men, but the core thing of being Cheyenne is that  we hold our women as sacred, the way I know it. Our kids are sacred. Our  women are sacred because they bring everything into this life and into this  world. That   s why these men, back in the day, that   s why they were  warriors. They did it for their   . They went out and took all this   they  fought these other people. They kicked these other people off their land, and  they took their territories. They fought the military. That way their family  could be taken care of. They did all that stuff so they can have food. I  wouldn   t say food on their table because they didn   t have tables, but so they  could feed their family. That   s basically what it boils down to. All of that  was just being a Cheyenne back then and the scenes they did, how they  lived. It all boiled down to their family, taking care of their kids, taking care  of their extended family, taking care of their wife. All that stuff they went  through, these men they sacrificed their lives basically for the growth of  their people, tsiihistano, our people, you know and stuff like that. That   s  what it   s all about, n  v  ohest, my relations. That   s what it   s all about.  Little Thunder How about your signature? Sometimes it   s hard to come up with a signature  for an artist.  Levi When I sign it, I put George Curtis Levi. I used to put George Levi, but I put  Curtis on there, and I put Cheyenne on there. I started adding the Curtis after  my dad died five years ago. That was his name, Curtis. I was named after  him. At the same time, I   m out of a family that   s just Curtis family, real big  family. I   m out of Bents, and there   s Curtis, and there   s Burns, that whole  group. I always put that Curtis because people always saying,    You   re a  Curtis. You   re out of that Curtis family  That   s why you   re named Curtis     I  put it on there, Curtis Levi, because they say I   m named after George Curtis,  stuff like that. I just sign it George Curtis Levi, and I   ll put Cheyenne.  22  That   s why I put it out there. There   s people that at least they know me now,  who I am.  Little Thunder What   s your creative process starting with how you get an idea?  Levi I   ll just sit there. I read a lot of the history. I   ve tried to know as much as I  can of our people   s struggles, where they come from in Canada, where they  come across the Great Lakes and our creation stories, everything like that,  and how Erect Horns brought us the Sacred Hat and those things that go  with that. How Sweet Medicine brought us those arrows, and how  everything, how our people came together as Suhtai and Cheyenne,  Tsitsistas, how they come together and how our men lived before that and  what Sweet Medicine brought us, and our societies. Then I read about   . I  try to listen to where we ranged, who we encountered, and what we did back  then. They traveled in ten bands. They were all over the place.  They were living. Women were giving birth, and they were raising their kids  on the move all the time. They were constantly on the go. It   s not like now.  We live in a home. We can go to the grocery store and get food. Back then  they had to worry about enemies, they had to worry about feeding their  families, and usually their extended families, every day. They had to know  where the water was, know where the wood was, and everything, buffalo  chips, whatever they used. They had it tough, but at the same time, the way  they dressed, the way they carried themselves, they knew they were  dominant. They knew they were the ones, the force to be reckoned with.  Everybody knew who Cheyennes were back then. It must   ve been hard to be  a Pawnee or be a Kiowa before they made peace, or be Shoshone, or Crow,  or be somebody knowing that there   s Cheyennes out there.  The Cheyenne   s are usually going to come and get you and push you out of  the way because they wanted this. Them people, they   re proud. They didn   t  have much, but they had everything. It   s just everything all boils into one. I  try to envision about what they went through, how they lived, and I try to  put it out there. Maybe one scene, maybe I   ve got little girls out there  playing, and what they did, how they had their animals, or how they made  their animals, or how they were dressed, or how they had their little tipis.  Sometimes I   ve done some scenes where little boys are coming in on stick  horses, and they   re messing with those kids. It   s the Cheyenne life in  general. There   s all different kinds of aspects to it. There   s wintertime,  springtime, summer, fall, weather, everything. I try to put it all in because  every day was a new day and everything was different, I guess you could  say.  I try to think about that and think about how I was raised and how  everything was struggles, and I know they had struggles. There was war and  everything, everything out there. There was good times and bad times.  23  That   s what I always try to put together. I   ve been doing one scene, done a  couple times, it   s called New Life. Shows a Cheyenne woman holding a  cradleboard. The reason I did that showing   there   s a couple, two, three,  other people on this side. Her and her husband and her daughters on this  side, and a little boy in a cradleboard. I tell people the reason I did that is  because our people lived in bands. The only time they come together was  either for Arrow Renewal, the Sun Dance, religious ceremonies, or time of  war. It shows them when they come back together. They   re showing a new  baby that was born when they were off. That   s what I try to show. It   s not  just generic battle scenes or generic buffalo like a lot of people do. I try to  cover everything except for religious ceremonies. I   m not going to touch  those.  Little Thunder You   ve got a lot more years to go in your career, but looking back from this  moment, what was an important fork in the road when you could   ve gone  one way and you chose to go another?  Levi In life or in art?  Little Thunder Either one.  Levi Either one? I think one main thing is I always wanted to be in the military. I  was eighteen, nineteen years old   I cut my hand real bad when I was  sixteen. I was making a gourd, and I cut my ligaments in my fingers. I did it  in Geary; barely made it to Watonga, man. (Laughs) We made it to the ER  in Watonga, and I bled out really bad. My dad was always onto me,    You  need to go in the Army. Go in the Army and see the world.    I tried to enlist  a couple times. I did everything in the MEPS  Military Entrance Processing  Station . I got one bad joint right here in my finger, and they would never let  me sign the paper. Then I also had a little hearing loss in my left ear, and  they would never let me take it. That   s one fork in the road. That   s one  because I see it now. If I would   ve went in when Desert Storm and  everything was going on, I would   ve been in right at the same time. There   s  no telling what would   ve happened.  I see a bunch of my bros that went over there and come back have a hard  time dealing with things. That   s one fork. I don   t know if I would   ve done  that how I would be now. I don   t know if I   d be an artist now or not because  I see, like I said, some of my buds had a hard time readjusting. That   s it.  Art-wise, I think I could   ve been like some of these people out there, not  knowing how to take that first step in art. There   s a lot of people out there.  There   s a lot of people that are talented, way more talented than I am, out  here in our communities. I can go to any community out there, and I   ll see  these guys that do great art, but they just don   t know how to get started.  That   s, I guess, a fork that I took. I took a chance, with my wife   s backing. I  took a chance trying to get out there.  24  She was always saying,    Man, you do some great art.    I had people say,     You do great art. You need to be out there.    I didn   t know where to go,  how to go about it. I   d go to these little galleries, and they   d take my art.  People were saying,    You need to do these markets, your stuff.    I was being  afraid. Being rejected was something that I was afraid of at first, but then my  wife said, and some other people, some other artists said,    You got to keep  on going because sometimes it takes three or four times before you   re going  to get accepted into a market. You got to keep on pushing. You got to keep  on pushing.    I guess I was willing to be turned down a few times, but I  wanted to keep on striving because I wanted to make it. I knew somehow,  some way, I was going to make it in this art stuff. When I go around these  art markets, people come up to me, and they   re asking me all kinds of  advice.    How do you do this? How do you that? Well, you   re George, and  you   re way up there      I   m saying,    I   m just an ordinary old country boy from Oklahoma, from  northwest Oklahoma, and you guys are trying to say I   m way up here.    I   m  just glad that I had people pushing me. My wife pushed me, and my bros  pushed me. Then I look at these other guys, and I see, like, Merlin and  Brent. I   ve always seen their stuff in those calendars for all these years. I see  those guys. Man, just seeing these guys out there, these different artists out  there that are top-notch artists, just being able to be put in the same  categories as these other guys out there   . Say when I go do market at Santa  Fe, or do the Heard, or do the Smithsonian, people they come up to me and  say,    Man, give me some advice. You   ve been in the Smithsonian for all  these years, and they sell your stuff there.    I   m saying,    I   m just like you.  You got to do trial and error. You guys want my secrets? I   m not going to  tell you. You   re going to have to do it on your own.    That   s two forks.  I don   t know what could   ve happened if I would   ve went into the military  because the US Army would   ve said,    Yeah, you   re good to go,    because  right when I was trying to enlist, right after that, Saddam invaded Kuwait.  Then my bros went over there, Cornell. A bunch of my bros went over there.  I   m glad to see they   re okay and they   re doing good, but sometimes   . I   ve  done a lot of work with vets, guys that come back from Iraq and Kuwait. I  did a lot of work with guys from Vietnam, helping them out and just  different stuff. They went through a lot of stuff. I don   t know what would   ve  happened if I went that fork. This other fork that I took, art-wise, it   s just  blossomed. I feel fortunate, the things that have came my way. I made my  own steps. I really didn   t have to rely on anybody with being carried by my  wife, my family, and people. Especially my own people, they supported me.  It just turned out good. Now I   m just kind of recognized at these different  places. I got people that collect my artwork from all over the world, China,  all over Eastern Asia, Asia, Kuwait, Dubai, Europe, and all over the United  25  States. People got my art. It   s really amazing because I never envisioned  myself as an artist and I still don   t, really. I don   t want to call myself an  artist. This is just what I do. I don   t know. I get excited by these things,  being able to do these things because it   s my own creativity comes out and  people like it. They see what I try to envision in my mind, and I put down on  paper or on canvas, or if I   m beading or something like that. They think it   s  just the best. I don   t know. It could be good. It could be they may be blind. I  don   t know. As a person, it   s cool.  Little Thunder Well, we   re going to look at a couple examples of your work here. Is there  anything we forgot to talk about before we do?  Levi Okay. Let me grab a couple pieces of work, and I   ll show you. I   ll grab a  piece of my beadwork, and I   ll grab a couple pieces of ledger art.  Little Thunder Great.  Levi This piece is called Fort Reno Indian Territory. That deals with Cheyenne  Arapaho after we were forced to settle out here in western Oklahoma after  26  the Red River War, 1875. It deals with pretty much a lot of the Cheyenne  history, Southern Cheyenne predominantly but also Northern Cheyenne  after Little Big Horn, after those guys were forced down here. It shows the  North Canadian River on the backside where the trees are. It shows an  encampment down here. Could be Arapaho; could be Southern Cheyenne.  Shows the railroad. It shows the actual fort itself, and it shows some  troopers, US Cavalry guys on horses. It also at the same time shows either a  Cheyenne or Arapaho mother looking on. This fort was established to  protect the Cheyenne Arapahos. That   s what they say. They   re just put out  here to make sure we behaved, I guess you could say. That deals with the   .  They took land from us, from our tribe, and they established that reservation  out there on the land. We still haven   t got it back. Our people are still trying  to get it back. That   s why I did that piece. Now it   s a tourist place.  Little Thunder All right, great.  Levi This one is called Girl Talk. It   s done on almost like a 12    by 12   , 12    by  14    paper. It shows Cheyenne girls being girls. It didn   t matter, you know,  girls being a girl. It transcends everything. It doesn   t matter if you   re  27  Cheyenne, you   re Arapaho, if you   re Caucasian, or Latino. If you   re a  teenager, you   re a teenager. You   ve got girls out there going after water, and  they see their friends. It could be their friends, or their cousins, or their  sisters, whatever, whatnot. They could be out there talking about boys, could  be talking about cooking, how we cook this or that, or complaining about  their mom and dad making them do things. You got the camp in the  background and just got these girls. One   s got a elk hide with a battle scene  on there, maybe her dad or her boyfriend or whatever. Next one shows, like,  a Navajo chief   s blanket. Next one   s got a design on it that the Arapahos and  Cheyennes and the western bands of Sioux used. Next one shows another  hide with buffalos on there. They were all powerful, with a lot of our   . Got  suns on there. The next one shows a blue blanket with a beaded blanket strip  on there. It   s just girls out there, being girls. That   s what that is: Girl Talk.  This one is on a piece of paper that come out Tuskegee, Alabama. I think the  date on it is 1919. I titled it Nemehot. It means    I love you    in Cheyenne.  What I told my wife, was me and her. It shows a Cheyenne woman with a  elk-tooth dress. Could be antelope hide dress, deer hide, whatever. Full,  painted yellow, got a chief   s Navajo-style Second Phase blanket around her  waist. Shows her man, her husband. It would have to be her husband  because they wouldn   t dare be caught like that, courting by themselves. It  shows a man. He   s got yellow paint on him on his face. He   s got a  breastplate, got those little najas, whatever they call them, those silver  ornaments, armbands, also hanging off his breastplate. Loose leggings,  breechcloth, Cheyenne moccasins all the way, Cheyenne headdress. The  thing hanging off below it would be like a mountain lion hide with those  spots on it. That   s what it is. It shows a Cheyenne man and his wife, the core  thing of being Cheyenne, a man and his wife. That   s what it shows all the  way.  Little Thunder That   s really a nice piece.  Levi The last one I   ll show you is     Little Thunder It   s a piece of beadwork, right?  Levi    some of my beadwork.  Little Thunder All right.  28  Levi This was a birthday gift that I did for my wife. I made her a pipe bag. My  wife   s been through our  inaudible  long time ago, and so she needed a  place, something to keep her he   ohko,  pipe  so I made that for her, classic  Cheyenne design, woman-style pipe bag. That   s what I made her for her  birthday. I surprised her; she didn   t know I made it. That was a lot of late-,  late-, late-night hours when she was asleep, of working. I gave it to her for  her birthday one year.  Little Thunder Great present. Thank you very much for your time today, George.  Levi Yeah, okay, not a problem, not a problem.  -------  -------   
