 Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  This is Julie Pearson- Little Thunder. Today is Thursday, April 21,   2011 . I   m interviewing Sherman Chaddlesone   Allie Chaddlesone   for the Oklahoma Native Artists    Project, part of the Oklahoma Oral  History Research Program at Oklahoma State University . We   re at the  Chaddlesone   s house in Andarko, Oklahoma. Sherman, you   re a painter  and sculptor and you   ve been a key figure in Oklahoma Indian art for a  long time. I was fortunate to interview you in the    80s and it   s really nice  to check back in with you. You   re a Kiowa tribal member. Where were  you born and where did you grow up?  I was born in Lawton   at the time it was called the Kiowa Indian  Hospital in Lawton, Oklahoma. From there, I spent most of my time out  in the Wichita Mountains areas, around Saddle Mountain, a little  community called Sedan, for most of my younger years. Then, when I  was about five years old, we moved to Lawton.  What did your folks do for a living?  At the time that we had moved from my original residence area, my  father obtained a job with the Civil Service at Fort Sill. He did that the  rest of his life, as a commercial illustrator. My mother, she had a few  jobs. She mostly did a lot of sewing. She had a few full-time jobs during  that, but most of the times, she did that at home on her own.  So you were used to seeing your dad   s artwork around, too?  Yes.  Any other extended family members whose artwork you remember?  5  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  I remember, really early, my uncle, my father   s brother, Kenneth  Chaddlesone, he painted quite a bit. He didn   t do it commercially to  exhibit in galleries, or as income or anything like that, but he would  finish a painting and just give it out, give it away to a family member. I  have one of his original pieces. That was one of my first exposures,  family members.  What are your first memories  of  doing art yourself?  Drawing figures in the dirt with a stick. (Laughter)  How about at school? Were you in public school at Lawton?  Yes.  Did they have art classes?  Were  you encouraged by your teachers?  Not when I first started in the elementary school, but my first grade  teacher had me do silhouettes of my classmates. It was real easy. We just  put them up against a backdrop and shone a light on them, and I just  traced their outlines and we cut them out. And each one of the students  paid me a quarter. That was like a million dollars to me at the time.  That   s what got me started. (Laughter)  Your great-grandmother, I read, kept a ledger calendar from 1856 to  1934. I   m wondering how old you were when you became aware of the  fact that she had been a record keeper?  It was prior to my early teens. Actually, my father was the custodian of  that ledger book. The family had given it to him to keep, so that was  when I was first exposed to it. He would bring it out, occasionally, and  let me look at it. He was very protective of it. He had it specially  wrapped and all that so we didn   t get to look at it every day or when we  wanted to. It was just when he felt like showing us something.  Do you think maybe that influenced your interest in history or art a little  bit?  Both. Yes, certainly.  Do you know where it is now?  It   s at the Fort Sill Museum. One of my aunts gave me a copy     she had a copy of it. It might be the only known copy of that ledger.  Done in the old school  on    I can   t remember what they call those   a  mimeograph copier? It   s a really bad copy, but I took it. I was at home  6  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  A. Chaddlesone  visiting from Washington State one time and she handed it to me. I  guess she wanted to give it to me. But instead, I took it back with me to  Washington and I made copies of that up there. I brought that back to  her. It   s sitting right there on the table, the copy that I have, because I  refer to it quite a bit.  Were you in high school when you went to the Institute of American  Indian Art? How did you hear about it?  I think I just barely heard about it when it first opened. Back to the  public school art, in junior high was when we started getting art classes  offered. That   s when I got more involved in it, formal training. The one  thing I did during that time in junior high in Lawton was they had a  school-wide competition with all schools in Lawton. That   s when Ivory  soap first came out with the large bars of soap, so I got one of those and  I carved a horse head out of it. I won first place in the school-wide  competition. I came home from school one day, I was looking for it, I  couldn   t find it, and I found my younger brother in the bathtub with that  sculpture. (Laughter) But that was my first exposure to formalized art  training.  It sounds like you had a pretty good base before you went to the  Institute.  Yeah, when it first opened, I sort of took notice of it,  but  I didn   t really  consider it because to me, that was on the other side of the world. The  only Indian people I knew were Kiowas, Apaches and Comanches. I  knew there were others out there, but I wasn   t that familiar with them.  Karita Coffee, she   s a Comanche, I had gone to public school with her  all the time in Lawton. We were in the same grade, same age. She went  out there first in    63, I believe. She came back and that   s all I heard all  summer,    You have to go to Santa Fe. You have go to IAIA.    (Laughs)  So, apparently, she even had an audience with my father about that.  School had already started out there in    64, in the fall. And he  approached one of his friends, who was a state senator, and got him to  push those people out there to accept me that year, that semester. So,  when we got the word to go,  my folks  loaded me up and drove me out  there real fast and that was a shock. (Laughs)  What were your first impressions when you first got there?  I was wondering with all the mud houses, how they were going to stand  up in the rain. (Laughter)  Culture shock.  7  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Total culture shock. Everything was still   most of the structures there  were still real adobe. That   s how different it was at that time. Of course  now, everything looks adobe but it  isn   t . That was the first shocking  exposure   the visuals there, the mountains and all that. And next was all  the different tribal people. Beyond the three tribes I had spoke of, I knew  there were Cheyennes and Cherokees here in Oklahoma. Then, all of a  sudden these Washington people pop up. (Laughs) These others from  Great Lakes areas and all that, I never knew about. So, that was my  second shock.  What kinds of classes did you take there?  All of the required courses that are the standard in high school. But I  started a course in painting and graphic   it was called graphic design  and print making. Those three.  You took painting class from both Allan Houser and Fritz Scholder.  What did you get out of Allan Houser   s painting classes?  Nothing. (Laughter) We were   myself, T.C. Cannon, Parker  Boyiddle   of course, there were others. Spencer Twohatchet from  around here, he   s Kiowa. We were in  that  class because they were  thinking, at the time, we were from the Oklahoma school of art. So they  put us in  with  Houser. He was teaching mostly traditional type art,  tribal art. They thought we were going to sit down and do blue baby  deer, but we didn   t. We started doing all this abstract stuff. Houser, that  was a surprise to him. It was the first time he   d seen Indian people do  anything like that. So he threw us over into Scholder   s class. (Laughs)  Was that a better environment?  Well, Scholder, of course, was doing his striped landscapes and  butterflies and stuff like that. He was doing a lot of abstraction, his  personal art. He had a couple of other artists from the North who were  doing more contemporary things. That   s why they moved us over with  them. From there we were able to do whatever we wanted.  Cannon had been out there for about a year before you?  No, we went at the same time.  Had you known Cannon and Parker prior to going there?  I knew T.C. better than Parker. I   d seen Parker around, but T.C. and I  were nodding acquaintances. We hung out in different circles. Our  circles would occasionally overlap and that   s how we knew one another.  8  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  A. Chaddlesone  Our friendship grew out there in Santa Fe.  You met your wife Allie, at the Institute. How did you get her attention?  Or how did she get your attention? (Laughs)  She was chasing me. (Laughter) She ran me down. (Laughter)  Did you have a class together?  No.  You did go to Vietnam right after the Institute, is that right?  Yeah, it was probably six months. I volunteered for the draft.  You   ve shared in interviews that it was hard being creative after the  war. How did you work through that?  I didn   t really start painting again until I went up and was living and  working with Allie   s reservation. Then, all that exposure to culture,  tribal traditional culture, that all came back. Gradually.  You had been in San Francisco, too, directing an Indian art workshop.  Can you talk about what its purpose was and what you did as director?  It was administered by the San Francisco Art Commission. They had  several similar workshops in the Spanish community, in the black  community, Oriental community, and of course, the Indian and the white  community. So we had ours there, at what they call the San Francisco  Indian Center. Actually, we had rented a storefront from the Indian  Center. Set up there and we did painting and drawing classes. Design  classes.  You taught most of the classes?  No, I didn   t. We had several people.  It was kind of an exciting time for Indian activism. Was Allie there with  you? You weren   t, I guess, painting yet, but did that kind of filter into  your sensibility a little bit?  I did a little bit of painting there. Not a lot. Not enough to do a one-man  show or anything. The first day we left from Lawton, we drove for a  couple of days and we stopped one night in Needles, California.  We spent the night with T.C. and Barb the first night.  9  S. Sherman  A. Chaddlesone  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  A. Chaddlesone  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Yeah. The first night we spent with them on our way out. We eventually  got to Needles, California and spent the night there. We figured the next  day we would get into the Bay area. We got up early in the morning and  got on the road, turned on the radio and there was a news flash that the  Indians had occupied Alcatraz. (Laughter)  Step on it. (Laughter)  So we just kind of went right into that thing. As a matter of fact, we  worked with them quite a bit.  Providing them with support and materials?  Yeah, all kinds of support.  I read that you attended Central State University in Edmond for a while.  After you worked for the Kalispel Tribe?  No, that was prior.  Did you add anything to your art knowledge during those classes at  OCU?  No.  Were you doing any Indian subject matter there?  Yeah. T.C. was there. He went there on the GI Bill. And our tours sort of  overlapped  in Vietnam . He came back before I did. He went into UCO.  I was out still moving around a little bit after I was discharged. Came  back to Oklahoma and he talked me into enrolling up there on the GI  Bill, so I did. That   s how I got up there. But I had already learned so  much in Santa Fe in IAIA, that I felt I couldn   t gain anything there,  except maybe a degree, if I stayed there all the way through. I don   t  know, I was just too restless, I guess. I didn   t want to sit there for four  years and twiddle my thumbs.  So the two of you went up to Kalispel Reservation and you were doing a  little bit of painting while you were working for the tribe and absorbing  some different artistic influences. What kinds of things were making an  impression on you?  The Owl Dance. (Laughs) Things of that nature. It   s very similar, their  culture, and a lot of their stuff is similar to Kiowa culture. It wasn   t like  going to a foreign country.  10  A. Chaddlesone  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  S. Chaddlesone  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  They loved him there. (Laughter)  I felt like I was able to fit in real easy there. I picked up a lot   I even  studied some of the Coastal art. To me, it was like Chinese when I first  saw it. I kept looking at it,  thinking , why did they do this and that?  And it all started dawning on me, why whales and ravens are shaped a  particular way. Salmon and stuff. I was able to pick them out eventually.  I even did some prints in the Haida style of their art.  Woodblock prints?  No, they were silkscreen. On textile. As a matter of fact, there was a  lady from Alaska that came down to Spokane, that used to come down  and purchase my art because she couldn   t get any of the artists up there  to do that type of work for her. (Laughter). We were up there for almost  ten years. We did a lot of stuff up there.  Were any of your kids born up there?  Two of them. One was born in California, in San Francisco.  What did prompt  your  move back to Oklahoma?  Art. When I started painting again up there, there was a show at the  Smithsonian that was coming up   I can   t remember the title   it  was a group show. I decided to try to put something in, to get some of  my works in there. And they did accept me for that. Following that  show, they had moved to a gallery there in Washington, D.C. And just  after that, the Southern Plains Museum contacted me and asked me to do  a one-man show. Then it just started ballooning like that, real fast.  I told Allie,    That   s where the art market is, in the Southwest, more so  than up there.    For painting   the type of painting I was doing. I had all  the experience working with the tribal programs, with the government  up there. I told her,    We   ll just go back and try this for a while and if it  doesn   t work, then we   ve always got this to move back to.    So, that   s  basically why we moved back down here.  Around 1978, you and T.C. Cannon were planning a two-man show. Is  that right?  Yeah, but it didn   t get very far of course because that was the year that  he died. I thought of trying  to do  retrospect ive show  but that didn   t  happen either.  11  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  That had to be really hard.  Oh, yeah. He did a large painting. I think it   s eight feet high by twenty  feet wide, something like that, it   s more of a mural-type image. It   s at  the Daybreak Star Center, their museum in Seattle, they purchased it.  We went out there to look at it. They put it up on the wall and it just  covers a whole huge wall up there. He   d never seen it completed.  He saw portions of it. But his studio was so small in Santa Fe, he  couldn   t stretch it out all the way. I guess he had it all up here in his  head and as he worked on it, he would start at one end of the canvas and  he would work on it like that until he got to the end, the final scene. He  just wrapped it up then, and shipped it up there. He was always  threatening to come up there and look at,  to  see the whole thing at  once. He called me about a couple of weeks before he died. He was  planning on coming up there to look at it, and he   d come over and spend  a few days with us. One of the things he was hoping to do also, while he  was with us, is white water rafting, of all things. (Laughter) So we were  waiting for that to happen. And all of a sudden, we got the phone call  that he was killed in a car wreck.  Parker  Boyiddle  got to come stay with us for a while  while we were in  Kalispel . We went berry picking.  Sounds like you were busy with your painting career when Allie decided  she was going to start doing sculpture full time.  Well, she was dabbling in ceramics for quite a while, ceramic sculpture.  I sort of remember her leaning towards the stone. I can   t remember what  her inspiration was but we do have a lot of the stone here in the area that  she knew was available. So, I think that was another impetus for her to  do that, try it.  Did you both start doing booth shows that had both paintings and  sculpture after that?  Yeah.  What were some of the early shows that you did together with both  mediums?  Red Earth.  Was Anadarko Indian Fair ever a factor?  No, not really. We did show there   (Gesturing)   there are some of my  12  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  ribbons. Not when we were starting into it full-time.   You , Mirac and Parker and T.C. Cannon were all such a force as  painters. What about Mirac Creepingbear? How did you guys become  friends?  I think when we were babies. When we were still in diapers. (Laughter)  Are you related?  Yeah.  He mentioned several times that you were so important in terms of  giving him emotional and artistic support.  We grew up together around here and I   ve known him all my life.  Did you stay on him, about getting his work out there?  Oh yeah. (Laughter) Crack that whip. (Laughter)  How would you describe the Oklahoma Indian art scene, the way it  changed from the    70s to the    80s? I realize you were gone for chunks of  time, too.  It didn   t change a whole lot, not very fast. They were still doing Bambi  deer when I came back. Moving back around, that took a while. The  influence from the Art Institute didn   t reach here fully yet. It was going  full blast out there. I remember the first year I went to school out there.  We had entered the Annual   I can   t remember the name   it   s a large  show. They still do it. It   s an annual competition.  Scottsdale Annual?  Yeah, Scottsdale. We won a lot of the categories in that show with all  this new imagery that we were doing. We caught a lot of flak from all  the dealers and all the so-called art experts that knew everything about  Indian art. They couldn   t understand what we were doing.  When you say    we,    you   re talking about Oklahoma painters     No, not necessarily. The whole group of us   like I said there were some  from up North. The Art Institute, students from there. It was such a  shock to all of them I guess. (Laughter) They didn   t have anything like  that hanging on the gallery walls. I think that   s what all the outcry was  about. That took a while to infiltrate over here to Oklahoma.  13  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  After being at Kalispel, what kinds of things were you painting and how  would you describe your style?  A lot of it was like that painting there. (Gestures) My technique. A lot of  traditional cultural things     Bright colors and pretty big. You like the larger format?  Yeah, it   s easier and faster.  You and Parker and Mirac got the commission to do the Kiowa Museum  murals. How did you decide who was going to do what portion of Kiowa  history?  It was such an evolved process. We had a general idea, a general outline.  Of course, the concept was to do tribal history from as far back as we  knew, up to today. We were limited in space to ten panels. We could  have done forty more panels and still not touched all of it. We got to the  point where we had to bring in a lot of elders and sit and do listening  sessions with them. They handed us all of these stories, tribal history.  We had several sit-down sessions with them like that, and they basically  ended up refining the outline for us. We were able to divide it into three  main portions: pre history, early history and contemporary. But we had  to leave out a lot that we wanted to cover. What we did was just the  highlights of the tribal history.  None of you saw what everything was going to look like side-by-side  until the opening? Was that the first time you all saw your work  together?  No, we had a studio here we all went to.  Have you taught any workshops in art and painting?  Probably the only thing that I did was I taught some stone sculpture over  there at the Southern Plains Museum. I did that for a week. I just showed  the basic tools and how they work, all the way to polishing and all that.  That was in the 90s. How do you think the Oklahoma Indian art scene  changed from the    80s to the    90s?  From the    80s to the    90s, it didn   t change very much. That   s one thing  about Oklahoma, you don   t get a lot of movement. We produce a lot of  artists, but for some reason, they don   t move into other areas, other  regions, to study. They just do what   s there at home so there is not that  14  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  mixture.  You   re saying Oklahoma Indian artists tend to be sort of regional in  their interests.  Yeah.  One change was the 1990s Indian Artists Arts and Crafts Act. I was  wondering if you remember how that impacted the galleries and artists  at the time.  I think it took a long time for it to soak in. I know there are still issues  with that going on. Some of the galleries are still advertising Indian  artists who are not enrolled or even recognized, profiting off that. That  still happens today. To me, the Indians, the true Indian artists, they don   t  worry about it, and they need to, because there   s other people shoving  them out of the way, making money where they could be doing that.  So, it hasn   t really been effective?  Not here in Oklahoma. It works pretty well out in the Southwest with the  jewelers, the rug weavers and them. A lot of that stuff is easily  reproduced in China and Mexico. Maybe that had something to do with  it. Doing original art, you can attach a signature to it like on canvas. But  I know it   s impacted the Southwest a lot more than here.  You spent several years working for the Kiowa tribe. Did you bring  anything away from that, that is going to be feeding into your artwork  now?  I think it   s going to help me do more art because it   s like you walk away  from that and say,    Don   t ever do that again     (Laughter) Learn lessons.  You paint mainly with acrylics, is that right?  Right. I started out in oils but it was too slow.  You know, you have such an interesting claim on ledger art. I wonder if  you could define ledger art for us and then talk about how your  approach to ledger art might be different from other artists   ?  Ask me that first part again.  How would you define ledger art?  To me, I think it is just an extension of earlier art forms like the  15  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  pictographs on rock art, petroglyphs. A lot of it looks exactly the same.  The ledger, the actual ledger, didn   t happen until the white man came  around. Prior to that they were painting on tepee covers, buffalo hides,  deer hides. But it   s the same imagery. What   s regarded as ledger art  now   it is just a misnomer, really   ledger. The art has been around a lot  longer than the ledgers have for us. (Laughs)  The way that I do it, there   s a wide range   I put a lot of contemporary  treatments into it. And also, I stick with the traditional elements of it so I  go back and forth. I see a lot of it moving nowadays just like the Bambi  art did. It   s starting to turn cartoonish, the ledger art is. It   s because the  people who are producing it now, they don   t have the background, they  don   t understand it.  Originally, for the Kiowas, it was record keeping. When they painted  images on tipis in what we call the ledger style now, they did that as a  record of things that happened, either to the owner of the tipi or to  somebody associated with the owner. They didn   t go and make up things  to put on there. (Laughter) To me, I see it drifting away from that right  now. If it continues it will become the new Bambi art.  How important is research to your painting?  If  I   m  using  the  ledger genre, very important, because most of my art  is based on history. Most of things I do in the ledger style. But then  again, (Gestures) that painting there, it   s a part of our tribal history and  it   s not done in a ledger style. So, most of the paintings, I make sure I  know what I am talking about before I do them.  Are painting titles important to you?  Yes, I think they should be as expressive as the image.  How about your signature? Was it a trial-and- error thing to come up  with?  Signature? No. It just sort of degenerated over the years. (Laughter) Fell  apart.  What   s your creative process, from the time you get an idea? Do you  take a note about it, or do a quick sketch?  Sometimes I   ll do a sketch. I am at the age  where  I   ve got to record  everything.  So it   s not ,    What was that now?    (Laughter)  Do you do preliminary sketches before you paint?  16  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  A. Chaddlesone  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  Not every time, but now, most of the time.  Do you have a different creative process when you sculpt?  No. Mostly, you   ll just see an image in the stone, and it   s there. You just  remove the outer portions of it and it comes out.  You don   t do any sketching with your stone sculptures?  If it   s something like a commission or something, we will.  Somebody has something in mind  Yeah, a theme or something like that.  You   ll try some different approaches and then look for the stone that  might work for that?  Yeah, we have to do that, too. Find the stone that will fit.  Are there any concepts or treatments that consistently run through your  sculpture, that would allow us to say this is Sherman   s sculpture, not  Allie   s?  I think mine mostly have been male-oriented subjects, and the opposite   with  hers. Female. I did do one partially dressed female at one time  though. (Laughter) But that was a commission.  Are you still doing patterning inside the stone, engraving or incising?  No, I haven   t, but we did do that with a commission that Allie had.  Recently,  with  larger stone, two larger stones we did do that. I helped  her with that.  Have you ever done a painting of something that like spun off an idea  for a sculpture or vice versa?  I can   t think of any.  What   s been one of the pivotal moments in your career up to this point?  The Art Institute in Santa Fe.  How about one of the highlights of your career so far?  17  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Tough question. Maybe I   ll think of something in the editing.  An award that was especially meaningful to you?  I have to think back.  How about one of the low points?  In the art? There   s been several, mainly in the loss of my friends. T.C.,  Parker, Mirac, Benny Buffalo   there   s several others. They were all  such a surprise, the way they happened. It seems like they all had a lot  more to do yet.  Is there anything we didn   t talk about that you would like to add? Any  important things that we didn   t cover?  No, not personal.  Okay. We   re going to take a look at a few or your paintings here. This  painting here, what is the title?  Those We Left Behind. It comes from an old story the Kiowas have when  we lived up in that northern habitat area, along the head waters of the  Columbia River in what is now British Columbia. There was no such  thing as Canada at that time. This particular creature, our name for that  is Zone Ait Ghahnay, which means    creature with large teeth,    very  fearsome or bad. The creature appears in several stories, stories of  Saynday, Spider Woman, and Zone Ait Ghahnay stories. The creature  appears in those stories and we know there   s a lot of petroglyphs in that  area that also portray that creature. There remain a lot of tribes, northern  tribes, in their stories also. Even Allie   s tribe. Probably the most famous  images that we have are one of our tipis,  it  has large paintings with that  creature on it. Then there   s others like Silverhorn, he did several  paintings of that creature in the late 1800s. Also another fellow by the  name of Zone Tahm, while he was a prisoner of war in Fort Marion in  Florida. He did at least one that I know of.  (Changing paintings) This is an example of your ledger work. The title  of this is?  The title of this is The Winter They Dragged the Head. I expanded on an  image from one of our tribal ledger keepers, whose name was Little  Bear. It was the winter of 1837, I believe. It   s an actual event that  happened in Texas. It portrays a group of Kiowas and Comanches  entering one of our camps, dragging the head of an enemy. The event  was recorded by Little Bear and it was even later confirmed by a fellow  18  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  named Boin Ale. That name describes somebody who is large and light  in complexion. He was a German captive from the Galveston Bay area.  He was captured as a young boy but he lived out the rest of his life with  the Kiowas. He was offered repatriation one time, but he was already  married and had his own kids, Kiowa kids. So he became Kiowa and he  just stayed with the tribe until his death. Parker Boyiddle is a  descendant. The Kiowa pronunciation of the name is Boin Ale and it  was corrupted later to Boyiddle. I tried to portray him right here.  Even though it was an event that happened, that the Kiowas were  involved in, we didn   t start it. The Comanches drug us in to it. The  Comanches made us do it. (Laughter)  (Changing paintings) Do you want to tell us what the title is?  The title is Owl Dancing North of the Snake. It   s basically set in the  Northwest region of the United States. It   s a particular dance that tribes  up there do, called the Owl Dance. Similar to the Two-Step that happens  here on the Southern Plains. It   s a social dance. It   s the only time the  men and women touch or even embrace, in any ceremonial dancing or  social dancing. The little winding blue area there, of course, is the Snake  River, so that is one of the reasons for the title.  It   s a beautiful painting. Well, thank you very much, Sherman, for  sharing your time with us.  We   re going to switch to interviewing Allie.   Where were you born and where did you grow up?  They say I was born in Creston, British Columbia. I was raised by the  Black Bear family in Usk, Washington on the Kalispel Indian  Reservation, and I learned their traditional ways. The Kalispel was my  first language before I learned to talk English. I learned their ways but I  didn   t learn sculpture from them.  But you were interested in art. What are your first memories of seeing  artwork?  The grandma. She was the artist, I believe, of the family because she  used to draw pictures of everybody on the reservation. At night, she  would draw pictures of things that happened during the day or she saw  in town. (Laughs) Some of them were funny. But it was so funny  because she did that all time. I remember her drawing pictures all the  time. And then, my sister and I drew pictures all the time, too.  Did you have plenty of materials at the house?  Well, she always had a tablet and pencils. (Laughs) Of course, like  19  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Sherman, we always had the dirt outside to draw in. (Laughs) In fact, we  used to draw highways and stores. We all had little bicycles we used to  drive around the yard.  Did you work three-dimensionally at all?  Not that I remember. Maybe some little rag dolls and that was all. That   s  about it.  How about school? Did you attend a public school off the reservation?  Yes.  Were art classes offered?  No, but the principal of the school there was really interested in art. I  don   t know where she got all this, but she used to enter the school in the  veterans competitions in the state, and find  student  artists. And I  entered one and I won.  How old were you?  I must have been, gosh, maybe fourth, fifth grade? But I did a Veteran   s  poster.  With watercolors?  I think it was watercolors, if I remember. She just handed out posters  and we did them. She was always encouraging me. I don   t know why  she picked me. But after that, she always tried to get me to do things, to  draw. And I was never really good at drawing, but that   s what I went to  school for. In Santa Fe, I went to school for painting.  In between her and your high school years,  did you have  any other art  experiences that were very significant?  No.  How did you find out about the Institute?  One of my friends went to school there. And when he came back, he  thought that I should go.  Was it hard to talk your family into letting you go?  No. They thought I should go to school. (Laughter) Go do something.  20  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  S. Chaddlesone  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  S. Chaddlesone  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Something really good like that. I   d never been away from home that  far. I   d been to Montana, which is a couple of states away. I   d never  been anywhere at all like that, and I rode a bus out to Santa Fe.  That was an adventure.  It was. By the time I got there, I was ready. I got off and I was going to  get back on the bus. (Laughter) It was so different and I was so scared.  But somebody was there waiting for me already. One of the dorm  people. And this was like the middle of the night. I remember there was  nobody around. It was scary. These buildings were so different. And the  streets were tiny. I went to the dorm and rested a while. When I got up I  asked if I could go home. (Laughs) I started in. Every time I seen  somebody that was in charge, I was asking if I could go home. I was  ready because I didn   t unpack yet. It took over a week. I was wanting to  go home. I was crying. I just didn   t want to stay there.  Until she saw me. (Laughter)  I didn   t even see him for a long time. (Laughter)  How long did it take you to start getting into the classes? What were  some of the first classes you took?  They just put me in classes. They put me in painting, in Mr. Tubis   s  class. And I enjoyed that a while. They put me in jewelry. I was not a  jeweler. I disintegrated my silver or whatever I was using.  Who was teaching the jewelry class?  I can   t remember.  Was it Charles Loloma?  No, I can   t remember his name because I wasn   t in there long and he  wanted to send me off to another class.  What did you end up sticking with?  They finally tried me in modern dance and that   s where I stayed.  And who was teaching that class?  Rosalie Jones. I was more into moving around a lot. I liked that instead  of just sitting. I   d danced all my life. I came from a very cultural,  traditional family. Did all the cultural things in the tribe there.  21  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Did you perform with the students when they took that piece out to  Washington D.C  to represent the Institute   s performing arts program to  Congress members?   No, I think it was after. But I knew everybody in the class who went.  Was Jane Lind in your class, by chance?  She was from Alaska, and the other Alaskan girl. I can   t remember the  name right now. That was a lot of fun. I liked that, but then, I was in  shape and I could jump around. (Laughter) Do those deer   (Laughter)  Did you ever kind of hang out around anybody who happened to be  sculpting at the Institute?  Well, there were some friends of mine, like some people from Taos. I  never knew any women sculptors at all. Just guy classmates. Houser, of  course. He was doing something there. I think he was teaching there,  sculpting and painting. I saw him around quite a bit. But the guys that I  knew that were doing sculpting were from Taos.  Were they working in stone?  Yeah. I used to kind of watch. It was always there. It always bothered  me,    Gee, I could do that.    (Laughs) And then, we used to go through  Santa Fe a lot and see all the sculptures in the windows and go in the  galleries. Even as we left IA IA , I used to see  sculpture  and I     (Laughs) I just could do it. I could do that. I know I could.  So, that was percolating     Yeah, for a long time. It kept bothering me. And then, we were visiting  with Doug Hyde, and I kept asking little questions.  After you and Sherman had been married, in the    80s?  Yeah. He sat with us and talked to us about steps. That   s how it started.  We were in his gallery. He had a gallery there, a studio den. We were in  there and he was showing us all big sculpture stones that he had there. It  was his house, too, way up there in the hills.  You also visited Allan Houser   s house.  Yeah, briefly. It was something I   ve always wanted to do. Really really  wanted to. But I didn   t know any women that did it, did the sculpting.  22  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  So, it was just like, go for it.  How did Sherman get your attention at the Institute?(Laughter)  He chased me, as I remember. (Laughter) He was following me  everywhere.  Did he come to some of your performances?  Yeah, he was everywhere. (Laughter)  Did you visit Allan Houser   s sculpture garden before you visited with  Doug Hyde, or was that on the same trip?  I can   t remember.  I think it was after     So, all these ideas are percolating about the fact you could be  sculpting   then Sherman serves in Vietnam. That must had been hard  time for you.  Oh yeah. I had a job and I stayed with his parents in Lawton. I worked at  the Indian hospital there. When he came back, I worked at the museum  there at Fort Sill.  Did you enjoy that?  It was interesting. I wasn   t there too long but it was real interesting. We  dealt with photos, old photos. Categorizing.  What was your first impression of Oklahoma the first time you came  down with Sherman?  I came home with him on Christmas. It wasn   t hot here. Maybe if I came  in the summer I might not have came back. (Laughter)  You hadn   t been painting or drawing anything yet?  No.  Just  office work.  Were you involved with the arts workshop?  Yeah, we hung around there a lot. As far as teaching anything, I didn   t.  We were just there to have fun. (Laughter) We had Angela then. She  was the baby. I did one show, didn   t I? At the    What   s the name of that  23  S. Chaddlesone  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  S. Chaddlesone  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  place? That was a group show, too. I did a painting.  Palace of Fine Arts.  Yeah, that was a good show there.  In San Francisco?  Yeah, it was several artists. They had all these movie stars      You must have been producing, then, in between taking care of your  daughter?  I had a couple of paintings out there in a gallery. But it wasn   t like  major, you know, working. Total art.  What was your style like then? Your painting style?  More abstract, I would say. It wasn   t anything like he does. Shield-type  things  In Kalispel, were you starting to get into painting again?  No, I started working in clay. Tried that. And I did another group show  with the Daybreak Star. I was doing sculptures with them. I remember  the piece that I sent, sold before the show started. So, that kind of  encouraged me. I said,    Hey, I can do more of this.     What kinds of clay things were in the show?  One I did was mother and child. That was one of my favorite subjects  that I do.  Did you put any kind of color? A slip?  Yeah. The lady had a Hudson Bay blanket which is Northern. And that   s  about it. She just had long hair, she had the baby and a cradle board. So,  I got encouraged there. I just kept it up, but  the clay  was too slow for  me. I like to get in there and just do it, finish it. Like stone. Stone is real  easy to do for me.  When you visited with Doug Hyde, did he tell you how to look for your  stone or did you just have to figure it out?  I think he got his from Fort Collins. In fact, he gave me a little piece of  stone. It was so small. I think we still have that. I didn   t do anything  24  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  with it. (Laughs)  When you were leaving did you swing by Fort Collins, after that visit?  No, I think we came back this way. The next thing I knew Parker was  here and he was all excited because he had found some stone.  Remember that?  Here in the area?  Yeah. That was crazy. We were all happy. (Laughter) He was so happy.  We were out there as soon as we could.  Parker had been sculpting, I guess, since the Institute. In any case, he  was a sculptor that you could also talk to, right?  Oh yeah, he used to work in our backyard all the time. We were all  working like crazy. (Laughter) This stone around here, it   s like alabaster.  It is not like the Colorado stone. Probably a little bit softer. But it was  easier to start working with, and the colors are a lot different than Fort  Collins. They have more sand in it so it has more   what would you call  it? What   s the word? Spots? Mottled?  When did you start placing your sculpture with galleries? Do you  remember some of the early galleries you started?  I did the  Anadarko Indian Fair  show.  Was that your first show?  I think so, but I was just kind of messing around a little bit with it  already.  Did you sell a couple of pieces?  No, I just entered that one.  In a competition?  And I won. (Laughs) For stone.  Was that your first award for sculpture? What was that like?  It was fun. Then I knew. I always knew I could do it. There just was no  doubt about it.  25  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  S.Chaddlesone  A. Chaddlesone  S. Chaddlesone  There weren   t a lot of Indian women sculptors.  No, not that we knew of at all.  Did you feel like you had to work harder to prove that you could do this?  Yeah, it was work. Really hard work. (Laughter) There was a lot of  mistakes. Did a lot of terrible things to my stone. (Laughter)  What is one of your more memorable mistakes?  Dropping it when it was almost done. The garage has a cement floor. If  you don   t have it down good, it slips and it   s gone. I don   t know what it  would do on marble. I don   t think marble would break that easy, but  with this stone here it does.  When you first started sculpting, did you discover muscles you didn   t  think you had?  Yeah, you get that elbow thing from hitting. (Laughs) I remember I used  to just get real sore but I didn   t care. You just want to get through, get  finished. It   s really an exciting feeling to get started and get it done.  (Laughs) We used to just have so much fun when we would go to this  quarry out here. We   d go in there and you see all those   if you could  bring all the stones home, you would. (Laughter)  Here in Anadarko?  No, it   s out of town. Where they do some blasting and you go in there.  I don   t know if they do that anymore. Probably not. (Laughs) You could  just see everything in there. You see all these sculptures already almost  made.  It must be kind of hard because your initial expenses have got to be  more than like for a painter.  Yeah. When we do up to Colorado, it takes a lot of money. You have to  pay for your stone by the pound. Then you have to have it shipped on a  freight track. So, it   s expensive.  And then, the tools are special tools     Yeah, they   re expensive.  You   ve got to search them out   they   re pretty expensive   and they  don   t last long. (Laughs)  26  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  In Denver is where we usually get our tools. It   s a very expensive art  when you come right down to it, if you can   t find your stone yourself.  Sherman picked up sculpture more seriously after you started on your  work, right? Was it pretty soon after?  No, she   d been doing it for a couple of years before I tried it.  I don   t even know what he was doing after that. (Laughter) I was in my  own world.  He hadn   t been polishing or anything? You were doing the whole  process.  Yeah. At first, and then he helps, and vice versa. Whoever needs help,  We both know what we are doing.  Among the galleries in Oklahoma that handle your work, I know Doris  Littrell did, and she had been already showing Sherman   s paintings. Do  you remember the first time you brought a sculpture in to Doris?  No, because I had other galleries that I was approaching then. The one in  Norman. I can   t remember their name.  The Olsens?  Yeah, and then the Art Market. So, I had a few different places. In fact, I  think there was one in Yukon and Colorado Springs. I just, I was ready.  I remember reading that, when you were starting to sculpt seriously,  you were doing from thirteen to fourteen shows a year.  It was a lot, yeah. Maybe more. From here to Washington, I had  galleries. So, I   d always have to have several sculptures ready to take off  and they   d be waiting to buy them. We had a lot of people up there  waiting for them. It wasn   t just Oklahoma or one gallery. It was along  the way. That made it really helpful when we traveled.  I am trying to remember if you did Santa Fe Indian Market for a while?  No. That was weird, we never did. We   d go and look around. In fact, we  would be up in Washington about then. We   d be up there   going up  there to dance. We had other things to do, too, besides art. So, we  weren   t just one thing.  27  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  How do you think your sculpting style has changed over the years?  I really don   t know. I do a lot of them because they   re an order and they  stay the same because that is what people want. These two commissions  that I did, I tried to keep them kind of northern, for the area. It was for  the Kalispel tribe, the Northern Quest Casino and Hotel. That was for  their grand opening. It   s a very elegant hotel. Just beautiful as can be.  One   s in the dining room and one   s in their long hallway. They   ll  probably change it around, but they   re in very prominent places.  What were the images?  One I titled On the Flowery Trail, which used to be a trail from the  Kalispel Reservation over to Chewelah, and the Indians went back and  forth on that trail. I did this sculpture of a lady with flowing hair and that  blanket and I called it On the Flowery Trail. The other one was a  warrior, just a bust of a warrior. Not of Masselow, but in memory of  him.  He was one of the Kalispel chiefs?  Yes, so they were pretty happy with it. (Laughs)  What kind of stone did you use for those?  Colorado stone. I was really happy to do it, that they let me be the artist  to do that.  You were the right one. When did you begin incorporating stones like  turquoise, in your work?  It was pretty early on in my work. I thought it was pretty neat, putting  stone on stone and then the pots  inside the stone sculpture .  Did you make those pots?  Some of them are made out of stone, some of them are from New  Mexico, Santa Clara  Pueblo , and that   s about it.  Were there any other sculptors that inspired you or were maybe an  influence?  Well, all of the sculptors. I think they were all really neat. I like all of  them. The ceramicists   Bill Glass, Mike Daniels. They do the pottery.  And then Parker and Sherman. And the bronze. I like the bronze. I think  I might be starting that.  28  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  You   ve done a little bit of bronze work as I understand.  Yeah, it   s old school. (Laughter)  What was your first time you tackled bronze?  I helped  Sherman  with his bronze out there  at the American Indian  Hall of Fame . So, I have a little bit of experience with the wax.   Was this  the bronze bust of T.C. Cannon?  I did five of them total. Late    80s through late    90s.  So  Allie , you helped with the wax process?  So, I kind of got a grasp of that. (Gesturing) I don   t care for the wax. I  don   t like it. Now I   ve heard there is an easier way they have been doing  it for a few years now, so I am going to try it again. It   s messy. I don   t  like that wax. (Laughs) (Gesturing) And then I did that one,  mother and  child . I forgot all about that until  we  got it  out . (Laughs) That was  done with kind of like plastic clay, I guess      Original form  To make the mold? It   s got some really wonderful detail.  See that cradle board? That   s like our cradle boards up north. They   have  the round board.  We didn   t get to talk quite so much about how you  two  help each other  with the sculpting process but when you were both doing sculpture, as I  understand it, if you had roughed out the stone, he might switch off and  polish for you for a while or vice versa.  Just when we needed help. No, I want hands on.  There were times when she had rush orders and then I would help her  then. I would do the rough work and she would do the detail and I would  help with the polishing.  As Sherman said, you   ve a lot of times done women and children. You   ve  also kept this simplicity, this elegant, minimalism to your work.  I don   t do very much detail. I don   t like to do that. Just my style is the  other way. Have to keep the lines real clean and smooth.  29  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  S. Chaddlesone  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  S. Chaddlesone  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  You   ve done a lot of dancers and there   s something that stone conveys  about dancers really well, the way someone carries themselves. There   s  a nice emotion to your dancer figures.  You can go around  the sculpture  and look, too, and  get  a lot of  movement, the feel of movement there.  When you were at your busiest doing sculpture, how many pieces were  you putting out  in  a month?  I have no idea. One time, I tried to figure it and just couldn   t. It was  crazy there for a while. There was even one time where I about went  crazy. Indian Territory Gallery in Sapulpa. Remember that? She ordered  fifty little sculptures that were to look all the same. We should have  done that  in  bronze, but she wanted them all in stone. I about went  nuts. (Laughs) Insane.  That must have been a lot of work. (Laughter)  It was. I wondered why I agreed to it after a while. (Laughter) Those  were some of the crazy times. (Laughs)  Your miniature sculptures were always just wonderful. How did you get  the idea for doing the small pieces?  From some stuff I messed up in there. (Laughter)  It was one of her broken stones. (Laughter)  I hated to waste it. I didn   t want to waste pieces that could be used, you  know. (Laughs)  What are some of the solo shows that you have done over the years?  I don   t think I did any, did I? I always did group shows.  The closest one you ever did was the State Capitol. You and I showed  there.  I never did really do a one-man show.  How about your Southern Plains show? Was that an important show for  you?  It was real nice. It was a really good turnout. I think they said it was one  30  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  S. Chaddlesone  of the best ones that they had here. Ladies    show. And I was in a ladies     show in Santa Fe.  Who were the other women sculptors or painters?  There was a Fragua. I can   t remember her name. She did sculpture. I  think there were only two, though. I can   t remember her first name.  Nowadays you   re mainly working on commissions. Do commissions  present a challenge?  Not really. It just depends on what subject it is. They usually know my  style, anyway, before they   ll ask   just like these two ladies  who  ordered sculptures . I guess I have to do the potters, but those are easy to  do for me so it   s not a real challenge. I can do that.  What is your creative process, from the time you sort of get your ideas?  Just look at the stone and start. I don   t sketch. I just look at it, and then  decide what it is going to be and get started.  Even picking it up at the quarry, are ideas already kind of percolating?  Yeah, it   s that simple. (Laughs)  What   s the next phase of the process? Let   s talk about your tools a little  bit.  Use your files. Just file it down until it is fine enough to start sanding.  Sand then polish. I use several grades of sandpaper to get it to where,  when it polishes, it will be super shiny. You have to get to your ultra  sandpaper. From your coarse clear to your ultra, all of the different  grades of paper to make it however you want it. You polish it and then  you   re done. Put it on a base.  And you build your own bases?  He does. He   s the base maker. (Laughter)  The special tools for sculpting in Denver, what are  they ?  Filing, mainly. All kinds of different files you have to use for different  parts of your stone.  Sizes and shapes.  31  A. Chaddlesone  S. Chaddlesone  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little thunder  S. Chaddlesone  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  That is the word. Sizes and shapes. Then you have to buy your   what do  you call that stick, that buffing stick you use?  I can   t remember.  It looks like chalk, but it isn   t. That is what we used to put on our buffer  to polish it.  You have your space set up in the garage. Is that right? Where you  work?  Yeah, but I can work anywhere. He always says he has to have a studio.  (Laughs) I could sit here and work if I had the chance, but nobody wants  me in here working.  She trashed out a motel room in Colorado one time. (Laughter)  Working on the road is just something so many artists have to do.  Isn   t that fun?  I would think it would be really hard with sculpture. (Laughter)  She wrecked the air conditioner. (Laughter)  And probably their sink after sanding all of that stone. (Laughter)  But you got it finished.  Yeah, I got it done. There was a lot times we had to work on the road  and those were all fun times. (Laughter)  Over the last few years, you   ve run into challenges with your sculpture.  Went through a period where you weren   t able to work for a while.  Oh yeah. Came down with breast cancer. It was caught in time. So, I  was out of commission, you would call it, for a few years. I just finished  my five years of survival last October.  Congratulations.  They   ve let me go, except for once a year, I have to go back. But that  slowed me down quite a bit. Due to the   they severed some of my  nerves  in the operation . That took a while for me to get back. To get  my arm back, too.  32  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  That was your right arm, the one you depended on?  Yeah, it still numbs up quite a bit and I   m still numb back here (Gestures  to back of shoulder), but otherwise, I   m okay. I thank the Lord.  Have you adjusted your approach to sculpting, working shorter periods  of time?  Yeah. I just work when I feel like it, when I   m able, and I still love it  just as much as ever. I am just so happy I learned how to do that because  it   s something I really, really enjoy doing.  How important are titles in your work?  I   m not like Sherman about titles. (Laughs) Because usually sculpture,  you can look and it just speaks for itself. A painting, he feels like he has  to have a story title to it. Most of his stuff has stories to it. I like to do  just images, and most of the time they tell what they are. There   s really  not a big story about it. (Laughs)  In terms of your more important awards, would Red Earth be one of the  places you won? Do you remember the first time you took an award at  Red Earth?  Oh, yeah. I was going (gasps),    Ahh,      I didn   t want to walk up there. I  knew I would probably fall down or do something. (Laughter) It   s crazy  because I have been known to fall. (Laughter)  What was the image, the first award that you won at Red Earth? Do you  remember the sculpture?  I can   t remember.  Did it sell at the show?  I think so. The other one was, I remember Doug Hyde and Kevin  Redstar and Bill   what was his name?  Prokopief  I think they were judging one year and I got second there. They were  teasing me about finding a scratch on it. (Laughs) They said,    Do you  know why you got second?    (Laughter) I said,    What?    And they said,     Can   t you see it?    And I went all over, I looked. I could never find it.  They said,    Somebody covered it.    I said,    What are you talking about?     They said,    Well, that   s what did it, a little scratch on there.    (Laughs)  33  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  When I talked with both of you in the mid    80s, there was a lot of  sculpting activity among the young people here in Anadarko. Is that the  case today?  It started out   I don   t know what happened. I think they found out it   s  not as easy as it looks, for one thing. I don   t know. It just disappeared.  There   s a few people still doing that but not as much. There was one  point where we thought they could do it too, but you have to stay with it.  And then, you have to find the people that want to buy it, if that   s what  you want to do.  That business part is hard, isn   t it? Did you ever get any good business  tips from another sculptor?  I think we just learned from our mistakes. We had to live and learn and  some of them were pretty costly. First time, we didn   t keep receipts  for   the business part of it. We just went out and did whatever. (Laughter) I  mean, just like it was nobody   s business but our own. Wow, tax time.  Whooo  (Laughter) You will learn real fast what you have to do.  Pricing   s kind of tricky.  That   s another thing. A lot of people don   t realize the business part of it.  Somebody should tell them. (Laughs)  Maybe you can have a workshop.  Yeah, I should. I think they had one here at one time but probably  nobody listened.  In terms of pricing, did the galleries help you or did you just sort of  figure that out?  I think we probably just figured it out ourselves and went from there.  Well, Parker was around, too, and we all kind of decided on prices,  didn   t we? (Laughter) Because if somebody really sells low and the  others are selling super high, it gets crazy. And we have to decide, too,  who is more experienced in it. A newcomer just can   t go and sell  something for a high price unless they   re super good. (Laughs) It takes  time to build up.  As far as you know, there   s no young women who are taking up  sculpture here in the area?  Ted Creepingbears    wife was doing it. I don   t know what happened to  34  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  S. Chaddlesone  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  them. I think they just don   t sell anymore.  You have grandkids. Anybody among the grandkids who is kind of  interested in art?  Oh yeah. (Laughter) Her grandpa steals her ideas, she says. (Laughter)  She   s eight. She   s the artist. She really draws a lot. Pictures. She   s  supposed to start painting this year. She hasn   t started yet.  She says I stole one idea from her. (Laughs)  And that other one. At lunch she said,    Grandpa stole my idea. I was  going to do that.    So serious. (Laughter.) (To Sherman) Well, maybe  you did. She   s a real artist.  So she will have your blessing to explore that?  Yes. She is real fun.  What is her name?  Summer. In fact, she was trying to work on my sculpture. I caught her  on my commission. (Laughter) She had that file in there. (Laughter)  She   s a character.  Allie, as you look back on your career so far, what was one of the major  turning points for you?  Turning which way? Better or worse?  Just kind of a fork-in- the road moment.  Where I decided what I was going to do? Probably that Daybreak Star  show. That   s probably when I decided I was just going to do that. Do art.  In fact, I was working in an office most of my life then, and we just let  all that go and went totally into art. People said we were crazy.  It   s hard when both people are doing art full time, isn   t it? A lot of  artists will have spouses working.  Sometimes we wondered what we were thinking. (Laughs) But  something was always there with us to get us through, and inspire us and  keep us going. Of course, our kids, they grew up in the art world. They  were all little hors d   oeuvre kids. (Laughter) There were several artists     children that used to always see each other at shows. (Laughs) Other  people wouldn   t dare let their kids in a gallery.  35  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  I know you have lost some of your artist friends, but are there others that  you keep in contact with?  Mostly everybody we see at the shows and see all the time. Familiar  faces. Small world.  Will you do Red Earth this year?  No. I   ll be around. I   ve been dancing there through the years.  I don   t think I   ll compete this year. I   ll probably just go dance. Our little  grandson may dance there this year, so I need to be ready. Summer,  she   s dancing, too. If they want to dance, we   ll have to be there for  them. Last summer, during the Indian Fair, it was so hot. She wanted me  to dress, so she could go dance. And I couldn   t say no. It was so hot. I  had a buckskin dress on. (Laughter) I   d just smile and get out there.  That   s what we do for our grandkids.  Oh, you have to. (Laughs) If that   s what they want to do, you   ve got to  do it.  What has been one of the highlights of your career so far?  Highlights? Probably that commission  for the casino . I wanted to do it.  Because all of my work   s always been here, south, in the stone. They  always heard about me doing that, but they   d never seen my work. And  they finally got to see what I really did for a living. (Laughs)  Were they doing research and contacted you or had you contacted  them?  They contacted me. They always knew I did this type of work. I just  never had enough to bring up there. Sometimes I would bring stone and  work in the yard up there at the house. I never did finish anything there.  (Laughs) I was always too busy, visiting. But I   d sit outside and I   d  work, chip away. The family would sit around and watch. They   d never  see me finish anything. (Laughter)  What has been one of your low points?  Like he said, we lost some friends and that   s really, really sad. It  happened so quick, and like him, (Sherman) he   s the last of the mural  guys. It   s really, really rough. Parker, every time he was around here he  would come over here. He was our brother, Indian way. And it was  really a shock to us. He painted and sculpted, too.  We  just miss him a  36  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  lot.  Is there anything we overlooked that you would like to talk about?  I can   t think of anything right now. I think I have talked enough, the  most I   ve talked in a long time. (Laughter)  We   re going to look at your cast paper picture, which is beautiful. We   ll  try to catch up with your sculpture in another session. Do you want tell  us what this piece is called?  This is titled Mother and Child on the Prairie. It   s an edition of 15/100  and it was done in 1986. It   s cast paper, and the subject is a Northwest or  Northern tribe, with the cradle board. The shell dress and the shell  earrings makes you know where it   s from.  Can you talk a little about the cast paper process?  I did the clay on a table. I flattened it out and then started cutting away  the outline and the figures. Kind of like sculpting it out until you get to  what it   s like, and then you put a mold over it and let it dry. Once you  get the mold, you get the paper and leave it sitting there.  It   s got such nice dimension, the face.  It takes a while for the paper to dry to get that pulled out of your mold.  Let it sit and then you   re done. I didn   t do the actual casting, I had  Linda do that, but I did the image.  Well, Allie, thank you so much for your time today and thank you for  talking to me.  Thank you.  ------- End of April 21, 2011 interview -------  This is Julie Pearson- Little Thunder. I am here with Allie Chaddlesone  on May 21, 2011 at the Art Market. We are looking at an example of  Allie   s sculpture. I wonder if you would talk to us about this particular  piece.  This is a dual piece, I guess you would call it. This stone is Colorado  alabaster that I went and picked up in Fort Collins, Colorado. I just  looked at it and I saw this.  You saw two images  back to back ? Does that happen very much?  37  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  A. Chaddlesone  No. For some reason I just thought it would come together like that and I  guess it did.  The drummer, maybe doing an honoring song or something, is that what  you had in mind?  Yes, and it just felt right to do it that way, so that   s how it happened.  What a wonderful idea. Your cast paper sculpture, which we did look at,  I understand, went to a celebrity. Can you tell us about that?  Willie Nelson. He was selected as Indian of the Year  at Anadarko  Indian Fair . I can   t remember the year. I guess it was in the    90s, and he  ended up with one of my cast papers. I hope he still has it. Whether the  IRS got a hold of it, I don   t know. (Laughter)  Were you the one that got to present it to him?  I just gave it to him and we got our picture taken together. (Laughs)  You did a series for Shirley Wells at Indian Territory Gallery called the  Collectors Club. It would be hard for a sculptor to do a series.  Yes, it was. That was a chore. Fifty little pieces that had to look alike.  And all of them had the little turquoise, so I had to find all these  miniature turquoise to put in them. To get them, that was a real  challenge.  How did you even get the stone to  match      I know. I don   t know. (Laughter) A miracle.  Could you get a couple of sculptures per stone?  Oh, I can   t remember. I did it somehow to keep the stone color uniform.  Keep it as close as possible. That was really   I don   t know how I did it,  but it happened. (Laughs) I pulled that one off. I think there were several  artists that did that  series , too.  But I don   t think there was another sculptor. I think you might have been  the only sculptor. That   s quite a feat. (Laughs) Thank you very much,  Allie, for your time.  Thank you for having me here and doing this. I enjoyed it.  38  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  S. Chaddlesone  Little Thunder  Sherman, we   re looking at one of your  sculptures  now if you want to  talk about this one?  The stone is alabaster. I believe that particular stone came from  Colorado. I did that in 1992. The title is Buffalo Chief. The inspiration  loosely honors one of my grandfathers who had a headdress of eagle  feathers, some call a war bonnet. And he also had buffalo horns on it,  attached to it. It   s not an exact portrait of him but that was just the  inspiration.  It has some wonderful incising for texture, a beaded section on the war  bonnet and the necklace, too. So, pretty much when you saw this piece,  the image came to you?  Yeah. It was more or less just built into the stone.  That   s beautiful.  Thank you.  Thank you for talking to us about it.  ------- End of May 21, 2011 interview -------  
