 Little Thunder  This is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is Wednesday, May 25, and  I   m here with Johnny Tiger at his house. Johnny, you   ve been entering  art competitions, winning awards since the late 1960s, and you come  from an extended family of artists. You   ve witnessed some major  changes in Indian art over the years. Where were you born, and where  did you grow up?  I was born in Tahlequah, Oklahoma, and we lived down in Eufaula. I  was born at Hastings and grew up down in Eufaula until about junior  high. We had to move. I didn   t want to move. I liked it down there. We  moved up here to Muskogee in 1954 or something like that. No,    52 or     53.  What   s your first memory of seeing art around you?  Well, I went to Bacone  College . Dick West was teaching out there,  then. I saw like the real Indian art, his style. I took a couple years out  there, took a course of sculpture. I think that was about it. From there, I  was kind of on my own.  At your folks    house, do you remember the first time you did any  drawing or did any art?  Yes, but I don   t know what happened to them.  Were you able to find materials you could draw with at your folks     house?  Yes, I could get that material all the time. I   d either buy it, or if  something was laying around, I   d draw on it, cardboard.  I imagine Jerome probably did the same. Did your parents pay attention  5  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  to you guys    drawings?  Not too much. Usually, young, we was outside playing all the time.  We   d be playing sports or something with a bunch of the other guys  outside when we was young, say, grade school and junior high. We   d all  go meet each other, or see each at the church house, Indian church.  We   d get kind of restless in church and take off outside and play.  (Laughter) They   d try to track us down and get us in church.  You mentioned you didn   t want to move from Eufaula. You liked  Eufaula.  Yes, see, my granny and gramp raised me, mostly, you might say. I was  kind of like their pet, so I didn   t want to leave there. Especially going to  Muskogee, I didn   t like it, but I had to finally get used to it. I never got  used to it, but you have to go along the way.  Your grandpa was Coleman Lewis. He was a preacher. You remember  spending time with him as a child?  Yes.  What do you remember doing?  First thing, he used to always get up and go to church early in the  morning on Sunday. Granny would be in there cooking by five thirty, six  o   clock, and I made sure I was up. I   d go there, eat, and I   d want to go  with them because I wanted to drive. He was the first one that taught me  how to drive in his old pickup. It was a 1940 International. I remember  that stick in the floor, floor shift, the old type. I used to drive for him  early in the morning, and he   d be going to preach at church.  Supposedly, in those days, you   re not supposed to   I don   t know why  they say all that, but he used to be a stomp dance leader, a long time ago.  Everyone used to say how good he was. I mean, they all talked about it.  He was good. Even when he retired out of that stomp dancing and stuff  to   he became a Christian. Granny was a Christian, anyway, and she  didn   t want him to go. He knew all that, but he finally became a  Christian. They even offered him, back then, fifty dollars if he   d lead  one more time. That   s a lot of money back in 1920s. He didn   t do it. He  just finally went into religion and stuff. Then he became a real good  preacher.  He spoke Muscogee, of course.  Yes, he knew all the Creek language.  6  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  I remember you telling a story that you all had to sneak out to stomp  dances because you had been raised church-way.  Well, Mom didn   t like us to go because she was Christian. It was mainly  Christian-type, but we   d go to stomp dances, anyway. We had a car. I  had a car, so we   d get a bunch of guys in there and go. One, where we  used to live at, the church grounds in Eufaula you could see over the  horizon, that Eufauloce, Eufauloce stomp grounds, but the lake knocked  that out. You used to hear it up from the house...  Oh, that must   ve been hard on him.     the stomp dancing. Anyway, we   d come back early in the mornings,  and he   d always ask us,    Who was there? Who is this? Who is that?    He  was still interested in it. He still had it in his blood, I guess. I guess so  because I heard about how good he was.  He did talk to you about a lot of Creek ways and shared stories?  Yes. If I didn   t stay with him most of my life, I wouldn   t have knew all  that Creek. Jerome and them, they knew a little bit, but they didn   t catch  on to what this and that was, maybe not coming to eat or something.  So both of you were in Muskogee at the secondary school level, or was it  high school?  I went to school in Muskogee all through junior high, seventh, eighth,  and ninth. Then I went back to Eufaula because I was in high school.  Let   s see. Tenth, eleventh, the first nine weeks, I was wanting a car  because I was really interested in cars.  Plus, you drove so young.  Yes. Mom said they   d look for me a job. Dad used to get office supplies  in town, and I guess they must   ve asked around. They said,    Come on  down.    They got me a job.  Oh, in an office supply store.  Yes, like a delivery boy, put desks together and different things in the  back, clean up. I was just an all-around guy, I guess, and delivered  orders. I worked there about three years. I got out of school and started  out fifty cents an hour. I remember my first dollar bill. I don   t know  whatever happened to it. I was going to keep it for life, the first dollar  bill I made working. A dollar an hour, that   s what it was. I made it up to  7  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  a dollar an hour. That   s nothing compared to nowadays.  That   s right. Were you exposed to any art classes at all at Eufaula?  No, you just did it on your own.  Did you ever sketch while you were working or at home during those  days when you had your first job?  Yes. Let   s see. I got messed up on schedules. When I went back to  Muskogee for eleventh grade, they sliced me up and put me in a senior  class, and I couldn   t think. It just got my mind off   of course, I had a  job, and I could go to work at eleven o   clock. They had this thing called  Distributive Education, DE. I took that, so I went to school half a day  and worked half a day. Then I went an extra year. I didn   t care because I  was having fun back then because I had a car, a real sharp one.  When did you sell your first painting or drawing?  First one? I can   t even remember that far.  Do you think you sold anything during high school?  No. Usually, back then,    Do you want this?    and you   ll give it away.  Later on, I went to Bacone and drew Indian art like Dick West. I don   t  even know if I sold that.  Was this while Jerome was at the Art Institute?  I   m thinking it was pretty close to that time. He went up to Cleveland.  Of course, he always drawed before then. Any time he could sketch and  draw, he   d do it.  What were your first impressions of Dick West? Was he actually your  teacher, or was he just there?  Yes. He was funny. I liked him.  How did he get you interested and serious about your work?  I just took art, and under him, I just did what he said. I had fun in there,  and I thought it was easy.  Were you doing Plains images when you were     Yes, I did a lot of that, Plains images, feathers and all that. Creeks didn   t  8  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  have all that stuff. They didn   t have those kind of clothes you see in  them books.  What kind of research did Dick encourage you guys to do?  Well, he was mainly on his Cheyenne types. I kind of went along with  that. I don   t think I even hardly did any   I might have did a Seminole,  but not really Creeks. Plains Indians had all the feathers, and they   re  kind of always on the warpath and stuff like that, with horses. I liked it  there. Then I went to Chilocco  Indian Agricultural School  and did a  few things.  You were still painting a little bit at Chilocco and doing art?  Yes, drawing, painting there. Some guys was there that painted after  that. I think there was a guy named Ingram.  Yes, Jerry Ingram.  He was up there.  Okay. Did you know him?  I knew who he was, said hi and stuff. I didn   t run with him. Him and  who else? Bushyhead. You know Henry Bushyhead? Jerome Bushyhead  died. There   s a bunch of others I can   t think of right off the bat.  What was the earliest Indian art show you remember doing?  See, I went to the Air Force and come back.  Oh, I didn   t know you went to the Air Force.  I was working in a body shop after that because I liked to work on cars  and fix them up different. I worked in a body shop. All in between that  time, I even worked at Douglas Aircraft. My dad worked up there, and  we   d take turns driving. We   d carpool, so I had to get up every morning,  go to work, and come back. I didn   t have too much time to do anything  else. When you come back, you was tired and everything. I got used to  that. It was about three years and eight months, I think. Then I started  painting, doing artwork, shows. See, Jerome had died in    67, and they  kept telling me I should enter that Five Tribes show. They was just  starting out. I think that was the first big one I entered, the Five Tribes.  Did you do anything there?  9  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Yes, I won first.  Oh, that   s great. First at your first show. What was that like?  It was pretty good, felt pretty good. I made a little money on it. Not like  nowadays, but money was money then. (Laughter)  Did your piece sell, as well?  I guess the museum bought it. They kept it. They   ve got it up there  somewhere. I used to enter that every year and other shows around.  I remember you doing the Trail of Tears show.  Yes, I did that, Trail of Tears.  Did you ever do any of the early mall shows?  Malls? The arts and crafts shows, yes. I went to those. They was pretty  fun.  I heard they were. Who were some of the artists that were showing at the  same time?  Bert Seabourn was always there. Who else? There was a whole gob of  them, but I   m just blank right now.  Did any Indian artists ever give you business tips when you first started  out doing shows?  Oh, I learned some things from old Antowine Warrior. He went to   Bacone  at the same time I did.  Okay. Did you guys run together a little bit?  Yes, up there at Bacone. That   s when we lived in town. I didn   t stay on  campus. He did. He lived in that dorm. I used to go out there all the  time.  What tips did you pick up from Antowine?  Bunch of crazy tips. (Laughter) He was a good artist, though. He showed  me a lot of different things. He was good. He kind of stayed the same  way, like Dick West did, same pattern.  But his work was more realistic, wasn   t it?  10  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Yes.  It was breaking new ground, a little bit. It wasn   t that traditional flat  style, as much.  He had good ideas. Showed you different ways of mixing paints and  stuff, too, Antowine did.  Oh, okay. Was this water-based paint?  Yes, like tempera. Dave Williams, too. I liked his stuff because he  painted Plains. I could tell Dave Williams    paintings from anybody   s  with just one glance.  Wow. What was the trademark for you about his paintings?  I just liked his horses. They   re just one certain type. We was good old  buddies, too. We ran a long time, quite a while. He lived in Tahlequah  for a while. We used to get out and go. He sure could sing good, though,  powwow songs. Yes, Dave could sing good.  You rode, didn   t you, quite a bit growing up? You did good horses, and I  think Jerome rode horses, too. Sometimes when an artist has been  around horses, then they can do them pretty good.  Jerome was a member of that roundup club downtown.  You didn   t belong to it?  No. I was always busy working or working on cars, them two things. I  mainly liked to fix up cars and customize them different.  As I   m understanding it, you got more serious about your artwork after  Jerome passed away. Who were some of the early galleries when you  started having galleries carry your work?  I used to take it up to Five Tribes a lot when I first started out. Used to  take them up to Philbrook, and sell up there, not the museum part, but  the gift shop. Then, where else? I just forget everything. I   ll have to  write it down or something.  Did you enter the Philbrook Annual?  Yes, I entered there a couple times. Yes, I have.  11  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  I heard from one artist about the    reject room.    Did you ever have  anything in the reject room? These were well-known artists.  I don   t think so.  Sometimes if it was a little bit too out there, style-wise, a little bit too  new and nontraditional, they   d put you in the reject room.  A regular one was Fred Beaver and all them. I used to like to go to arts  and crafts shows, and they   d be there. They already had different motels  and stuff. It was a lot of fun. Even with old   what   s his name? Sculptor.  Oh, Willard Stone.  Willard Stone. We used to have fun in the later years before he died.  I understand you were a pretty good marketer, too, in a way because you  used to mentor younger artists, and I just heard from Dana how you  encouraged the kids to paint.    You   re not going out to play unless you  get this done for this art competition.     Yes, I   d have them painting all the time. Then my problem was I   d have  to mat every one of them in the front, not frame them, but mat them,  shrink wrap them. It   d take me all night on that. (Laughter) I think  sometimes I never made the show because when I brought that, there  was a stack like that, going up to the Five Tribes for the kids. I was  younger, but it was a lot of fun.  I also heard that you would help promote not just family but other  artists, up and coming artists, if you were going out and selling your  work.  Yes, I could see who had good talent.  You would take some of their work with you?  Like that Mike Wimmer, he paints up there for the capitol now. He   s  real good. He don   t paint Indian art, but he paints, like, these pictures in  the history books.  Like illustrations?  Yes, like a lot of people in this courtroom. He   d figure it just like them. I  need to go to the City and look at those. I   ve seen it in magazines,  Oklahoma Today, and all that.  12  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Is he one that used to travel with you? You used to sell some of his art  for him?  Yes. Back then, went to different places.  Did you deal with Nettie Wheeler, too, at all?  Jerome did, mostly. After he was gone, I went out there and she bought  some. She used to buy them, Nettie. I don   t see how she kept her  inventory. She   d just set it all under the bed, all in this one room, just  piled up. She just had it everywhere. Whew   How she kept track of it.  Yes, I don   t see how they kept in good condition, either.  You   re related to Lee and Edmond Joshua?  Yes, they   re my dad   s   they call them Uncle John. Dad   s side is kin to  them.  Did you guys paint together?  No, they always lived out west towards Wewoka, Seminole, and around  that way.  But did you show together sometimes?  Oh, yes. They   d be at arts and crafts shows.  That must   ve been kind of fun.  Yes, I liked that part. It was fun going, seeing your friends and  everything. Next day, on Sunday, you don   t feel so hot. (Laughter)  Let   s see. You were involved with Ni-Wo-Di-Hi Gallery for a while in  Austin, Texas?  About    74,    72, somewhere in there.  How did you get into Ni-Wo-Di-Hi?  This Ted Pearsall, he got Jerome   s stuff from Peggy  Tiger , and they  started on their own stuff. That was real successful. Just knocked them  all out, so he got some others. I guess later on, Peggy and them thought,     Why should we do this?    It was Peggy   s cousin, Molly. So they quit  13  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  doing that and went on their own without him getting none.  Without getting a cut?  Yes, a big cut. They started doing their own and did that. I got mine after  they quit them.  You started printing with him? Is that what you   re saying?  Yes, I printed with Ted, them early ones. I started out doing that. I  finally quit them, too, and went on my own about five years or so later.  Were you with Ni-Wo-Di-Hi before Donald Vann, or was he in the  gallery around the same time?  I can   t remember now. He was there, sometimes. I remember going  down and signing prints, and he was there. I got out of it. I didn   t stay in  it like he did. He did real good, though. He became a good artist.  How would you describe your style in the early days? Were you painting  in gouache mostly?  Yes, gouache. I didn   t use too much acrylics. Just tempera, gouache, pen  and pencils, graphics. I still haven   t used too much acrylics. I don   t  know why. I should. I think that was one, way back there. (Gestures in  the room) I was just tinkering around with it. That was of Chris  Tiger  I  did when he was playing football. He was  number  sixty-seven.  Yes, that   s a nice one. Seemed like portraits were a format you liked  back then.  Yes, I like to do portraits. I like to do faces.  What do you like about portraits?  I just like to do the faces. They say all them faces I do look like me, and  I say,    No, no, no. It just looks like me drawing it.    (Laughter) I just lay  it down. I don   t look at nothing on the faces. You can tell it   s mine. I  don   t know why.  That   s one thing I think you and Jerome share is this really fine line, this  kind of graphic quality to your work. How would you describe your  colors, your palette?  Jerome   s were like more pastel and looked softer. I did a lot of bright,  here and there.  14  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  When did you begin experimenting more with moving away from Plains  images and doing more Creek and Seminole images?  I didn   t do too much of that. I did if I had to. I don   t know. I just stuck to  the Plains-type.  One thing, I guess, is people weren   t totally receptive to the idea of  buying Creek or Seminole images or Cherokee images then, because  they would say,    Well, it doesn   t look Indian to us,    or whatever. Is that  part of the reason you stayed with Plains?  Yes, Indian art, I just always think of feathers or horses and stuff like  that.  You like doing the horses and warriors. How did the Indian art  landscape change in the 1980s from the   70s?  I don   t know. There   s been different ways, different artists. They started  using this   I don   t know what you call it. Not abstract, but pretty close,  all that coloring, and wild. They really rave about it out there towards  Southwest. I didn   t see any good art about that, not to me. I don   t know.  I guess that   s the way old Dave thought that, too. He says,    You call that  Indian art?    (Laughs)  David Williams?  Yes. I   m the same way. The Southwest art   I don   t know. It just didn   t  hang with me.  Didn   t grab hold of you. That was big in the mid-   80s. Of course, the  pastel colors were a big part of that, too. How about in the 1990s? What  were some of the ways in which the Indian art scene changed?  Even having prints, I noticed in the years where print selling just kind of  went down. I was asking different galleries how come they don   t buy  much anymore.    Well, they haven   t been selling that good.    I thought it  was just not going out, but not as popular as they was way back in the     70s.  I guess maybe it was in the   90s when the print market just kind of  started drying up. Also, one artist told me that Woody Crumbo had  always told him that was a mistake. Crumbo felt it was a mistake for him  to print his work because he felt like he then didn   t get the prices for his  originals. People didn   t want to buy originals because they could buy  prints, but in the    90s, that kind of reversed itself, seems like.  15  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  I don   t know. They hadn   t been buying prints that much.  But they were important for you early in your career, prints.  Yes, they was selling good back then in the    70s,    80s, and    90s.  What was one of your best out-of-town show memories, going out of  state? What was a good show for you, out of state?  You mean, like, selling or just having a good time? (Laughs)  Yes, well, selling, or having something fun happen.  I liked Red Earth.  Was that a pretty good show?  Yes, I sold good over there. Mainly originals.  Did you do Santa Fe Indian Market at all?  Never did do that. I   d go.  I thought so, and maybe have a show?  I don   t think I had a show like that, when I was doing them t-shirts in  one of those     Galleries?  Yes.  Do you remember which one it was?  It   s right off the Plaza, that square. It   s kind of on this side and back.  They sell t-shirts and moccasins and different other things like that.  What was it like when you sold your t-shirts out there?  It was good. I sold quite a bit of them. I took my art down there and   David  Tune sold it. They said I could do that. That was fun down there  at Santa Fe. I knew a bunch of different ones, and even got to know  some people that lived there. We   d go party after that, go somewhere out  to eat. It was a lot of fun.  16  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  All the Oklahoma artists hang together?  Yes, it   s fun. I haven   t painted too much here lately, in a long time. I  don   t know. Been a long time. Used to have fun at it when Willard was  around and Fred Beaver was around. I   d have fun with them.  Right, a lot of camaraderie. In 1990, the Indian Arts and Crafts Act was  passed, and it required artists to provide proof of tribal enrollment, or  be certified by their tribe as an artist of that heritage. Do you remember  the impact of that bill on galleries and artists?  Well, the real Indians, they   d laugh about it. They   d make some kind of  joke about,    Well, do we have to have a paper to show this and that?    I  think they said,    They should see how we look. We don   t look like no  Estelusti or anything.    Why did they do that?  Well, one of the goals of the legislation was to keep Indian art from  being knocked off by people from Japan or China who were making  knock-offs of Indian art, Indian pots, and things like that. That was one  of the reasons. I was wondering what your reaction was to it, if you  thought it had been effective?  Some people told me,    John, do you know someone   s doing this print of  yours?    Even on t-shirts. I had a graphic of two Indians, or three, and  faces, and a buffalo right here, all black and white, different ones.  Someone was putting it on t-shirts and then printing them and selling  them. I never did catch who it was.  You never caught who it was? Wow. Was this in the    80s or the    90s?  Eighties or seventies, way back there.  I didn   t get to see any of them, but they sound real intriguing. You  experimented for a while with some white, maybe it was Conte crayon or  just white wash on dark mat board. Do you remember doing a series like  that?  I used to sell a lot to this certain woman in Sapulpa.  Was it Indian Territory Gallery?  No. Well, I sold to all them galleries up there. They don   t like it when  you sell if they   re in the same town, you know.  There was kind of a rivalry between gallery owners?  17  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  There was about three different galleries over in Sapulpa: Mr. Indian,  Indian Territory, and that one in Broken Arrow. Remember that? Two  Feathers. I used to sell to them up there at Broken Arrow. There was one  more, and I can   t think of who it was. Oh, Ms. Boone. She   d buy more  than all of them put together, and she   d buy originals. Before she died, I  told her about this one buyer up in Pennsylvania. I think she sold a  bunch of my originals because she was pretty bad off, going to die, and  she was going to pay some of her bills with it. I   m glad she sold it to this  man and woman in Hanover, Pennsylvania. She collected pots, real  pretty ones. She had Bill Glass   , and she had real pretty baskets from  people over in Mississippi, around that way, and Texas, Livingston,  Texas. She sold a bunch of that and her collection of quilts. She sold  quite a bit. She had over a hundred paintings hanging in her house, of  mine.  Oh, wow  She was big collector of yours.  She sold quite a bit of that. She   d pay me what I asked her for. She never  ever did say,    Well, how about this and that?    You know how some of  them want to jew you down? Anyway, I felt sorry for her because she  was going to die. She had cancer or something. She had already sold  over ten thousand dollars    worth of things at one time. She still had  more, and she promised to give different ones. She said she was going to  give me some, but I never did get any. There was one person that  watched out for her and was wanting what she gave in the will to him  because he used to mow that lawn and everything, kept it up and stuff.  It   s where they get to where they said that she didn   t have to pay him,  but then later on I found out that nurse that took care of her said,    That   s  not right. She always paid him.    She always was going to either hand it  to you and give it to you. He took it anyway if she laid it there. It would  be there. She was that nice.  It was nice of you to give   some artists don   t give the names of their  collectors to other collectors.  Well, this one she knew. I gave her name to them, and they   re the ones  that got a hold of her. I was just helping Ms. Boone out. She had a lot of  artwork of different types.  Did you have a show at Southern Plains Museum at any point?  Anadarko? No, never have.  I was wondering if you had an opportunity to walk into a place where  you saw a lot of your work together, all hanging together, like a  retrospective.  18  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  No.  Probably her house, I guess. Like walking into a museum.  At her house, yes. When you said that white on light blue, I did a lot   for  her. She loved paintings of that type. She bought about every one  of them I had like that. I liked them, too. I keep forgetting about doing  some more like that.  I heard they were really effective. It   s interesting. Did you have any  other collectors that shaped, helped, because you knew they liked  particular themes, and that kind of helped you explore that a little more?  Well, there   s different ones. Women. I don   t know about men. A couple  lawyers, I guess. Women, they   d say,    How come you don   t do  women?    I said,    Oh, I do. When I do one, I   ll call you.    She was a  lady, so I sold her one. She wanted a woman.  What was the subject matter? Was it a Plains Indian woman or a  Muscogee woman?  It was a Creek. You know how they wore that dress up to here and a  long skirt. It makes them look long, anyway, because they had the belt  all the way up there. They got that, you know, how they tie their hair,  twirl it around. What do you call that? Then I did this other type for this  lawyer. He sure liked it. You might say it was a real good-looking Indian  girl. When I thought of that, I had this good buyer in Georgia. He   d  always buy real expensive ones. He   s got one of a little girl I did, and I  did this other one of that other little girl. They sell pretty good, I guess,  because they   re gone fast.  That   s good to know because I hadn   t seen any of your women pictures.  Yes, I forgot about him. I guess he   s still living. I don   t know. He used  to come here and buy a lot and then go on.  Would he stop at your place, or he would come to Red Earth?  Red Earth, and he would stop by here. If I was going to enter any of  them, he   d stop by here first.  Oh, okay, so he   d get first pick before they went in the show. What   s one  of the best compliments you   ve gotten from either a collector or another  artist, or something that stands out in your mind? A collector of your  work, something that they said about a painting that just kind of stands  19  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  out for you.  Gee, I wouldn   t know. There   s a lot of them I did, and I just can   t  remember. I used to really be on the stick, always painting and getting it  down because I was making money on it. I used to get a new car every  year or two. Got a car and would go to these shows. I had a Corvette one  time and packed them all in that bag in the back seat. Then I   d stay in  some motel in Oklahoma City off I-40, hoping no one broke into it. I   d  hear things about people breaking into anything, anywhere. I used to go  out there and stand on that ledge, looking out at the car.  Checking on your car and paintings. How many shows did you do,  approximately, a year?  That Trail of Tears show, the Five Tribes Show, and I used to go up to  Red Earth.  And Denver. Colorado Indian Market, you did that.  Yes, I went there. I went there, not too many times, about three or four  times. Went to one in Boulder. There   s a nice climate there.  Was that your first time in Colorado?  Yes.  Did any of those landscapes show up in your artwork or any of the     Not really. I was sketching around, just painting around with it. I   d say,     Wow, that   s the way they paint it.    I knew how to do that, but I guess I  was in the same   like Dick West taught us. Not too much background,  just the real thing, like real Indian art. Do you remember, back in those  days?  Focused on the figures, not much foreground and no background. It   s  been a good style for you.  Did Peggy show you that one of Jerome?  Yes.  Donald Vann used to copy off of them all the time. That   s why his look  like that.  Oh, is that right? Donald told me about being real influenced because  Jerome mentored him when he was in high school.  20  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Yes, when he was about sixteen.  He felt very close to Jerome. So how important is having a story when  you paint? Is it important for it to be kind of like a story, or are you just  trying to strike a certain mood?  I kind of go by the title.  Okay. Do you get the title first?  I just kind of work them about the same time, thinking a certain title, and  I   ll think back about a lot of things Grandpa told me. Then I have to  think of the wording to go with it. Sometimes that   s real good. It gets the  buyer to know exactly what it means or what the painting is.  Right, it has to be kind of a short-hand summary. So you   ll get the idea  for the image and the title at the same time?  Yes.  What kinds of research do you do?  I used to do quite a bit in different books. Here I go again, mostly Plains  Indians, you know.  People would make that point when everybody was doing Plains, that  you needed to be sure and research your material.  I read on the Seminoles and the Creeks. Seminoles got a lot of good  color, all the design. I read on things like that. I don   t know. I guess I got  hooked on Dick West   s way. I still like to do just what I think. Like that  white on blue, I liked doing that. I don   t know. I did lots of them when I  think about it. Ms. Boone must   ve liked them, too. (Laughter) No one  else hardly seen them, I guess. She just was hung up on them.  I hope we get to see them at some point. Can you describe your creative  process a little bit, like from the time you get an idea? How does that  unfold?  If I   m supposed to do a certain piece, I   ll research some of it, get the  idea of the clothing or whatever. Usually, I like to create my own,  creative-like, different. I wouldn   t want it to be like anything else. I   ve  still got things in my mind I want to do because I haven   t seen nothing  with it anywhere else. I still want to do that.  21  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  If it   s not a commission, if it   s something you can come up with,  whatever idea you want, do they come to you listening to music or  driving or     Maybe it   ll come to me, like, if I see something, it   ll spur something. Or  I read something.  And you   ll see a picture in your mind?  Yes, I can see pictures, images in anything. I like to get Bev Doolittle   s  paintings. I always look through that, and I   ll come up with so many  different images she   ll have, places. I do that a lot, even, I guess, before  she did because I just did it on my own a long time ago.  Like spirit faces?  Yes, or a little object, something to do with a rock or weeds. There will  be something hid, like hidden images. I didn   t look at anyone else for  that. It just came to my head a long time ago, but I   ll see different ones  that have those. I liked old Bev Doolittle   s. You   ve seen hers?  Yes.  I like it. It   s fun.  I think she did borrow those ideas from Indian artists, though. (Laughs)  No, maybe not.  Not in the same form, but, as you said, you were kind of experimenting  with that, and there were some others. Did you do very much trading of  your artwork with other artists?  Yes, I used to do a lot of trading at places when  the show was  about to  close down. I   d go around different places. We   d make arrangements or  something before the show was closed, and they   d say,    We   ll do it at  the end, okay?    I   d say yes. That   s where I used to trade a lot of them.  I   d hurry up and make the rounds before the thing was really shutting  down, then I   d trade. Even trade people at art shows not like Red Earth,  but where they got pottery or different things like that, just like little  gadgets someone made, a vase or wood cup.  What   s one of the favorite things you   ve traded your art for?  I don   t know. There   s so many. (Laughter) I got some cups with  different faces on it. I   d have to think on that because I used to trade at  22  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  every show. I   d trade for jewelry, too, like silver, silver necklace, silver  jewelry. What else? Artwork, too. All that.  You traded with other painters?  Yes.  And you got to keep some of your artwork, too?  Yes.  Used to be, those old-timers, they didn   t always get to keep anything of  their own. In fact it was Ben Harjo who said to me,    I decided I was  going to keep some things for me and my family.     Like when you   re selling? Oh, I haven   t kept nothing yet, but     (Laughter)  There   s a couple pieces Peggy kept of yours.  Oh, the ones she has? I painted them a long time ago and gave them to  her and said,    Here   s you a present.     So that   s how they stayed in the family. (Laughs) Looking back on your  artistic career, what would you say was an important turning point for  you?  Turning point was, I used to work at Douglas Aircraft. They had a big  layoff in    69 on everybody, and I was getting that layoff, too. We kept  our seniority up, where they   d pay us for six more months. After that,  that   s when I really started painting more and selling it then. I said,     Wow, this is pretty easy sales.    I   d go to people around Muskogee, and  they   d get enough or full of it, and then I   d have to find new people.  Sure enough, I did. They set me up with a show at Five Tribes that first  year, and I sold seventy-five paintings.  That   s an amazing body of work. How much time did you have to  prepare for it?  I don   t know. See, I wasn   t so intricate in doing things. I just kind of did  them fast, painting. I was in a hurry and would just do one. Kept on like  that. I sold seventy-five. That was a month show. If I had a new one, I   d  take them up there, and they   d put them in. I had most of them at the  first.  That must   ve been an incredible feeling, that opening night. Were your  23  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  folks there, too?  I think so. I used to tell them to come on over. Sometimes they don   t  know when it   s on because they didn   t get the paper.  What has been one of the high points of your career? It might be an  award, or it might be an experience that you had, some kind of honor,  maybe just getting a chance to go a certain place you hadn   t been?  I used to sell at Port Jefferson, New York, and some other places on the  East Coast. This is another pretty good high point. Fred Beaver was  there and that sculptor from Santa Fe. He died. What was his name?  He   s got one in front of the capitol building.  It was Allan Houser.  Houser. I think it was Houser, yes. He has one up in the state capitol up  there. He was there at this show, and we drove all the way out there.  Who was with us? Gary White Deer went up there, too, with us. There  was just four of us, but that was a real fun show.  Was it your first time going to New York?  This was out in California. It was a big Indian show that they had out  there, not too far from LA. Santa Monica? Anyway, Fred Beaver, I think  it was his last long run when he was living. All them good artists I had  fun with died. Seemed like artwork wasn   t as fun as it used to be when  we was younger and full of spunk and had your good old friends there.  They   re gone now. Like you said a while ago, I traded Tiller Wesley. He  died, and I was surprised. And old Burgess  Roye died. He was with Ni-  Wo-Di-Hi for a while. He died, and a lot of them died suddenly.  They were younger guys, too.  And good artists.  And good artists. What has been one of the low points of your career?  What I remember is I had a show   where was it? Kansas City or  somewhere on this end of it. Maybe I was in the wrong spot, but it was  just me, I think, that had a show. I always remember that. I said,    I never  have done this before,    I think to the one that put it on. I said,    Can I  trade somebody something?    And they wouldn   t. I don   t know how to  put it, but I went to that show and didn   t sell nothing. That   s the only  show I haven   t sold one thing, not one. I just felt low down. I thought,     What is this, anyway?    I said,    I never have gone to a show and didn   t  24  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  sell one thing, anyway.    I always will remember that. That   s the only  show I did and didn   t sell nothing. It was up there in Kansas City, I  think.  Did you have to try to sell, coming back? We   ve done that before, trying  to sell after a show.  Yes, I have sold like that before, see if I could find somebody.  I bet that was discouraging. What advice would you give to an aspiring  Indian artist these days?  I used to just tell them,    Keep that art up. You   ll be getting up there the  way you paint. You   re doing good.    Like a neighbor that lives down that  road about a mile. I showed him a few things in art, Indian art. I took  him to the museum to look around, and I said,    Here, you need to enter  just one show.    I think he won some things in there. He   s a Cherokee.  One bad thing, if he starts drinking, you can   t get him to paint or do  anything. I heard the sheriff or someone say,    Oh, Marvin, he   ll get in  jail, and he   ll ask for a pen or a pencil or something, and he   ll be doing  some drawing in there, and it   s good      He said that he sold some in there before. I said,    That   s good, but he  should be painting all the time.    I saw some of his, later. He was getting  better, real good. He sells them and everything. His mother used to work  up at the hospital. She had a lot of those sold to doctors because she   d  been a nurse a long time. She   d get a lot of those sold for him. You  know what he   d do? Give her the money, and then take some and go out  and get drunk with his boys or whoever.  Is there anything we forgot to cover, Johnny, anything you   d like to add?  I was going to say, I wish my grandpa lived at least ten, twenty more  years. That   d be too far, but maybe. That   d be good because I try to keep  in my mind what I learned from him. It was good. If he did live longer, I  could   ve knew about more of the medicine side and the stomp dance  side, the    good side.    They call it that because they   d quit going to  church in the summertime and go stomp dancing. Baptists think that   s  no good. I don   t believe that. I told Mom, I said,    Why   d they do that?     Indians, they just had their own ways. These other Baptists come over  there and tried to make you all change your ways. You all had your own  culture. You don   t see them doing that.     My granny lived to be almost ninety. She died in    87, that year I went to  London, England. Mom said,    You better go see your grandma before  you go because she   s not feeling so good.    I went down to the hospital  25  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  one Wednesday night and stayed there until after midnight. She was  getting worse because she fell and she was diabetic. She hurt herself.  Sometimes she   d come in reality, and then she   d forget who you are.  Like that   what   s that thing called?  Kind of like Alzheimer   s.  Yes, something like that. Whenever we left, I went to get ready and left  out Friday for New York, me and Jamie Reason. He   s a Cherokee from  New York, Long Island. We went up there, and we was up there the first  or second night at these people   s house. The phone rang, and I don   t  know how anyone got that number. Jamie just said, all of a sudden,    It   s  about your grandma.    Sure enough, it was that she had died. Jamie asked  me if I was going back, and I said,    I don   t know. I don   t like to see  Granny like that. I just want to remember her how she was. I   ll just wait,  I guess, until I get home.    I didn   t go to the funeral because I was out of  the country.  You were on your way to London for an art show? Was that your first  experience out of the country?  Yes, out of the country.  What was your impression?  They drive the car on the wrong side of the road  (Laughs) In fact, I sat  this way on this side of the road. (Laughter) The streets are so little,  them cars come by you just a little ways. I told  name? ,    Let   s trade  seats. I   m afraid one of them cars going to hit us.    (Laughter) I got on  that side. Little cars and little streets. I don   t see how they drive like that.  Was the show pretty good? Did you have a good turnout?  Yes, had a good turnout.  How many paintings did you have?  I had quite a bit, maybe about between twenty and thirty.  Oh, that   s a good number.  Boy, those people over there are real interesting. I was over there with a  bunch of them, and they was listening to everything I   d say. Jamie was  over there laughing at me because I was bullshitting them a lot.  (Laughter) They asked,    Do you all have buffalos in your yard?    I said,     Oh, yes. When people get hungry, they just go kill one.    Then they   d  26  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  say,    You all would eat that?    I said,    Mmm-hmm.    Jamie over there,  just laughing at me. He couldn   t believe it. (Laughter) It was funny.  Then later on, I told them I was just BSing them. I said,    We do have  buffalos, but they   re not in the yard.    Told them we went on horses to  town. I just said all kinds of stuff. (Laughter) That was fun, just talking  to them like that.  Yes, that   s for sure. Where was the show, again? Was it in a museum?  London, England, at some institute. Some big place.  Highgate Literary  and Scientific Institution   Well, let   s take a look at a couple of your works that Peggy has, that I   ll  have you talk about. Do you want to tell us just a little bit about this  painting, what you put into it, and what it   s about?  Posketv, it   s the Green Corn Ceremony for the Creeks, Creek-Seminole.  It   s like any other gathering, a lot of others, but the main ones, they  come, like, one day. Friday is for the women, playing stick ball and  games. This is like a creation of the Spirit, watching over them.  Always fours, things come in four. The feathers equal that up there.  These are two stickball players. Right here are the four different arbors  where they sit around the ring, the stomp dance ring. They   re usually in  the country. They are in the country, outdoors all the time. This is the  sun going down or coming up. You can play that either way.  It shows the stickballs, the sticks, and they had lochas, turtles. That   s for  the singing of the stomp dances. They use that for the rhythm. The four  green corns to show that it   s a Green Corn Ceremony.  That   s really a beautiful piece.  Focusing on another painting.   I did that in    04. This is not the Creeks or anything. This is the Plains  Indians because you   ve got the tipis in it from back then, with the camp  in the sky, you might say. The tipis signify that. These Indians, two are  looking at the one on the left side like he   s the boss. He   s the one that  knows it all because these are younger bucks. He   s the main one. The  title of this is Wisdom. He   s the one with all the wisdom.  And this one was done in   06?  In    06 or    01.  Oh,    01. I   m sorry. It   s gouache. Is there any chalk in the back?  27  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  Little Thunder  Tiger  All gouache. I like them little things sometimes I put in, little designs.  Yes, into the mat board itself. That   s really neat. Do you want to tell us  about this one?  This one, I finally used   the red part is acrylic. The rest that   s like  splatter with a tooth brush is a white. Then I paint and use the other  white. That   s a gouache where the heavy part is, and then you kind of  lighten it out.  Just a little bit of red there at the horizon, like the sun going down. It   s  called Night Watch? Is that right?  Yes, Night Watch, kind of like the night watchman sees over the place.  That   s a beautiful piece. What   s this called?  Young Medicine Man.  It   s done in what medium?  White ink and colored pencils. It   s white colored pencil.  White colored pencil. That   s so striking. It was     Two thousand three.  And there   s a little bit of toothbrush splatter, I guess, around the moon  on that one, too.  Yes, around the moon.  Well, Johnny, I really appreciate your time today. Thank you for talking  with us about your art.  Okay, thank you.  -------  -------  
