 Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University  Library. Today is Saturday, June 13th, 2009. We   re in Stillwater,  Oklahoma at the Stillwater Public Library interviewing Joe Morris. This  interview is being conducted as part of the Spotlighting Oklahoma: Life  in the 1930s Oral History Project. Thank you for joining us today.  You   re welcome.  Let   s begin by learning a little bit more about you. Could you tell me  where you grew up and give us a little insight into your early life?  Well I was born in Mountain View, Oklahoma. That   s southwest  Oklahoma, in Kiowa County, in 1923 and lived there five years until I  was ready for the first grade and then my family moved to Lawton. Of  course that was in 1929. That   s when we first knew of any depression  setting in. My dad, he was a traveling salesman and he would go on  Monday and come back on a Friday, but he worked for Arbuckle Coffee  Company, which was a big coffee company back in 1929. But anyway,  he got laid off   I guess I was six years old   so we had to move to  Lawton, I suppose, for him to look for a job, because Mountain View  was a little town, about 1000, probably. I started school there and went  five years to Lawton grade school and then from there, we went to  Hobart. Went to junior high at Hobart, which was not too far away. And  there I kind of got to know small towns. I thought I was a city kid, I  guess, in Lawton because I spent a lot of time on that Army base with  military kids and got to watch   the military was big on polo and I guess  it was in the third or fourth grade, but every Sunday, my dad would go  out there and it was free polo games. The Army had the horses so it was  kind of a big sport. The kids got to hold extra horses and keep the old  polo balls that they beat up and so then a lot of times we would have our  own polo game on foot down in the street, there in Lawton.  5  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Anyway, we went to Hobart for junior high school and then from there  went to Carnegie for high school and then I decided   well I had four or  five high school buddies that all graduated together and in    42 we knew  we were going to be drafted in the next few weeks, in World War II, so  we went to Oklahoma City to have a big, last celebration. Lived at the  YMCA. It cost  5.75 a week. There were six of us in a room, three  bunks high, but it was cheap and we were having a good time. We  worked out at Will Roger   s Field, joined the Union, made 50 cents an  hour or so. We were big time. We had plenty of time to go to Spring  Lake at night. We were there about a month and across the street was the  employment office and they had a big sign one day    Go to Alaska for a  construction job.    And so I thought,    Well I might just do that.    Exempt  from the draft, make a lot of money. They   d ship us up there, board and  room was free; had us sign a one year contract. So me and another  buddy, we decided we   d go up.  So I went up there for a year and of course, I didn   t understand   or they  didn   t tell me that the board and room was living in a tent. Of course,  this was war time. The Japanese were still out in the Aleutians and at  that point they thought the Japanese were going to take Alaska. I  thought,    Ooh, I don   t know what I   m doing here     Anyway, I come  back and by the time I got home, the draft board was waiting for me. So  I got in the Navy right quick and did a four year hitch in the Navy in the  South Pacific. But I was really lucky. Transferred me to CBs   Construction Battalions . Spent four or five months around Pearl  Harbor and my brother was in the Air Force at Hickam Field and he was  the smart kid in the family. He was a captain in the Air Force and so I   d  go over and stay at his house. They had housing for officers, kind of a  residential deal and in the mean time I was unassigned Navy duty so I  could come and go as I pleased. I had to go to duty then until they  shipped me out to Guam. Did a lot of island hopping in the CBs. It was  kind of a maintenance unit. Well it was a CBMU Maintenance. We had  to keep all their equipment up for the Army and Air Force on South  Pacific Islands which, I guess, has very little to do with the    30s.  Well going back to the time when you had just moved to Lawton, what  employment did your parents secure?  Well that was unusual. I guess we were, like I was telling you earlier, the  Depression, we didn   t really know that much about it. I know we didn   t  have a lot of money, but nobody did, you know, as far as pocket money.  Kids just in    29,    31 and    32, it was just ideal. I kind of skipped the  Depression, I guess. But I knew my dad, he knew how to find a job. I  remember one job he had in Lawton, it was a little hole in the wall candy  store manufacturing   what do you call them, peanut clusters? He   d buy  boxes of them and go sell them to stations for re-sale and I   d ride with  6  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  him once in awhile and I didn   t think much about it, but I suppose that  was just to get him by   the family. There were four of us in the family,  but we always lived in a decent house   rentals, but with plumbing, gas  heating. So I really didn   t notice much. I lived on Dearborn Street and a  block away was a big city park and I guess it was probably WPA days  and they had young people managing the playground. They had a  wading pool that opened at two o   clock every day and so we lived in the  park all summer. It was kind of fun. So we kind of missed all of the bad  stuff.  I do remember a few of the dust deals, but we weren   t in the heart of the  Dust Bowl. But they would come in kind of late in the evening, like a  fog nearly, it wasn   t wind, and I think they used to say that it wasn   t all  Oklahoma dust. It was Texas and New Mexico, maybe. But it was not  like I see, stand out and fight the dust out of your eyes. I can remember  dust along the window seals. I remember Mother saying,    Oh, we   ve got  to clean them window seals up.    So actually, Lawton   by the time I got  to Hobart then my dad had another sales job selling flour wholesale to  grocery stores. He was never really out of a job, I don   t think. But I need  to mention that in the heart of Lawton, he got into the rabbit business  raising rabbits, of all things, on a regular city lot. We had rabbit hutches.  We had to have several hundred in that backyard. The does would have  the litters and that was his income. He   d raise them to frying size, dress  them in an old one car garage. My two older brothers, one of them was  in high school, one of them was in junior high, so they helped him dress  them on Saturday mornings. They   d put them in a wash tub and take  them to the mess sergeant out at Fort Sill and they   d buy them. He dealt  entirely with the mess sergeant. Oh yeah, and my job, of course I was in  the third, fourth grade, was taking the hides and turning them the wrong  side out and drying them. About every two months a man would come  by and we   d get a nickel for them, so we made big money. So actually  my dad, he was a manager, I guess, as far as staying out of the deep  Depression.  And Mom took care of everybody at home?  Yeah, she was a Sunday school teacher and the PTA and involved in the  local schools. I found out early on, you want to be the teacher   s pet, you  make good grades  (Laughter) So she helped with the school, once a  year they   d have cookies and she   d always bring cookies. I thought,    Oh  boy, this is the way to go.     Would she have a favorite meal she   d cook all the time?  Well, not exactly. I don   t know that our   I was never quite conscious of  having to do without anything in the way of eating. I mean, when we  7  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  were in Lawton, which would be    29 to    34, you would get a quart of  milk, set on the porch every morning and buy one quart, they   d deliver  it, you know. So not really, she was strictly a housewife.  Would she sew or quilt?  Well, yeah. Well not really quilt. Later in life, way after the kids she  joined up with a quilting club, but that was several years later.  Would she make your clothes?  Yeah, yeah. Oh yeah. Our clothes   all of our shirts were made out of  feed sacks. Early on, later   of course that   s a little bit passed the  Depression era a few years   she made all the shirts, usually out of flour  sacks and the feed companies got to printing on the material, if you buy  chicken feed or whatever, you get to save those and yeah you can pick  those out,    No, I want a shirt out of that.     Would she make your siblings and your dad clothing out of feed sacks  too?  Yeah, but it seemed normal. I don   t know.  Well everybody was doing it.  Yeah, like I say and I had no connection with farm kids. Those days in  Lawton you didn   t have school buses for the rural kids. I guess they  were out on the farm. So they had a different experience. But I   ve got a  friend here and she   s going to interview with you too and she   s got a  whole different story because she was in rural Kansas at that time. She  can tell some wild stories. And to me, I think,    Where was I during that  time?    because I just lucked out, I guess.  Did your parents talk much about politics or President Roosevelt?  Not really. It   s funny, my dad was a republican, my mother was a  democrat; they didn   t talk, but it was tradition. Her dad was a democrat,  so she had to be a democrat which she knew none of them talked it  much, but pass it down      Well, I need to show my loyalty, I guess.     And I always teased him, you know, about one of them was a republican  and the other was a democrat.  So he and she had no strong feelings either way about the WPA and the  CCC?  No, not really. Now living down that way, the Wichita Wildlife Refuge  8  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Nykolaiszyn  is right there, it   s big, kind of like Fort Sill. It goes for miles. The WPA  was there and I knew a lot of people and I knew older kids that was from  what they called the old CCC   s, you know what that was? Young people  and they lived in, let   s see, barrack-like buildings around Lake  Lawtonka and they built a bunch of lakes. When I was in the Boy Scouts  later in Hobart, we   d camp down there and all those lakes were built by  the CCC   s which young, single boys lived there and semi-military sort  of. And then Mt. Scott, I remember them building a road around it. The  WPA did that and they were people, grown men. I think they kind of  camped down there because the family stayed home. They probably  stayed for the week and would just do horses and teams, building that,  just a scenic road, but I guess it was kind of like the Stimulus Package,  only the forerunner.  Well when you were a little boy, outside of helping out with the rabbits,  what would you do for fun?  Well, in Lawton, my two brothers   that was the early    30s   had paper  routes. They had five major streets, which is a lot of paper routes. So the  kids, my older brother who was a lot older than me, he got out of high  school in Lawton the year I was in the fourth grade. So I would tag  along and I   d help him a little bit with the newspapers. I   d ride on the  back of the bicycle occasionally. But they, I guess, made some money.  Yeah, that probably went into the family fund, I   m sure. Oh, in Lawton  in third or fourth grade I was a big deal too because I had a job selling  Saturday Evening Post and Ladies Home Journal on Saturday, door to  door, knock on the door and have my little satchel. And it   d be three or  four of us third and fourth graders. And our boss, boy he was a big guy,  a seventh or eighth grader and he   d get our magazines and show us  where to go and we   d start knocking on doors. On a good Saturday I  could make 15, 20 cents. I don   t remember if I got to keep it or not, it  might have been for that quart of milk.  What did things cost back then?  They had an ice cream store there in Lawton, downtown, and probably a  nickel, not more than that because every two or three months, I guess,  my dad would really splurge and we   d go get an ice cream cone, but that  was once every two months, something like that. I wasn   t aware of  money. I should have been, I guess.  Did you listen to the radio?  Yeah, oh yeah. Radio was big time.  What were some of your favorite shows?  9  Morris  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Well, in that particular era, of course   the two white guys would do the  black guys.  Amos and Andy, does that sound right?  Yeah, Amos and Andy, yeah, that was one. And then later on, the radio  was big. The whole family sat and listened to the radio. Right now I  don   t recall the program but we had our favorite. Of course, clear up to  Jack Benny, clear up to TV time. But in the    30s, I   m not for sure we  listened to a lot of radio.  Did you listen to any Fireside Chats?  Oh, I remember those. Yeah, the Roosevelt time. Talking about the  radio, we were living in Carnegie at that time when Will Rogers died in  the airplane, you know, in Alaska and I mean the whole town just shut  down nearly. Neighbors were just upset and my dad took off of work  and we went and visited with a lot of his friends and they sat around and  talked. He was the entertainer then, of course. Of course, being in  Oklahoma everybody thought they knew him, personally.  Well, at any time did your mother or your father or your brothers do any  work for government agencies?  No, I don   t think so.  And tell me about cars.  Like I say, my dad, in    29, he had a good job when the thing fell and he  had just bought a Model A two-door, oh that was a nice car. It cost  400  or  500, so you knew you had a big car. He used that to travel, but  evidently he had it paid for, he didn   t lose it. We always had a car   we  had that car for years. And then in    35,    36, I remember we had a Ford,  1932 or 3. So I guess he managed to   we never were without a car.  Didn   t drive it much. Oh and when we lived in Lawton, I guess since  vacations would cost money, we   d go around the Wichita Mountains in  about a week and camp out and take all the groceries and never leave the  little camp site. But usually one or two neighbors would go and we   d  have tarp poles, not tents, in case it rained, we could stand under that. Of  course, summertime it was hot down there. And that was a big vacation.  That was just like going to Las Vegas. Of course, that was 15 miles out  there and we   d just cook right there on the campgrounds. That was kind  of taking care of business the cheap way. So actually, that   s why I guess  I don   t remember bad feelings. And I   ll tell you about my friend Ruth,  she can tell some   it   s really kind of scary, but I missed all of that.  10  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Well in Lawton and Hobart, did you notice anybody coming through on  trains?  Yeah, rode trains. Carnegie had a train until   my dad was a heck of an  amateur baseball player, several people told me. Baseball was big. Every  little town had baseball teams. That was big time and he   d tell me they   d  go play Chickasha or Anadarko and the whole team, of course, not many  people had cars and the team would go on a train. They   d get on the  train, go play and get on the train and come back. And Carnegie had a  passenger line, but I was never on it. It was gone by the time I moved  there, but they did have a freight train until a few years ago. But I had, in  the Navy, good experience on trains. Man, that was fun. Sleep on the  trains.  Do you recall when The Grapes of Wrath came out?  Probably not right at the time. Now I knew of people going, not  personally, but I knew people were leaving Oklahoma and like I say,  well I did know a few vaguely, my parents    friends. They went. I was  aware of them all shipping out to go to California to strike it rich. I guess  overall they did pretty well. I mean, better than nothing.  You   ve had a different experience than some because you lived in the  city, but how do you feel that now people consider our current economic  state like the Great Depression?  Well, I don   t know that there   s a lot of comparison right yet. They   ve  still got the Hi-Fi television and, of course, it could deepen a little, but I  kind of doubt it. I don   t have a lot of fear right now of us getting back to  that. I think we   re smart enough now to manage it a little bit.  So after high school, you went out to Alaska, you enlisted eventually in  the Navy. What happened next?  Well, the reason we moved to Carnegie, like I say, my dad, he could  figure out some way to make a living, so when he left his job as a feed  salesman, calling on the local retail stores, we moved to Carnegie  because he put in a chicken hatchery, which was totally off the wall. We  never lived on a farm, but he always liked, for a hobby, to show  chickens   back then that was a big deal, to show chickens like at the  fair and all. But anyway he had a friend that had a hatchery in Mountain  View. We moved into Carnegie and set up a hatchery which was pretty  successful. So all through my high school I worked at my dad   s feed  store and chicken hatchery. That was right after World War II. So  agriculture, the government was pushing it and the only thing to do was  get into agriculture. Farming was going to be   it was a boost, you know.  11  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  And we did that for about   well by the time I got back from the Navy, I  worked with him in the feed store for about a year and then we decided  to put in the chicken farm.  So we ended up with a pretty big chicken farm, for west Oklahoma   not  like today. We had about 25,000 chickens which was a bunch then  because they were all independent, but now its corporations like in  Arkansas and now of course, Arkansas boomed and those are all gone.  But my five kids grew up on the chicken farm. I like to tease them about  it (laughs); Anne was the first one to go to OSU. Three of them went  here. So she was working for the college to make a little extra money in  her freshman year. Her job was in the Ag Department, so they ran her  for the FFA Collegiate Queen and she made it and they still tease her  about it   the chicken farmer. Of course, she was not really the chicken  farmer.  What was a typical day like on the chicken farm for you?  Lots of work, but I liked it. One year I raised frying chickens and that  didn   t work out real good. I went one cycle with that. So then we went  with hens, egg production. Those days were before cages which made it  a little different, but I had big houses a half block long, or a block  long   300 feet. So you   d put 5,000 laying hens, so three or four times a  day you   re making rounds picking up eggs. We were well equipped. We  had a walk-in cooler for the eggs and the modern equipment. Big  washers and sizers. It was long hours, but you lived right there and for a  coffee break, you   d go to the kitchen. So it had some advantages, but  Saturday and Sunday was a work day. Sunday   half a day off, but you   d  still gather the eggs. You   ve got to do that part regardless. Christmas  Day, those chickens don   t know. So it was a fun time. And it finally paid  out. I don   t know that I   d ever do it again.  How long did you have it?  About ten to twelve years.  Wow.  I got five kids through college, so I guess it made something. Never had  money in my pocket, but never was broke.  Well that   s good. How did you learn though? Was it all trial and error?  Yeah, pretty much. Well the Department of Agriculture has got   and I  came to Stillwater for two day seminars and stayed at the college, and of  course, in the State Department of Agriculture they had a lot of  12  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  assistance. Everything you wanted to know, they had a little bulletin or  they had people come out even. If you had a problem, I could call them  and they   d probably send someone out. They did a time or two when I  had a little disease and couldn   t figure it out. Oh yeah, the government  really helped, the Department of Agriculture. I   d come up to Stillwater  and they had a big poultry department in Stillwater back in 1945 and     46. Those old chicken houses are still out there, some of them. Yeah I  was telling the kids the other day I ate on the library lawn several times  when that famous cook, a little bit before your time     Oh, Clay Potts.  Clay Potts. We always had half a chicken grilled out there by Clay Potts.  (Laughs) I was probably at six or eight of his deals. I met him a time or  two, but he was the talk of the campus.  Yeah, we hear all kinds of Clay Potts stories.  Yeah, I   ll be darned. I hadn   t thought of that in years. (Laughter) He  must have been   I don   t know what his job was really. He worked for  the University was all I knew.  Just cooked that barbeque.  Yeah, it was really neat. The University   it was chicken farmers and  hatchery men and there   d probably be a hundred of them maybe that  would come up to those seminars   lots of information. So we had help.  Well did you take any lessons from the Depression that you   ve passed  down to your children?  Well I guess unconsciously I did. They worked a lot on the chicken  farm, but they never got paid. (Laughs) I guess they are all pretty  thrifty   they know how to handle money. I   d give them money like my  parents did for the weekly picture show and whatever, but no weekly  allowance. Two of my daughters never had a car going to OSU and that  was Kim there. She rode a bicycle. So I guess I might have managed a  car, but heck the bicycle worked. So I must have been either stingy or a  good money manager, I don   t know. But they didn   t squander money.  So I suppose I learned something and wasn   t even conscious of it.  At what point did your father retire?  He didn   t. He died one day just sitting in a chair at 72. And I worked  until I was 75. I   m 86 now. Was always pretty healthy. Played a lot of  tennis. Oh on the egg farm, the kids come up a lot, had a little acreage  13  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  and I played in Lawton also, in that WPA, way back in    32 or    33, they  had four tennis courts there and they had young high school kids  teaching tennis to us grade school kids and we had tournaments and  matches and so I always played a lot of tennis and got pretty good. We   d  play exhibition games in the fourth and fifth grade at night with the  lights on. There   d be big crowds, you know. We thought we were in  England playing the big tournament. In the Navy CB they did a lot of  construction, so I always remodeled a house. I never called anybody in; I  did that after work. So one day I decided to build a tennis court right out  the back door and so the kids, after they left they come back and we had  a little Wimbledon tournament. Run up the British flag and we   d have  strawberries and cr  me just like they did at John McEnroe way back in  those days.  But never throwing of your racket?  No. (Laughter) Then you didn   t argue with the referee. You didn   t  argue. I built a referee   s seat up there just for fun and there   d always be  some smart alec-y girl   you know how smart alec-y girls are   that  would kind of tease and act like McEnroe and she   d give them a lecture.  They made fun out of it.  Good times.  Yeah, I worked until I was 75 and didn   t even think anything about it.  But looking back I thought, hmm that wasn   t very bright. Next time I   m  going to go to school. That was why when all my five kids got their  college degree, I thought   they knew from day one and my wife was the  brain, so they got their brains from her. She was really smart and she had  a junior college degree from Carnegie Junior College which is a town  about like Perkins. I don   t know if you knew, back before the war when  I was in high school, they made a bunch   junior colleges hired three  teachers and you even met with the high school kids and she went to  junior college right there in her hometown. But when she was about 40  years old she decided she wanted to finish and teach school. So she got  her degree and taught school for ten or twelve years. And between the  two of us, we knew they were going to go to college.  How did you meet your wife?  There, the time when I came back from the Navy, she was just  graduating from Junior College. I was 25, I think, when I come out of  the Navy and she was about 20. Young kid. We spent a lot of years right  there in Carnegie. She died pretty young, 52; had a big time heart  surgery way back when Dr. Zuhdi was performing in Oklahoma City.  He was kind of a famous heart surgeon when first open heart surgeries  14  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  were possible. But she worked right up to two weeks before she died.  She wasn   t going to give it up.  That   s determination.  Yeah, I guess that goes a long ways.  Well do you have any other remembrances you   d like to share with us?  Well, I can   t think of any. That pretty well covers it. I was going to  make little footnotes on the back of my hand, but I kept licking that pen  and making my tongue black. Like I told Kim, when she said,    You  need to go down there,    I said,    Well I don   t have what they   re looking  for.    But I guess it kind of gives the bad things about the Dust Bowl in  the    30s.  Well for some it wasn   t all bad.  Well I guess. Well it definitely wasn   t.  Especially getting the city point of view. You know, not everybody lived  on a farm.  Yeah, like I say, I didn   t know farm kids.  Did your family have a garden?  We had gardens. Always gardens. And even way after that time because  that was fun and the thing to do and we didn   t have a farmer   s market  like Stillwater.  Did your mom can?  Yeah, lots of canning. Always had a cellar. Didn   t go for storms, but we  put the fruit down there, the good stuff. No, we never were conscious of  running to the cellar. Well I guess that   s partly rural people had a lot  more. In town we couldn   t see them coming. I guess in those days we  didn   t have TV to scare us.  Did you have an ice box where they delivered the ice?  They delivered the ice. And my brother even in high school at Hobart,  he graduated at Hobart in probably    36 or    37. He delivered the ice in the  summer time for the ice company with a horse and a wagon. That was  not ancient times. In the entire town of Hobart which is the county seat,  5,000 or 6,000. It was really cool. I   d ride with him once in awhile. One  15  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  Nykolaiszyn  Morris  horse, he   d go door to door and he had the little sign up there 25 pounds  or 50 pounds and yeah we had ice a lot. Always. And in Lawton, I  remember Dad would take that old Model A and we   d go to the ice plant  and go pick it up once every three or four days. Get 25 pounds and chip  a little of it for iced tea and put the rest of it in the   I   ve still got one of  those old boxes. They finally come out with the old gas powered Servel  when they were invented. You probably never heard of it. They didn   t  stick around long. They were run on natural gas which was strange,  instead of electricity. It lasted a few years. Electricity was more  efficient. Yeah we had an ice box forever, it seemed like. I don   t know  that we   ve skipped anything.  Alright, well Mr. Morris we appreciate you coming out to Stillwater  today.  I imagine it   s not much help, but it gives you the other side.  Well we appreciate it.  Yeah, you   re welcome.  -------  -------  
