 Wilson and I   m with the Oklahoma Oral History  Research Program at Oklahoma State University Library. Today is  February 18, 2011 and I am in Choctaw, Oklahoma. Today I will be  interviewing Christel Turek as part of the Spotlighting Oklahoma Oral  History series. Thank you for having me today.  You are welcome   I understand you are not originally from Oklahoma.  No, I   m not. I be from Germany. We moved here in    74. My husband   s  sister, she is married to an American, and in    73 we made a visit here for  three weeks. On the last day, before we went back to Germany, we  thought,    We   ll buy five acres. We are moving.    Yeah, and we had been  talking a lot, back and forth and all that. In Germany you just have your  apartment, but over here we had the option. We could have our own  acreage and could build our own house, if we wanted to do that. So we  went back to Germany and we told the kids,    We are moving to  Oklahoma     The kids said,    Yeah, yeah, yeah. Whatever.    And they  were not happy in the beginning. Then, we started our paperwork, which  takes normally about two years. Then we got from the Embassy a phone  call, we have to come and finish our paperwork early. They had so many  social security numbers open for immigration, you know. Then, okay,  we are starting. I am very, very fast. We was here on the 19th of August  in 1974. We lived with my sister-in-law together, then we started to  build a house on the five acres, a Jim Walters home. And in December,  we already had moved into our own home.  Wow. (Laughs)  And then my husband, he worked at that time for Central Fixture  Manufacturing. I worked at International Crystal; they made little  5  Wilson  Turek  Wilson  Turek  crystals at that time for the computer and all this. Then my husband lost  his job because Central Fixture closed up. Then somebody offered us the  little  Dairy Queen style hamburger place  here  called Tasty Burger .  They said,    You want to make a German restaurant?    I said,    Well, I  don   t know.    My husband said,    Okay, let   s do it.    I went to my boss in  Oklahoma City and I told him maybe I would have to quit. He said,    Go  ahead and do it. I know you will make it.    He said,    And the door is  open, if nothing works out you can come back to the job.    That was a  big relief for me. The kids were little, they were all in school still. The  oldest one came a couple of years later. We had moved here with four  kids and the other two came later.  Then, we started. This year  2011 , on the first of March, it will be  thirty-five years for the restaurant. We started with five tables in there,  and then we were building on and building on. We have big help from  the kids. Everybody works in here. That was the beginning, and we are  still here. In 1980 we made our citizenship, because we have to serve  alcohol and you have to be a citizen. That was pretty tough. We made it.  My husband, he passed away twenty years ago and I still do it with the  kids. We are still here.  How long did the citizenship process take?  Oh, the process was about two, two-and-a-half hours. Then you got onto  the final, then everybody came together. So it takes about    I was a  nervous wreck  It was a little room with two chairs. I said,    Oh, my  god.    Then a guy comes in. He said,    You look like you are nervous.    I  said,    Yeah, I am.    He said,    Why?    I said,    My English is not that good  and all that.    He said,    I understood every word that you say.    He  started talking about what we do in Germany, and about how we have  the restaurant. Then he asked some questions: who was the first  President of the United States? Who are the Congress people? So after  fifty minutes, I was done. My husband, he was there over an hour. He  had writing and reading and all that. I didn   t have to do that. It  makes  you  nervous. I agree, if you are going to be here and live in the USA,  you learn their language and you make your citizenship if you want to  stay. At that time, you had to give up your German citizenship. But I  don   t want to go back anyway.  Well let   s back up to the very beginning. Will you tell me about where  you were born and about your family?  Yes. I was born in Essen. That is close to Dusseldorf and Cologne in  Germany. My father worked for the railroad. We were five kids. During  World War II we had a pretty tough time. So in 1939, I think, they took  us kids away from our parents because at the time they wanted the  6  Wilson  Turek  Wilson  Turek  Wilson  Turek  Wilson  Turek  Wilson  Turek  young people to stay alive. With all the bombing, it was pretty bitter. So  for two years, we were with different people, my sister and me. We  didn   t know if our parents were alive or not because we had no contact.  So finally, after two years, we got the contact back and they picked us  up and we went home. Then I started school again. Sometimes we had  school, sometimes not. With the bombing, you were always on alert.  You would have to run in the bunker and everything. And then at  fourteen, for one year I had to go in the Hausart and learn something.  After this I went in a job training program for a salesperson, for  dressing. It looks like Dillards, you know, department stores.  Where did you live during the two years you weren   t with your parents?   On a farm in the Black Forest area . I  later  met my husband in Essen.  He was a glassblower. Then we started moving because he got a  different company, so we ended up in Frankfurt. My husband, he was a  glassblower for Rosenthal. For the Uni  university  he was a speaker and  all that. And we ended up in Bad Soden, and then after this we moved up  here, and lived all the years up here.  What year did you get married?  In 1953. On the 28th of February.  And how many children did you have?  I have six. My oldest daughter, she was the reason I got married. I was  twenty. She turned fifty-seven this year, so I was seventy-seven last  year. We had four kids when we moved up here, and then the two oldest  came a little bit later. They were married over there and they are now  here. I have the grandkids here, I have the great-grandkids here, so now  everybody is here.  What are some memories you have of growing up, of time with your  family?  Growing up was for me the hardest time because of World War II.  What year were you born?  1933. So you know, before I went to school, the war was starting. My  father worked for the railroad, and he had five kids at home and he had  to belong to the party, the Nazi party. He had no choice, you know. But  then, when everything was over, they put my dad in jail, because he was  a Nazi. He had helped take care of a lot of prisoners, foreign prisoners.  When they heard that they put my father in jail, they went on hunger  7  Wilson  Turek  Wilson  Turek  Wilson  Turek  Wilson  Turek  Wilson  Turek  strike. They said he was the best guy. He always brought them  something to drink or cigarettes or whatever and then he had to leave  him alone, he had to let them go. Things were pretty bitter, I tell you. It   s  a long history, but I think everything works out for the good. I   m happy  here, the kids seem happy.  What are some values and principles that you learned in your childhood  that you have carried throughout your life?  Well, there weren   t many values in that time. It just was a big family.  My father was the only one bringing the money home. There wasn   t  much. We always had good  food  to eat and drink, and had good  clothes all the time. That was important to us, and later on for my kids,  too.  So when you decided to move to the United States, what did your parents  think?  My father had already passed away and my mother, she was pretty  upset. But, after this, we were in contact all the time. I went a couple of  times to Germany and visited her. She passed away too, so I have now  two sisters over there. They were here last year for the first time, and  they were very impressed with what they all saw. I have a blind sister  and my other sister, it was the first time they flew over seas, they speak  no English. It must have pretty tough for them but they had a good time.  And you said you had a sister-in-law living here already, that you came  to visit before you moved?  Yes, we were visiting here, just on vacation. Then, well, they drove us  around everywhere here in Oklahoma and showed us everything and my  brother-in-law   s neighbor wanted to sell an acreage, and that   s who we  bought from. We live close together out here.  What caused your sister-in-law to move to Oklahoma?  She married an American. He was a soldier over there in Germany. She  got married by Frankfurt. Every year she said,    Why don   t you come  over? You have to see everything.    Then finally, the kids was older  already, and that is what we did.  Did you speak much English?  Nothing. It was pretty tough in the beginning. I cried a lot in the  beginning. I would tell my husband we would never make it with our  language. Well, we are still here. There was the thing with my driver   s  8  Wilson  Turek  Wilson  Turek  Wilson  Turek  license. I have no driver   s license over here. But I have a good  policeman that drives me in the car. He speaks a little bit of German, so  that helps a lot.  And did you move to Choctaw because     We moved in the beginning to Choctaw, yeah, and we are still, I have  lived in the house now for thirty-four years.  You mentioned there was a hamburger restaurant for sale.  Yeah, somebody offered us it, they said,    Meet us out here and take a  look around a little bit.    My husband said,    Either we do it or we don   t.     You know, we have no restaurant in Germany. But we said okay. I  mean, we had to make a little down payment. That was all. Then I  watched that lady that had it before. I watched her for one day and the  next day I was on my own to make some hamburgers and burritos and I  didn   t ever know what that was before. Or a hot dog or a chili dog. But  if you want to, you have it in your mind, you go forwards. You have to  do it. And the customers here were very, very nice. They helped us a lot,  too. And that is where I really learned a lot to speak English, with  customers. First of all, hands and feet, this and this and this, you know.  Then we put an American dish out and put a German dish in. It was in  the beginning tough to get all the ingredients that we needed. So my  sister-in-law, she had in Chicago some relatives, and they found out that  there are a couple of wholesalers, German wholesalers, in Chicago. So  we went with the train then to Chicago, and I found then the wholesaler  where I got my ingredients. Now, you get everything here, too. But in  that time, no. And then we found a wholesaler. We were in a German  restaurant there and they said, when I told her, the boss came to the table  and I said,    My god, you have it really good.    He said,    How long  ago  did you start  your restaurant?    I said,    It   s been four-and-a-half years.     He said,    You know what, sweetie, in fifteen years you   ll be where I am  now.    He was right. It takes a long time to build up everything.  After that, we built on the front first, and then the wine cellar. That was  my husband   s dream. So he enjoyed that for one year and then he passed  away. In Germany, you have the wine and it is underground, but you  cannot do that over here. That is why. But he always wanted it to look  like a rock room.  What year was it built?  In 1991. In 1985 we built the front, because we had more and more  people coming in and we needed more    We have always a big line  9  Wilson  Turek  Wilson  Turek  Wilson  Turek  Wilson  Turek  Wilson  Turek  Wilson  Turek  outside and a small building. And then one day, we have not everything  finished yet, we came to work in the morning and  there were  a lot of  people standing around the building. We said,    What   s going on here?     And then we found out, a week before somebody from The Daily  Oklahoman,  columnist Robert E. Lee,  was here and asked some  questions. He wrote out the article in the Sunday paper, and that is why  people showed up. It was pretty good.  So now, you just serve German food?  Yes.  How long did it take?  Oh, it took about, complete, almost one-and-a-half or two years. We  always have a little bit of American food. Because in the beginning, it  was tough to get veal meat and all that, you know. But then now it is  complete German and nothing more. I mean, we have steaks and  chicken, prepared our way. We make our own seasoning. We don   t give  any recipes out, so we keep it all in the family. The whole family is  involved. And we have the Oktoberfest every year and there is a big, big  turnout. In the beginning, we had it over here every year next to the  restaurant. We are getting so big now we have it in Choctaw Creek Park.  Wow. I have heard it   s huge. I still haven   t been.  This year we will have it the weekend before Labor Day and the  weekend after. We will make two weekends this year.  Really? Is this the first year for you to do that, to have two weekends?  Yes. So my daughter, she made last year over 6,000 pounds of potato  salad. Everything is from scratch. There is nothing finished, you know.  And then the bratwurst and everything we cook down there.  Are some of the recipes what your parents used?  Yes. I learned a lot from my mother-in-law, because she was from a  different area in Germany than I was. And then later my mother took  everything over from me. (Laughs) Then we have our one recipe, so  how we cook it at home, and we still do it that way.  Have you been back to Germany to visit very often?  Oh yes, I go almost every two years. My son makes a lot of wine tours  to Germany, and last year we made a wine cruise tour to the  10  Wilson  Turek  Wilson  Turek  Wilson  Turek  Wilson  Turek  Wilson  Turek  Wilson  Turek  Mediterranean.  Oh, nice.  It was very nice, was very nice. I like cruises. You put your suitcase in  the cabin, you know, and then you have to do nothing anymore. This  year he will go to Germany again, so.  Have you met a lot Germans that are passing through or that live here?  Yeah, we meet a lot of Germans. And we have Germans here, too, in  Oklahoma. We have a lot of people from the base, from Tinker. They  stay in Germany before, the soldiers, and they  say ,    Oh, (sighs) it  looks like home.    They feel comfortable. We have the General in charge  in here sometimes. We make a lot of donations to Tinker, too, Officer of  the Quarter and all that.  Did you meet many German friends when you first moved here?  No, not really. There was a German Club    There was some German  thing, but it has fallen apart for some reason. It was all older people but  nobody took it over. We have some Germans that somebody will bring  when they come visiting here. So we have a good time.  Do you have any stories that you would like to share?  Not really stories. That was a big story  (Laughs) The only thing that I  have to say is I have so much    everyone from the city are so behind us.  We have a good relationship. They were very, very friendly from the  very beginning. When the kids  started  school, they didn   t speak  English. It was tough for the kids, too. Oklahoma has the best people, I  tell you. And the friendliest people. I never have a problem here. Knock  on wood. (Laughs)  So do you consider yourself an Oklahoman now?  Yeah, I  am an  Oklahoman. Yeah. I mean, I   m German, yeah. I was  born over there, but it does not take me back. I will be over there and  after three weeks I say,    Okay, now let   s go home.    Home is here.  So what does Oklahoma mean to you?  This is my home. You know, I like the people here. I like the Governor  that we have here. Mary Fallin is a good friend  of ours  and all the  governors before.  Governor Brad  Henry, I know him personally. We  were involved a lot in the republican  party  here but everything got a  11  Wilson  Turek  Wilson  Turek  Wilson  Turek  Wilson  Turek  Wilson  Turek  Wilson  little bit apart, nobody has any more time. But if someone has a  fundraiser, we have that here. Butch Freeman is a good friend  of ours .  Can you think of many famous people that have eaten here? Do you  have any favorites?  Mary Fallin was here. Frank Lucas who is in the  House of  Representatives , when he is in Oklahoma he is here. He comes up here  because he likes it up here. Oh, we know so many people.  I know the mayor of Choctaw loves it here.  Yeah, Randy Ross is a good friend. He was a friend already before he  was mayor. And Bobbie Freeman is a good friend of ours, she was a  former mayor here in Choctaw, too. And our city manager, he is a good  guy, so we have a good relationship. And my son-in-law, he works for  the city.  I don   t know what else I can tell you. I love it here, and I will stay here  until I die.  Do you have any family stories?  The rest of my four kids got married here.  Both of my oldest daughters   were in Germany and got married over there.  What is your favorite German food?  My favorite German food is, for two people, I recommend the Old  Germany plate. There is variety for two people, there is some beef  tenderloin with different sauces on it and then pork schnitzels. My  favorite is the mushroom and cream sauce, pork schnitzel breaded with  mushroom and cream sauce. I mean, I like bratwurst and all that, but I  am used to that. That is our largest  seller , for two people. Especially  when people come for the first time. They ask,    What do you  recommend?    We say  the Old Germany plate . And they really like it.  And then later on, they are changing, they try everything. We have a big  variety.  Do you eat at the restaurant a lot?  Yes, every day. Sometimes we might say,    Okay, let   s go have a  hamburger     (Laughs) But no, we are generally eating here, all the  whole family.  Are there things from Germany that you miss that you cannot get here or  12  Turek  Wilson  Turek  Wilson  Turek  Wilson  Turek  Wilson  Turek  Wilson  do not have here?  There is nothing anymore, because we got everything and then when we  go on the internet, in Texas there is a big GermanDeli.com. When we  call them, the next day we have the delivery. The Maggi  products  and  these sorts of things, the little seasonings. The potato dumpling we get  from Germany, we have a wholesaler for that. And then the sauerkraut  comes in a big can from Germany. But the rest of it, we can get it all  here, the potatoes and lettuce and everything.  What about beer? Do you have a favorite German beer?  Yes. I had a favorite beer before but they don   t export it anymore. Mine  is Bitburger or Spaten is my favorite. But you know, then people like the  dark beer. Spaten Oktoberfest or Warsteiner. Let me think. One two  three, four five six    we have eleven different kinds of draw beer and  then we have also bottled beer. And then we have a good wine selection.  Did you used to attend Oktoberfest in Germany when you lived there?  Yes, we were there    We were already here, that was the first time we  went to Munich to the Oktoberfest, that was the first time in our lives.  Munich is very, very, very big. Ours here is more cozy, it   s not so big.  Last year we had, we estimate about 40,000 people in three days. That  was a lot. We started with 3,000 people here in the beginning. Then  everything is building on. At that time there was a lot of room here, but  everything was built up, housing additions and all that, so there was no  parking or nothing, you know. So we have room in the park down there.  It is very cozy down there, too.  Our business is perfect, we cannot complain. Last week was bad, or two  weeks ago, because of the bad weather. But we have good business, I  really can   t complain. We have customers that still come today that  came from the very beginning. Some were little kids in that time and  now they are married and are bringing their kids up here.  That   s wonderful.  Yeah. We have really a lot of regular customers, and I appreciate that.  Well I really appreciate your time today. Thank you for talking with me.  Oh, it   s no problem. And I hope everything works out for you.  Thank you.  13  Turek  You   re welcome.  -------  -------  
