 Finchum  Winters  Today is June 2, 2010. My name is Tanya Finchum. I   m with Oklahoma  State University Library and we   re conducting an oral history project  called    Women Extension Educators.    I   m in Altus, Oklahoma, to speak  with Ida Fay Winters of Jackson County, Oklahoma. Thank you for  coming today. If my notes are correct, you started in    74 and retired in  2003?  Yes.  So we   re going to talk about those thirty years. Let   s get started by  having you tell a little bit about your childhood and then we   ll work our  way forward.  Well, I grew up in Alfalfa County, which is  about 200 miles  straight  north of Altus. I grew up in the town of Burlington, a little town of  maybe 300 or 400 people, and that was counting everybody miles out  into the county. So our town was very small. I really was born in Kansas  right across the state line. That   s where the hospital was, but the rest of  the time I lived at Burlington. My parents were George Mitchell, and his  wife, my mother, was Ida Faye Raaf Mitchell. I was named after my  mother. My name Ida means    happy.    Fay comes from a term of being  faithful, and my mother wanted me to be a happy, faithful person to the  Lord. So, my name is rather old-fashioned, kind of unique. There are not  very many with that name. So because I knew what the meaning was, I  was excited to have a different kind of name.  When I was born in    51, it was November 2. It was an ice storm blizzard  in Kansas and northern Oklahoma. My daddy was a local truck driver  and so he had taken cattle to  the livestock sale in  Kiowa, Kansas, and  some friends brought my mother to Kiowa and then he took her on to the  hospital. But it was kind of scary weather, so I was glad I was at the  hospital. Then, two years later, my little sister Irma Kay was born, and  5  then my little sister Bonita Gay was born. My middle sister had red hair,  much darker than mine. But when Bonnie arrived on the scene, they had  a name that would start with    I,    and her middle name was to be    Gay.     But since she didn   t have red hair, they gave her a unique new name and  broke the pattern that we   d all had. My sisters and I were graduates of  Burlington School. I had a large class  of twenty-five  when I graduated.  At that time, that seemed like a lot, compared to some places. I know my  sisters had smaller classes.  One thing about growing up in Alfalfa County  is its closeness to rural  life . So, I was close to farms, but I always lived in a little town. My  daddy would go to haul cattle or pigs, haul hay and wheat, and haul  water for the livestock. So we were always close to farms. Always  wanted to be a farmer, but grew up in a little town. When I became nine  years old, or in the fourth grade, I got to join 4-H. In fact, I just thought  it was required that your mother had to be at the meeting, because I had  always seen older 4-H members with their mothers there. I remember  the day my first 4-H meeting was to be held, I told classmates,    Well  your mother has to be at the meeting.    (Laughs) I guess I caused a  ruckus because they all started calling their mothers and telling them  they had to be at the meeting. My mother was not working outside the  home. She was always a homemaker, and so she was able to be at the  meetings a lot, but it   s kind of funny that I just thought it was tradition  that your family should be at the meetings. I guess I started thinking how  it would help bond  and involve  the whole family.  Mrs. Maxine Pederson was my 4-H leader (starts to cry) and the reason I  guess I   m crying is because she just died  in 2008 . Mrs. Pederson was  such an influence, and she was the fourth grade teacher. She worked  with all ages, and I think how much of an influence she had on me and  many other kids. Now, Mrs. Pederson really tried to get us to do  everything. (Laughs) I guess you learned to participate in so many  activities so that you kind of knew what you enjoyed the most, whether  it was judging animals or giving a speech, which I didn   t like doing.  (Laughs) She really wanted us to do  various projects and activities , and  I have great respect for her and her family. I guess knowing that there  were a lot of other families in our 4-H club   we were so close, I think,  in a little town.  My mother did get cancer when I was an eighth grader, and that was so  hard  to understand . I had a lot of mothers who came in and helped us  girls do  record books, especially my state record book . I think how  lucky we were  My mother died  in April 1968 , when I was in the tenth  grade. My little sister was in sixth grade and my middle sister was in  eighth grade. I can remember that spring after my mother died. Those  women met me at school where we had typewriters. The school allowed  6  us to  use the typewriters . I don   t know if I ever thanked them, but they  were so good to  me and my sisters .  Really it   s kind of ironic that I was the daughter that went into home  economics. My two sisters probably should have been the ones that  became home economists. My sisters could do stained glass artwork.  They could crochet. They sewed. They had sergers set up and sewing  machines. But I think because I was the oldest sister, I probably assumed  more role of taking on that leadership of two younger sisters, and that   s  probably where I became more of a boss (laughs) or mother than a sister  to them. But my sisters then went into library science work,  rather than  home economics .  All three of us girls went on to Alva  to attend  Northwestern State  College and got our degrees. Of course, mine was in home economics  education. I was going to start and go there for two years and go on to  OSU, but I just never had the opportunity or the money to go on. My  two sisters, who were so talented and had so many skills, they chose to  go into library science. I always realized that I chased them away from  home economics, but that was probably being the oldest sibling and the  influence in their lives. But the strange thing is that now, years later,  here I am in library science work. (Laughs) My two sisters went off to  work in Texas and then to Arizona and work in that kind of career field,  but I continued in home economics.  I did my student teaching at Hardtner, Kansas. That was a good  experience, and I liked being in the school system. My cooperating  teacher wrote that I had creative lessons, brought in a lot of factual  information and presented material well, but she wondered if I would be  able to control a class. She thought that I wouldn   t have discipline. That  made me think,    Well, maybe I don   t have what it takes to be a  classroom teacher.     I had met Howard Powell in Enid at the district office. He knew of my  4-H work and knew about me, I guess, through my involvement  and he  told me that I would be contacted before my summer job in New  Mexico . Even when I was in college I received a 4-H scholarship on the  national level. I have a clipping of where it told about that award, and in  the same clipping was a picture of Larry Derryberry and Vivian  Cochran, both from Jackson County, who were being recognized at the  National 4-H Club Congress as national alumni  and honorary member  awardees . I did not even know who those people were, nor did I realize  that I would be coming to their county to work. It was about a year and a  half later that I would be coming to Jackson County.  That summer I went to work in New Mexico in the mountains at a  7  church camp. I got a letter  offering me a position as Extension Home  Economist  in Jackson County. I didn   t even know where Jackson  County was (laughs), and beginning  September 1, 1974,  I could start  my job with  8100  salary . I thought that that was so much money. I  had no car. I had to even first look at a map to see where  Jackson  County  was. But of course, hiring procedures were done differently  years ago, and  I don   t recall filling  out an application  or resume .  I remember, though, as a child, our family came to Tipton, Oklahoma, in  Tillman County, the neighboring county  to Jackson County . As we  drove in the summer to pick up an orphan to take back to our town to  stay with several church families for part of the summer. There were  cotton fields everywhere. They were getting ready for cotton  season   and there were people out in the fields, black people working, and they  were probably chopping the weeds or working or getting ready for  harvest, but I remember seeing all that. Driving up to the Tipton  Children   s Home where it has large pillars at the administration office, it  looked like a plantation. I thought I was in the Deep South. (Laughs) I  grew up in a little town where everybody was Caucasian. Only when I  went to college was I ever exposed to different races or different  nationalities. I guess I lived a really  sheltered  life, and so coming to  Jackson County was like a big metro to me. (Laughs) This county has  30,000 people in it, and I still think that I   m in a city. Yet when I go to  Oklahoma City or Lawton, I get reminded that I   m still rural. That   s  what   s important is that in smaller areas you really get to know the  people better and get to know more people.   Before my summer  work in New Mexico, I met with  Dr. Evans, an   administrator from OSU at Oklahoma City and talked about this type of  career. I was excited. I remember exactly what I wore: a bright green  and white polka dot dress (laughs) with a white collar, and I had carried  a wooden purse that was in the shape of a house. (Laughs) Isn   t that  funny, some of the things you remember about your career? Probably I  was not typical for an interview, but I was so excited to be considered   for a  Cooperative Extension job. And  I was offered the job while I  was at my summer job, so  when I said,    Yes, I would come to this  county,    I didn   t know the agriculture agent,  Bob Reeder , had retired,  and the Extension home economist,  Pat Coffey, went to teach  at the  Altus Public School. She had been in this county for thirteen years in  this position. The 4-H agent, Dennis Vernon, had left to work as a loan  officer at a bank.  So, I was coming to a place where no  county staff  was there working at  the time. There were some area agents, and when I came back from New  Mexico  in August , I rode a bus that came to Altus so I could meet the  people and see what I needed to do. I stayed a few days here in August,  8  went  to Burlington  because I was supposed to start September 1, which  was a holiday  What a way to start a job, on a holiday, Labor Day. But  soon after that was the county fair. So I guess I had a little ease at the  beginning. But boy, from then on I hit the ground running and it was  always a very busy type of work.  When I started, some of the  district  personnel,  Mary Busch and Bill  Cook , came to meet me here. The courthouse was being remodeled, so I  didn   t get to go see what it was like, but they took me to the fairgrounds.  An old swamp cooler was blowing and so loud, and it was hot. I really  thought I was in the Deep South, it seemed like. It was very hot, but the  people made me feel so welcome.  Debbie Paulk , one of the secretaries  of the area agents, took me around town to help me start looking at  apartments. So, they made me feel welcome and even though boxes  were stacked everywhere, and they had their typewriters out and they  were trying to make the best of the situation, they certainly made me feel  welcome. Lemoin Speck was the administrative secretary, the main  secretary who would be my secretary, and she definitely helped me  understand better my job. Mary Busch, the district home economist, was  there and she made me feel so important by coming to this position, and  that was really appreciated. She told me that I was the    queen of the  county,    (laughs) and that I would have all these people needing to talk  to me and want information. That was probably an exaggeration, but  that   s what she said my job was like, being the queen, but that I would  be a worker bee along with the others. She made me feel that the job,  working for Cooperative Extension, was an honor and it was a respected  job. I always wanted to live up to that challenge that she told me. But I  had really never been a queen, so I really thought,    I   m getting into  something that I don   t know about      I went  to Burlington  and got things around. I had always lived in  Alfalfa County except when I went to college at Alva, twenty-one miles  away. And then when I was a junior and senior, I went to New Mexico   to work in the summer camp as a counselor . So basically, except for 4-  H trips to National 4-H Congress in Chicago, or Stillwater or Oklahoma  City, I   ve basically lived in a very rural area.  I started here with the county fair. I even still have the first county fair  book that I carried with me, because when I got there, people were  asking me questions. I suddenly realized I should have read this book  before I ever got here. But some things were not new to me. I loved the  county fair. I always was excited to do an entry and see what was the  result. I understood not everyone would win, and I understood they  needed to be in the right categories. It was such a great opportunity for  meeting people. That first fair for me, I still have that  1974 Jackson  County Free Fair  book and I treasure that. There   s still a lot of the same  9  things that were done at that fair that are still done today.  I think through the years, the fair boards were very receptive to looking  at new ideas and new activities, because as people   s lives change and  their interests, you have to kind of keep things relevant or what they   re  interested in. So we had a lot of contests that weren   t typical fair  categories. We did a lot of research back into early day fair times here  and locations. There was a period, I want to say was in the    80s that we  revamped a lot of activities: a beautiful baby contest, a tug-of-war over a  water hole, et cetera. Things that were fun and exciting brought in lots of  people to the fair. We had turtle races. A lot of things that just aren   t  typically done, and I think that   s what has kept a lot of interest through  the years at a county fair. But, there was definitely a lot to learn.  One thing I learned quickly was that every  District and State  Extension  meeting I had to go to, the sun was always in my eyes, and when I came  home, the sun was always in my eyes again. From Altus, the county seat,  to Stillwater was four to five hours, depending on the speed. Now the  speed is faster and  we have  turnpikes, but it was always a long  drive .  We   d have to get up at four or five o   clock to be up there for in-service.  The early morning sun would be in our eyes and we   d have to shield our  eyes, always going in, and we would be so sleepy trying to wake up after   arriving for  in-service training. Then when we   d leave, it wasn   t over  with for us  in the Southwest . We had 250 miles to come back, and  there   s no real straight road, direct way. There are many side roads and  side trails you can take depending on your time, but we always came  home facing that sinking sun. A lot of people used that time to unwind, I  guess, or to get prepared  by thinking of things to do . I know I always  kept a tablet beside me  in the car . I   d be always thinking of things  going to meetings, and I   d jot down    check on this committee,    or     write this article.    I   d make little notes to jog my memory, because  when you   d go to training, you   d learn so many new things to try back  home that you   d be so interested and excited about trying them you   d  get overwhelmed. So, I probably was not too safe of a driver.  I can remember one time it was raining and we had to go to Tulsa to a  meeting, so I went to my neighboring county, Tillman County, to pick  up Micah Treadwell. It was raining so hard and I miscounted the  intersections west of Frederick. I happened to turn down a wrong road. I  got about, I don   t know, maybe a half a mile or so down and I realized,     This is bad. I cannot turn around.    But my car went in the ditch no  matter how much I tried not to do that. It was raining and I had on a lime  green dress, which I was thinking,    This knit dress is going to get really  soaked.    So I took my shoes off and I walked down that gravel road  back to the pavement. It was dark, probably 5:30, and I remember the  rain was letting up. I was kind of glad that I was wearing something  10  bright. Somebody passed and saw me and picked me up, and we went to  Micah   s house. It was one more mile  to the east . So we got my clothes  into the dryer and her husband went and they could not get my car out.  They had to get a big old tractor to pull it out.  There was a good twist to that story, because at the end of that road was  a woman who soon was to have a baby, and everybody had said that  road was terrible. So after that rain, the county commissioner came and  graded the road and put in more gravel and fixed it up so she would have  a better road to get to the hospital. So even though we were probably late  to that meeting, I can remember that dirt roads didn   t always stay dry.  And when there was moisture, you better know which way to get to a  meeting out in the country. There were times that I hit roads here in  Jackson County if I was going to cut through the county. I remember  going to Humphreys, I needed to go to a homemakers    meeting down  there. I had been at the county fair building south of town and I thought,     Rather than go back to the main paved road, I   ll just cut through.    But I  didn   t realize it had rained that much the day before. I got on a road, but  that time I was able to back out of that. It didn   t take me too long to  realize there  would be  times we had to go in bad weather.  One time I started working with a group of young women. They  organized to be the Country Friends Extension Homemakers. They had  about thirty women and it was so exciting to see their interests in being  better homemakers, and better with their families, and their jobs. One  time when they were first starting, it was snowing and we met at the  courthouse, about six carloads of us, to go to Duke, where one of the  members lived. We couldn   t even see, but we toughed it out and I don   t  know how we got there, and I don   t know how we got home. I guess we  were just determined, and we just didn   t think about turning around and  saying,    Forget it.    That   s the difficulty of working in a job where  there   s travel. Bad weather can greatly influence your attitudes quickly.  Another time, we had to be at Oklahoma City for a big annual meeting,  and it was in January. It was already known that there was going to be  ice storms, but we didn   t receive a call. Of course, we had to leave so  early in the morning. I went up to Sayre and picked up Loretha Roper. I  drove, and she was in my passenger side. She happened to be doing a  broomstick afghan, working on that, and I was so intent on watching and  seeing semis going off in the ditches, people stranded up in those hills  by Clinton and Weatherford. It was scary. I told her to hurry up and get  that done because we may have to cover up with a blanket if we get  stranded. So I was glad she had a project to work on. She wasn   t worried  a bit, but I was worried. It was so scary.  We slid into Oklahoma City, got to that motel room. We found out they  11  had canceled the meeting. I   m not sure when that meeting was. It might  have been in the    90s, but we didn   t have cell phones or we didn   t stop  to call, because everybody in Stillwater was probably already there.  When we got there, we were told the meeting was canceled, that we  could stay the night and then go back, venture out the next day. I was so  nervous over that drive and when we got to our room, I was so happy to  be on still ground. I just sat down. Not Loretha. At that time, I bet it was  the mid-   80s because energy conservation was a big thrust for us. She  noticed around the door sill that snow was being blown into our room,  and the amount of waste that that was causing on our room being warm.  She wanted to go back down there and ask for a new room. I said,     Loretha, I think we   re very fortunate just to be here and have this.    And  she said,    No, this is ridiculous.     We walked, and it was so icy and snow on the railings and we had a  room that was on the north. You couldn   t hardly walk down there, but  we did. We go to the front desk and I was so embarrassed. She was  giving them an educational lesson on the waste of their utility bills, how  they needed to put some weather stripping in their door frames. I was  ready to crawl out of that lobby because everybody was wanting a room,  and here we had a room. There were people in line wanting a room and  here she was trying to give the room back, and she was demanding a  new room. We did get a new room (laughs) and I was, again, thankful to  be back, but any time we went to the winter conference, we knew we  better have warm clothing with us for travel. We were always prepared  with gloves and ice scrapers.  Even when we stayed at Stillwater, as you well know, ice and snow hits  there a lot. When we were at the Holiday Inn, Rosemary Clifton, Zen  Stinchcomb and I roomed together. Those were my neighboring home  economists. Rosemary was from Tillman County, Zen from Harmon  County. We would get up early and take turns going out and scraping   the windshield . We   d sit in the car and keep it going and try to warm it  up and scrape the ice off, like hours before we had to be on campus. It  didn   t take us long to realize we should try and get into the campus  hotel,  the Atherton . That was a lot better. It had covered parking. So  those days were scary days. Even coming home from meetings like that.  I guess that   s the one part that I found unfavorable to Cooperative  Extension work, if there is anything that   s bad, was the travel in bad  weather, because it can be bad here, but other locations would be okay.  Another time the weather was bad was at the Eldorado  Farm Forum in  February 1986 . There was a farm crisis, markets were low, and jobs  were not available. We had a forum on agriculture and alternatives to  farming, and a great wealth of speakers that went to this rural area,  similar to the town that I grew up in. And we had over 200 people there,  12  even though it had snowed the night before, so you can never predict   your audience outcome . It was just such bad weather no one could go  out and work, so everybody came to the Extension meeting. So  sometimes bad weather can be good when you   re trying to get your  audience. (Laughs)  I probably fell in love with Jackson County right off. It was good people,  good times, good fun here and I was fortunate. I worked with 4-H and  with adults, and I guess if I got tired with kids then I could go work with  adults. It was just back and forth. No one ever told me to do half time  here, half time there, and then you always had general public. It was just  a balance of needs it seemed like, so that was kind of exciting about my  job. I must have really liked it because I never left here. I never applied  for another job. Although sometimes late in my career, I did consider  working as a district home economist, and was asked to apply for some  other districts, but I loved this district. I love the people here. I didn   t  realize how you fall in love with the people, especially with this county.  I did fall in love with one person, my husband. My job brought me to  this area and I was able to meet Gary Winters, who was the  Southside   vo ag  vocational agriculture  teacher, so I guess my job led me to  someone who became my husband. It was neat. He had FFA kids and I  had 4-H kids, and we   d go together sometimes, take kids to the state fair  and work. He   d always have boys, and a lot of their activities would be  the day after our entries, so they would help us take projects up there.  They had projects too to take, but when they got through, they would  bring all these boys to help us. In the years that we   d be in the clothing  exhibits, they were always the last to be judged   tons of clothing. We   d  have to hang those garments up on the mannequins or the hangers, the  frames, and it was so funny seeing these boys hang up formals and  clothing. They would always be helping because my husband told them  they would get to help us, so I appreciated all that. We married in  January of 1977.  When you travel, you learn to have your calendar with you, phone  numbers, and since I grew up in the north part of the state and when  going home or going to Stillwater, going to a meeting in Oklahoma City,  as you travel through all the different counties, it was obvious if there  was car trouble, you knew exactly who to call because you had a friend  in every county   the county extension folks. I always had that directory  with me so I could call, because I knew if I had trouble, I could get help.  Isn   t that fortunate? There are people who don   t know folks except in  their little town, and I knew people all cross the state. That   s probably  the reason I was elected president of  two state organizations, Oklahoma  Extension Association of Family and Consumer Sciences and also the  Oklahoma Association of Family and Consumer Sciences  was working  13  Finchum  Winters  Finchum  Winters  Finchum  Winters  with  people from  the seventy-seven counties. That was fun, getting to  know what kinds of jobs people had, being around different people.  Jackson County definitely created a lot of exposure to people here. We  had an air base here, so people would come in from different states,  different countries. You know, what an opportunity to work with people  like that. Then there were lots of minorities here. We had blacks and  Hispanics. I was able to have programs directed to those audiences.  Then working with young people and older people. Not only having  grandmothers in the homemaker groups, but seeing their grandchildren  in 4-H and through time seeing them grow up. This county has the  county seat at Altus, but there were maybe seven different schools  around. I may have to count that, but there were always communities  scattered around. It just wasn   t one town as a focal point. I have been in  many homes going to visit people and having meetings or showing  families about record books or clothing projects. So I was able to be in  the different communities in the homes. I probably went to more homes  than the pesticide spray man who goes  house to house  (laughs), but I  think it was neat getting to see really how people live. Only when you  are in their living space that you really see people   s interests, their  abilities, their talents or their needs, or see what needs to be done.  When you first started how many homemaker clubs were there?  There were about fourteen. When I finished I think it was seven, but you  could see the differences there. I think we directed a lot of meetings to  have more community focus, like lunch-and-learns, or special programs  where people could come by and visit booths, get information, things  like that. Writing articles in the paper to get the information to the  people. We were fortunate to have a radio station here that had a weekly  program, ways to get the OSU Cooperative Extension and the  Department of Ag information out to the people, and not just relying on  club meetings. Because when I came, 4-Hers were meeting at school  during school time. That changed where meetings were held after  school.  About when?  I don   t remember the time that that happened, but probably the late    70s.  Well let   s back up a little bit. You said when you started you didn   t have  a car. How did you solve that?  Well, my daddy  helped me shop and buy a car. After we  went all  around Cherokee, Kiowa, and Alva we went to Wichita, Kansas, and  found a green car, a Montego. It was a Mercury car. Brand new car for  14  Finchum  Winters   4,000. Of course, I didn   t have any money like that. My daddy paid for  that and I would pay him along. But I started a new job with a new car,  and it didn   t take long to get the miles on that car. I guess that   s carried  on because I still today get a lot of miles on my vehicles. And when I  retired, I can look back to when I started as a twenty-one year old. I was  fifty-one years old when I retired, which seemed pretty young, but  through that span I had many opportunities and I wouldn   t trade it in for  anything.  Well some of the hobbies like sewing and quilting, has that changed  much during those thirty years?  Oh yes, that has changed. I know when we started we did a lot of  recycling, taking garments and adjusting, like cutting pieces out of it to  make vests or to make aprons or skirts. A lot of patchwork was very  popular in the late    70s. Then sergers came in and no matter what it was,  our job was to try to show people how to use the latest, the newest, but  how to realize that things do change. Canning was decreasing, and that  was what my 4-H state winning project was in, food preservation. But  again, realizing what people were doing, or needed to save money to be  more economical. At that time, drying foods, making beef jerky, all  kinds of foods that we could show people a better way. The food  dehydrators were popular. I can remember teaching people how to use  microwaves and blenders. The state housing specialist, Lucille Clark,  realized that a lot of us had different programs, and mine was slow  cookers. She got several of us together that would do programs at district  meetings or state meetings and we would just share what we   d learned.  I know being in Cooperative Extension, you roll with the punches.  You   ve got to be flexible. You   ve got to realize that the way you   ve  always done it doesn   t mean it   s going to be that way now. Although  there are times I still wish we did some of the things. I think now  quilting, right when I was getting ready to retire, quilting really started  to pick up and people were gaining interest. I still wish children could do  more handwork and keep their little hands busy and their minds  occupied. I have a daughter-in-law now teaching here in Altus, and I   ve  gone to her first grade class and done some of my old Extension  programs on dental health, nutrition, anti-tobacco information, and  smoking. Those were the kinds of programs helping people have better  care, better health. The well-being of the people was the goal.  Sometimes you had to toss aside some of your favorite interests. Of  course, crafts were always interesting, but you had to realize that  skill  might  help people have better income or a better self-worth? I think  many of us that enjoyed different kinds of crafts had to incorporate  things like that, but bring it back to being economical, satisfying, getting  a job done, or something you could be proud of. I know that was  15  Finchum  Winters  something that   I can   t remember what years that was, maybe it was in  the    90s, that we were told    do less crafts.    But most of the time, that  was the drawing card to get people to come to some of our programs. I  think a lot of times we incorporated a lot of the fun activities into the  researched education that we were trying to get across.  And where was your office?  My office was really the whole county. I   ve always said,    My desk and  chair were at the courthouse until May    96.    In    96, we moved the whole  office to the junior college here, Western Oklahoma State College. And  what a time to clean out files and things   everything had to be moved.  A lot of things were taken to the fairgrounds, but we moved to the  beautiful campus of our junior college here at the north part of the city,  and we were given a new facility next to the agriculture department  there. That was really like a shot  of energy  in the arm being around all  of the college students. Around the year 2002, we had the marriage  initiative  promoted by  Governor Keating,  so I attended the  training  on that. I had the audience right there  at my door . I could do the  marriage enrichment classes. If I offered a little lunch, I   d have a good  crowd. (Laughs) And so that was exciting, getting to change to a  different location. I always wished, though, that all Extension workers  had some kind of mobile unit or something. I think we should have had a  sewing machine in there, a little kitchenette design where we could  move this mobile unit around the county and start a demonstration. Still  today I carry bags of tricks to teach. I always loved the demonstrations.  Now I hated 4-H public speaking  as a kid . I always would get a white  ribbon or a red ribbon   always  But when I did 4-H demonstrations, I  always got blue ribbons, so I knew right away where my skills needed to  be directed. I just like having things with me when I talk, I guess.  Being able to have a nice office. I know across our state there are  different locations, and I was always proud that we had a nice  courthouse. It had been just remodeled before I got there and that was  nice. They about kicked me out of the courthouse one time, though. I  knew I could restore this old government gray file  cabinet  and I just  knew if I painted it orange it would be so pretty. I was going to put  corkboard along the side to pin up notes and things. (Laughs) Well, I  scooted that out to the lobby and I sanded it off, and I spray painted that  little old file cabinet, four drawers tall. Got it back into my corner, and I  was so proud. I worked all night in getting that done. When I got ready  to leave, I looked down and there was orange... I mean, I had put out  papers, but that had drifted all over that lobby. I worked even harder  cleaning up that mess because I thought they might kick me out of there,  but no one knew, I don   t think. To this day, that   s my little secret.  (Laughs) You know, sometimes you didn   t have a lot of funds to do  16  Finchum  Winters  Finchum  things.  I always found that whenever I would go out, if it was going to a  ballgame or going to church, that   s when somebody would stop and say,     Now how do you put in that blind hem stitch?    or    How is it you   re  supposed to do       or    How long do you water bath peaches?    That   s  when I needed my resources at my fingertips, and I didn   t always  remember everything, so I sometimes wished I could carry a big tote  pack with all of the factsheets and things like that. I think for Extension,  you need a strong back to carry all of the factsheets and all the exhibits  and displays we used in teaching, all the films that we would show or the  overhead projectors. But of course, now, things definitely have changed.  You go online and get things printed. I think somebody figured out you  can save your back and save a lot of paper and boxes by not carrying  those publications.  And you had to have a big trunk?  Yes, I guess I always did have a full-sized car. But later when we had  two boys, then I   ve had a van all the time  and my husband   s pick-up . I  know why, because it was to carry exhibits, to carry kids, to carry  homemakers to different meetings. When the ag agent retired  in 1997 ,  I became the interim director  in January 1998  and tried to have our  area and state agriculture specialist come in, so keeping that program  going was a real challenge. I enjoyed working with the farmers, and I  mentioned earlier the program we did at Eldorado and we had a good  turn out here. I just know that people have needs and you get the right  resources out to the people and they will appreciate it.  At that time,  in the summer of 1998 , there was the drought. Oklahoma  did not have enough hay and OSU worked with the Oklahoma  Emergency Management staff.  As the interim county director, I  would  find farmers that needed hay, match them up with people north of here  who had hay and try to make the connections. The National Guard  Armory people brought a lot of the hay. So coordinating that was a new  experience. I think anybody who has worked in a county office has done  soil samples and answers questions about that no matter what area you  work in. You just know what a service that is to a gardener or someone  that has a lawn or agriculture production, so I was quite acquainted with  that. Again, you always learn, no matter how long you   ve been in an  office or working with Cooperative Extension Service, it   s just  surprising. You think you know information and then things change     new procedures. So that   s one of the things that I have always valued,  being able to find the latest information.  And if you don   t know it, you go to the next level?  17  Winters  Finchum  Winters  Finchum  Winters  I would always call my neighboring home economist. So, they knew so  much. (Laughs) I had lots of friends in Extension, and I believed in  calling our state specialist. That   s right.  And I read somewhere where you did character critters?  Oh yes, character education was a big emphasis, and we had puppets.  But anything to help young people understand why it   s important to be a  good individual and make a contribution. We did a lot of classes on  manners even. And still to this day, one of the girls that was in the class   still reminds me of my coming to her school . We did school  enrichment programs, not just 4-H work, not just Extension homemaker  work, but also school enrichment. Going and speaking to classes was a  big area of exposing OSU Cooperative Extension to other classrooms  and different civic groups, and I strongly believed in that. It   s easy to  teach and do a program that you believe in, that you know will make a  difference. But yes, that was fun. It was fun, but still today when you see  people who were in second and third grade when you did programs, and  they come up and talk to you about still remembering the programs     When I first started, I really, strongly was concerned, and it came out in  our advisory committee, or a committee that would give us insight once  a year or twice a year about what needs to be taught, what are the  concerns, so that we could give the information to OSU and try to get  information. One of  these concerns  was the amount of  cigarette   smoking that was being done. I borrowed a smoking mannequin from  the Oklahoma Cancer Society. It was just a little dummy that you turned  it around and there was a glass jar with a tube running up to the mouth  with a pump. You put a cigarette in the mouth and you pump it, and in  the jar was cotton balls. You would see after a while how gray and dirty  it would get. Well, then eventually that mannequin died. It would not  smoke another cigarette. I went to every elementary class in this county  and did that program, and they started calling me    the smoking lady.     I   d be shopping and a little child would say,    Momma, that   s the  smoking lady.    And then I thought,    Oh, I   m getting the wrong name  here.    (Laughter) I   d have to explain to the mother what was going on or  to the father. Later, we did the same program using just a detergent  bottle with cotton balls in it, opening up the little spigot and sticking a  cigarette in that and  lighting it up and squeezing the bottle . So I had a  lot of interesting programs, I must admit.  We can wrap up by having you talk about what you   ve done since  retirement.  Well, I took advice from  retired  Virginia Walker in Washita County.  18  Sometimes I would stop in different counties and visit people, and I  stopped to tell her that I was going to retire  in the spring 2003 . Her  advice to me was to do nothing for one year. Say    No, no, no.    You  need to step back and rest. And I did follow that advice. Although, I was  president of Oklahoma Association of Family and Consumer Sciences  with people who teach home ec in schools, colleges, Cooperative  Extension, business. So I was president of that  after retirement  and I  was  active with the 2004 4-H Agents National Conference  in  Oklahoma City. I was on the spouse   s hospitality committee and  organized tours and workshops and a hospitality room for them during  that time.   As I mentioned,  I really did clean my office. When I retired, it took me  about three months cleaning every file, every drawer, every little thing I  had piled up. I really was a packrat.  I went through and sorted through things, and for three months I would  show up at work and not have to be there. (Laughs) I didn   t get to use  sick leave. I worked right up to the end,  July 31, 2003 . We had a 4-H  banquet. We had a county fair that I needed to get organized and done so  I did have a departure eventually in December, but I really enjoyed  retirement. I could  love retirement , but my two boys went off to  college on August 19, 2004. They even took the two dogs. That same  day the library director  Kathy Hale  called me from the Southern Prairie  Library System and said,    Would you be interested in just a little part-time  job as a literacy coordinator?    I said,    Well, I   ll come in and talk to  you about it.    I remembered Virginia   s advice, wait one year. August 1,  2003 was my departure date, so it had been a year. I said yes, and I truly  enjoy working with literacy, helping people to read, write or speak  English better. It has opened a lot of learning for me and helping people  who did not have advantages. It has made me sad in some ways to  realize the amount of people in this area who could not read. All those  years I wrote those many news columns, those special feature stories, or  I carried those heavy boxes of factsheets, I wonder how many people  missed the whole point by not being able to read them well.  Now have a new interest and I thought it was interesting. I have gone  back recently and looked  where I developed this literary interest . There  were a lot of articles I wrote about reading to your children, about the  literacy month of September and how important it is to continue reading  at all ages.  I organized    Reading Renaissance    as a 4-H and Extension  Homemakers project.  So I guess I really was never too far away from  literacy. I have an English minor and enjoy writing, so maybe that was  held back for me, and the fact that my two sisters were in library work. I,  now, am doing that kind of job, and I have always valued my 4-H  experience. That helped me hit the ground running. I knew about  19  Finchum  Winters  Finchum  projects. I knew about recruiting. I knew about leadership, and so that  really helped me. And I, again, was thankful. When I retired they threw  a big party. I don   t know if it was just to get rid of me or what, but there  was a big party, and a declaration of Ida Fay Winters Day. The radio   and TV stations  came and did on-the-spot interviews with people about  my work. Sometimes when I get thinking,    Am I really making a  difference? Am I getting too old? Am I just not contributing anymore?     I go back and read the cards that were sent to me and the special notes. I  think that   s probably why I   ve kept so much. I have saved little thank  you notes or little reminders that people have sent. Those have meant  more than the big bonuses we got in Extension or the big raises we got. I  still value things like that, and I have, probably, a lot of memories that  can   t be erased of the good fun, the good friends that we gained through  Extension work.  When I retired, the Homemakers made a quilt, and that was a friendship  quilt. There was no way to put everybody   s name on it, but they tackled  that and I have it on one of our beds at the house. And just a lot of the  nice gestures that people did. Of course, I worked here for so long. I  mean, I know that I got so acquainted with different people. I lived right  in Altus in an apartment when I was single. Then when I married I lived  at the south part of the county with my husband and we had two little  boys in a trailer house at the school grounds. When that Southside  school closed  in 1991 , then we moved north of the airbase here. It   s  such a coincidence. I moved in the house of Pat Coffey, who was the  home economist here for thirteen years before I got here. You know, I  came and I took her job, and then I   ve taken her house  by buying it .  (Laughs) I guess she was a good influence for me.  I appreciate all the people that have been friends. Right here, with Altus  being a hub of the southwest, we   re surrounded by Tillman, Kiowa,  Greer and Harmon counties. So those home economists, or the  Extension workers, in that little huddle, we were close. We worked  together because we knew it was more efficient for us to work across  county lines than rely on people, maybe, coming from Stillwater. I think  we   ve really bonded well that way. I had a lot of good mentors that  helped with the work.  Well if there   s nothing else I   ll end by saying you have remained faithful  and happy, it seems.  (Laughs) Yes  Yes, that   s right. Just like my name.  Thank you for sharing.  -------  -------  20  
