 Wilson  Hawkins  Today is June 21, 2011. My name is Latasha Wilson and I   m with the  Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at the Oklahoma State  University Library. I am in Durham, Oklahoma, at the home of Dewitt  Hawkins.  Gary Sides is also joining me.  I   m talking with Dewitt today  about growing up in the    20s and    30s, in Oklahoma, in this area. So,  thank you for talking with me.  You   re welcome.  To start out, can you tell me when and where you were born?  Yes. September 2, 1925 at Sayre, Oklahoma, in Beckham County.  Were you born in a home or in a hospital?  At home.  Was it a farm?  Yes. My dad had been farming there for several years.  How did your parents come to that area in Beckham County?  Well, they just kind of moved in from Texas and they just settled there.  Of course, going to the parties and things, they met and eventually got  married there, at Sayre.  Were you the first child?  No, I have an older brother, who has passed on now. But he was born in  1918 and then I had a sister, born in 1921.  5  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  So, how long did you live in that house there, that you were born in?  Well, let   s see. For a month,    25, so about three years.  Then where did your family move?  Moved into New Liberty, which was Northwest of Sayre. The  Depression hit along there in the    20s. We stayed there from    28 until     39, and it was dry and dusty. It was really, really bad.  What caused them to move to New Liberty?  Well, they just thought they got a better place, better farm, better  farmland, and a better place to live.  And it was still in Beckham County?  Yes.  When do you remember the dust starting?  Well, like I said, in the early    30s there, probably in 1931,    32, and then     35 was when it really got bad. It was all Kansas and all the states north  of us were experiencing that, too. You just can   t imagine. I mean, it was  so hard to even breathe. Dad and Mom would wet old sheets and  blankets and hang them up over the window. Back then, we didn   t have  those storm-proof windows. They   d hang them up and they would kind  of filter that dust and sand.  Would you ever put wet sheets over your face?  Well, yes. We   d tie some kind of wet   like, if you went outside, you  had to. You kind of had to tie a lariat rope or a clothes line wire from  one building to the next, in case people got lost and turned around, so  that way you could always find your way back to the building.  So, it was so dark and dusty, you couldn   t see from one building to the  next?  Oh, no. When that hit, it just looked like it was picking up the whole  earth and rolling it. A lot of people thought the world was coming to an  end. Well, I remember, Dad and Mom took us kids and went to the  cellar. Had an old dirt storm cellar. Of course, the snakes and frogs were  in the cellar. I remember watching this little old frog one night. He was  going up the corner and he   d just put his feet on each side of that wall.  He was getting away from that snake. (Laughter)  6  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  How long would you stay in the storm shelter?  Well, it depends. Sometimes it seemed kind of like this Oklahoma wind.  It   d just blow on through and sometimes it would just keep blowing. It  was like, oh, I don   t know, maybe from an hour to three or four hours.  Of course, some of us kids, they fixed a pallet or   what would you call  it? Where you just lay down in the floor     What about the animals?  Well, they were having a hard time living, too. In fact, that was during  the years the government paid the farmers so much a head and the  animals were destroyed. I can still see this big old canyon over there,  where we drug some of those nice looking cows   no feed and no  money. We didn   t have any money to buy. If anyone had had feed for  sale, we couldn   t have bought it. They   d pay so much for a hog and little  pigs, like maybe ten cents a pig. It was a bad deal. A lot of people cussed  the government because they were getting rid of those cows and feed,  but what else could you do? They did let you can. My mother canned  some of that beef in those big old mason jars. They knew how to fix it  and you couldn   t eat it all. There wasn   t much transportation back in  those days. You couldn   t send it or give it to nobody.  Do you remember how much they paid for a head of cattle?  Well, I did, let me think a minute. I   ll probably be wrong, but I was  thinking around fifteen to twenty dollars a head. It may have been a little  more or less.  How old were you when you started to school?  Well, let   s see. I guess I started there at, probably, seven years old.  And where did you go?  New Liberty. It was a little, consolidated school, right northwest of  Sayre. I remember my first day in school. Oh, I got so lonesome for my  mother. I sat down on the steps and I remember this first grade teacher  came over and sat down by me. That helped a lot. (Laughter)  How many kids were at your school?  Then, they were kind of like there at Durham, there was a big family on  almost every 160  acre section . They had big families back then, from  five to ten. They built this school out of those red rocks, kind of like  7  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Durham. They chipped them and then put them all together.  Do you know when they built the school?  I   m not sure. Anyway, we were there in    28. I don   t think we had a little  wooden school then, but I think they built this new school along in the     30s because they had this, what they call the WPA  Works Progress  Administration  and they gave people work to help haul those rocks and  shape them up.  So, the school was a WPA project?  Yes.  The new school?  The new building, yes. A lot of these, you see these red rock buildings,  nearly all of them are WPA. I didn   t know what that stood for.  The Works Progress Administration?  WPA. I know there was a saying always going around that it stood for,     We piddle around.    (Laughter) But that wasn   t necessarily true because  they worked. They worked hard and maybe got a dollar a day   not an  hour, but a dollar a day. Then, maybe if you were lucky, you got two  dollars.  Do you remember any other projects they worked on?  Yes, they built a lot of bridges out along the roads. They   d build a rock  end and concrete middle. And outdoor bath houses, they built a lot of  those. I   m not sure what else. Oh, like that red rock fence in Elk City,  around the football or rodeo arena, that was WPA. They built a lot of  those. The main thing, it gave people something to do.  What about the CCC  Civilian Conservation Corps ?  That was another good program, yes. A lot of boys, that was the only  thing they could do to make a living. They   d send part of their check  home to their parents.  What do you remember about the school day?  Well, I guess it was a little different than it is today, but we were always  ready to go to school. I don   t know, I guess to be with other kids and be  with our friends. I know they had different things. One year, they had a  8  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  kite day and everybody wanted to bring a kite. We all went out there to  fly the kites. I wasn   t very old, so I let this senior boy take my kite and  he flew it and got first prize. (Laughs) It was things like that, that kept  kids busy.  What would you do at recess?  I remember the old merry-go-round. I   ve still got a scar on my finger.  (Laughter) Kids would run around that and it had a wooden plank. It had  a big old splinter plumb under there   and swings. It was just good  times.  So, what did your dad do for a living?  Farmed, yes, we raised cotton. He thought we always had to have a  patch of cotton because that way, us kids would stay busy chopping  weeds. He raised some grain, too. We didn   t have much wheat back  then, but eventually they started planting more wheat. But that ground  was so poor down there in them red hills and they didn   t have no  fertilizer then. It was different.  So, besides chopping weeds or chopping cotton, what were some of your  other chores?  Milking cows. Nearly every farm had at least five or six milk cows.  You   d milk them, separate it, and the cream would bring enough to buy  some groceries, or some places you could swap the cream for groceries.  Yes, nearly every farm family depended on those cows and selling a  little cotton or selling a little wheat. I remember we had a neighbor one  time, it was just him and his wife, but he had five real good milk cows.  That   s all he had. It came up, one of those Oklahoma thunderstorms and  lightning, and killed all five of them.  Oh, no   They just lived about a mile west here. Dad was over there talking to  him and he said,    Well, them cows don   t owe me a thing     (Laughs)  They had milked them for several years. Each one had a calf and then  they had to sell the cream. But there he was, killed all five of them, and I  thought,    Well, how could he have a good attitude like that?    I  remember that just like it was yesterday.  Did you raise a bunch of chickens?  Yes, Mother always had chickens and turkeys, usually. That was another  experience. When we first moved up to Durham in    39, Momma had  9  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  bought some little turkeys. They were just getting not quite what we call     frying size,    but they were getting pretty big. It came up a hail storm,  and the hail killed all the little turkeys. Yes, always, she   d have some  hens and eggs. We had fresh eggs.  Did she raise a big garden?  Yes, always. Nearly everybody had to have a garden. It wasn   t treated  with a bunch of this 24D and all that spraying stuff.  What are some of your favorite dishes you remember her cooking?  Well, biscuits and gravy, that was the main. I think it was better than  McDonald   s. But we had biscuits and gravy and we usually had pork.  They   d butcher, and we didn   t have any refrigeration. Mom would stuff  those sausages in a kind of a sack looking stuff, cheese cloth, and hang  them up on the north side of the house, in the shade. That stuff would  keep a whole lot longer than you think. I guess they treated it with that  Morton   s Sugar Cure. I know one time, we butchered a bunch of hogs  and they had fixed it in a little old, we called it a well house. It had a  shelf there, and he put this Morton   s Sugar Cure stuff on, it cured it out.  It was mostly salt and a little bit of sugar, and it would keep for a long  time, until one night our neighbor   s greyhounds got the window open  and they got in there and carried out   oh, they had hams and shoulders  strung up and down the fence.  Wow.  So, I guess Dad finally fixed that window. (Laughter)  Would your mom make you something special on your birthday?  We always had a barrel of sugar and a barrel of flower and I suppose,  I   m sure she did. It seemed like it was donuts, but I   m not sure. She was  a good cook and fixing for three kids and a husband, it took a lot of  cooking.  Did she do much canning?  Yes, always. Yes. If it made any   nearly everybody had a few peach  trees or apple trees or apricots. It seemed like there were more apricots  than anything. I guess, maybe, they grow better here than some of the  others. Cherry, I remember climbing up in the cherry tree and eating  those fresh cherries. One thing I remember, I had a neighbor that he  liked to chew tobacco. He was younger than I was. So, we went out in  this orchard there one day, and I was climbing up in this pear tree and  10  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  they were not quite ripe. So, he got this tobacco out and he wanted to  share with me. We were eating green pears and chewing on this   I  forget what kind of tobacco   but we liked to have fell out of that tree. I  mean, that was the sickest I had ever been, I think. (Laughter) But  anyway, he was used to it. It didn   t really bother him any.  How old were you?  I was probably about twelve, thirteen, something like that.  So, he was about ten or eleven?  Yes. (Laughter) He had an older brother that taught him how to chew  and smoke.  Did your mother do much sewing?  Yes, she did. In fact, I had her old sewing machine up until four or five  years ago. That old Singer sewing machine, she made all of her shirts  and overalls and stuff.  Did she quilt?  Yes, yes, I   ve still got some of those quilts, too. They used everything  they had, old wool, coats, britches, or anything. They   d cut them up and  make quilts out of them. They really came in handy in those old houses  that didn   t have any insulation or no storm windows. You had to have  quilts. The only thing about it, some of them were so heavy, you  couldn   t hardly turn over. (Laughter) Everybody, that   s all they had.  Did you share a room with your brothers and sisters?  Yes, my brother and I. Of course, he was almost eight years older than  me and he graduated and went away from home. Then my sister, she  was four years older than me. So, I was the baby.  How would you bathe?  Well, that was one of those big old   have you seen those gallon ice  tubs? In fact, I   ve still got the scar from one of those. Mom would fix  this tub in the living room. We just had one big old heater there and I   m  not sure. A lot of them didn   t have a washing machine and they   d wash  their clothes in this tub and then use that, take a bath in that because the  only way you could heat water was out in the yard and build a fire under  this old (I   ve still got that, too) cast iron kettle, heat your water, dip it  out, and take it and put it in the tub. Yes, I remember that tub. I guess I  11  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  probably didn   t take a bath except every Saturday night. Anyway, I was  fixing to dry off or something and I stooped over to do something and I  happened to bump into that heater that was right behind me. So, I  straightened up pretty quick. But that was the only way we had.  Did you haul the water from somewhere, initially?  Yes.  From a well or   ?  A spring. We had an old well there, but it was jippy and the locust trees,  that black locust, the roots would run right down and get in that well.  Oh, that was bitter tasting  So, we had a spring about a quarter of a mile  and it was real good water. That   s where Momma would keep her milk  and cream, in that spring, and the cool water would run through there.  But we were lucky. A lot of people didn   t have that and they would have  to haul water a long, long way. Of course, they didn   t have any  electricity, any pumps then, except the hand pumps. I know my brother  one time, him and somebody were pumping this water and up here  where it hooks onto the rod, there is a hole there. I don   t know why in  the world my brother stuck his finger into that hole and it almost cut his  finger off, that pump.  So, would you go to sleep with the sun or how would you see at night?  Well, yes, probably most of the time because we had them kerosene  lamps and lanterns, but they didn   t put out very many kilowatts. Of  course, the rooster always woke you up.  What caused your family to move to Durham?  Well, they were just looking for a better place to live. I guess the main  thing, this landlord that we   d rented from down there had bought this  place over here, loaned money on it, and then the guy lost it. So, that  was the main thing. I remember he had 320 acres and he charged Dad  twenty dollars an acre. That   d be  6,400, wouldn   t it? Twenty times  three    Anyway, he got to thinking about it and he felt sorry for us so,  he sent Dad back  400. (Laughter) But he was a good, old guy.  What was his name? Do you remember?  Zach Thompson. Yes, he was an old bachelor.  So, was there already a home on the land?  12  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Yes. Yes, it was built by Mr. Anderson, years ago.  So, how did the five of you get to Durham?  How did we? Well, we had a wagon and team, and then Dad finally  bought a car. We just didn   t go too much.  But when you moved     Oh, when we moved? Yes, we had a wagon and team, and a tractor. I  know Dad drove that old Farmall tractor from New Liberty up to here.  He   d liked to froze. It came up a storm cloud and back then, we didn   t  have any cabs or nothing on those old tractors. I know he stopped at  Cheyenne and bought another coat and he   d still liked to froze before he  got here at Durham.  And you all came on a wagon?  Well, no. I think we had an old Chevrolet car. I guess my brother   I   m  sure he had his license and he drove it and, I think, pulled a trailer. We  didn   t have any pickups. Back then, a lot of people fixed a hitch on the  car and pulled a trailer. Yes, that old tractor, I think, would make about  six miles an hour.  Oh my goodness  (Laughs)  That was top-speed. (Laughter)  How long did it take him?  Oh, mercy  I   m not sure when he left down there, but it must   ve took  eight, nine hours, anyway, maybe more.  Had you been to Durham before?  I think we just came up one time and looked at the place. I know a  neighbor helped us move and he looked at Dad   s boots. Dad always  wore those high-heeled boots, and he said,    You   ll trade them off for  some flat shoes.    (Laughs) The sand is so much different here than down  there, the red heels. So, I think that   s what happened.  So, what did you find when you got to Durham? What was the town like?  It wasn   t much bigger than it is now. It had a cream station and two or  three filling stations and they had the gin down there, and I think there  were maybe two churches. One of them, I think, they didn   t have a  13  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  building, but they would meet in the store, up in the upstairs of the store,  or I   m not sure. I know there was a Methodist church, the Church of  Christ, and a Baptist. Each one finally built their own building.  So, what grade were you in when you came to Durham?  Seventh grade.  Was the school much different than New Liberty?  Well, it was larger, yes. I remember I was kind of embarrassed the first  day, or scared. I didn   t know who   I left all my friends down there, at  New Liberty. So, I remember one boy came and met me when I got off  the bus. I walked from here, up to this corner, west, half a mile every  morning. During the winter I got my ears frostbitten. But anyway, this  one boy, Elmer Adam, he met me and said,    I   ll show you where your  room is,    and boy, I was glad because I didn   t have any idea. We had  seventh and eighth grade together and it seemed like about fifteen,  maybe twenty kids in the two grades. I remember about the third day I  got a whipping from the principal. (Laughter) I was sitting next to this  boy and he got to talking. Well, anyway, we were just too loud and this  Mr. Taylor was his name, Lloyd Taylor, and he had a paddle made out  of plywood. So, we stopped that talking after he gave us his paddle.  (Laughter)  Was there a lot of work to do, getting settled into your new farm?  Not really, just getting ready to plow and plant the spring crops. I know  it rained. I believe it was that year we had so much rain, by the time  we   d just get everything planted, it   d come a big rain and wash and we   d  have to start over. We had a neighbor over west there, Carl Challough,  he just bought a new tractor and he wasn   t planting much, so he just  brought that tractor over and left it with us. He said,    Just keep it until  you get done.    So, we had two tractors running there for a while.  What year did you graduate?  I graduated by correspondence course in    44, I believe,    45.  Why was it by correspondence?  I dropped out and my brother had volunteered for the Air Force, and so  they would let the younger one stay at home to help with the cows and  plant the crops and so forth.  So, you needed to help out on the farm some more?  14  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Yes, that was what it was. And Dad was kind of crippled in his back for  part of the time.  Did your sister mostly help your mom? Or did she     Yes, my sister, she really liked the outdoors. But she would help either  way.  When were the grasshoppers   ?  Now, that was in Beckham County, when they were really bad. They   d  been that way here, but it seemed like the last few years they haven   t  been. I don   t know if it was too dry or what the deal was. They   ll just be  in a different location. You could go a mile or two and there might not  be so many, but next time, they   ll just eat up everything.  We talked about them earlier, but will you tell me again how many  grasshoppers there were and what they would do?  Yes, they were so thick. You   d just walk down through the field and  you   d almost step on them. They got so hungry after all the green leaves  and things, they   d eat on wood posts. Like I said, they   d eat the cork out  of your drinking jug. Oh, they were just terrible  I think that   s why a lot  of people got turkeys. Those turkeys would catch a lot of them, but they  couldn   t catch them all.  Did you say they would eat hoe handles?  Yes, we had the wooden hoe handle and they   d just get on that when  we   d go to the house or shade to eat lunch, and they   d actually eat that  wooden handle. Trees, they   d eat a lot of the bark off the trees. Of  course, when you get that bark off, it   ll kill the tree.  Were you in Beckham County when there was a big blizzard?  Yes, in 1938.  What happened there?  Well, it just blew in. This was April, now. Usually, you don   t have a  snow blizzard in April, but it was, I believe, the seventh of April, 1938.  Oh, it blew and blew  Some of the cattle got choked and they couldn   t  breathe, that snow and wind was so bad. One neighbor, I know he had  some mules in the barn, and the snow got to blowing in this barn and  they kept walking and tromping it down, and they just pushed the top of  15  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  the barn right off. The chickens would be covered up   out of the  building, they   d just be covered up with snow.  Did you have any warning that this was coming?  No, no we didn   t have any radio. Well, we might   ve had an old radio,  but no weather forecast. It just blew in and I   m sure some people died. I  don   t know. I can   t remember just where or how, but it was terrible. If  you happened to be out in it, it sure   I can   t remember how many died.  Did you have a radio?  Yes, we had an old 6-volt. They had to take the battery out of the old car  and we could listen to the radio at night. Then we   d have to put it back  and charge it up.  What are some programs you remember?  The Grand Ole Opry, Amos and Andy, they had a talk deal going, and  that was about the main ones, I guess, that we listened to.  Would you all go into town on Saturdays?  Later on, yes, they   d have a drawing, Monday or something, down at  Cheyenne and most everybody, it seemed like that was the one day the  town was really crowded.  Did you ever go to the picture show?  Yes, yes, we   d go if we had the quarter. It seemed like it was a quarter.  They   d have   well, let   s see. They   d have a   what   d they call it? Serial  going, mostly all western serial. Momma would take us kids sometimes.  I think you could get a milkshake for fifteen cents, maybe, but a lot of  times we didn   t have the fifteen cents.  Right after you moved to Durham, were there some fires?  I don   t remember any. There could   ve been, but I just don   t remember.  Well, after you got your high school degree, you were working on the  farm for a little while with your father. How long did you do that?  Oh, well, let   s see. I was twenty-two, I think, when my wife and I got  married and I worked all the time. I just helped him. I   ve just been right  here around this same country for   what would that be      39, sixty,  seventy-some years?  16  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  How   d you meet your wife?  At church. Her daddy was the Baptist minister and our church here  called him. They were living at Roosevelt and they moved up here. One  of the ladies in church told my wife, said,    I   ve got someone I want you  to meet     So, she introduced us and I guess the rest is history.  What year was it that you got married?     47.  And that was in Durham?  Yes. Well, we went over to Wheeler, Texas, and got married, but we  were living at Durham. Yes, September 20,    47.  Did you live in a house on your parents    farm?  We lived upstairs with them for a while, and then rented a place down  south of Durham that had a house on it. We stayed there five years and  then we moved to another place a year, and then we   ve been here since  1955.  When was this home built?  It was built in    25, I think. It   s kind of odd. It was built west of Durham  and then years later, they decided to sell it. Our church bought it and  moved it to Durham, so my wife, which was the preacher   s daughter, she  lived in this house out west of Durham, and then at Durham, then we  bought it and moved it down here.  Wow.  So, she lived in it at three different locations. (Laughter)  When did you have children?  Our little girl was born in    49, and then Kent was born in    52.  Did they both graduate from Durham?  No, we lost the little girl with leukemia when she was eight and a half.  Then we lost our school and Kent went to Reydon School. So, he  graduated from Reydon.  17  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Do you remember what year the school closed in Durham?     57, I believe. That   s the year our little girl passed away. I believe it was     57 or    58.  So, did Durham change much from when you moved here until now?  Just like losing the gin, it burned down. The mill, we had a flour mill  here and they moved it to Cheyenne. Then it burned after they got it to  Cheyenne. But I remember this old gin. I was helping my neighbor  move some cattle. We were riding up the road there, north of Durham,  and we looked up there and the gin was on fire. Oh, it was   the smoke  and stuff was really a boiling. What happened, a welder they said had  gone down in under there to do some welding and that lint and cotton  caught fire, and no fire department. It just all burned up.  What year was that?  Let me think. Probably in the    50s, I   m not real sure, but I   ll bet it was.  What about the B-17 that crashed?  My brother-in-law, he was staying with my wife and I, over at that place  south of Durham. So, we heard this loud racket and of course, we ran  outside, and it was that B-17, four-engine bomber. It was just circling,  just getting a little lower every time. Of course, back then they didn   t  have much communication and anyway, somebody got the word that the  men were bailing out and wanted everybody to   we just had electricity,  then. That was about    48 along now, when we got electricity. They  wanted everybody to turn on their yard lights so that the pilot could see  where they were and what was going on. We turned on all the lights we  could and they said to drive up the road each section line and watch  because those guys were going to be landing, they   d bailed out. So, we  all did that and we started to find the guys, pick them up. It just so  happened, I think, one guy got his ankle hurt, but we picked up all of  them. The captain was the last one.  What happened, one engine was on fire but as he was circling that thing  the fire went out. So, he stayed captain, bailed out then, and we began to  find those guys around, pick them up, and bring them up to meet up. We  had a central phone office, called a central office, and they were all  supposed to meet there. So, this pilot, he called his boss somewhere.  Anyway, they had just stopped at Wichita Falls to refuel, and this big old  plane was just getting a little lower every time. Some of the people saw  it and said it came over so low they could look up and read the numbers  on the underside of the wings. But anyway, it crashed across the  18  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Sides  Hawkins  Canadian River. We picked up all those guys except one and nobody  knew about him until morning. This was happening during   it seemed  like, eleven o   clock or midnight. So, the next morning, some of the  farmers over there were milking their cows, and this guy came walking  up. He was from New York City and they said,    Well, what are you  doing?    He said,    They told us we had to bail out and I did. When I  landed over here, I could hear the coyotes barking,    and it scared him to  death  From New York. So, he rolled back under the barbed wire fence,  thinking that would protect him. He just wrapped up in his parachute  until morning. (Laughter) They were all kind of disgusted with him, but  that   s all he knew to do. So, I don   t know what the hell, they picked up  pieces of that plane over there across   most of it burned up because it  had a full load of fuel. But that was about the most excitement Durham  had in a long time  (Laughter)  So, was there a telephone operator from the time you moved here?  Well, yes. It was strung up on those old posts along the road, and it was  kind of a community deal. Each community took care of their own poles  and wire. If it broke, somebody had to ride around and check it out.  Is this when anybody could listen in?  Yes, that was one of those kinds, when they   d ring by hand and yes, you  could tell if there was somebody else on the line. One guy, he used to  laugh. This certain lady, she was always on the line listening and it  would make this guy so aggravated. One day he said,    Clara, you   re  beans are burning     She said,    Oh my goodness     (Laughter) So, she  hung the phone up and took off. But yes, that old phone then, that was  something else.  What about the newspaper? Would you get the Sunday Oklahoman out  here?  No, I don   t think. Not out in the country. They may have gotten it at  Cheyenne, I   m sure. But I don   t remember. No, the only paper we got  was the Cheyenne Star, Cheyenne and the county seats. No, I take that  back. We got the Kansas City Star.  Dewitt, remember about Lee Roark?  Oh, yes. He was a pilot in World War II and after he came back, they  wanted to deliver the Oklahoma Daily out in this country. So, he bought  a little Piper Cub plane and he   d trot around and drop that. If you put  your order in and paid for it, he   d fly around and he could throw that  paper rolled up. He could almost hit a tub or a bucket out there. So, he  19  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  delivered that a long time. He also helped the coyote hunters. When  they   d start hunting coyotes, he   d fly into the brush and scare the  coyotes out to where the guys could turn their dogs loose. He said one  day he came in and he had sand in the cockpit. He flew down so low at  that creek or river, that propeller threw that sand back. (Laughter)  Wow.  He quit awhile for some reason and another guy took his place. I think  there were three different guys that worked on that, delivering that  paper. Two of them, they went up   I believe one of them went up here  by Texas to spray. I don   t know if he had a sprayer on there. But  anyway, two of them were coming back, and they got to flying under  each other and just kind of moving off. Directly one of them hit and  crashed and killed one of the guys.  What about mail delivery? Do you still get it at your house?  Yes, yes. We   ve been awful fortunate it on that. Really, I guess I   m the  first one on this now. Used to, there were two more people that lived  back that way and I was box three. But now, they leave Durham, come  here and drop the mail off, and they circle back, 140 mile route. A lady  drives it every day, even on Saturday.  That   s nice.  Yes, this neighbor lived right West of here, where Gary   s place is, and  he had two old horses, which is all he had to depend on to go to town.  He hauled water from one place to another and he had this old sled and a  barrel on it to where he could haul water. Well, his horses got out one  night and they came down to our place and they ran in the lot   I guess  Dad left the gate open   and they were licking this block of salt. Oh,  they were just licking like a cow. So, when Dad saw the guy he said,     Tyler, do you ever give those horses any salt? They   re just starved to  death     Tyler said,    No.    He talked entirely funny, worse than I do. He  said,    If I do that, they   d drink too much water     And of course, he was  having to haul water and he didn   t want them drinking a lot of water.  (Laughter) Sure enough, that gave him a problem. He was quite a guy.  He was Seventh Day Adventist and he was a good neighbor, but they  observe their Sabbath day as Saturday. He would always make sure that  he could work on Sunday. It didn   t matter, he might not work the rest of  the week, but he   d always be out there Sunday morning, plowing or  whatever. I remember that about him.  What was his name?  20  Hawkins  Sides  Hawkins  Sides  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Tyler Hale.  Is he the one you traded the .22   s with?  Yes. No, that was Cantrell.  Well, tell that story.  Yes. During the war, you couldn   t buy shells very easy, but they did  make some .22 long rifles, where people could kill rabbits and so forth.  Well, I had an old single shot rifle that shot .22   s, long rifle. This  neighbor, Mr. Cantrell, he had a slide action Winchester .22, but it  would only shoot shorts, and you couldn   t buy .22 shorts during the war.  He was comparing them down there one day and he said,    Would you  trade that off?    I said,    Oh, I don   t know. I guess so.    He said,    Well,  I   ll just trade you for this slide action. Now, you can   t get any shells for  it.    I said,    I realize that.    He said,    I   ll trade you it for that single-shot  bolt action.    There was a lot of difference in price, but I said,    Okay, I   ll  just trade with you.    Well, later on then, you could by plenty of shells.  So, you got the better deal?  Yes, I guess I did. Yes, Gary knows more about guns than I do. Well, let  me think.  Was there a story about Mr. Armstrong?  Oh, yes, the milk cow. (Laughs) Yes, he was a trader here and he   d drive  into a farmers place, trying to buy cattle, and he always bought them     he could weigh a cow just by looking at her. I mean, he could just tell  you   about like Gary, he could just guess real close. So, anyway, this  guy was wanting to buy a milk cow from him and he said,    John, how  much milk will she give?    John said,    Well, she   ll give all she can. In  fact, she was giving over a five gallon bucket full until she started  sucking herself     (Laughter) He   d end up with something like that, but  he   d lay around and talk to my dad or wherever he was going, trying to  Jew them down to take this price for the cattle. Of course, Dad never  went to sale very much and you couldn   t get a market on the radio, and  he didn   t really know how to price them. So, John, that   s the way he  made his living. He   d go to nearly every farmer within miles around  here and buy their cattle. He was quite a cattleman.  What did people used to do for entertainment in Durham?  I really don   t know. They had a lot of square dancing. I never did go.  They   d call them a school party, where they   d play those old games. I  21  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Sides  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Sides  Hawkins  Wilson  did play a little bit of those, but I forgot the name, what they called it,  now. Flying Dutchman or something. They finally got a theater put in up  here at the school. One of Junior Porter   s kinfolk would get those old  films and show them. We, of course, played baseball. Nearly every  school had their baseball team and that was about the most competitive  game, I guess, back then.  After you graduated school did you still go to baseball games?  Yes, Cheyenne had a lot, and track meets, they had the track meet down  there. I remember Gary   s dad running that mile race down there a time  or two, and he could beat about anybody. I guess they had rodeos down  there. Dad used to let the neighbors come in there and they   d rope calves  and ride steers there, at our place. I know Dad was going to make a   he  was a pretty good rider, bucking horses or bulls. So, he was going to  make a bull rider out of me. I had on those overalls with the suspenders  and something happened to the button, so I just had a safety pin in each  suspender. So, Dad got this bull there, I think it was one Sunday evening  and a bunch of neighbors came over. He set me up on this bull and he  said,    Now, I   ll hold your suspenders until you get started.    On about  the first jump, those safety pins came loose. So, I landed out there in the  dirt. But anyway, that was part of the entertainment. Well, one boy got  hurt, got a horn stuck in him or something, and so Dad said,    Well,  we   re quitting.    (Laughs) So, that was the end of the rodeo business  there at our place. I can   t think of anything else.  Is there currently a mayor of Durham?  A mayor? Yes, they call Junior Porter. I think they still call him mayor.  They call him mayor, but it   s not an official title. (Laughter) They don   t  have a city government, but they call him the mayor.  Yes.  How many people would you say live around here now?  Oh, goodnight  Well, you can   t count Karen carrying the mail, but some  of hers is the Crawford District.  Yes.  A lot of it. She carries 140 boxes so, would it be seventy around  Durham? Something pretty close to that.  Well, what has kept you here all these years?  22  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  I sometimes wonder that myself. (Laughter) Yes. It   s all I know. It took  me eighty-five years to find out I didn   t know too much. (Laughter)  Well, it   s a good community. It has always been a good community. It  seems like Durham has kind of stood out among lots of the other deals.  It   s just good drinking water.  That   s important.  Yes. The grass, when it rains, it   s really good.  Do you have any stories about Antelope Hills?  You probably heard that, about that gold that was buried up there. Way  back years ago, they said there were some Mexicans that came through  here some way or another. They had this chest of gold. I don   t know  whether it was all coins or bars or what, but they buried it over there at  Antelope Hills   so they claim. There were two or three guys that  thought they knew where they buried it. One of them, a brother-in-law,  they dug down, it was getting dark, and they hit something. He thought  it was this box, but he didn   t tell the other guys. During the night, he  came back and dug it up and took off for old Mexico or somewhere. But  they never did prove that. Anyway, the indentation or the sinkhole is still  over there, where they dug. Old man George Gants used to live over in  there and he took me up there one time and showed me. He said,    Right  here is where they dug that up.    So, I had an uncle come along later, and  he had one of these Geiger counters. He said,    Let   s go over there. I  want to just see if it   ll pick it up.    We went over there and sure enough,  that thing just went crazy  We started digging and we found a fruit jar  lid. (Laughter) That was what was setting off this Geiger counter. But  there   d been other people that just knew they could dig that out. That   s  about all.  Of course, they   ve got a marker up on top of there that marks the  elevation. Some people used to say it was the highest point in  Oklahoma, but I don   t think it is. Anyway, it   s a concrete deal, buried up  there on top. They claim that   s where Custer spotted Black Kettle. Some  claim there are some little caves. I   ve seen the outside of two or three  that you could go crawl in there and go way back, but I never did have  any desire to do that.  Not quite sure what else is in there. (Laughs)  No, I just   not enough room to stand up.  Well, earlier you showed me one of your publications, one of your  23  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Sides  Hawkins  Sides  inventions that has been featured in the Progressive Farmer magazine.  Do you want to talk about that a little?  I started that several years ago. They wanted people to send in any idea  that would make farming a little easier or whatever. So, I don   t know, I  just got to working down here in the shop and just different things came  up that I needed. I needed one myself, so I   d go ahead and try to make it  like that, and other people could use it if they thought it was worth it. So  far, I think I   ve had seven published. They would pay fifty dollars for  the first one and usually, if I got it published, I   d just turn around and  spend the money for a subscription to the magazine. Of course, that  helped them and me, too. I had one editor, he called out here one time,     Now, just how does that work?    Well, I had to tell him again and I sent  a picture of it, but he wanted to make sure before he published it.  Anyway, they fixed a book about every   I think they do it about every  five years, and they try to pick out so many different, they call them  handy devices. So, they put three of mine in the book and they were  supposed to come out with another book later.  Neat. So, you take photographs of your inventions?  Yes, I just photograph it and     And then you write a description?  Yes, write a description and if they can figure that out, they go ahead  and publish it.  And they draw a picture of it in the magazine.  Yes. Sometimes, they   ll show the actual picture if I   ve got a good, clear  picture.  Well, that   s neat. Have you had any feedback on those, people that have  seen them and used them?  Yes, I   ve had a few calls. What   s that guy   s name, Jack Odell? Editor  of   he had Farmer-Stockman. We used to get Farmer-Stockman,  Progressive Farmer, Successful Farming     Farm Journal.  Farm Journal, yes. I don   t know. I just got started sending it to  Progressive Farmer. But that   s about all I     Tell her about how you came about the M.  24  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Wilson  Hawkins  Oh, yes. I   ve still got that old    45 M Farmall.  Oh   International made the Farmall M, which it was one of the most popular,  I think, next to the John Deer 4020. But I believe there were more M   s  made than any other farm tractor. So, anyway, Dad bought this one in     46. It   d been used a little bit during the year and I   ve been driving it  ever since. It   ll still start just right quick when you go out there, coldest  weather, and it   ll start up when nothing else around here will start. Yes,     46. What would that be, sixty-some years?  Sixty-five years ago.  Sixty-five, that   s about right. And it still runs.  So, you just take really good care of it. (Laughs)  Well, I know a guy told me when I first got it, he said,    Now, D, this  tractor       I forget how he said it. Anyway, he said,    It   ll last longer than  you will     (Laughter) So, it has proved about that   That   s neat. Is there anything else we need to cover?  I can   t think of anything. Probably, when you drive out I   ll think of  something really important.  Yes. (Laughs) Well, thank you so much for talking with me.  You   re welcome.  -------  -------  
