 Wilson  Huff  Today is April 5, 2012. My name is Latasha Wilson and I   m with the  Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at the OSU Library. I   m in  Tipton, Oklahoma at the home of Marvin Huff, who is currently the  mayor of Tipton. I will be interviewing Marvin today as part of the  Spotlighting Oklahoma oral history project. Thank you for having me in  your home. To start out with, would you mind telling me when and  where you were born?  I was born the twenty-eighth of September, 1941. I was born four and a  half miles east of Tipton on the Baseline in the home. That   s it.  Did you have brothers and sisters?  Yes, I had an older sister, six years older, Ladine. Ladine Huff-Kirtley. I  have a brother that   s six years younger, Lonnie Dale Huff.  What were your parents    names?  Richard and Mattie Mae Huff. Dosher-Huff was her name.  And what were their professions at the time you were born?  They were farmers until they retired. They would farm. Mother was a  homemaker, also a city treasurer in Tipton for many years. My dad was  a deacon at a Baptist church. Like I say, just farmed, that   s what I was  raised on.  What were the primary crops?  Cotton, milo, corn. Of course, we had cattle. When I was very young,  had pigs, chickens and other natural farm animals at that time. Anything  that they could put up to eat or butcher, they had it. They had a horse for  5  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  a brief time when I was a little kid, but that didn   t last very long.  (Laughs) His horse wasn   t doing a lot of good. How far are you wanting  me to go in what they do?  As far as you want.  Dad served on the Citizens Co-Op Gin board for many years. Mother  was a Sunday school teacher and was in WMU, which is a women   s  missionary group at the Baptist church.  Did the women   s missionary group send missionaries places?  No, no, they just met and did things around this area, basically in the  church. My mother also was a member of the home demonstration club  called the Victory Club until they abandoned that many years ago. Oh,  let me see. Dad died in 1980 of a heart attack, February the fifth. Of  course, Mother passed away May 11, 2011.  What were some of your chores when you were growing up?  Well, my chores was being ornery, I guess. (Laughter) I fed the  chickens, fed the pigs and helped Mother garden some. We used to have  a large plot of potatoes and different things. Then when I was just eight  or nine years old, I drove a tractor for Dad. We had the small Ford  tractors and like I said, we had a horse he bought me for a brief time. I  decided I didn   t like the horse, so we got rid of the horse. I think he did  that on purpose because I kept bothering him about getting a horse, and  that horse throwed me the first time I rode it. I think he had that planned,  so we didn   t have to keep the horse. (Laughter)  Dad and I just became real good friends, also. We farmed together for  several years. Him and my uncle farmed together before that. I   m getting  ahead of myself. I bought my uncle out, Frank Huff, and Dad and I  farmed together. Later, Dad   s health got to failing some, and he kept  some of his land he owned and I took all the rest of it. Then also, we ran  a service station. He helped with that, some. I don   t know how far you  want to go back on my life. I don   t know what else to say about Mother  and Dad other than they were just great people, very good parents.  We lived in a house where I was born that for a while didn   t have  electricity, no bathroom. I always told my mother,    You   ve had the  kitchen in four different rooms in this house,    because you know, they  just move the sinks and drill a hole in the wall and it run outside, you  know, for the kitchen. The stove and stuff, they could move around  anywhere. When it would rain, Mother had Dad a job moving the house  around, changing things around all the time. She was very unhappy     6  Wilson  We had a neighbor at that time, who was a great person, but when it  rained he would want to visit with Dad. He was a stayer, he   d stay four  or five hours, you know. (Laughs) Mother didn   t particularly like that  because she wanted him doing some things for her and so. (Laughter)  That was funny, parts of it.  Of course, Mother and I had a great time, even through her illness. But  after Dad died, she stayed very healthy until the last year she lived, I  guess. Of course, in 1952 we moved out of the house I was born in and  bought an old schoolhouse called Factor School. Then we moved that  from its location to three miles east of Tipton and remodeled it, had a  nice home, built sheds and had our milk cows and everything there, had  a hired hand   s house. July 5, 1953, this house burned. In between those  years, from    52 to    53, I attended Laing School, because I was in their  district. After our house burned, we moved into Tipton and then back a  mile east of town for some time. Then I graduated and lived one mile  east of town.  Mom and Dad ended up back in town, and I attended Tipton High  School from seventh grade, up, and I   d been in Tipton schools to the  fifth grade, graduated in 1959. I went off to college in 1959 and played  football at Southwestern Oklahoma State University. I met a lot of good  people, had a lot of friends, still have some friends there, but they   re all  getting   at my age, they   re all getting older. I played with a lot of guys  that were five or six years older than me, but they   re still friends.  They   re still friends, some of them   s alive, some are not. But had a good  time, there. I was in love. I had started dating Ellyn Van Gronigan in the  winter of    58. So, I went off to college, and it was letter writing every  day to each other. We didn   t have access to phones. Her folks didn   t  have a phone. They lived four miles east, a mile north, and three-quarters  back east. That was their homestead. Their granddad had  homesteaded that place.  Then in 1960, I come back to Tipton in January and went to work in a  service station for Ray Ferguson. Then I drove a truck for a brief time,  hauling cattle, then come back and went to work at the feed lot at  Frederick, Cope and Quam Feedlot. Worked, I don   t really remember  how long. Then I had some trucks and hauled cotton seed from the  Manitou Gin in the fall. I come back, worked in a grocery store here  called Right Price Grocery for some time. Then I   of course   I   ll back  up a little bit. Ellyn and I married in 1960, July 16, 1960. Then that   s  when I worked at Right Price and the feedlot and those places. I get my  stories ahead of myself.  And she had stayed in Tipton when you went to Southwestern?  7  Huff  She was still in high school when I went to Southwestern. She graduated  in 1960, then we married in July of    60. And I worked those various  places, for a small time, I was telling you about. Then we bought a  service station here in Tipton, which is right next door to us now, in  1962, in January 1962. We had our first son in September of 1962. Then  we built a house in the west part of Tipton and stayed there just a few  years and sold it and bought where we currently are. Moved here in  1964. Then we had a son named Craig. He was born October the  fourteenth of    64.  We continued to run the service station, and I farmed some, too, and  trucked some also, and then we leased this out in 1976 to another party.  We had a daughter that had leukemia, diagnosed in 1970   she was born  in 1968. Then in 1972, we had another son named Ryan Huff. He was  born November second, first or second, I   m going to have to look on  notes. (Laughter) But anyway, she had leukemia. We made about three  trips a week to Oklahoma City back to the children   s hospital. We lost  her in August of 1976. She was eight years old. She was born in July of  1968.  Then I began full-time farming and farmed about two thousand acres.  Big into cotton and had some real good years from    76 through till    80.  Nineteen-eighty was a real disaster. We continued to farm the best we  could with not a lot of money, and the interest rate was very high. I  became mayor in    83. I just retired from the volunteer fire department,  over twenty years, and served until 1991. In 1987, I had a massive heart  attack and had open heart surgery, had four bypasses. I was forty-five  years old. I resigned from the city in 1991 for health reasons and  continued to have small heart attacks and problems and my gallbladder  out. Just seemed like various things, but went on.  We got into the trucking business. We were running like ten trucks over  forty-eight states. Three of them was leased trucks, seven we owned. We  got out of that business in about 2000. Then I was still farming, reduced  it a whole lot. We   re farming with cattle and grass and wheat. We   re  farming about a thousand acres, now. But through those times with the  city involvement, it   s been quite a journey and some quite pleasant times  and some very hard times. But in the    80s we built new water lines, new  lagoons, and a new water tower, which we   re still paying for in 2012.  There   s many different projects, and I can   t think of all of them at one  time, but our big project right now is the senior citizen center. We got a  federal grant. The city could, so they deeded us the property that they  had, the senior citizens had, which used to be the old Walker Grocery  Store. We   ve been in the process a year now of remodeling and we   re  very close. I don   t like to set dates. I   ve had several people ask me and I  8  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  say,    Forever and two days,    is what I tell them, because I just don   t  know. I   m looking at next month, but that may not be true. We   ve done  some re-work on our airports and it   s been a good ride, but sometimes it  gets bumpy. Like I said, I can   t think of all the projects we   ve done.  During the period of time through not having anything to do with the  city, the school has done a lot of remodeling and building on a new gym.  We have a wonderful school. A super great school is what I call it. Of  course, I   m very partial to that because I   ve been here all my life.  (Laughter)  Is that the same building that you went to school in?  I went to that high school building, the north building, the old high  school building, which is now what I call junior high, but it   s middle  school. That   s where I went to high school. The other, the grade school  that I went to was away from there, and it   s no longer there at all.  They   ve built apartments on that ground. That   s where I spent five years  of grade school. At that time, we didn   t have kindergarten. We just  started first grade. This school, and this city, is very special to me. I   ve  been real fortunate with a wonderful wife, and we   ve been married since  1960. It   s going to be fifty-three years this summer. We had the four  children, and we   re just best friends. We love each other very much.  She was a Laing school person. She was a basketball player. Quite a  basketball player, in fact, and her and her sisters were all very good  players. She come to Tipton the last two years of her high school and  played ball here. Did a very good job. Just a super person. I call her my  partner, my best friend and my mate and my love mate and all that, she   s  just all of it. Caregiver, she does a lot of that. (Laughs) My health hasn   t  been great, and she waits on me probably better than they would in the  hospital. She   s a super person. We   re always together. Interested in land  we bought and redoing, cleaning up places and building new things on  our land, and house, the same way. We started out with just a shell here  and have built on and built on.  It   s beautiful.  We enjoy that, and we both like to do that. It   s not just a one-way deal,     I want this and I   m going to have it.    It doesn   t happen that way. We sit  down and discuss and figure and see how, and we   re very agreeable on  things. I   m not going to say everything we   ve ever agreed with, but after  we discussed it and made plans, then we agreed. We don   t like to say,     Yes, we   re going to do that tomorrow.    That   s not the way we work.  She does a great job opening gates to check the cattle, and she does a  great job picking up scraps and wire and this kind of thing. I   ve even  9  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  seen her take a round bale apart because we couldn   t get it off the pickup  and cut the string and rolled the hay off in the field, just a piece at a  time. She does anything and everything. I just am not able to do some of  the things I used to do. Like I say, right now, we own about 560 acres, I  guess, then lease the rest of it.  So you   ve got 560 you     We own.  And then do you farm it?  Yes.  You farm a thousand, I guess.  Yes, we farm it all. But we do get a lot of   a lot of people do planting  for us. And we own a tractor and equipment, but sometimes it   s a lot  easier to get somebody to come in with two or three drills and sow you  in about three days and get it done with. Of course, we   re building new  lots at our west-of-town place that   s all grassland   well, we do have  some alfalfa on it. But we love that place. It   s what I always call the old  Kenny place. You might remember where I   m talking about. Barbara  and Tommy Kenny was raised out there. Do you remember them?  No. I   ve heard the name, but     Bird Nevlin was the daddy   s mother. We were good friends, and we  ended up buying that place. I bought some land off my sister, and I  inherited some land from my mother. Ellyn also has a place that we  don   t farm, someone else farms it, that she owns. She owns half of 160  acres, but it   s out in the Laing area. Most of our stuff is   we have some  leased that   s seven miles away, but most of it is three or four miles from  where we live in either direction.  We enjoy the farming. I mean, there   s been some real bad times. Same  with the trucking. There   s been good times and bad times. I think when  you go through life you   re going to have good times and bad times. I   m  asked a lot about my health and it   s not great, but I get up every  morning, I do things all day, mostly point a finger, but I do things and  get out and around and don   t sit here in this chair all day. I just enjoy  life, enjoy people. Love people. I have a lot of good friends. I just go on  and on about the people in Tipton and the friends that they   re just   it   s a  super place to be. I can   t imagine being somewhere else. I have children  that live in Edmond and Oklahoma City, but they still like to come to the  house. I don   t know that they could live here without Wal-Marts and all  10  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  the steakhouses and all that. They   re twenty-one miles away from that if  they   re here, but they still like to come down and spend a day or two and  visit and look around.  What would you say is one of the main things that   s kept you here in  Tipton?  I would just say that, of course, both of our families lived here, until they  passed away, in this area. Mine has just been the love of the school and  the love of the town and the people. I   ve just had a lot of people that   s  many years older than me that   s passed away, but we were good friends,  very good friends. J.W. Dizert, Lois Boyd, Franklin Lane, Marvin  Austin, I can just go over and over and over people that   s passed on.  That   s not nearly all of them, but I had some very good friends that   s  passed away. Ronald Haney. I cannot remember all of them, and I feel  bad about that, but I just didn   t know many people that wasn   t my  friend. I probably have a little problem right now with some of them  being mad at me over the senior citizen situation, but it   s not my fault.  It   s just a lot of things happened that shouldn   t have happened. But  anyway, we   re getting there.  I   ve just loved it here. I   ve loved the land. I   ve loved the cattle. I just  think the world about the cattle. That   s my big item every day. I don   t  know. I just wouldn   t want to be anywhere else right now. I don   t  believe that everybody in Oklahoma City or everywhere else will watch  me like everybody does here, watches if I   m going to get in their way or  driving too slow. (Laughter) I would manage some way, but I don   t want  to be anywhere else but here. Thoughts will run through your mind  through your years,    Well, maybe if I   d of done this and if I   d have done  that       but really, I   ve done what I   ve wanted to do. I love my church. I  love all the churches in Tipton. I   ve got friends in every church here.  How many are there, do you know?  There   s the Baptist church, where I   ve been a member since 1954.  That   s where my folks were. Then there   s the Church of Christ, which I  have a lot of good friends at the Church of Christ. I mean, I could just  name over and over and over. There, and especially your folks used to  attend the Church of Christ here   no, your grandparents, I   m sorry.  Well, your dad did, too. But I thought the world of them, and just many  friends there. I just can   t get over it. Another place that we   ve got very  special in Tipton that I am very, very proud of   it   s gotten a whole lot  better and it   s a great deal, is the Tipton home. We just annexed the  Tipton Home in the city limits so we could give them more coverage and  they   d be able to vote for whatever, for town. Before, they wasn   t able to  do that, because they wasn   t in the city limits.  11  Wilson  Huff  When were they annexed in the city limits?  Just last year. Not a year ago. We were real proud to do that. It gives us  more speed help, the traffic, plus the fire department. Of course, we did  attend to it as the fire department, but there is more leeway to do that. It  doesn   t bring us any taxes in other than the people that live there that  come to town   and buy things here is what I mean. It   s just a great  place. They   ve got a wonderful superintendent out there now. Well, I   ve  liked all of them. It   s a real asset to Tipton, and it   s an asset to our  school.  I   ll go back to the churches. There   s a Methodist church and just  recently, the Assembly of God church closed, and they   ve sold that to a  builder. There was a Catholic church, and I don   t think they meet  anymore. There   s a Mount Gilliam Baptist Church, also. It was formed  by black people, but there   s some great people there. There   s great  people everywhere. I   m good friends with Spanish, blacks, whites    I  just like people. I probably repeated myself a dozen times, but     (Laughter)  But also at the same time, we   re involved with the senior citizens.  We   ve been involved with the clinic, the health clinic. It   s just about  complete. It   ll probably be complete this month. Just across the road  from here, I don   t know whether you saw it or not. It   s east of the park,  across from the Hop   Sack. But it   s just almost completed. We   ve been  somewhat involved in that, some of the work and things that had to be  done. We   re real proud of that. I liked it better downtown, and they   ve  got it downtown in the old Largent Drug. But their board wanted to put  it up on the highway. I really wanted it downtown, but anyway, we  furnished the land for them to build it up here. I didn   t want to lose the  clinic. So, I think it will be nice. I think it really will. They seem to get  quite a bit of business from out of town and in town also. We   re real  proud of that.  I have been real proud of the senior citizens. Of course, I   ve kindly  worked two boards there. I   m the mayor and then also, I   m on the Board  of Senior Citizens. So, it   s been kind of a tough shop, there. Then I was  on the board of the Golden Grove Apartments, and I did resign that  board this month. Just more boards than I felt like I needed to do so I got  rid of one. (Laughter) You know, my doctors, it   s crazy, I have less than  30 percent of my heart that actually functions, but he   s told my wife and  he   s told me,    You just keep doing what you   re doing. Don   t quit.    He  said,    I   m afraid if you quit, I   ll have you back over and lose you.    I  tend to agree with him. My mind has to stay pretty busy. Sometimes it  gets covered up, but it stays busy. I do a lot of planning for ourselves  12  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  and the city and things that we could be able to do in the future and  hopefully we can. We   ve got a super volunteer fire department, just a  great bunch of guys and good equipment.  How many people are volunteer firefighters?  I think there   s fourteen now. Since I was there, through the years,  they   ve accumulated a lot of nice equipment. They   ve got a different  barn. We also have a super police department. We   ve hired a guy about  a year and a half ago that had several years experience that   s our chief,  and then we   ve got another guy that just finished CLEAT (Combined  Law Enforcement Association of Texas) school. We call him night  watchman, but I mean, he might be here night and day. People want to  ask him what time they   re going to be here. They   re not going to tell  them, and you know why. They don   t want a routine. We   ve also hired a  part-time guy that works out at the Tipton Home, but he   s certified with  everything. He   s going to help us out a little, too. So, we   ve got a super  department. We   ve got super girls in the office. Ann Rogers is our   I  call her our manager. That   s probably not exactly the word I need to use.  She   s also a clerk. Then Janis Whitt is basically collections and answers  the phones and this kind of thing, you know. They do a good job.  They   re great girls. I just love all of it around here.  My one son has moved back here, Craig, the middle boy. He is the  superintendent of the Lawton Country Club, but he lives here. He   s got  two girls and two boys. Of course, they   re all grown, now. I   ve got great  ones, now. (Laughter) Then, his two boys also live here. They work for  an irrigation company and stay busy all the time. His two girls work for  Integris in Oklahoma City. Mark has a girl that works for Integris in  Oklahoma City that   s getting married this month, the twenty-first, at  Oak Tree. The youngest granddaughter is a cheerleader at OU. She   ll be  going into her third year this fall. Ryan has never married. He graduated  and lived in Norman ever since he left here. He works for a company  called LexisNexis in Oklahoma City. That   s not a car dealer. That   s  what I thought when he first said it. (Laughter) It   s a company that  handles a lot of high-dollar bankruptcies and this kind of thing. He  writes a check to some of the employees and is mostly on a computer  and things like this. He   s doing great. They all are doing great.  Where did they go to high school?  They all graduated from here. Mark graduated in    82, Craig    84, Ryan in     91. Ryan graduated Valedictorian in    91. They were all football players.  Two of them played basketball. They were very active in school, kept us  really running from little league, up. But we enjoyed it.  13  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  When did you start playing football?  When I started playing?  Yes.  You   re going to get me on years, here. It   d be 19     Or what grade?  1953, seventh grade. I mean, we played a little bit in grade school. Never  any match games or anything, just choose up sides is what we called it. I  guess I started that when I started school.  Well, Tipton has some pretty good sports teams.  Oh, yes. I was fortunate when I became a parishioner. Don Royal came  here at the same time, which is Darrel Royal   s brother. I guess you know  who I   m talking about. I had him all four years and I was a starter the  last two years. Was captain my senior year. Called offensive and  defensive plays. We didn   t have a defense and an offense then, just all of  you played. (Laughs) If you came off, you were hurt. But it was a great  experience, and I loved Don Royal. Just a super guy.  We remained real good friends after high school, because I was still  here. Our first little house we rented was pretty close to him, and the  superintendent and the principal were all within half a block of each  other. So, I became good friends with all the people I had in school. Jess  Hannah, Benny Kennedy, the Grizzles, which are Ag teachers and my  English teacher, Ms. Maynard, lived right across the road from me. I  was friends with them in school, but I also became friends with them as  adults, you know. We hunted, some of us, together. Don Royal and I  fished together, and the superintendent and I hunted together as I was  getting older   not old, but through my younger years, after I was  married     Who were some of the town leaders at that time?  When I was in high school? Hmm.  I know you were probably not paying as much attention to     Jim Martin was the mayor in there at one time. Anon Smith and Dale  Hasley was involved in a clerk   s position and    Yes, I can think of a lot  of people, but I can   t put the right years on them. When I was in high  school, I just can   t remember exactly who was. If somebody told me,  14  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  then I   d remember, but.  When and how did you get involved with the volunteer fire department?  I was   this is kind of strange   I knew all these guys. They were, at that  time, quite a lot older than me. There was Riley Taylor that ran the dry  goods store. Russell Bates ran a garage. Sid Tompkins ran a service  station. Mr. Rogers, they ran a laundry. I hate to forget all those  people     We can add them in later, too.  Anyway, I was around town. I had started running this service station up  here. I knew nothing about them maybe wanting me. I   m twenty years  old or twenty   let me think back. I was about twenty-one, I guess.  When you bought the service station?  No, I was twenty years old when I actually bought the service station.  Really?  But then in    62, I had an operation, and they did it by a bone specialist at  Hobart. Russell Bates and Riley Taylor and there was another one, I  can   t remember, came to see me in the hospital. They asked me. They  said,    Marvin, would you be interested in going on the volunteer fire  department?    I said,    Yeah, I think I would.    I said,    I   m not in any  condition at this time.    They said,    We know that.    So, they voted me in  and put me on the fire department when I was twenty-one years old.  That was quite an experience. That   s when we had no telephones, no  radios. When the whistle went off, you got out of bed and went down to  where the siren was to answer a phone. Had a lot of that.  In later years, we finally   I had a telephone. When I was in there about  six years I became chief. Some of these older guys had retired. Then I  ended up getting a phone here and my assistant chief had a phone. We  could answer it here, but we   d have to wait until some of the guys got to  the station to tell them what was going on, you know. So, many, many  times, many times, it was false alarms. People just ringing the phone or  wanting a policeman or something like this, you know, different. But  later years, after I left, Benji Milligan is chief now and Gerald Milligan  was before him. They   ve got a lot of grants and done a real super job.  They   ve got radios and pagers. The whistle doesn   t go off. We only use  that for storm sirens. Their pagers go off, they all go, and they leave.  You never know where there   s a fire, which in some ways, that   s a  15  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  whole lot better because we used to have a crowd like they were going  to a ball game show up at the firehouse when the whistle went off. I  called them fire chasers, just interested people, really, but just wanted to  see what   s going on. Some of them would actually get in the way and  run across your hose. (Laughs) Just not thinking, not thinking. Not bad  people, but they just weren   t thinking. That was quite an experience and  like I said, I stepped down the spring of    83 and became mayor. Then  my actual fire term ended in August of    83.  What   s the area that the fire department services?  Now, we have an agreement with Frederick, Manitou, Snyder. We even  worked a refuge last year, some. If we   ve got equipment still left here,  we   ll send some to help. They do the same way. Frederick will come  over here or Manitou or Snyder or Hollister, any of them, they just help  each other. It works great. We used to could not go out of city limits  because our good truck had to stay right here in case something  happened in town. When our house burned, they couldn   t bring a fire  truck out, so it burned completely down. Which was probably better, I  mean we didn   t have to clean up near as much. But now, they   ve got  country trucks, rural trucks. Just a super little fire department.  Have there been many historical buildings that have burned or big fires  over the years?  Yes, after I was mayor, we lost what we called the old Benton Building,  which used to be the Wal-Mart of Tipton years and years ago. They had  a funeral home in it, they had furniture, they sold tractors, sold different  kinds of hardware items. We hated to lose that building. It was probably  the biggest building in town, also. They had turned it into a leather  factory and some guys were burning in the alley behind it, some grass,  and where they tarred that roof, some of the tar had run down in the  gutter, and that fire caught the tar on fire, and they couldn   t ever put it  out. It   s like rubber burning, you know. But now, that   s cleared off and  that   s where our fire department is stationed, that building there.  Town-wise, we   ve got a super town. Like I told you, everybody is not  pleased all the time, but part of them is pleased all the time. (Laughter)  And it comes and goes. I   ve said ever since I became mayor in the    80s  that there is usually 7 percent of the people that doesn   t agree with most  things. They have different ideas and 7 percent of them are probably  more verbal about things, I guess, about things they   re not pleased with.  It just usually stays that way. They   ve come and gone, but it   s still at 7  percent all the time. (Laughter) But that   s all right. Everybody is entitled  to their opinion and that   s fine, just please don   t get mad about it. We do  the best we can.  16  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  When did you sell the service station?  I still own the building. I just leased it out in    76. My wife and I had a     well, my son had a little self-service station there for a while, for less  than a year. Then my wife and I moved in a little antiques and whatnots  and even some clothes and furniture and called it Kountry Korner, I  believe is what it was called then, with a K.  In that building?  In this building, right here. But then we leased it out two different times  for car lots. One time, they made a caf   in it called the Rock Caf  . Then  last, I had it leased to a man that was doing tire changes and oil changes  and things like this. Now, we   re remodeling over there some on the  outside. We   re putting some new metal on the outside. It got in pretty  bad shape. But my son and I have talked about   Craig, the one at  Lawton. He just was kidding a while ago, he said,    Well, you   re getting  that ready for my barbecue place, aren   t you?    I said,    Well, whatever.     So, I don   t know exactly what we   re going to do next. I   ve been  approached by a man wanting to put in a car lot again. Craig works at  Lawton, but what he kindly would like to do is us do a barbecue thing to  go, just do ribs and briskets and pork ribs and all that, pork. Then like if  you order a slab, then you come by a certain time in the morning or  evening and pick up a slab. Not really serve food in there, that   s not the  point of it. But that   s a ways away.  Sounds good, though. (Laughter)  Yes, that   s another project down the line probably, but it would probably  be fine. We   re fortunate. I know a lot of people that think we don   t have  any place to eat. They just closed the caf   where your granddad used to  have, where Doc lived, Doc Boyd. They made a house out of it again.  We have a caf   on the east Baseline Road, and we have a Hop   Sack,  which serves food and serves lunches. We have the grocery store  downtown that does pizzas, sub sandwiches, different days, different  things, tacos, barbecue sandwiches. We have senior citizens.  So, we do have places. It   s not like we   ve got a big steakhouse, but  we   ve managed. Of course, naturally, if you   re here every day, you get  tired and you want to try something else different, and my wife and I do.  We don   t always eat here. We usually have a reason for going  somewhere else, having to do something else. But I think we   re  fortunate, no bigger than we are, to have those things. We   ve got a neat  hardware store downtown and also the grocery store. We   re fortunate to  have a grocery store and they do some hardware business.  17  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  Is there still a drugstore?  There   s not a drugstore, but we have a Clinton   s Attic, which is a used  furniture place, and he   s been there quite some time. He does real well.  We have the dance studio or music studio here that they give dance  lessons, guitar lessons, record. That   s in one of the old drugstores. We  have, like I say, a brand new clinic building. We   ve still got a bank,  which we   re fortunate. Post office, we   ve still got a post office. We have  senior citizens, city hall. We also have a taxidermist business here.  There   s a little more here than you really think you see. We have a  flower shop.  And a funeral home.  And a funeral home, yes. That   s one thing everybody is going to do is  die sometime, so a funeral home is all right, you know. (Laughs) That   s  going to happen to us one day, and we look forward to that because it   s  going to be better.  Well, having lived here over the years, have you noticed Tipton  changing, or does it just gradually change?  Well, when I was young, there was three cotton gins in business. There  was two cotton offices just to buy cotton. There were six service  stations, and there was six grocery stores at one time when I was  growing up. And we had a theater, had a dry goods shop. Had a locker  place where you could butcher beef and locker it, you know, because  everybody at that time didn   t have a deep freeze.  Was there an ice house?  Yes, there was an ice house that they sold beer. Same man ran it for  years and years and years. In the corner of it, they finally put a little  liquor store there. But it   s no longer there. He died and a few have tried  it and it didn   t work out. At one time, when I remember, we had a John  Deere Tractor, an International Tractor, a Ferguson Tractor. We had a  Chevrolet Agency, we had a Ford Agency, cafes all over downtown, two  bigger ones and several smaller ones. Had two pool halls, and I think  there was two beer joints.  Not all that   s good stuff, but I   m just   every building was full of  something. We had a feed store. That   s where you went to buy your  certain sacks to make a dress out of, get the right print. You want to  make sure you   ve got the right print in when you bought your feed so it  matched whatever else you had. I actually worked at that place some of  18  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  the time. I have delivered chicken feed all over town. I delivered  groceries all over town when I was in high school, because I worked for  Walker Brothers Grocery while I was in high school.  So, did you drive your own truck or did they provide you with   ?  No, they provided me a delivery truck. We delivered to many, many  widows houses, you know. Plus, in the fall of the year, the Spanish  people that come in to pull cotton, or whatever they might be doing at  that time of year, had bobtail trucks, and they would park a block away  from the grocery store. So, we had a car take groceries for a block.  What is a bobtail truck?  Well, that   s just like a small grain truck. I think your granddad had one.  It   s like sixteen, eighteen-foot long bed with a cab, you know. But they  traveled in those things because they put tarps, a peaked tarp, you know,  like a housetop. So, they   d get a little air in there beside the   they just  didn   t want tarp flat across the bed. We had a lot of people come in. The  town would go from 1,250 to 2,000-something in the fall of the year. My  first job, the first job in Tipton, was when I was, well, I guess about in  the sixth and seventh grade. I shined shoes in a barber shop for Fred  McCorter. We got fifteen cents for shoes, twenty-five for boots. I had  one guy that always tipped me a dollar whenever he   d come in. Of  course, he   d come in with pretty dirty shoes. Been in the cow lots, but I  was tickled to death. I thought I really had a good job, you know. And it  was. It was all right at that age. I still have the shine chair. I have it  down here in that building next to city hall. We   re decorating with it  through Easter and Christmas and all the holidays. It   s kind of in the  front of the building. Anyway, as soon as funds are available, we   re  going to try to make a museum out of that building. So, that   s where it   s  sitting right now.  What   s the building called?  It used to be Bowman   s Hardware. It sold fishing equipment, electrical  equipment, and guns. We just called it the Bowman Building. There   s  nothing in it right now but storage, and it   s got to have a new roof. It   s a  two-story. It   s going to be a bit of a problem. So many old roofs have  gone bad in Tipton, still bad. We   ve accumulated a lot of buildings that  people just give up on them and give them to the city. We probably  don   t need them all, but we   d hate for them all to be torn down. We have  another building that the superintendent had bought at auction. It used to  be a funeral home and years ago, I think, it was the post office. I get my  buildings mixed up. He got some ceiling tile out of it to decorate his new  home. Of course, it was above the false ceiling and then he turned  19  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  around and give that building to the city. So, we don   t know exactly  what we   re going to do with that. It doesn   t need a lot of repair. It needs  some repair on the front, but the roof is not leaking. That   s a big plus.  Yes. Where do your roofers come from around here?  We   ve had roofers out of Altus and Hobart, and we   ve also   the metal  roofs we   ve been putting on is a man out of Frederick, Dan Bernard. Just  different situations, different bids. Of course, money has to become  available.  Well, how have farming practices in the area changed over the years?  Oh, many, many ways. I was farming when we were still using cotton  choppers. People come in and pull the weeds out of your cotton. Then  we had what we call boll pullers. We had people come in and pull the  cotton. They didn   t actually pick it out of the burr, they took burr and all,  and then had to gin it. Then it changed to the stripper cotton, the  mechanical stripping. That lost a lot of people. The chemicals became  famous for killing weeds, which I   m not sure we don   t use too many  chemicals over there anyway, because I don   t think it   s all healthy and  good for the environment. You   re going to have to control it some way.  You couldn   t ever get that many hands to do that kind of job anymore.  We might have twenty hands at one time, hired hands. That   s changed.  Bigger equipment has changed.  When I was farming in the    70s, I had four hired hands. They all had a  pickup. They were all old pickups, but they all drove pickups because  they were different places. That   s kind of centralized to some bigger  equipment, you know. Like you say, hiring custom people to do some of  your work. It helps them out too because they   ve got a lot of expense on  their own, and it really helps out me. I   ve got a lot of good friends that  do that, but I pay them. It   s not for free, but they   re reasonable and  they   re willing to do it. That   s the big thing.  There   ve just been many, many changes in the farming. We used to  irrigate the cotton down the row, what I call it, and that got to taking so  much water to get from one end to the other. I mean, if you get it soaked  right, you couldn   t get over it all quick enough. They   ve gone to the  pivot systems, which you can go over it several times with a lighter dose  of water and do it easier, except last summer. Combines have gotten  bigger and bigger, that harvest your wheat. You used to have some  fourteen foot, I call them combines, but now you   ve got some up to  thirty-six foot that are big machines, large stuff, large equipment.  They   ve gone a lot from what I called the bobtail truck a while ago to a  lot of semi-trucks hauling to the elevator out of the fields.  20  Milo   years ago, we had a farm plan. You pretty well had to rotate your  crops because we didn   t have the best fertilizer, and we didn   t have the  chemicals like we do now. You would plant maybe half of a place in  cotton and half the place in milo. The next year, you   d go back and plant  the cotton where the milo was and plant the milo where the cotton was,  just to rotate it. Then we had what they called layout ground that you  could put beans, or any kind of forage, on it that you   d turn under to help  build the land. A certain percent of that, you had to set aside, called it  set-aside acres. You couldn   t grow anything for sale on that.  Really, the rotation of the land, I really think was a nice deal. I think it  was a good deal. But we   ve all gotten away from that. When money got  tough, pinch to pinch, you just had all one place in cotton and you may  have cotton three or four years. Then it   d be all in wheat. It just changed  about.  There was a lot of cotton planted, the years I remember. In fact, I  worked at nights, even when I had the service station, working in the  cotton gin. I didn   t run the gin. I worked in a cotton gin. As far as cotton  is concerned, I   ve worked in a gin, I   ve raised cotton, I own my  strippers, my trailers, harvested cotton. Then I got to hauling mail to the  different co-ops in the country for the Plains Co-Op at Altus. My route  was three hundred miles a night and went as far up as fairly close to  Oklahoma City, Hinton, that area. I had, really, from Altus, northeast.  All the little towns had a cotton gin.  What I did, we had a runner that took samples and cards to the Plains  Co-Op in Lubbock every day and then he   d bring back the checks for the  farmer   s cotton. At night, not only me, but there was like four of us, had  a route and we delivered these checks and put them in   they had little  black barrels locked in front of gins and we   d put that in there in a bag.  So, I hauled a lot of checks. At one period of time in there I missed, I  also, like I said, I done all that with cotton, and then I also hauled  compressed bales of cotton from Altus and area compresses to Georgia  to the mills. Clear over to the cotton mills. Got to go through all those  cotton plants, more than once. I actually took a trip back there with my  wife on a tour with the co-op and went through all the mills. So, cotton  has been pretty exciting. I   ve had it hailed out, I   ve had it washed out,  I   ve had it blowed out. Worms and weevils were so bad, and it got to  where we couldn   t hardly raise any cotton.  They formed a boll weevil eradication program. Really, that   s wiped the  insects out of the cotton. If the moisture is right, the heat is right, cotton  will make money and it will do good without these insects. Of course,  they have the herbicide that you can spray over it called Round Up, so  21  you basically don   t have a big weevil problem. This is where I   m getting  back to chemicals because now, instead of plowing our wheat ground all  summer, we spray it a couple or three times, and then go in and no-till it,  not even a plow, just plant the wheat again. That   s great, but again,  we   re building up with chemicals. I couldn   t farm without them. I don   t  know, I just wish we could come up with something more natural to take  care of it than the chemicals. They   re very high, very expensive.  Fertilizer is very expensive.  I saw it when I was farming the fertilizer being, oh, seventy-five dollars  a ton, maybe. Now, it   s like six hundred dollars a ton. Cotton seed, we  bought a bag of cotton seed for eight dollars. Finally got up to twelve for  a while. Now, we   re paying what they call a tech fee, which goes back to  your people with technology. A bag of seed will cost you from anywhere  between  250 to  350 dollars depending on which one you   re getting.  We don   t plant as much pounds per acre because it   s so much more pure  now that we   ve learned not to plant as much per acre. So, we went from  planting twenty irrigated to ten to twelve dry land, down to like six both  ways, irrigated and dry land. So, you don   t use many pounds, but it   s  very, very expensive. Chemical, fertilizer and cotton seed.  Wheat has gotten very expensive. You can go buy regular seed wheat,  but we try to save seed wheat if we can. Wheat prices have been   I   ve  sold wheat for a dollar fifty, and I   ve sold wheat for twelve dollars. You  never know, right now   last night, anyway, when it closed it was like   6.80. But a few days before that, it was seven-something. They just  marked it   well, I shouldn   t get into this, but politics and up-buying and  down-buying changes the market pretty regular. Investors. Land, I   ve  seen go   oh, it   s changed so much. You   d give a big price to give two  hundred dollars an acre when I started farming for land, and I   m seeing  land right now that some of it farming will bring maybe  2,000 to   2,500 dollars an acre, which is still not with Iowa and that part of the  country. But it   s changed a whole lot, really a lot in the last five years.  Part of that has happened because of banks, loan rates, and things like  that. The percentage they pay   if you had quite a lot of money and you  want to put it in a bank, you   re going to draw at the best, in a bank, 2  percent right now, I think. At the best. That   s quite a bit of money. So,  these guys are investing in land. We   ve had a lot of hunters invest in  land here that love hunting. In fact, we have three hunters   we have a  hunting club called Covey Rise. It was based on quail. So, I   m the  president of that club, but actually the club members, not me, own a  place north of town, a double-wide trailer that they call the clubhouse.  But I actually have some coming down tonight, three of them, to hunt  turkey. Great bunch of guys. They   re basically from Oklahoma City and  Edmond and that area. But I became friends with them a long time ago  22  Wilson  Huff  and remained friends, and they   re great people, too. They   re good to  Tipton when they come to Tipton. They try to spend money in Tipton,  all they can. We   ve had one that worked for Hormel Meat Company that  every year, he   ll furnish turkeys and hams for the senior citizen   s  thanksgiving dinner.  I   ve just met and been around a lot of good people. I   ve met a lot of  these through my sons, because my sons have worked at golf courses  and one owned a golf course, and that   s where he met a lot of people in  the city. But now, there was a few of those come down here hunting a  long time ago when my sons were just in high school or so. But they   re a  super bunch. We   ve got, I think, about eighteen members. They don   t all  come at the same time. Some of them are avid deer hunters, some of  them are quail hunters, some of them do all of it, but you   ve got turkey  hunters and dove hunters.  The deer hunting thing, I know there   s a lot of people that hate to see  animals and things killed. But what happens with your quail if you don   t  harvest them, they die out anyway, first year, they die. Then your  turkeys, they will last several years, but they   ll die off, too. Your deer,  we   re getting so overrun with deer that we   ve got to do something.  They   re hard on pastures and crops of all kinds. It   s nice to have some  around, but we don   t need many more. We   ve got this four hundred  acres   well, I   ve got leased all of my ground. When I say leased, what  ground they use of mine, he pays my membership and everything and  my sons and grandsons, pays their membership. They   re all hunters. It   s  a good organization. Good bunch of people.  Are you seeing a lot of land in the area bought by hunters in the last five  years?  Around this area, yes. There is a section down here that   s bought by  hunters. They   ve dug ponds, they   ve got irrigation water running in  those ponds. It   s all grass around it, shrubbery. They   ve built a nice club  down there. It   s all hunting. That   s all it is. Then they have different  grounds leased. We also have another five hundred acres leased on the  river, just across the road from the four hundred I own. But I don   t have  the river running through me unless there is a great big flood. It ran  through one time, I remember, but this belongs to Sharon Johns, used to  be Sharon Pinson. So, we have that leased for hunting. We lease some  land from Andrew Sooter, just grassland.  We   ve gotten overrun pretty bad with wild hogs. So, we   ve had a lot of  people hunting wild hogs and they multiply quicker than you can get rid  of them. South of here down toward Davison, they   ve got to where the  people go and plant corn and they   ll just eat out for the rows. Don   t even  23  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  have to plant over or something. I   m talking about thirty, forty hogs  eating on that when it   s just coming up. So, they   re having to do  something. They   re not poisoning them but some of them are taken for  market and there is a place you can take them that actually markets  them. Whether they ship them to some other state, I don   t know.  (Laughter) I have never marked any. I   ve never shot a wild hog. And  some of them just have to leave them lay.  Well, with the farm lands, are there fewer people owning more land? Is  that the common pattern?  Oh, yes. Yes. There used to be a house on at least every quarter of land  and almost on every eighty in a lot of situations, there   d be a house.  There   s very few houses in the country anymore.  When did this shift start happening?  The shift started happening about, I would say, late-   50s, early-   60s,  back, like I said, when we went to stripping cotton instead of hiring it  done, because everybody had to have another little house for somebody  to live in when they did that. I won   t say what we call those houses, but  anyway, they were for labor. It   s just shifted a lot, fast. We went from     well, I want to say it was five years ago, I ran some cattle for a company.  They were just steers for winter wheat, and they paid us like thirty cents  a pound on the game. We ran 350   250 this year, they paid seventy  cents on the game. So, the cattle market has really changed in the last  few years. Now, it can go down just as quick as it went up.  The food prices in the stores, I watched the news today and on the  computer that food prices are gaining pretty fast, going up. Of course, I  always tell my wife, I don   t care if beef goes up, you know, because I   m  getting more. (Laughter) But I think about it for other people, and that   s  tough. But gas prices, food prices   I sold gas for nineteen-nine when I  started the service station, a gallon. They   d almost give you propane  when you wanted it, you know, for tractors and things. Not give it to  you, but very low. I   ve seen all that change to tremendous prices.  The food thing, the bad part about it, and I see this with equipment,  many things that   s happened when we   ve had the rises in the prices and  they go up, the market may go down, but the prices don   t go down in the  stores, normally. They may run more specials or something, but you  don   t see   just like gasoline, like I started out at nineteen-nine in    62  and saw it rise in 1976 to sixty-something cents. I thought that was  terrible because we didn   t have the technology then for computers and  all that stuff. I would sell eight thousand gallons of gas, a load of gas,  and then the next time it come in it may be ten cents higher and I   ve  24  already sold. So, I   ve lost that ten cents. But when it went from forty-something  to sixty-something it was a tough deal. But now, I   ve seen it  rise and rise and rise.  Today, it   s like   I   d say the national average, I haven   t looked today,  but I   d say  4.19,  4.20, something like that. I expect it to go down,  some. We   re just using a lot of fuel, a lot of   and a lot of your things are  built out of your fuel. You know, your plastics, waterlines, all kinds of  lines have some kind of fuel in it of some sort to make that stuff. Diesel  fuel, I have one diesel vehicle that I feed with and pull a trailer with. I  just don   t want to fill it up very often, but gasoline is almost there, too.  It   s up and down, but I don   t see it ever going back to where I saw it.  I   ve fixed flats for a dollar and now, you   re lucky if you get one fixed  for ten dollars. We changed oil, we   d air people   s tires, that was a full-service  station. We washed the windows, vacuumed, everything you can  imagine. You   ve got to hunt a place to pay dollars for that now to get  that all.  It   s hard for me to get used to pulling into a place and nobody will come  and check my oil and water and all that stuff. Of course, the vehicles are  a lot better than they used to be. They don   t need a lot of service like  they did before. I can remember my dad talking about the old Model A  car that they   d be going somewhere and they   d have a flat and they   d  just change the tire off the wheel and patch it on the road and go on.  They   d get a bearing knocking in the engine and there was times they  stopped and pulled the pan off the engine and put bacon brine and stuff  around the rod bearings, so it would make it so far more, you know. I  never had to do that, but I   ve heard them talk about it a lot. It   s just been  quite a deal.  I never was in the military. I didn   t want to go when I could have gone  because I had children. I didn   t go, but I kind of feel like that might have  been part of life I missed just a little, that I didn   t serve two years, or  something. But I can   t do it now. (Laughs) But I do think that   s a part  that   s missed in your life when you talk to people that   s been in the  military at one time or another. It   s a part you miss. I would have been  awful lonesome because like I told you, I was in love when I got out of  high school and everybody kept saying    That   s puppy love,    and I kept  waiting and waiting. I finally just it stood as long as I could, and I talked  to my folks and her folks.  My dad, I   ll never forget what he told me. He said,    I just want you to  remember one thing. You   re very young.    I was young, but he said,    But  when you   re married, you   re married. That   s the way it   s going to be.  That   s the way I intend for you to do it.    I   ve never had a quabble about  that. That   s just the way my dad was. He didn   t believe people should  25  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  marry and divorce and change families and everything like a lot of them  do now. It happens. I can   t stop that, but I just hope the Lord is taking  care of it. I know there are some situations that just it   s almost a must to  go separate ways, but I   ve not experienced that.  Thank goodness.  Yes, I just never even thought about it. (Laughs) Never entered my  mind.  What is the water source for the irrigation around here?  It   s wells. Right in this Tipton area is wells and, oh, from sixty foot to  sixty-five foot deep. Part of our water source is down at Tipton   s well.  It   s like sixty-one foot. We also buy Frederick water. It   s piped over  here. We buy a certain percent. I think right now, we   re blending like  twenty-five/seventy-five, seventy-five us, twenty-five Frederick. DEQ   Department of Environmental Quality  gives us a pretty hard time when  we get some of the different levels in nitrate and this kind of thing so we  have to be very careful. So, that   s what we   re doing right now with that.  The irrigation, I got off on the city instead of irrigation, I guess, but  almost once a week, putting up a new circle system right around the  Tipton area. They   re fortunate that we can still get water. It got low last  year and the pivots run pretty low. They had a little tough time getting  water and getting enough water to make their good crops. Hopefully,  this year we can get the water table up some and it will be better, but  they just keep   of course, when they put in these sprinkler systems,  they   re not using as much water as we were running down the row like  we used to. That helped some, but I know three that   s gone up within  five miles of here in the last week.  The circle system?  Yes. My two grandsons do that. They don   t put up the circle system.  They do the repairs, the servicing, and some of the wiring. They sell  them, also. They   re working for another man, but he pays them a  commission every time they sell one. Of course, they know everybody  around here. They was born and raised here.  Sounds like a good deal.  They both have been on the volunteer fire department. The younger one  moved away for about a month to Oklahoma City and was going to go to  firefighter   s school, and they put him way down the line. He couldn   t  take the city life. He   s an avid hunter and outside person. So, he came  26  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  back and went to work for this guy out of Duke named Duds Hall. He  called the company Fast Track. They   ve both got service pickups. But  Austin, in the meantime, Austin went on the volunteer fire department,  the oldest one. So, he currently is on the fire department. My middle son  Craig was on the fire department. So, three generations have been on the  fire department. Oh, we   ve had six generations of Huffs playing football  here. I hope I live to see the seventh. Of course, he hasn   t even started  school yet, but    (Laughs)  Has there been a significant decrease in grain elevators and cotton gins,  just over the years?  Yes, we   ve decreased the cotton gins. There   s very few in this country,  in Oklahoma, period. We   ve got a big cotton gin in the Frederick area.  The one that used to be here is closed. It merged with Humphrey   s Co-op,  and it   s a pretty big gin. Then they   ve got Grower   s west of Altus,  Cotton Grower   s Gin.  Did that all happen late-   50s, early-   60s?  No, that   s happened in the    90s,    90s and 2000s more than anything. A  lot of your real small gins went out of business in the    70s. I think our  gin closed here in the late-   90s. Elevators, we   ve got a bigger elevator  than what we had years ago. There was two small elevators here when I  was growing up in high school. Now, there   s just one, the Humphrey   s  Co-op. But it   s a lot bigger storage than it used to be. It probably won   t  be enough this year if everything looks like it does, stays like it is.  We   ve had to, I guess it was four years ago, pile wheat on the ground  over here. But they own this elevator, they own an elevator in Altus, and  they own an elevator in Olustee, and one in Blair. So, they have different  places they can go. Depending on the rail cars, whether you can get them  in or what, or if you get enough trucks to ship it out. Right now, we   re  shipping out 200,000 bushels, I think, between now and the first of May.  We   re full down here and we   re having to ship it to get rid of our  harvest. When I say we, I   m a member of that co-op, and my wife works  there. So, it   s always we. I served six years on the co-op board in the     70s.  Where does it ship to?  It   s going to Saginaw, Texas. Some of it is going to mills and some of it  is actually going to an elevator to be, I   m sure, shipped from there to  overseas or wherever, you know. If it   s good quality, it   s going to some  actual mills where they mill it and make your bread and everything. I  can   t think of the name of that place. It just changes every day. It   s fast.  27  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  Has the demand for cotton increased?  Yes, it has in the last few years. Price, Ellyn and I raised cotton the year  before last. Made a real good crop and sold it for like a dollar and forty  cents, thirty to forty. Today, that kind of cotton is worth about eighty-nine,  ninety cents. So, it   s down some, but that   s still a good price  because I remember way back there, we sold cotton, some less than fifty  cents. Way down there.  And that   s per     Per pound.  Per pound.  Yes. We used to call a bale of cotton 500 pounds, but they actually call it  480, now. We used to get tickled at some different farmers. It was kind  of a hoot to   they   d say they made so many bales an acre or made so  many bales on that amount of acres. Well, when you actually figured it  up, if you figured 500 pounds like most of us figured it, it wasn   t a bale.  It wasn   t that amount. But they like to put them in that many bags so  they can call it that many bales per acre. (Laughter) It   s kind of strange,  you know. I really think a perfect bale of cotton is 480, now. That   s what  they call it. That   s the tying and the covering. Of course, used to, we  used that old bagging. What we called it was   it was made out of  cotton, but it was kind of like burlap. It and the metal ties weighed quite  a bit on top of the bale. Now, it   s just stuck into, I call it plastic, but  that   s not what they call it, in an already compressed bale. They changed  the presses where they press them and they   re a smaller bale. They just  go through the chute and go into this    (Phone rings)  What would you say is the percentage of people in Tipton that are  farmers or who have farming enterprises?  That   s changed a whole lot, actually living in Tipton and the  surrounding miles, the farmers have gone to about   I   m going to say  twenty farmers, from about two hundred at one time. But you know, so  many people farm so many more acres now than they did then in one  operation. You   ve got a lot of corporations, a lot of trusts, a lot of things  that put a lot of land together. Basically, the ancestors, a big part of it  still are here, some part of the family. The Boyds, you know, there   s still  some Boyds, there   s still some Vernons, of course, us and the Dizerts  and the Meeks and the Todds. I don   t want to leave out anybody. The  Dudleys. Then we actually have some farmers out of Frederick and  Altus that farm some land here. Basically in this area, but I   m talking  about people that the names have been here for a lot of years. The  28  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  Dizerts, the Todds, the Huffs, the Boyds, the Dudleys. The Meeks  actually married a Deyoung, which the Deyoungs been farming here for  years. There are not any Laings left. I used to farm about three quarters  for the Laing family.  Is that who Laing school was named after?  No. Well, it was some of their relatives, I think, back through the years  because they were all in that area and all around. We always still call  this hill up here Laing Hill, where you go out of Tipton toward Manitou  and you go up this hill just two and a half miles out here. That   s where  the Laings, the older Laings that I knew, lived. I   ll leave out somebody  when I try to think of names, you know. If somebody listens to that,  they   re going to say,    Well, you didn   t mention my name.    (Laughter)  McCulloughs, they   ve still got land that they   ve had for years. There   s  still a McCullough farming it. Abernathy. They   ve still got land, still  farming it. I know I   m going to leave out somebody. Gosas.  Who?  Mike Gosa, his dad was James Gosa. He farmed here for years. Mike  was raised here. Most all these I   m telling you about were raised here,  went to school here. The Haines graduated here. I am sure that I   ve left  somebody out, but I don   t want to.  We can add them in later if you think of them.  Well, if I can get my mind where I can think about it, you know.  (Laughter) When we used to have an office full of farmers that more or  less what I call roll your legs up and shoot the bull, you know, roll your  jeans up, we   d have fifteen or twenty in there. Now, you   re lucky if you  get five together at different times. Of course, some of them have  different jobs also with their farming that they need for security. It   s a  good thing for them because they can actually, one of them I know that   s  teaching can draw some retirement when he retires out of school and  still farm it. He has some very good help. Most of them around here  have got very good labor help anymore, but they don   t have near as  many because they   ve got bigger equipment. It   s just changed so much.  Well, we   ve lost so many of them that   s passed away the last few years  that were involved, still their family name is going on, but they were  involved, themselves.  Well, do you see the population of Tipton in the future changing?  Well, you know, this is only my opinion. It has gone from   I   ve seen it  at twelve to twelve-fifty to about nine. Around nine, now, maybe shy of  29  nine a little bit, but I see the population growing. We   ve got a lot of  people that would like to move back here. They like the small town  atmosphere. Like I say, there   s not a Wal-Mart in Tipton and there won   t  ever be. There   s not a Holiday Inn or a Hilton. Dr. Cook that was at  OSU was raised here. He used to write me, tell me, say,    We need a  motel, a big Holiday Inn and       Many things he wanted me to try to add  to Tipton. I have tried the dollar stores and things like that to get them to  come here, but they want so much population to be able to be here. But  when they do, then some of these other little mom and dad places, they  are not going to stay in business. I don   t know which way is the best or  what, you know.  There   s people building new houses occasionally, and I know that in the  last few weeks we   ve had two or three more families move in, younger  families. They may not stay forever, but they   re here. We have a lot of  young people. When I call them young, I   m talking about sixty and  below, but that work over at the Air Base at Altus, civil service-type  jobs. We have a factory at Frederick. We have a lot of people work over  there that live here. We also have a new apartment complex down here  that   s just for sixty-two and older. Right now, it   ll hold about twenty, but  we   ve got, I think, about ten right now, the board that I resigned off of.  A lot of people come and look at them and based on their income, how  they can get in there, a lot of them get just a little too much money to  qualify, but they   d like to live here.  We have a builder here that   s been building a few houses alone, Jimmy  Lovejoy. He   s been buying several houses and selling them, rent-to-own-  type things, fixing them up, remodeling them, which has been a  good thing for Tipton. We have many, many old ones that need to be  torn down. They   re really bad and tore down and lots cleaned up. We   re  in the process of   we   ve already sent notices, but we still have to go  through a waiting period before we can actually go in there and take  them down. That would be a county/city thing, together. When we get  around to doing these things    We have some people that get very  disgruntled about their old place. They don   t even live here, but they  hate to see it torn down. I understand part of that, but some of it is really  bad. The roofs have fell in and it   s growed up all around it, trees into the  house and everything else. But again, you can   t please everybody at the  same time.  We have a group of people that wants all those cleaned up, but they want  it done right now. Some people, it doesn   t seem to bother. Some people,  we have some very good people that continue to pat you on the back for  what you   ve done. You don   t hear from them as much as you do the  disgruntled people. (Laughs) But like I told you, that 7 percent is  disgruntled about most things that do happen. I have people give me a  30  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  very bad time that are friends that they know they   ll just give you a bad  time, just teasing with me. And some of them are serious, but I can  answer their questions and explain it to them and then they   re fine. Some  of the people you just can   t explain it and they don   t want to understand  it. They just don   t want to be. Tipton has always had a dog problem. It  just goes on forever, because they keep breeding. They get out of their  yards and that goes on all the time.  When is the biggest time of year when the most people come to visit?  It will be tomorrow and Saturday and Sunday.  Easter weekend.  Yes, Easter weekend. This is, I think, our eighty-fifth alumni banquet  this year. I think it   s the longest one in Oklahoma.  Really?  Yes. That   s what I   ve understood through the years. We   ve had the  longest consecutive years.  Well, it   s really neat how the community comes together and how  everybody holds their events around the same time.  We   ve been cleaning all week, alleys and people piling out trash. It   s a  special week that they can clean up and we   ll pick it up. But we have a  little problem, we won   t get it all done because we   ve been to places and  now, they   re piling more out and we   re not going to get it all done but  tonight, because our employees don   t work tomorrow on Good Friday,  unless it   s emergency. But they have hauled a lot of stuff. The county  and the city go together. The county furnishes dumpsters, and we fill  dumpsters. Of course, they   ve also helped us in town do some of the  cleanup.  Where does all the trash from Tipton go?  We think it goes to Wichita Falls. The people we deal with is out of  Wichita Falls. Some of it may go to Lawton. They may own the landfill  at Lawton, too. I don   t know. We tried to do our best keeping the limbs  picked up, and we have an area we piled in and sometime or another we  get fire control and burn the limbs. We don   t like to put anything there  except wood products. It   s not for a dump. It   s just for our purposes  only. When I was first on the city board in the    80s, we had a dump  ground ourselves. We had a man and a bulldozer that kept it buried. But  then the government got involved and the soil wasn   t capable. There was  31  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  too much leach into the soil and it wasn   t the right time for a landfill, so  we had to ban it. That hurt some because the closest place now for a  landfill is Frederick. That doesn   t seem very far, but the way fuel is and  the way labor is, you drive fourteen miles to Frederick two or three  times a day, it gets pretty expensive.  We control the cemeteries, somewhat. We own it and have been  maintaining it. They also have a perpetual care that has a hundred  thousand dollars in it, but you can   t deplete that hundred thousand  dollars. You have to use the interest off of it, is all you can use for the  cemetery. Right now, the way the interest rates are, that   s bad. When  they first formed this, we were getting interest rates about 10 percent and  that did pretty good. But we think we   re doing a good job with the  cemetery. Every once in a while I will get a call,    Did you see so and  so   s grave? Did you see how it   s growed up so much over there?    or this  kind of thing. But we try to maintain it good.  So, do people give donations for that, also?  Also, yes. For both   they give for perpetual care and cemetery funds. A  lot of times, if somebody passes away, instead of flowers, they   ll give to  the cemetery fund or one of the churches or the home or senior citizens.  Flowers, sometimes you get overrun with flowers. They   re beautiful at  the service, but then they   re a waste unless they   re plants because they  are going to die just quick. Because they always put them out at the  cemetery and then you know what the sun does, then. But anyway,  we   ve got the airport that we maintain.  Is that mostly for crop dusters?  Yes. Anybody can land on it. We   ve got some hangars out there for rent.  We had several back in the    80s that the farmers, even, have had  airplanes. Things got so expensive and they got rid of their airplanes.  We had it almost full out there. Abernathy used it to crop dust out of.  He   s got three planes, I believe. We just redid the runway lights again,  and we   re in the process of resurfacing or sealing the cracks in it. But we  maintain the grass and everything around it.  Also, so much farmland, which we lease. We cash leased, and we take a  bid like every three years and lease it. We have a couple different spots  west of town, a twenty-acre plot and about a fifteen acre plot that we  cash lease also. It   s basic cotton and wheat there, cotton and wheat at the  airport. So, that helps somewhat to get along. We were close on our  utilities. It   s pretty tough sometimes to get by, but so far we   re making  it. Increased the sales tax, I guess it was two years ago, a little over a  year ago. It   s helped quite a bit. There is more sales tax than we really  32  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  Wilson  Huff  thought there would be.  What was the increase?  Two percent. We were already on two, so now it   s four. But it   s really  helped us. We still have a high payment to the USDA  United States  Department of Agriculture  for, like I told you, back in the eighties, built  a water tower, sewer lines, water lines, and we   re still paying for it. I  don   t know if it will ever get paid for. We   re making our payments  anyway and keeping some in reserve for it. We had hoped that the  government might forgive it because they have forgiven some places  around that have always had some income problems and large debts. I  know they   ve also dismissed some farmer debts through the years that  don   t know how they   d make it if they didn   t. Well, they   d just lose  everything. That   s what it   d amount to. But we   re still keeping our head  above water. We don   t have any hot checks out. (Laughter) We don   t do  that. It   s just been a great ride with the city all through, from fireman  through the job through today. Like I told you, a bunch of bumps in the  road, but it   s been a super life for me in Tipton, Oklahoma.  I usually finish with,    What does Oklahoma mean to you?    I think my  question to you should be what does Tipton mean? But we   ve covered  that throughout the whole thing. (Laughs)  Yes, Oklahoma means a great deal to me. We have so much   and I  don   t get to see it often   but we have so much in Oklahoma to offer that  so many people don   t realize. Your lakes, your countryside, your  sightseeing, your animals and birds. Oklahoma City has added so much,  Tulsa has added so much. And a lot of your towns have   golf courses in  Oklahoma are super. You   ve just got a super state, really, when you sit  back and look at it. You think,    Well, I   m going to go to California and  look around.    Well, just go across Oklahoma and look at all that first,  because you   ve got a lot to see here. I   ve been to some of the basic  places, but I haven   t been everywhere. I still want to drive that east side  of Oklahoma. What do you call it, Talihina?  Yes.  I never have got to do that. I want to do that. But I   ve been to southeast  Oklahoma some and around the Tulsa area and up through there. Miami.  I   ve been quite a few just straight shots to those places. I   d like to be  able to just sit and ride for days and look at different things. Gosh, there  is some beautiful grassland in eastern Oklahoma, since we   ve got some  rain, anyway, northeast Oklahoma.  Football is great in Oklahoma. Both the big universities are great. Of  33  Wilson  Huff  course, I   m very partial to Southwestern Oklahoma University, and I got  to go to state playoffs with our Tipton team this year. It was wet and  rainy and I got with the athletic director when I got there and he actually  put me in one of their   the alumni building right on the field, but up  higher, inside. He checked on me, the president come in and visited with  me. It was just a great deal. I hadn   t been there in years. They   re  building so much there, so many more things at Southwestern. I guess  all your colleges are.  I   ve hunted in northwest Oklahoma, the Panhandle. I know the  Panhandle gets a little rough and I won   t be like Governor  James  Howard  Edmondson did years ago and say that   s the end of the world,  but it is different up there, I   ll have to admit. (Laughter) They stay pretty  dry, and it   s a long ways between places. But I love Oklahoma. I just  don   t know of another state I   d want to be in right now. I know we have  our problems, but if you look at every state, they   ve got their problems. I  think Oklahoma has been super for friendly people everywhere I go. My  sister had car trouble in Oklahoma City a while back, and it was so  strange. This guy came to her and asked her what was the matter and she  said,    I think I ran out of gas.    He said,    I   ll go get you some gas.    She  didn   t know who he was. He went and got her some gas, and then her  car wouldn   t start because she had sat there and left on the flashers and  the battery ran out. So, he went back and got cables to start the car. She  asked him,    Who are you?    He said,    I   m a Headlock.    She said,    I  knew some Headlocks in Tipton.    He said,    That   s where I was born  and raised.    (Laughter)  So, my sister got to meet somebody in Oklahoma City that come and  stopped and helped her from Tipton, Oklahoma. But I mean, basically,  Oklahoma people are just helpful and friendly. They care. I know you   ve  got a certain percent in every state, every place, we don   t all agree. We  all holler for different teams, different politicians and all this kind of  stuff, but it   s still a great state to be in. I   m just proud of it. I   ve seen it  progress so much in the last twenty years or maybe thirty. Oklahoma has  progressed a lot. Rural areas, we   re all going down some. We realize  that, but still have a lot to offer. If you like to talk and visit and see  friendly people and fish and hunt and see different kinds of crops  growing, you can go from one end of the state to the other and see  everything different. It   s beautiful. Oil, gas, we   ve got it all. It   s a great  place to be from.  Well, thank you so much for visiting with me today.  Okay, I enjoyed it. I hope I did it right. I   m sure there is things I left out.  -------  -------  34  
