 Little Thunder My name is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is Monday, October  20,  2014  and I   m interviewing Tonia Weavel as part of the Oklahoma  Native Artists Project sponsored by the Oklahoma Oral History  Research Program at Oklahoma State University. Tonia, you   re a  Cherokee National Treasure. You specialize in Cherokee tear dresses  and other nineteenth-century clothing interpretations. You also work at  the Cherokee Heritage Center as the Director of Education, and that   s  where we   re interviewing today before you report for work. Thank you  for taking the time to talk with me.  Weavel My pleasure.  Little Thunder Where were you born, and where did you grow up?  Weavel I was born in Perryton, Texas. I   m a Texan by birth, in the Panhandle. I  was raised in Hardesty, which was a small farming community in the  center of Texas County, Oklahoma, near Guymon. My dad was a  transplant from Stilwell, so that   s where I grew up. I went to school  there twelve years, went to college at Panhandle State University for a  couple of years, but we always vacationed in Stilwell. As a matter of  fact, I didn   t even know there was other vacation destinations until I got  older because every summer we came to Stilwell. That   s where I was  not necessarily introduced to the culture, but that   s where the culture  was more prevalent.  My granny had eleven children, so I had lots of cousins. When my dad  came home, he was the oldest boy. When he came home, everybody  came to Stilwell to the home place to see him because he was one of  only two that moved away, sort of. That was my upbringing. I was  raised in a small farm community where domestic arts and sewing and  cooking were well-placed things for women to do. I took home ec in  high school. They don   t teach it anymore, but that   s where I learned to  5  sew. My mother did embroidery and handwork, and my grandmother  did some sewing. It didn   t fill their day, but it was done as needed.  That   s a little bit about my background.  Little Thunder What did your father do for a living?  Weavel It   s actually quite interesting. My dad, like so many other men of his  generation   he was born in 1920. He lived through the Depression, and  he went to the Second World War. When he got out of the war, they  played baseball. He and his brothers were big baseball players. In the  Panhandle, natural gas was a big industry, and natural gas companies  sponsored baseball teams. They recruited players by giving them a job,  and my dad was one of the ones who   he was a pitcher. He was a big,  tall, strong, Cherokee man. They gave him a job if he   d come and pitch  on their baseball team, so he went. That   s what he did.  He met my mom, who was born and raised in Hardesty, and they  married. He lived out there his entire life, and he worked for the natural  gas company for thirty-five years. I feel like I   m a real hybrid because  my grandmother on my mother   s side literally went to the Panhandle in  a covered wagon; my dad   s family walked the Trail of Tears; so I was  Oklahoma Territory and Indian Territory. I feel like I was a child of the  infamous marriage of the two Territories, but I have a good cross-section  of all of Oklahoma, and I   m real proud to be from Oklahoma.  Little Thunder Right. That   s a great story. Thanks for sharing that. Brothers and  sisters?  Weavel I have a brother and sister. Both are deceased. We were quite   there  was a big age difference in us. My sister was sixteen years older; my  brother was eight years older. My mother had three children spaced out  for quite some time.  Little Thunder What about the role of Cherokee language growing up?  Weavel My dad was a Cherokee speaker. Cherokee was his first language. They  lived in   he was raised in Fairfield Community at Stilwell. The first  five children of my grandmothers were all Cherokee speakers. Their  grandparents lived with them who spoke only Cherokee, and my  grandparents were bilingual. My dad grew up speaking Cherokee. They  went to school at Marietta. They had such a difficult time at school that  my grandmother took the remaining six children and integrated English  to them right away, so my dad had lost a lot of the language. I think he  could understand when he was around people. I would beg him to tell  me,    Food   s on the table.    I don   t know if he couldn   t remember or if it  just wasn   t important to him, but in his generation, the language wasn   t  6  important. I am the first generation not to have Cherokee as a first  language.  Little Thunder You sort of explained that your grandmother, I believe it was, did  handiwork and your mother, too, so you were around it in that way. Do  you have any early memories of sewing before you got to home ec  class?  Weavel My mother would buy me embroidery kits. They were these great  stamped pieces, and we had dishtowels that were embroidered, and  pillowcases. My grandmother actually did hairpin crocheting, so she  would crochet these gorgeous pillowcases with big lacey edges that  were for her guest bedroom. No one was allowed to be in that room or  certainly not to climb on the bed. We had a few things like that, but my  mother taught me to embroider French knots and chain stitches and  things like that. I really loved it. I really enjoyed doing that needlework.  That was actually my first instance. The first time I learned to iron, my  grandmother ironed her sheets, and so I ironed pillowcases. That was  the first thing that they taught me to iron. I ironed handkerchiefs, when  women would carry hankies in their purses. That was just a domestic  trait that all the girls in my class, I mean, that   s how we all learned to do  those kinds of things. We learned them at home. We didn   t learn them  at school first. We were doing them at home before we ever got to home  ec class.  Little Thunder Right. You explained that you went to school there mostly, but I notice  after high school   can you tell us where you went to school?  Weavel I went to Panhandle State University for two years, which was a local  community   well, it wasn   t a community college. It was a four-year  state college. Then I transferred my junior year to Stillwater, and I went  to Oklahoma State University. I finished my degree in education,  Secondary Education. Speech and English were my two areas of  concentration, and I love theatre. I was a dancer. I took dancing lessons  as a child in Guymon, so I was a tap dancer and a ballet dancer. I  enjoyed that very much. In 1976 I was in the Trail of Tears drama as a  dancer. That was between my junior and senior year in high school.  That really introduced me to Tahlequah, Cherokee County, Cherokee  people as such. I loved it.  I was sort of a Broadway baby, kind of. I liked to perform, so that   s  what I studied in college. Then I got my teaching degree. I always, and  still do, have a love of the theater and have enjoyed that very much. The  Trail of Tears drama, I joined during its heyday when the crowd would  be full, and the cast was eighty strong, and I was a dancer. Then I  danced again in 1978, and that summer I was also a tour guide at the  7  Tsa-La-Gi Village. That   s when tours would go through every twenty  minutes, and there was an incredible crowd. It really was in the heyday  of the Cherokee Heritage Center, what we know now, Tsa-La-Gi  Village and such. That was a strong foundation for me. I finished my  degree at Oklahoma State University and am a proud OSU alum.  Little Thunder And of course in the drama, both, and at the Village, you   re around a  lot of nineteenth-century clothing.  Weavel I was. I didn   t take note of it. I just knew what they had on and what  they wore, and it was Indian. I have to just do a quick explanation that  in my research since, I realize that it has been, the 1940s,    50s, and    60s  was a real strong pan-Indianism time for clothing. My cousin, who is  very identifiable, competed   maybe she didn   t compete, but she would  perform the Lord   s Prayer in sign language, as I think every girl, every  Cherokee girl, in that time period knew. She wore a fake fringe dress, a  headband around her head, and a single feather behind her head. That  was very acceptable. It   s really frowned upon today because now we  know better or we know more, but at that time that was a real strong  image for people.  There are pictures of W. W. Keeler with headdress on, and that  identifying Indian look was acceptable and admired in that time period.  When the Village started, those clothes were similar. Oddly enough,  Betty Smith, who is also a National Treasure and a founding member of  the Village, she raised three generations of children in the Village, and  she worked here for a long time. She   s a great friend to me. I designed  the costumes for our new Village, Diligwa  1710 Cherokee Village ,  which opened in 2012, and I was really worried about the image that  would be relayed from what those women would wear. I visited with  Betty, and she said,    That   s something we have in common because I  designed the first costumes for the people in the Village.    That made  me feel really good because I knew the struggle that I had in  researching authentic clothing of the time period because I knew that   .  Well, here at the Heritage Center where I work, we   ve been open for  fifty years, and we still have visitors every day, which is amazing to me.  People are still fascinated by the culture. They   re charmed by Cherokee  people. It   s a wonderful place to be. I knew that the representation, that  the visual image would last much longer than what they heard or what  they learned about Cherokees. It was very important to me to make sure  that it was as authentic as I could make it and still be modest in our  timeframe because, as we know, women were topless, so we couldn   t  do that. That was a strong challenge for me. When the early Village was  here, there was a different feel about how to represent Indian people at  that time.  8  Little Thunder Thanks for putting that in context. Then you went ahead and got a  master   s degree at NSU  Northeastern State University . Am I right  about that?  Weavel Yes. Wathene Young, (many of your viewers may recognize her name)  she had the American Indian Resource Center, and they were offering  master   s degree programs for candidates. It was offered, and it was an  opportunity that was hard to pass up. I got an education degree in  counseling. I taught school in Hominy, which is another culture of  beautiful people. I taught school there for just two and a half years and  ran the Indian Education Program, and realized that school teaching was  not my forte, which was very depressing because I   d spent a lot of time  going to school to do that and then realized that that wasn   t my thing. I  moved back to Tahlequah, and I got a job at Cherokee Nation when  Cherokee Nation was still young and flourishing, and have been  involved in Indian education on many levels all throughout my  professional career.  Little Thunder When did you first, then, start making Cherokee tear dresses or  clothing?  Weavel When I was twenty-four, I ran for Miss Cherokee. I did not win. Regina  Christie won that year. I had to have a tear dress, and Ruth England  from Stilwell, close to Fairfield, England Hollow, which is just on the  backside of Fairfield, my home community, made me a tear dress. I  thought it was wonderful because I could turn cartwheels in it. The way  it   s made, the way it   s built, you could play basketball in it. That was  my first exposure to tear dress. All this time, I had begun to sew for  myself and my nieces, dabbled with quilting, and still was doing  needlework, and cross-stitch, and crafts of all kinds. A friend of mine,  Eleanor Raper, (that   s her maiden name; I don   t know her married  name) Eleanor asked me to make her daughter, Callie, a tear dress. She  was about five years old. I said,    I   ve never made one, but I bet I  could.     I took the dress that Ruth had made for me; I turned it wrong side out; I  examined it. I looked at how she had done it, and I tried to copy it,  which I did on a fair level. That was the first tear dress I made. About  three years ago, she ran for Miss Cherokee as a twenty-three-year-old,  and she asked me to make her another dress. I felt like I had come full  circle. As a child and as an adult I had sewn for her. I started making  dresses, and I made them not very often, just for a few family friends.  Then I met Wendell Cochran, who changed my whole tear-dress life.  He is the master of tear dress. He is an extraordinary tailor. He   s very  good. He has a keen eye for color, design, style. We were connected  9  through the Cherokee Youth Choir, which started ten or twelve years  ago.  They had fifty choir members, and Wendell was farming out dresses to  all these women to make. He tested me, which is Wendell   s way, and he  had me sew for him for someone else. He saw the quality of my work,  quickly criticized all the wrongs, which I learned from and was grateful  for, and studied with him and have worked with him for the past ten or  twelve years in a really delightful collaboration, and learned so much  from him because Wendell is the one who designed the tear dress, who  has made it so that it is a custom fit for every woman, who has showed  me tips and tricks and ways to measure, and to compensate for a full  belly and a flat belly, and a tall, and a short. He   s remarkable. I   ve  learned so much from him. I credit him always to my tear dress  knowledge.  Little Thunder Yeah, that   s interesting because often you think of it as being kind of a  restrictive form that not every woman can wear.  Weavel Yeah, every tear dress that I make is a custom dress. I don   t go by size.  I do ask your size if I   m going to sew for you, but it   s all based on your  measurements. There   s a bodice and a skirt. If you   ve got a long torso,  you make the bodice longer. If you have short legs, you make the skirt  shorter. Some women will make a size ten dress, and some will make a  size twelve and so forth, but I don   t ever do that. I always have to have  your measurements, and I make the dress just to fit you, no one else. It   s  custom work, and I   m proud to do that because it is a special dress and  it   s a special thing that most people will keep for a lifetime and maybe  hand down to another generation.  Little Thunder When did you first enter a dress in a competition?  Weavel The Cherokee Heritage Center, I believe it was the third year. I think  this is like the fifteenth or sixteenth year. The Cherokee Heritage Center  sponsors the Homecoming art show, which is Cherokee citizens only.  We accept work from Cherokee Nation, United Keetoowah Band, and  the Eastern Band, but it was a Cherokee-only art show. I made a tear  dress to enter in that competition. That was the first time I   d entered a  competition. I didn   t win, I didn   t get a ribbon, but I was proud to enter  a dress.  Little Thunder What do you think, and, of course, your making the dresses is  continuing to evolve, but what distinguishes your tear dresses from  others?  10  Weavel I don   t know what distinguishes my dresses from others, but I was duly  impressed when people said they recognized my work. There are few  tear dress makers. Hopefully we   ll have more, but there are very few  women who actually do tear dresses. One of the things I did that  received criticism and was well received, was I started to put the seven-pointed  star. I started to appliqu   the seven-pointed star on dresses. I  think other people may have done it before I did, but I kind of was  known to do the stars. Then I began to do other appliqu   things like  turtles, and hummingbirds, and different things like that. That sort of  distinguished my work, but I don   t know.  Little Thunder I was going to say the appliqu  , I think, was really   .  Weavel Yeah, that might   ve been. A few years ago I started to do other things.  I   ve done ribbon weaving for the contrast band in the tear dress, and  I   ve also done cording with ancient pottery designs. That   s a hand  stitched   that   s a time-involved effort to do the cording, but I really  enjoy doing that because you can do so much with it. I   ve started to do  a few other things, not to break too far from tradition but yet spice up  and have some variety for our beautiful young Cherokee women who  wear those dresses so beautifully.  Little Thunder How about some of the other clothing that you make?  Weavel I didn   t make anything else. I didn   t know that there were other things  to be made until I began to research. I was aware of the hunting jacket,  often referred to as a Sequoyah jacket, the one that he   s so famously  pictured in. I made one, and I entered it in the show. At the time   .  Little Thunder Cherokee Homecoming?  Weavel At the Cherokee Homecoming art show. Before the show opened, it was  purchased, or it was claimed, maybe I should say. Howard Meredith,  Dr. Howard Meredith, was the husband of our Board of Trustees  President at the time. He had a keen interest in Cherokees. He  immediately snatched it up and was very intrigued by it, which was  flattering to me because I had such respect for him and his knowledge  about Cherokee people. I began then to do hunting jackets. You know,  our former chief, Chad Smith, is sort of renowned for wearing hunting  jackets. That was his choice of dress. I never made Chad a jacket, but I  have made others, and I made my children hunting jackets when they  were four and five years old. I have two, now, teenage boys, but at the  time I made them hunting jackets and turbans and dressed them.  That sort of began that era. Ribbon shirts are popular with Cherokee  people, men, so every year my children got a new ribbon shirt for  11  Cherokee Holiday. What   s interesting about that is I was so careful I  wanted to do it traditionally. Well, come to find out there   s not a  traditional ribbon shirt, in my estimation, for Cherokee men. When they  were about four and five years old I thought,    I   m buying this drab  olive green, trying to do traditional   .    I said,    Let   s go to Wal-Mart.     We went to Wal-Mart to the fabric, and I said,    Pick out fabric.    My  youngest son picked dinosaurs, and my oldest son picked out a tie-dyed  Scooby-Doo. I made their ribbon shirts, and I thought,    It has to reflect  them. It has to be about them and who they are in 2000.    For several  years, they picked out their fabric for their annual ribbon shirt. My  children didn   t even own dress clothes. We wore ribbon shirts as our  dress clothes for a long time. I   ve made ribbon shirts for several years,  as well.  Little Thunder Do you do any beadwork at all?  Weavel Beadwork is, Cherokee beadwork is beautiful, and just in the past  fifteen to twenty years have the masses learned and known about  Cherokee beadwork, thanks to Martha Berry, my dear and good friend  who I think singlehandedly revived Cherokee beadwork for us today.  I   ve learned from her, and I have done some beadwork.  Little Thunder Taken a couple of workshops?  Weavel Yes.     I have done some Cherokee beadwork, and I really enjoy it. It   s  very time consuming, but it   s so rewarding. I have made a couple of  pieces for friends, and I really enjoy it. If I ever get caught up on  sewing, I   ll do beadwork. (Laughter)  Little Thunder I thought I saw a shirt that had a bit of beadwork on it, (I could be  wrong) buckskin shirt. I was looking at a whole page of photos. It might  not have been yours.  Weavel I don   t remember. No, I don   t think so.  Little Thunder What   s an award or honor that you   ve won for your clothing that  you   re especially proud of?  Weavel The highest honor that I   ve   let me start again. The best award that I  ever received was Best of Show in about 2009, I think, for the  Homecoming art show. I was very ambitious and made a buckskin coat  in the Cherokee fashion of an example I had seen. It was a double-caped  coat with hand-embroidered designs. It was a labor of love, and it  was a challenge to myself. I think that   s the best award that I   ve won.  I   ve won numerous times in our art shows, and I don   t utilize art shows.  I   m not an artist that makes a living doing artwork. I have a full-time  12  job and a full-time family, and I   m a single mother. Much of my time is  devoted to my children and their school activities. I don   t get to devote  time to art like a lot of people do, so art shows are a passing fancy for  me. I don   t have to sell and have art shows to live. I   ve won several  ribbons at the art shows that the Heritage Center sponsors and that the  Cherokee Nation sponsors during the Holiday.  Little Thunder What   s been one of the most surprising people that an item of clothing  went to?  Weavel One of my most treasured buyers, I suppose, was the Children   s  Museum in Indianapolis. They bought a tear dress, a unique tear dress  that I had made using what now I call stacked stars. I was doing primary  colors, red, blue, yellow, and green, and I had a star stacked up on a  star, on a star, on a star. I   m a Stitch Witchery fan. I love Stitch  Witchery. I use it, and I   m proud to say it. When I went to iron them, I  tapped them, and they all turned like a kaleidoscope. They turned in a  way that was just like, (Gasps)    That   s how that   s supposed to be.    So  that   s how I made that dress, which was really a very unique and fun  showpiece. The Children   s Museum, I don   t know who was here to buy  it, but that   s where it ended up. That was an unusual and fun event for  me to have my dress go to.  Little Thunder Do you have clothing in other museums, as well, that you know of?  Weavel No, I don   t think so.  Little Thunder What   s one of the best compliments you   ve gotten on a piece of  clothing?  Weavel The best compliment that I   ve gotten was on my work as a whole. I was  nominated for National Treasure in 2012, and my good friend Wendell  Cochran was the number-one nominator. Part of the requirement is to  have a letter of recommendation, and he wrote a letter of  recommendation to me that was glorious. My comment was,    If I never  win, ever, I don   t need to because Wendell   s reaction and his adulation  of me was enough to last a lifetime.    I think that has been the highest  compliment that I   ve received is from someone who knows the craft  and is renowned as the Father of Tear Dresses to be complimentary to  me was truly an honor.  Little Thunder And you got to read the letter.  Weavel Yes, I did get to read the letter.  Little Thunder That   s wonderful.  13  Weavel It was very nice.  Little Thunder How often have you been back to North Carolina?  Weavel I have not   I have been to North Carolina twice in my life. I have  cousins who live there but were born here. I don   t have a very strong  connection to the Homeland, to people in the Homeland. I have met a  couple of ladies who sew. They actually taught me how to make the  1700 cloth and linen clothing, and I   m real grateful for that. When we  see each other we have a great time visiting, but we   re not in touch very  often. Don   t have much of a connection to North Carolina.  Little Thunder Right. I know that you and Lisa Rutherford are friends, and I know that  you two worked together on trying to reproduce a feather cape.  Weavel Yes. (Laughs)  Little Thunder I wonder if you could tell us a bit about that.  Weavel Lisa and I, Lisa Rutherford and I, have collaborated on several things.  When the 1700s clothing style became relatively popular, we were  imitating and making things together, discussing, and talking. We  decided we   d make a feather cape. It was in January, and the Heritage  Center that year was closed in January, although the staff still came to  work. It was a perfect time for us to get together and try to get our heads  together about how to make a feather cape. We spent a week trying to  figure out how to tie the net, how to tie on the feathers. We recruited  David Fowler, who is the curator at the  George  Murrell Home, and he  is an expert in Cherokee clothing, as well. We were just absolutely  determined to figure it out, but we didn   t. We gave up. Lisa continued  to pursue it, and she   s known today for her feather capes. She does a  beautiful job, and she has since gone back to North Carolina to talk to  ladies there to get techniques on netting and feather-tying. She  continued to pursue it. I left it alone. (Laughter)  Little Thunder You left it alone. I understand you two were also involved with a sort of  last-minute fashion show in Tulsa. I wondered how much you do  fashion shows and if you have any memories that are particularly   .  Weavel I haven   t done   I   ve done very few fashion shows. There have been a  few attempts by local people. About three years ago, during Cherokee  Holiday, there was a Cherokee fashion show. It actually included other  tribes, as well, which was very interesting. I participated a little bit in  that. We were also asked, Lisa Rutherford, Margaret Wheeler, and I  were asked to do a fashion show for a Native travel conference that was  14  held in Tulsa. I had a few items to show, as Lisa did, but Margaret  Wheeler, who is a Chickasaw genius, she does beautiful, amazing work.  She has such flair. I was so pleased to meet her and to enjoy her  company. She was the fashion show. Lisa and I just had a few extra  pieces. (Laughter)  Little Thunder Have you given any workshops on tear dresses or other clothing?  Weavel I have. At the Cherokee Heritage Center we do cultural classes  throughout the year. They are from beadwork to pottery to hide tanning.  We do a variety of things that are Cherokee in nature, and we teach the  public. They   re able to come and take a short lesson and try their hand  at whatever craft it is. I have done several sewing workshops. I was  na  ve enough to think that you could teach tear dress in four hours,  which is crazy. When I make a tear dress, it takes me from ten to twelve  hours from start to finish. I thought I would just teach the techniques for  different things because a marker of the tear dress is a gusset or a square  piece that   s set in the sleeve to give extension of the arm. That   s tricky  to stitch in. I thought,    I   ll teach that, and I   ll teach a few other little  things that are markers of tear dresses,    and it was terrible.  You have to have a basic knowledge of sewing before you can begin to  make a tear dress. You have to know just a few things about sewing. I  did a tear dress class about two years ago in which I got a little bit  smarter about how to conduct the class. We did four Friday afternoons,  spaced about two or three weeks apart. Each time we met, the ladies  went home with homework. They were to bring their garment back with  the homework done, and we   d move on to the next step. I vowed to  meet with all the women until they each had a tear dress. It ended up  being about eight weeks. It is a process to teach. It   s difficult to teach,  but once you know, you should hopefully know for the rest of your life.  I   ve also done hunting jacket classes, ribbon shirts, 1700 Cherokee  clothing classes, so I   ve done quite a few. I   ve taught quite a few  classes.  Little Thunder What about the younger generation   s attitude towards sewing? What  kinds of interest are you seeing?  Weavel There is, in my opinion, a terrific decline in sewing. It   s not a necessary  skill to know today. You can live a full and complete life without ever  knowing how to mend your shirt or put a button back on your pants. It  is a dying breed, unfortunately. However, I think with the Cherokee  Renaissance, as I like to call it, in the past twenty years, with our  government picking up the pace and becoming more involved, and with  Native people all over, not just Cherokee, there   s a resurgence of what   s  ours. The art world, I think, has exploded with beautiful, wonderful  15  people who are recreating art and then integrating new ideas in our  world today. There   s been a Cherokee Renaissance in my opinion.  With that comes clothing, so I think there are young people today that  are interested. There   s a young lady who   s in her mid-twenties, and  she   s been texting me quite frequently because she made a hunting  jacket. She wanted to know how do you do this, and how do you do  that. I   m happy to help her because now there   s somebody younger than  me doing it. I think with that resurgence of the culture, I think will  come clothing, and people will understand and do things that are  authentic to our time periods, as well as make innovations to those  things that make it uniquely us in the twenty-first century.  Little Thunder Nicely put. What are some of the places now as you   re sewing     obviously people will commission you sometimes to do things. Are there  places where you have to do a quantity of clothing? Who are some of  your clients?  Weavel I usually do commission work, and I typically have work all the time.  I   m a one-person show. I have no desire to have people help me  because I   m very firm on the fact that it   s my work and it   s represented  that I represent my work. I am a solo artist. However, I have been  commissioned in a way to make the tear dresses for the Cherokee Youth  Choir. I   ve done that for ten years or more. Sometimes there   s a  quantity. Sometimes they need ten or twelve dresses, which is a big  order. This past summer I was fortunate to be asked by the Cherokee  Marshal Service, our law enforcement officers, to make ribbon shirts  for them to wear during Cherokee Holiday and other special events. I  had an order of thirty-seven ribbon shirts, which I completed by myself,  wee hours of the night, but I was proud to do it. I was happy to do it so  that they were able to be represented by Cherokee clothing. Even if it is  a ribbon shirt that perhaps is not specific Cherokee, but at least they   re  represented by that.  Little Thunder So tell me a little bit about your duties here at the museum as Education  Director?  Weavel I   m fortunate to work at the Cherokee Heritage Center, and I really like  my job. Our mission here is to preserve, promote, and teach Cherokee  history and culture, and I feel like we do that every day. We have a lot  of people who come, curious about Cherokee culture and often  enamored by our culture. It   s a wonderful place to work because we are  very detail-oriented to the authenticity of Cherokee people. I work in  the education department, and my main job is to educate schoolchildren  and the public with the culture. We have structured classes that we host  throughout the year, and we have particular days where we invite  16  schoolchildren to come for special events where they can actually  participate in and enjoy the culture. They can make pottery. They can  weave baskets. They get to play all the games. They can hear  storytellers. They can see and feel and touch our culture. It   s a  wonderful event for schoolchildren.  Little Thunder What changes have you seen (you sort of implied them and talked a  little bit about them) in terms of Cherokee Nation and their support for  the arts and culture over the last decade, maybe?  Weavel The Cherokee Nation has, I believe, really embraced Cherokee artists  and the perpetuation of our culture through art. Our business side of our  tribal affairs has instituted that every new structure built will include a  certain percent dedicated to the purchase of and the fabrication of  Cherokee art, which is really refreshing. To know that our art is being  seen and our culture, even through those motifs and those images of  Cherokee peoples from thousands of years ago, is refreshing to know  that it   s ours and that people who come, of course, are from all walks of  life. They   re exposed to our art, which is really what artists want.  The artists have been   it   s been a big boost for artists, too, as well, to  have a buyer and to have someone appreciate and purchase their art. It   s  been a win-win all the way around. I appreciate that the tribe has done  that, but they also have done things that help local artists get situated.  There are programs through Cherokee Nation that help artists be better  business people, about how to manage their art and how to cultivate  buyers and cultivate sales. That   s been a real big help, too, and I  appreciate that that small section of the population has been embraced  by the Cherokee Nation.  Little Thunder Let   s talk a little bit about your process and techniques. Do you have a  new fancy sewing machine or an older one? (Laughter)  Weavel I have a story about my sewing machine. I had a little machine that I  was real pleased with, and when I graduated from college my dad said,     Let me buy you a new sewing machine for a college graduation gift.    I  said,    No, no, no, no, this one   s just fine,    so I refused it. When my dad  died in 1987, a portion of the life insurance money came to me. I had  just a little bit, and I went to Tulsa. I went to a sewing machine store,  and I said,    I want the best machine you have.    They showed me a  machine that was  2,300, and I bought it. So my dad really did buy me  a sewing machine. That was 1987, so I   ve sewn on that machine ever  since. I bought a quality machine.  I know it backwards and forwards. I don   t even have to look. I have  sewn hundreds of hours using that sewing machine. When it breaks  17  down, I   m just in a panic, but there   s a lady in Tahlequah who is a great  sewing machine repairman. I still prefer that, even though I   ve bought a  couple of other machines. It   s the machine I go back to, and it   s my  very, very favorite. I sewed on it last night. I have a small studio space  of sorts. Actually, it   s just a sewing room in my house. When my  children were young, I was unemployed, recently divorced, didn   t have  a job. Sewing funded our way.  My children would literally lay down at my feet and take naps as I  sewed. My schedule   I   m a night owl, so I like to stay up late. My kids  would go to bed at my feet as I sewed. That   s a real special time for me  because my sewing did get us through. When I was unemployed my  sister said,    Why don   t you open a sewing shop? Why don   t you make  this a business?    I just never could because it   s my hobby. It   s my  therapy. It   s my shut-the-world-out kind of time. If it was a business  then I was afraid I would have to do it. Now, even though I sew often, I  sew when I want, and I like that. I have to go to work from eight to five  every day, but I get to sew when I want, and I appreciate that.  Little Thunder And what you want.  Weavel Yes.  Little Thunder How about fabric? Do you buy all your fabric locally or online? Do you  ever make trips to buy fabric?  Weavel I love to shop for fabric, as many seamstresses do. When I finally gave  myself permission to buy good fabric, then I started making better  items. I was always cost-conscious in the beginning and always tried to  find things that were cheaper than other things, but when I learned the  quality of the cotton, the quality of the fabric made the garment, then I  realized I upped my standard. That was a good revelation for me. I like  to use the best because it makes the best garments. The things that I  make typically are not things that are worn out and sold in a garage sale  or cut up for a rag, so it   s important that they last. I do shop locally. I do  shop online. I love to shop online, and I do make fabric runs. I   m very  particular. I make lists of what I need and the kinds of things I need. All  of those things are important to me, and I have a pretty good stockpile  at home of things that are necessary.  Little Thunder Now, if someone   s commissioning you to do a tear dress, for example,  and they bring their own material, have you ever run into problems with  that because it   s not as good?  Weavel No. I actually prefer people to buy their own fabric because their blue  and my blue may not be the same blue. I know that they   re going to get  18  what they want and they   re going to have the dress made as it is, so  typically not. I   ll encourage them to buy good fabric, but I   ll make  whatever they bring to me.  Little Thunder You   ve experimented with some jackets that look quite contemporary,  like more of what I think of when I think of Native-inspired fashion.  Weavel Yes.  Little Thunder Can you explain how you started getting interested in those?  Weavel I am happy to make authentic Cherokee clothing, and I try very hard to  make the clothing represent as close to authentic as what we know. At  the same time, I think that we should have Cherokee-inspired clothing  and modern-day things that are contemporary and are fun to wear, and  yet still represent Cherokee-ness. I have made several pieces, and a lady  in particular really liked them very much. She liked really bright and  bold colors, and I was happy to do work for her. It just inspired me a  little bit more to have other things done, to make other clothing, like  other artists perhaps. I don   t know. When I got clothing magazines,  especially those western-wear types of things, I would cut out things  that inspired me, to make a little book to refer back to and say,    Oh, that  would be cool if it were a spiral design instead of the cow brand,    or  whatever. I just in the past seven or eight years have started doing  things like that. I   ve found a little niche, a little market of people who  appreciate and have purchased those things and have actually  commissioned me to make other things for them. That has been a real  joy, to step out of the box of the traditional clothing and to make things  that are Cherokee-inspired.  Little Thunder I imagine you take photographs of everything that you do as part of  your documentation?  Weavel How do I say it? I have a portfolio, but I don   t have a complete  portfolio because to me it   s not about what I have done. It   s about what  I   m ready to do. I don   t always have a complete portfolio, and my other  artist friends sometimes are appalled by that. Sometimes I think,    Oh,  maybe I should   ve taken a picture of that before I sent it.    I kind of  have a private one. I don   t have a website. I don   t have it online, but  once it   s done, for me, it   s done. I   m not an artist in the sense that I  have a book full of things for you to choose from. A portfolio doesn   t  hold a lot of weight with me.  Little Thunder I understand. You sort of talked about your creative routine or that you  liked, at one point, working at night. While you   re working, do you set  19  aside weekends, certain number of hours on the weekend? What is your  creative routine?  Weavel My creative routine is when I can. My good friend Martha Berry, who  is a bead artist, works her beadwork like a job. She sits down at a  certain time, she gets up at a certain time, takes a break, has lunch, goes  back to her beadwork, and works for a certain number of hours. That  schedule works beautifully for her. I am not nearly as structured.  Because I have children, and because they are high school boys who are  in athletics, I   ve drug many a thing to a wrestling match, or a baseball  game, or a football game, and worked on it. When my children used to  play roller hockey, I was making, I think, thirty pair of moccasins for  the Village. I took my moccasin work and in between the hockey games  would stitch up moccasins. I take it wherever I can. I am very  conscientious of my time, and I enjoy setting aside time to do it. Even at  home, I feel like I have to have the dishes done and the kids fed before I  can truly enjoy my sewing time. I   m structured in that way, but I sew  whenever and wherever I can.  Little Thunder I didn   t realize you made moccasins, too.  Weavel From our cultural class series, we   ve had a variety of classes, and Mary  Horsechief-Henderson makes moccasins and has taught several classes.  I learned from her, and I was able to make moccasins. I was  commissioned by the former director of the Cherokee Heritage Center  when the new  Diligwa  1710  Cherokee  Village was constructed to  make the clothing. I researched clothing, and then I was commissioned,  not to only make the clothing but to research the correct clothing and  then to make them. We were integrating the trade era where we were  able to show metal and steel implements, as well as a change in the  clothing style to include linen and cloths. Not only did I have to design  those, I had to make them. I made several sets for the Village to start  with. I made about thirty pair of moccasins. I think everyone had two  pair. There   s two styles of Cherokee moccasin. I don   t think a lot  people know. There   s an ankle cut, and then there   s a cut that wraps  around the calf and is tied up on the leg. I made both of those styles. I  hand-stitched the buckskin leggings and did some other things, so I was  sort of baptism by fire to learn to sew with buckskin.  Little Thunder And have you ever made clothing for the displays, as well?  Weavel Yes, on occasion we   ve done some things that were specific to  Cherokee time period. Then we   ve used   Cherokee style was  integrated by 1830, 1840, and certainly by the time the Cherokees were  living in Indian Territory or Oklahoma. Those costumes and that era of  Cherokee clothing has been reproduced, as well.  20  Little Thunder Looking back on your sewing part of your life so far, what do you think  was kind of a fork-in-the-road moment for you where you just really     Weavel There were two forks in the road for me. The first fork began when I  finally made a dress that I wasn   t embarrassed to wear myself. I  remember trying to be fast and hurry up and get it sewn. When I took  my time, and when I fixed my mistakes along the way, and when I cut  things on the grain so it hung straight, I remember thinking,    This looks  pretty good.    Then I wasn   t embarrassed to wear my own clothing and  was proud when people couldn   t tell if it was homemade or it was store-bought.  That was a big fork in the road, that I finally could sew well  enough to not be embarrassed.  The second fork in the road I think would probably have been making  that first tear dress for that baby. Whenever I did that, I realized that I  could make tear dresses. To me, it was like making just a regular set of  clothes, maybe a short set for someone, initially. I think what really  turned my head was when I made the leather coat, the embroidered  coat. I was talking to my good friend Martha Berry. I said,    You know  there are only four known buckskin Cherokee coats in the world. Two  of them are in Berlin, and two of them are in Minnesota. You know,  there are only four.    She looked at me lovingly and said,    And now  there are five. You will always be associated with that coat because  your DNA is all over it.     When she said that, it lifted me to an artist   s status. Before, I was just a  dressmaker. When she said that, I just felt like I stepped up on a  platform as an artist. She really turned my head at the way I looked at  how I made things, and I appreciated that. Even though now I still make  things that you can throw in the washing machine and wash and hang  up and wear again, it   s a pleasure to perpetuate and to embrace  Cherokee culture by making these items of clothing for our young  people to wear and look so beautiful in.  Little Thunder What has been one of the high points of your sewing career?  Weavel I think the high point of my sewing career was when the Cherokee  Nation recognized me as a National Treasure. That is a wonderful  honor, and for your peers to embrace that and to nominate you and  support you in that effort was truly a high point for me, even though  that kind of honor is really just a plaque and I feel like I   m still a  student and I feel like there   s so much more to know and to learn. I   ve  not reached the pinnacle of wisdom about Cherokee clothing, or  sewing, or design, or technique, but I enjoy the journey getting there.  21  Little Thunder What about a low point?  Weavel I think when I am truly   people commission me to make their items.  I   m a procrastinator, and sometimes I wait a little longer than I should  to begin. Some of the low points are when I am just so overwhelmed by  the volume of work that I don   t want to do anything. Those periods are  particularly frustrating, where then it has become a job for me and  where I have promised by a certain date and the time is creeping up,  that sometimes I get very frustrated with that. I think that   s probably     just the frustration.  Little Thunder Is there any project you   re currently working on that you   re especially  excited about?  Weavel Actually I   m quite excited. It   s not a sewing item, but it is a beadwork  item for a particular friend. He has helped me make the design and  choose the colors, and it represents Cherokee ceremonial life. I have a  particular thought about that. Much of the meaning in design and motif  should just have meaning for that wearer and should have deep  significant meaning that the public should not always be privy to. Not  that it   s secret, and not that it   s sorcery or scary, but that it   s private,  and it   s personal, and it   s important. I   m working on a piece now that  encompasses all of that. I   m especially proud of it, though no one may  ever see it and it will never probably ever be on public display, although  I have a feeling this person will wear it and utilize it, which is  delightful. Those kinds of personal and private things that are  represented in a clothing item is especially fun to do.  Little Thunder We   re getting ready to take a look at your work. Is there anything that  we   ve forgotten to cover that you   d like to add?  Weavel I just think that Cherokee clothing has a genre and a niche all its own,  although our clothing represented the climate and that our neighboring  tribes (Creek, Seminole to some degree, Choctaw, and Chickasaw) we  have similar clothing styles. There are still a few things that are  uniquely Cherokee and that we utilize as Cherokee, but I   m excited to  see the future. I   m excited to see other people who integrate those  authentic structures of clothing into modern-day fun items to wear.  That   s something to look forward to.  Little Thunder Okay, we   re going to pause just a minute. Would you like to tell us  about your hunting jacket?  22  Weavel The Cherokee hunting jacket, this particular piece was made for a child,  my son, but it represents all the things in a hunting jacket: the lapel  collar, the fringe, which Cherokees were known for their red fringe, and  the patch pockets, and the turned-up cuffs. It was used as sort of a  utilitarian jacket for the men, although today we   ve stylized it to be a  fashionable piece of clothing.  Little Thunder That   s really nice. How about your woman   s jacket there?  23  Weavel This contemporary piece that I made, I wanted to represent Cherokee-ness  in it. The spiral design (I call it the double spiral) is a curvilinear  design which is very common in our beadwork patterns, our pottery,  and many other motifs. It   s represented by red and white: red for war  and white for peace, and the balance therein.  Little Thunder It   s beautiful. Next, a woman   s shirt, blouse, and skirt.  Weavel The skirt and shirt represent the 1700 Cherokee women   s clothing.  What   s curious to me about this style is that once wool became  available to Cherokee women, they made their skirts from wool, but  they made them in the same style that they wore their buckskin skirts in.  They were both wraparound. They lapped over the front, making it easy  to maneuver, run, sit, do whatever they needed to. It was a very  utilitarian garment. The trade shirt represented here was of course  borrowed from the European men who actually brought them as trade.  Little Thunder And then your tear dress here.  24  Weavel The tear dress is the official dress for our Miss Cherokee. There are  several markers of the tear dress that make it a tear dress. One would be  the standup ruffle. You see the standup ruffle on the bodice and the  standup ruffle on the flounce of the skirt. The tear dress is also known  to be authentic is to have the gusset or the set-in arm piece, which  allows for full movement of the sleeve over the head. Those are the two  markers that identify Cherokee tear dresses. The other things are that  everything on the tear dress is either a rectangle or a square, and the  fabric is literally ripped or torn because it   s all in straight pieces. The  only curve is the neckline of the dress.  This particular dress has seven-pointed star appliques, although  diamonds were very common and are still used today. We love to  decorate with ribbon, so our dresses today are beautiful and colorful,  although the original tear dress was a utilitarian dress that was made for  working in the fields. It buttons down the front for convenience and  ease. It has the bottom ruffle, the flounce, which is a full skirt so you  can run or sit or do whatever   s necessary. The bodice is attached to the  skirt for modesty so your shirttail never came out of your skirt. The  original dress is three-quarter length sleeves and hem, so that you  25  weren   t getting them extra dirty. It   s very much a working woman   s  dress.  Little Thunder Beautiful. Well, thank you for your time today, Tonia.  Weavel My pleasure.  -------  -------   
