 Nykolaiszyn and I am with the Oklahoma State  University Library. Today is Saturday, August 8, 2009 and we   re in  Stillwater, Oklahoma at the Stillwater Public Library interviewing Allen  Reding. Today   s interview is being conducted as part of the Spotlighting  Oklahoma: Life in the 1930s oral history project. Thank you very much  for joining us today, we appreciate it. Let   s begin by learning a little bit  more about you, Allen. Could you start with telling us where you grew  up and a little bit about your family?  Well, I was born in El Reno, Oklahoma on August 27, 1932. And my  family, on my father   s side, originally came from Luxemburg in 18 so  and so forth. They came by New York to Minnesota. My great-grandfather  settled Oklahoma City in 1895. They had eight brothers and  sisters that settled in Oklahoma City, Chickasha, El Reno, Geary, in  through that area and have quite a few descendents. I have a lot of  cousins. My mother   s side of the family was kind of from England. They  never told much about where they came from because they were  indentured   they came over and worked their way through. But they  came, I think, from up in Indiana and down through Oklahoma. My  grandfather was a house mover and they used to move houses a lot. In  fact, when Reno City   when the railroad didn   t come by Reno City,  north of El Reno, they moved the town to its present location. I think he  was involved somewhere. But that was about a six or seven mile move  to the city. And so that   s what my grandparents did.  The Reding  family  was all farmers. I mean, they all were farmers. So  we had a small house. A little bitty house and I go back and look at it  now and  wonder  how did we ever do it? It was less than this   it had  four  20    X 25     rooms that were less than the size of this room we   re in.  It started as a two room house and my dad built two bedrooms on the  south side of it so that had our little family of five. I had a younger  brother and a younger sister. His name was Bernard and my sister   s  5  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Marion so we all grew up at that time. It was good.  And you grew up on a farm?  I grew up on a farm, yes. Our farm is located, oh two or three miles  north of El Reno and a mile west of Highway 81. Our crops, we grew  just everything. We had part of a natural pasture. We had that part of it  and a part of it alfalfa hay and part of it in corn and this type of beans,  this group of soy beans. My dad worked for the Soil Conservation  Service, also. We were into those programs that were put on by the  government during that time. We had a shelter belt as part of that  program, which was a great help in the winter time to keep warm. So we  were involved in most of that. My dad would help build dams and do  crop   well earlier in the Triple A  Agricultural Adjustment  Administration  time the farmers, they   d show them how much they  could grow and so forth. He did some of that type of work. I don   t know  the details too much about that, but that   s was what he did.  Well I want to get back to your father in a little bit, but as a little boy,  did you have a chore that you had to do on the farm?  Yeah, we did. You know I never thought about it as chores, we just had  things we did. We had to feed the chickens. That was one of my things.  And we helped feed the cows. We had a silo and silage. We   d pitch  silage down and we   d haul it in to the cows in the barn. We did that and  we helped with that. We put up hay. There   s no way you   d get out of  work with that. (Laughs) But that   s just what you did. It was part of  getting along. I don   t think I was overworked that time, I don   t recall  that. But we had some little things we did. So, funny I hadn   t thought  about that. (Laughs)  Well, surely you had time for fun as a little boy?  Oh, we did have fun.  What kind of things did you do for fun?  Well, if you   re on a farm you have a lot of barns and stuff to play in and  so forth. We kind of made fun   we had a shop, a barn that we repaired  tractors, and we repaired all of our own machinery and we built our own  stuff, I mean you just did that. My dad would let us tear apart stuff and if  we could put it back together you learned how things worked. We had a  little Shop Smith  (a Shop Smith is a multipurpose tool that will do  many woodworking functions)  too that we could do woodwork with. I  learned how to build a lot of stuff and we just did it. It was pretty  amateurish but we did it. But that   s how you learn how to do things. So I  6  think that was probably one of the great gifts that we had is the resources  to do some things. Crude as they were, they were really good learning  resources.  What we did for fun, I had a tricycle. You drove it in the dirt to see if  you had strong legs with it. We had a cellar with a mound on top of it.  I   d ride up and down on the top of that mound at high speeds. In my  three year old mind, I   m just thinking of how funny that was. We had a  swing set with two swings under a great big locust tree which was nice  and shady in the summer time. Spent a lot of time there. And we played  with the neighbors. Our nearest neighbors were half a mile either way.  Several kids lived north of us and we would    visit.    We   d go down there  for an hour and come back about once a week. On the other side we had  the Indian kids that we played with. We   d all get together sometimes.  We were just a few miles from Concho. The kids would come down and  visit. We   d play with them sometimes. We   d get out in the wheat fields  and have immense football  games . You know, five people playing  football, it   s really a lot of fun. We   d run and run and run. We made our  own games. We had a little basketball. My dad was a basketball player  and had a basketball goal and we had the dirt court. (Laughs) But we had  fun.  And let   s see what else. What did we do for fun? My mother was kind of  an organizer as far as neighborhood stuff. She would organize the Good  Neighbor Club in that area. We met at the Reno Valley School house.  All the neighbors would come. They   d bring a little covered dish about  once a month and we   d have a little get-together. So I think that was a  great deal, keeping in contact with people. And, of course, everybody  knew everybody. I mean, it was just one of those things. But our  neighborhood was really good about that. Probably included about six to  eight miles in circumference and the people who lived in that area, we  had groups of 35-40 people, I guess. The kids would all get together and  play. That   d be what we did. Played cards for fun.  At that time, see El Reno is a railroad town. It was a southern division  headquarters for  the  Rock Island  Railroad . Some of the relatives on  my mother   s side lived in town. They worked for the railroad. So this  was pretty good at that time because they had a job. But they didn   t have  a whole lot. And they   d come out and visit a lot so we   d supply them  with milk and cream and they would buy   my mom made good cottage  cheese and she would sell that. We would sell our extra stuff in town. So  they would come out and visit quite a bit. We   d sit and we   d play cards  and we would play spoons and different things. The kids would all sit  around the table and stay and we could play. That was fun. What else  did we do for fun?  7  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Sounds like you had a lot of fun.  We did. We did. I mean, what else was there to do? (Laughs) So that   s  kind of where we go.  What was school like?  What was school like? Well, I had never thought about this until just  recently about prefer ring  private versus public schools. I never realized  I went to a private school. But I went to the Catholic school in El Reno  and school was pretty good. We had the Sisters of the Divine Providence  as teachers. They were good teachers. First and second grade I think  Sister Arsine was   I was not one who was terribly attentive all the time.  So I think I was one of her problems, probably. But we made it. First  and second grades were together, third and fourth were together, fifth  and sixth were together. We were in two grades together all the way up  through high school. I was near the last of the high school graduates. But  we learned a lot. When I went on to the junior college and OSU I  realized then that I had really a pretty good background in any of the  courses I took.  Were there a lot of students in the school?  Yeah. It wasn   t a huge school, but our classes   let me count here. I   m  guessing the third and fourth grade, I can remember that room pretty  well; we had about 40 between the two. And first and second would  have been about the same thing. Thirty or so up into high school. But by  that time kids were starting to go to public school. There were only 12 in  my graduating class.  As a little boy, how would you get to school?  Well, this is interesting. There   s a lot of commitment on the terms of  the   we don   t think about this now, but there was a lot of religious  differences back then and Catholics were not particularly   we were in a  minority. Not particularly loved, especially German Catholics. Not that  you   re unloved, but there was always this thing about it. We couldn   t  ride the school buses like you can now, so my parents drove us to school  every day.  Wow. What kind of car?  We had a 1935 Plymouth, is the car that I remember. It was a two-door.  It had mohair seats and during the latter part of that, we had gasoline  rationing and we had an A sticker right up there on the   an A and a C, I  think it was. We had to have a special sticker   we got extra gas to go to  8  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  school with. And extra tires.  So was faith very important in your family?  Very much, very much. It was very much. Okarche was a bigger   there  were two religions up there. They had the Catholics and Lutherans. The  Catholics had their own school, which was bigger, and their own buses.  But down in El Reno we weren   t quite as popular. (Laughs) Not quite as  fixed up as that. We did go to church. And my mother had joined the  church when she got married. She turned out to be quite a good Catholic  and we were pretty much raised that way.  Interesting. You were growing up during the tail end of the Depression,  could you tell that times are tough?  Did you have  any idea as a little  boy?  Yeah, as I look back on it. At that time, I don   t think we looked at it.  You were just living. At that time   as I look back on the times that were  tough, we lived on a farm north of El Reno and we were about a quarter  of a mile away east of the railroad tracks going north out of town. We  would have a number   I imagine, there weren   t just hoards, but there  were a lot of tramps or hobos that would come looking for food. Mom  would always feed them whatever we had. They always said there was a  mark someplace that they could tell where to go, and I kind of believe  that. But we did have a number of those, people just wanting something  to eat. As I look back, that was one of the things. I don   t know whether  providing food to my relatives in town was a necessity or whether it was  a means of helping us out with money. I don   t know exactly how that fit,  but that was that. We did our own butchering but that was pretty much  the norm. That was pretty much the way you did things, it didn   t mean  you had to. But we raised our own chickens and stuff, so self sufficiency  was pretty much   on the farm, we really had it pretty good, I think.  Did Mom have a big garden?  We had a big garden. To this day. Yeah, gardening was pretty much a  thing that we did. Our claim to fame was my granddad over on Highway  81 had a rhubarb farm. We had six acres of rhubarb and that was a  summer project. That   s where I really worked in the summer time. And  we supplied rhubarb for all the southwest. We would sell to Safeway and  Scrivner-Stevens in Oklahoma City and he was the Rhubarb King for  that area. It was kind of fun. Very unique.  Different, yeah.  We did a lot of truck gardening with onions and stuff like that. But that  9  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  was over at his place. He had a nice sandy farm and all of that stuff  would just grow like crazy.  Well, do you remember lots of canning?  Yes, we did a lot of canning. We canned. We had a storm cellar which  also was where we kept the cans. It was cool down there. We canned a  lot of tomatoes, green beans, corn, stuff that grew well we canned a lot  of. Okra some, which I would never eat. We made our own pickles. We  made a lot of pickles. We tried Sauerkraut but it never worked very well  for us. Part of the common stuff, potatoes we would keep as long as they  would keep. And we had some fruit trees. We   d hold pears for a while.  They kept better than most of that other stuff. But that   s what we did.  What were some of your favorite meals?  Oh, anything  (Laughter) My favorite meals, as you can see I   ve carried  on this tradition. Favorite meals, we had a lot of chicken. Fried chicken,  that was good. We cut our own beef and they had lockers in town. We  kept frozen meat in there. You didn   t have frozen freezers at home yet  but we had meat. And we   d grind   you know make hamburger and that  kind of stuff. We had a lot of potatoes and gravy. Mom was a good  gravy maker. You are getting dinner. We had canned green beans. We  had a lot of canned goods. Mom would buy a lot of canned fruit and this  type of thing.  One of my memories of buying food, we   d go into Safeway and in the  front of the store   the grocery stores back then were just rows and rows  of canned goods. Not like it is now. Not too many boxes of stuff. In the  front of the grocery store, they   d take all the boxes and they had a great  big pile of boxes so when you   d checked out you would get a box and  you   d fill the box to the brim, carry your groceries home in boxes. This  was another toy that we had, because my brother and I would take these  boxes and we   d make trains and cars and stuff around the house. So that  was entertainment that comes along with the grocery shopping.  So back to the food, what were our favorite meals? We ate pretty well.  We had a lot of Jell-o back then. And we had a refrigerator. It was a   propane  Servel that ran on gas. We had gas. We had gas refrigeration  which was pretty good. I can always remember that. Let   s see what else,  favorite foods. I always loved green beans back then. My mom was a  pretty good cook. I loved her breakfast. I would love to get oatmeal. I  would take cream that had raised to the top, that real thick jersey cream.  I   d cover my oatmeal in jersey cream. Then, I would put sugar on it until  it all soaked up. The health-nuts today would go crazy over that.  (Laughter) But that was my idea of really having    Another favorite  10  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  thing is my mom would time baking chocolate cake every once in a  while, chocolate cake to be coming out about the time we got home from  school. You walk in the house and smell that chocolate cake. We   d take  that and eat it with butter. Warm chocolate cake and put butter on it.  Then she would ice the rest. But hot chocolate cake with butter was just  really great. You   ll have to try that sometime.  What would you take to school for lunch?  We took sandwiches. We had paper bags for that. We had little lunch  boxes; in fact, I still have it. (Laughs)  Would she make the bread or would you buy bread?  Pretty much both. We had peanut butter sandwiches for the most part.  Peanut butter and jelly was pretty much it. She might stick a little carrot  or something in there. I don   t remember too much about that. It was not  a huge event because it wasn   t terribly exciting. I know we traded once  in a while. I had better sandwiches than some of the kids, and they had  candy bars. The city kids had candy bars in there and we would trade.  Did you have electricity on the farm?  Yeah, we did have electricity.  Do you remember how old you were when they got electricity?  I think it was already there. It was already there, so it must have been     the house was wired with the old porcelain   where they go through the  wire. They didn   t have conduits and stuff like that. It was wired the old  way. So I   m not sure when the electricity came in.  What about radios?  We had a radio.  What do you remember listening to?  Oh, everything. That was probably better than TV now. When you got  home in the afternoon, you listened to the kiddy serials with Little  Orphan Annie and all those types of things. And there were some  favorite shows at night. There was a lot of entertainment. Some of these  get compressed in the war thing, I blend into the war memories there.  Lum and Abner was a favorite. Henry Aldrich. Henry  You wouldn   t  know those. You should listen to some recordings sometimes. One  Man   s Family, something like that.  11  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Do you recall any fireside chats?  Sort of. I think maybe at the beginning of World War II. I remember  those, I think. I   m not sure.  How did your family feel about Roosevelt?  I don   t know. (Laughs) Since my dad worked for the Soil Conservation  Service, Triple A and all that, I think we probably had a little more  positive feeling than some other people in the neighborhood because  killing pigs for no reason at all, this was kind of negative.  Did that happen on your farm?  We didn   t do it. We didn   t have a lot of pigs, but we didn   t do it. We did  rotate crops and stuff like that. So no, it did not happen on our farm. We  didn   t pour milk. We only had one cow. (Laughter) I don   t know. We  didn   t really talk politics that much that I remember.  Well explain to us for the record what a shelter belt is?  A shelter belt? Oh, you don   t know what a shelter belt is? Do you ever  drive from here to Kansas? Or up through Kansas? A shelter belt is a  program that came out of the Dust Bowl period. You would plant a  series of rows of trees starting on the north side with something low like  the cedars and they would progress to taller trees. This was designed to  take the wind up over your farmstead. You would put this probably a  hundred feet north of your barns and so forth. Our particular one was not  the longest one, but it was probably 1000 feet, 800-1000 feet. But it  went on the north side of our house and our barns. In the winter time,  when the wind would blow it would protect your area. If you ever  wondered about how effective it was, when the wind is out of the north  and you step out on the other end of that thing and it hits you in the face,  you realize that it did make a lot of difference. And there   s still a number  of those if you drive into the country. Shelter belts, there   s a lot of them  in Oklahoma and Kansas still. In fact, the one at our farm is getting a  little peaked looking, but it   s still there. It still works. So that   s what a  shelter belt is.  I can remember Dad was talking   we kind of planned for this, and we  fenced off an area because you had to keep  animals  out. So we were  anticipating all these trees coming out, because we figured like 200  trees, it was a bunch. And we would plant those. We were waiting   I  was expecting all this big bunch of trees. Well, the package came in the  mail. It was about this big around and about this long  4    X 24    . These  trees were seedlings with this little stem and a few roots on them. Dad  12  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  took a post hole digger and dug all these holes and planted all these trees  and we carried water in five gallon buckets out and watered them in. We  watered them several times by buckets. They took root and they actually  grew. In a few years, they were pretty good size.  Interesting. Do you recall any stories from your father from his Soil  Conservation Service days?  Not a whole lot. He changed jobs in that area until   he worked with  them until he retired in different areas of it. His latest thing was to go out  and work with construction of dams doing surveys and this type of thing  for dams. He didn   t talk a lot about that, so I didn   t ever really go to  work with him. So all I know is what I have been told.  So tell me about your clothes. Did your mom make your clothes?  No, we had clothes. I had a couple of cousins who were three or four  years older so we had hand-me-downs. Buying clothes unless you just  had to was not really the thing to do. I think it was just a big world of  hand-me-downs, at least in our area. My grandmother Penwright  would   every year I would get Unionalls for my birthday. Now, if you  don   t know what Unionalls are, for kids they were made out of the same  cloth that overalls are but they were one piece and they   d button up the  front and so forth. So I would get that every year. And I don   t know how  old I was when I finally asked Grandma,    Is there anything I could get  besides Unionalls for my birthday.    (Laughter) So I did have a little  style sense.  One of the real embarrassing things, it was kind of sad and my folks  took care of it. I had a cousin who was a girl, and she had a really nice  wool coat and it fit me fine. I was really happy to have it until I went to  school and somebody noticed that it was a girl   s coat and they made fun  of me. They never made me wear that back again. So I remember that  was cool. But I remember that about clothing. We just had simple little  shirts and pants and shoes.  What about your shoes?  It was kind of a half and half deal. We went barefoot a lot. We were  talking about that and whatever happened to stickers? You had to wear  shoes a lot of the times because of the sand burrs or the stickers  (also  called Goatheads) . And they disappeared. We haven   t seen them for a  long time. We were talking about them sticking in your bicycle tires and  all this kind of thing. And stickers, nobody knows where they went. So  anyway, you pretty much had to wear shoes or you just couldn   t walk.  We had underwear. (Laughter).  13  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Do you remember the cost of some items in the grocery store?  Actually, I don   t. I don   t remember. Our family did not talk money. I  think that was kind of a thing of the era, that money was not a talkable  thing. We didn   t discuss it as a family, we just didn   t.  So you never snuck into the store to buy candy or anything like that?  Well, we would go visit my grandma in town, and she   d make us   not  make us, we would always be willing to take out her trash because she  would give us a nickel and we could run down and get a candy bar. That  was our shopping.  Getting back to the hobos, would your family put them to work, or would  they just feed them?  They would offer to work. As far as I know, we never had wood to chop.  We just didn   t. We didn   t have that kind of stuff to do. So no, we didn   t  really. We would feed them and send them on their way.  What were holidays like?  Oh, that   s a good one. That was a lot of fun. We had a bunch of family  traditions on holidays. As I look back, they call them traditions, but then  it was something we just did. But Thanksgiving, I   m going to start with  Thanksgiving. We would all get together at my grandmother   s house and  she had a pretty good size house and a big table. All my aunts and uncles  and everybody would come in. We would have turkey and ham and  dressing and pickled beets. They always made pickles and we got to  have olives and Jell-o salad and mashed potatoes, sometimes sweet  potato casserole. Green beans, always. We had usually a lot of apple pie,  pumpkin pie, mince meat pie, and I don   t remember cakes at  Thanksgiving, but I   m sure we had some. That might have been  cranberry. Cranberry jelly, cooked cranberries, I   m guessing. That  probably would be Thanksgiving.  And then for Christmas   one unique thing about our family was on my  mother   s side of the family there weren   t so many. And my mother   s  side of the family would join all of our big family. So we had a lot of  people. It was kind of an unusual situation, but it was just kind of that  way. On Christmas, we would always go to my aunt   s or my cousin   s  house in town and have Christmas breakfast and do gifts. Then, we  would go out to my grandma   s house, so they would all come back out  there and have another feast about like we had for Thanksgiving. One  thing they had was celery, we had white celery. Remember white celery?  We didn   t eat green celery back then, it was bad. We   d go out there, and  14  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  we   d have another big dinner. Of course, there was no afternoon football  or anything like that so the women would all go in the kitchen and do  whatever you did in there. The guys would sit around and talk. After a  while we   d go in and exchange gifts. We would have supper off of the  leftovers and go on. You   d really be bushed by that time. That was  pretty much Christmas. It was usually cold and our gifts that we had  were pretty small. Of course, they were small, but we didn   t do then like  we do   gifts now are pretty outlandish as far as I   m concerned. But we  just had small stuff we would give to each other, so that was nice. I don   t  think Santa Claus ever failed to come.  I remember in our house on holidays, one funny Christmas night, Santa  Claus was coming, you could ever hardly go to sleep. So we would lay  there and finally go to sleep. And I think Santa Claus came and Santa  Claus dropped a sock and our house was such, it   s older it had a little  slope to the floor. So this walnut dropped and thunk thunk thunk  bounces across the floor. And Santa Claus said,    Damn     And that sure  sounded a lot like my mom. (Laughter) So anyways, that   s one of the  funny things, I think.  For our Christmas tree, we   d cut a little piece of the tree, sometimes  daddy would buy one. But we had a little string of lights with seven  bulbs in it and we had little tin icicles which we saved from year to year.  And we saved gum wrappers because gum used to come wrapped in tin  foil. Each stick was wrapped in tin foil. We would save those and we  would take the walnut thing they sold us, we   d pick them out for  cooking   again we   d take those and recover them with the silver and  make little balls for the tree. And we   d string popcorn. We   d make a star  with the tin foil pieces and glue them on and let   s see, what else did we  do? We had some little stuff that we   d save from year to year and hang  it. We   d recycle. We didn   t call it recycling, but saving. Keep and  reusing was an absolute part of everyday life.  What were some of the other things you could remember reusing and  your parents saving?  Well, I don   t know, I think probably the greatest testament to that is  when my dad passed away. They lived on the farm, and then when the  kids all left, they moved to town.  They  built a house with a big  basement. But after my dad passed away, the auction sale lasted two  days. We had two auctioneers at some points going, selling all this stuff  that they had collected. He did a pretty good job of saving. I don   t  remember a lot of times actually reusing stuff, but we saved a lot. On  recycling, we pretty much used everything until it was gone.  Did you, as a child growing up, remember those lessons? And do you do  15  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  the same thing nowadays? Do you try to reuse items, save items?  Well, we   ve been in our house since 1972, and the car has never been in  the garage. And it would be a major project to empty it.  I think that answers my question. (Laughter)  It is hereditary. And my kids fight this, terribly. But one of them has a  garage they can   t get the cars in, and another one has a   they could if  they had to.  Well do you remember any feelings about The Grapes of Wrath,  Steinbeck   s book?  Never read it until we read it here last year. Yes, didn   t know it at the  time, but our family helped supply California with people that came  mainly at the end at the Depression, at the war. Part of the family on my  mother   s side went to Oregon. The other side went to California, the San  Francisco area, and built ships. We had neighbors   a lot of people left.  We just kept in touch with letters, still do. Or they did until recently. I  saw signs of it. We had neighbors who just left. They left their houses  out in the middle of wheat fields, corn fields. Everything would be gone  but the house. And it never dawned on me until I read The Grapes of  Wrath that they would take the farms and cover everything up   you  know just farm right up to the houses, and that   s what was going on. We  saw evidence of it, but to my knowledge we had good people sell out.  They had auctions, sales and so forth. I think some of that we attended  and saw them leaving.  But as I look back now, there was evidence of it all around. I suspect  everybody had their own story. But as a group story, we were not  involved in that so much. But as I look back, the old cars, the baling  wire holding them together, and I did see migrant people doing that, just  seeing them go through town. We were on Highway 66, so that was the  route. And so reading the Steinbeck book was pretty much   he had his  towns all backwards, but the story was pretty good. I could see that  actually happening. I would say it was a fairly true story   or it could  have been a true story.  As a little boy, do you recall seeing people going down 66, moving  away?  Our school was located on Highway 66.  Oh, wow.  16  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  So we saw all the cars. Yeah, we saw them. Highway 66 and you would  see   I don   t recall seeing too much of that particular thing, but we saw  out-of-state cars, you would see quite a few out-of-state cars. And  people would be moving but it wasn   t just a huge everyday mass  movement. I think it was more of a trickle but it eventually had its  effects.  Well do you recall going to the picture show?  Oh, the picture show, yes. My granddad was a great   the western  picture show, he would take us to the movies in El Reno on Saturday  afternoon. It was a dime or something like that and you   d get to see the  double feature plus the serials. You know, the serials would get you  right up to the edge of the cliff. Then, you   d have to come back next  week. So we followed a few of those. Some of the farm implement  dealers there would have public movies outside in the summer time.  They   d put a big sheet up in a big vacant lot and they   d show movies  outside and everybody would come and watch the movies. That was  kind of fun.  Wow. Well, do you have any other memories looking back, growing up  in the    30s that you would like to share with us?  Well, you   re bringing forth a few things here that are kind of cool.  Saturday nights we would go to town, and that   s when you   d try to do  most of your shopping and so forth. You   d tried to get to town early so  you could get a good parking place on one of the main streets. That   s  when you   d sit on your car fender or you   d go up and people would stop  and visit. You really saw a lot of people on Saturday nights. Saturday  night was a big time in town. The merchants did well and it was kind of  a community gathering time. Then as you got older (this was after the  Depression) we had our own car, we would circle   El Reno has two  main streets so you   d go up one and down the other, up and circle,  circle, circle. So that was something. Saturday nights was kind of a fun  time. So we got to stay back in the Depression. I think we covered some  of the highlights of that time.  What about onion burgers?  Onion burgers?  I mean El Reno is kind of the capital of onion burgers.  Oh, yeah  Well, I didn   t think there was any other kind. (Laughter). El  Reno had one, two, three, four, maybe five   at least four places that had  the little five cent hamburger. We had a little piece of meat, and they   d  17  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  splat it out and they   d put onions on top of it and splat it out and  grease   it was all full of flavors. You   d put the buns on that and it was  great. They had several of those. But that   s how they fixed hamburgers  then. I don   t know if you ever had raw onions on hamburgers. That   s  kind of a later invention. But you could get   was it a dozen burgers? In  a sack. Would it have been a dollar? It would have been   it might have  been a dollar. You could get a sack of them. That was kind of a picnic.  We   d go by and get hamburgers and some potato chips and something to  drink. We   d bring iced tea and go out to the park and have little picnics  with those. So that was kind of a fun thing with the onion burgers. But  the onion burgers, there was a little caf   right across the street from our  school,  The Topper , and we would go sometimes. You asked about  lunches, I   d forgotten about that. On some days, Mom would give us a  little money and we   d go across and eat at the hamburger  stand    the  Topper. We had the Topper and Bob   s White Rock and I don   t know if  Johnny   s was around yet or not. There   s another one but I can   t think of  the name of it. It   ll come after a while. About four o   clock it will be  there. (Laughs)  Did you ever go to the Carnegie Library as a little boy?  Yes, we did.  Do you remember anything? Did you check out books or     I don   t remember checking out books, this is funny. My grandmother  Penwright lived in a rooming house right around the corner behind the  Carnegie library and that   s one of the places we could go when we  visited Grandma. We could go to the library. We   d go up and read the  books at the library. But I don   t remember checking them out. That   s  funny. Now at home, we had books at home. My dad had an old set of  Book of Knowledge that he   d bought used. I spent hours and hours  reading those. I don   t know if you   ve ever seen an old Book of  Knowledge, but they had all kinds of stuff in them. Puzzles, stories, kind  of a dictionary of facts and so forth. So you could answer a lot of trivia  questions from it. But that was kind of our sub education at that time.  Well, as we move out of the    30s, any memories from the war years  you   d like to touch upon?  From the war years? Well the war years, I think the scrap metal drives  and, of course, your relatives, your uncles were going into that. So my  dad, being the  oldest son    I had an uncle who was in the Air Corps at  that time. My dad was not drafted because he managed two farms, so he  was one male that was left there and the oldest one. I remember the  scrap drives and the news reels. I guess we did go to the movies. I don   t  18  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  remember too much about that. Our news was nothing like it is now. I  mean it was scant news. We hardly ever knew what was going on  actually, except for a few little headlines. Totally different from now.  And then as I get into high school, after I was in high school the Korean  thing was going on, so I went in during the Korean Conflict. I was in the  Army for three years. I was a Signal Corps photographer, so I loved that.  I was stationed on Okinawa, so it was not a bad deal. They kept  reminding us we were 15 minutes from the Russian H Bombs.  (Laughter) There was a little bit of extra pressure at that time, because  you didn   t really know.  Well, after Korea, you came back to Oklahoma?  Yes.  What did you do?  I went to work for Aero Design and Engineering in Oklahoma City   in  Bethany. We made airplanes, the Aero Commander. I worked in the  photo lab there. I had a great time. It was really exciting. Sometimes we  would take pictures of airplane to airplane. We would take pictures of -  95  we were taking pictures of dashboards and foot pedals and so forth  for training manuals and engines and all that type of thing. We   d make  pictures for the sales people.  One day we had one negative of this really outstanding picture of the  Aero Commander and I had an order for 500 copies of that. And we  didn   t put them in a machine, you made them one by one. I got about  490   I said, I can   t do this any longer. So I told my boss, I said,    I think  I   m going to go to college. I   m going to go to college. I   ve always  wanted to be an architect and I think I   ll just try it.    My brother had just  graduated from OSU so I drove up to Stillwater and drove in behind the  library there, found a parking place because the streets went through,  and walked into   I don   t know how I did it. This is something when you  think you   re being guided by somebody. I walked into the first building,  and it happened to be the engineering building. I asked about that. They  said, yes you can enroll here. So I went up and talked to the dean and   Hamilton  enrolled me. I can remember walking around the front of the  building and hearing that fountain and it was like 180 degrees. But  hearing that fountain, how cool that looked out there. So it was a great  first impression. They enrolled me and I came to school that fall. That   s  how you make career decisions. (Laughter).  After that, I was having a great time with design and so forth. I could not  do math. It finally flunked me out of architecture, but my roommate was  in hotel and restaurant  administration  and he was doing all the stuff  19  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  Nykolaiszyn  Reding  that I had loved, so I switched. I switched to hotel and restaurant, and  that was my career. I went to work for the Student Union part time as a  bellhop while I was a student. And worked there at the coffee shop. Met  my wife. She was a customer. You should never fraternize with the  customers. Met her there and I graduated in 1960, went to work in  Wichita with Macy   s  Innes  Tea Room. Stayed up there two years. We  were every other weekend back in Stillwater visiting. So finally my old  boss,  Norman Moore , said,    Why don   t you come back to work here?     It took me about four seconds to make that decision. We moved back  and I, from 1964, was with the Student Union clear until I retired.  Wow, so you   ve seen lots of changes in the Student Union?  I have seen a lot of changes in the Student Union. I was part of that.  (Laughter) And it was very exciting. It was very exciting times.  Well, we may have to schedule another interview for another day just to  talk about the Student Union.  Oh, you   ll need more than that. (Laughter)  Well is there anything else that you   d like to mention that we haven   t  talked about before we let you go?  No, I think you   ve covered quite a bit. Of course, I   ll be thinking of  some more stuff. But I think you   ve done a really good job.  All right, well we appreciate your time this morning.  Yeah. You drug up a bunch of stuff that I hadn   t thought about for a  long time.  Well, thank you very much.  Okay, thank you.  -------  -------  
