 Little Thunder  My name is Julie Pearson- Little Thunder. Today is Friday, March 11,   2011 . I   m interviewing Mel Cornshucker as a part of the Oklahoma  Native Artists Project sponsored by the Oklahoma Oral History  Research Program at Oklahoma State University. We   re at Mel   s studio  in the Brady Arts District in downtown Tulsa. Mel, you   re a potter and  ceramic sculptor, a Cherokee tribal member, who found his medium at a  very early age. Where you were born and where did you grow up?  I was born in Jay, Oklahoma, in 1952, October 4. I stayed in Oklahoma  until I was about four. We moved to Kansas City, Missouri, for my dad  to get a better-paying job. All us kids went there and went to school. I  went to Kansas City High School,  Kansas City  school district. Went to  Bacone College for one semester, 1970, the fall of 1970. After that I  went to Southwest Missouri State University in Malden, Missouri.  You come from a family of artists. Can you talk about that a little bit?  Yes, my grandfather, who was named Lincoln Trotting Wolf, who lived  to be a hundred years old, had built his own rug loom. He made rugs and  blankets. His loom was always on the porch. There was something for  me to play on, something for me to get in trouble on. (Laughs) He was a  rug weaver. I   ve had cousins who are basket weavers. My dad was a  silversmith in later years, so art has always been there for me. It   s  always been there. When you   re going through grade school, in first  grade or second grade, you have these    Who can make the best looking  Valentines Day   s box?    little contests. Not knowing it, but for some  reason, I   d always win. Or    Who would make the best looking Easter  egg?    While all the rest of the kids are making theirs into faces, I   m  making mine into birds, putting wings on them and winning these things.  So art   s always been there and it   s always been easy.  I   m struck by the fact they   re dimensional, both the box and the Easter  5  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  egg.  Yeah, they are, hadn   t thought about that. (Laughter) I went on to high  school. In high school I took art. Art was always, like I said, easy.  What kind of encouragement did you get in the public schools? You got  reinforcement at the grade school level. In high school, was it also a  positive experience?  Yes. I had one art teacher, his name was Mr. West, and he was always  saying,    Well, you know you can do this better. You can always add  more to it.    I didn   t realize, but he was talking about my three-dimensional  pieces. I worked in plaster, wet plaster, making figurines,  things like that. I made a piece of metal sculpture that was kind of like a  Venus fly trap, coming up like that. It   s always been easy and I never  thought about it as a career.  I read that you did take a ceramics class at Southwest Baptist  University. Were you taking other classes there, too, or just that  particular class?  Well, I was going to school and I was on track to be a tribal lawyer  through the Cherokee Tribe. And I needed to take a studio art course. I  went down to Silver Dollar City, saw a potter throwing pots. I was real  enthralled, watching him do that. Went back to school, in my second or  third year of college, signed up for ceramics, took a course, quit college  and went looking for a job as a potter. (Laughs)  Just to pick up on the tribal lawyer thing, mainly  because  there was  funding available if you followed that course of study?  Right. (Laughter) If I made it through my bachelor   s and had good  grades, and got accepted into law school, they would pay for my law  school. And I would be a tribal lawyer for them for four or five years to  pay them back.  Aside from the fact that you   d already been showing a lot of interest in  three-dimensional sculpture and figurines, what was it about that  ceramics course that proved a turning point?  It sounds like I   m really making this up, but it   s the ease of it, you  know? There was an upper level   I think he was a senior art student  there   and he showed me,    Okay, this is what you do. Real basic. You  center the clay and then you open it up.    (Laughs) He showed me  basically one lesson. And then, I got in there. Any available time, I was  in the studio, messing around with clay. My pots were ugly and crude  6  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  but my mom saved them. I   ve still got them. (Laughter) They   re thick  and heavy, but they were up and had walls, so they were actual pots. But  they were just heavier than heck. (Laughs)  You have an interesting story about when you left school and  became an apprentice potter at Silver Dollar City, a resort town in  Missouri. There were several other people competing for that job. Did  you have to demonstrate your skills? How did that work?  Yes. You fill out your application. You have an interview with the head  potter. He says,    Okay. Let   s see what you can do. I want you to do  this.    He shows me what he wants. I come kind of close to it, not as big,  not as neat as his, but I showed him what I could do. (Laughs) I guess he  was impressed enough because I got the job, and there was something  like eight or nine people wanting a job. (Laughs) I pissed off a few  people because they thought they were going to get the job. (Laughs)  How long did you work there and what did you learn that you applied to  your art later?  Silver Dollar City was a good place to learn. I did it every day. I was on  the wheel for three hours a day, at least, sometimes four hours. I was on  the wheel four hours a day. It got me over my fear of being in front of  people, because I had to do demonstrations in front of people. There was  easily anywhere from ten to fifty people and it changed over every  fifteen minutes. So, I was doing demonstrations all that time. It got me  to the point where I could throw what I wanted to. I just had to learn  how to master more amounts of clay, bigger amounts of clay. And it  showed all the basics. It showed me how to mix glazes, what the process  is, what   s the process of firing, how to fire pieces. Everything you need  to know as a potter, they taught me. Like I said, it was a great place to  learn. Not a great place to hang out for any length of time, but it was a  great place to learn. I enjoyed the time I was there. Then I thought,    It   s  time for me to get out,    and jumped out. (Laughs)  What did you move on to next?  After I quit work for  Silver Dollar  City, I took a break and went to  Colorado and worked as a land surveyor, climbed mountains. I was in  the mountains in and around Crested Butte for about six months. I  enjoyed that very much. But it was one of those things   after three or  four months, I couldn   t wait to get back and start playing with clay. I  moved back to Kansas City, Missouri, and I moved in with my folks.  They said it was okay. I set up my studio in their basement. I built my  own gas kiln outside in their backyard. (Laughs) They were very, very  supportive. They thought it was great. And that   s how I got started,  7  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  doing shows, little local shows, in and around Kansas City. Not making  any money, but I made very simple cups, simple bowls. At that time, I  hadn   t done any Indian motifs on my pieces. They were just strictly  glaze on glaze. Let the glaze do the work. I was getting good success  from that.  Where and when did you meet Michelle?  I met Michelle in college and we dated all through college. We dated all  through my work at Silver Dollar City and everything like that. We kept  on dating and finally,    Well, let   s get married     So, we got married.  (Laughs) And she was okay with me being a potter. She didn   t make any  demands on me like,    You need to get a job. We   re getting married, so  you need to get a job.    She wasn   t that way. She was all for me being a  potter, and has been supportive all the way through my career.  That   s wonderful. I want to pick up on Bacone a bit. When were you at  Bacone?  I graduated in 1970 in Kansas City, Missouri, and that fall I was in  Bacone, the fall of 1970.  Was that the time when you began thinking about incorporating Indian  motifs, when you became more exposed     More exposed to it. I went to high school in Kansas City   it was  Northeast Senior High School   and I was the only Indian out of a  population of about 1500 students. I was the only Indian. So, it   s not like  there was a whole lot of interaction with other Indians. The only time I  ever got that was when I would come down to Jay, Oklahoma and see  my relatives and hang out with them for the summer.  So you basically spent summers back in Oklahoma each year?  Yes.  My parents would  drop me off and they   d come down and see  me. Then about time to go to school, I   d go back to Kansas City.  Were you around the language quite a bit, too?  My folks spoke it fluently. Everybody, all my relatives spoke it fluently.  For some reason my tongue doesn   t work that way. It doesn   t make the  noise, the guttural sounds, that everybody else   s does. So, I understood  what they were saying, I just didn   t speak it very well. And one bad  thing was, they   d just look at me and shake their heads in disapproval  about how I was saying things. So, I just stopped. I would just stop.  Spoke back in English. But there was always that flow from English to  8  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Cherokee to English all the time. That was going on constantly.  My aunts and uncles, that   s all they spoke was Cherokee, so if you hung  out with them you had to speak some to get your point across. Because  they spoke very little English and I spoke very little Cherokee.  At Bacone, did you continue with ceramics or did you study other  things?  There I was more of an academic. I took Botany, English, History,  things like that, to get those basic requirements out of the way.  Were you aware of any art instructors there?  Dick West was there at the time. I   d go in just to see what they were  doing. A lot of my friends were taking art courses, beading courses,  drawing courses. And I thought,    Well, if I come back here next  semester, I   ll sign up for class.    But I didn   t come back for that spring  semester.  That was when you were still on the lawyer track. So, you eventually set  up your own studio in Seligman, Missouri? Did you build it yourself?  During the course of my shows, I met and became friends with a guy  who did leather, contemporary leather. We became real good friends,  and I would come down to his place, which is in Seligman, and hang out  and bring the family down   well, just Michelle and I at that time. We   d  just hang out and do shows together. And I asked him one fall,    If you  know of any place in the Seligman area, or any land for sale, let me  know. I   m kind interested in buying some land and setting up a  household.    About three or four months later, he called me up,    How  would you like to buy my place?    So, we worked out a deal. I bought his  place. It   s in the middle of forty acres. I still have the land. It had a  studio already there. He had built a leather studio where he did all his  leather work. It was kind of small but it would work for me, so I built  my kilns, we moved in. I built my kilns and we set up a studio. That was  our home for about thirteen years until I decided it was time to move on,  try out other things.  When you built your kilns, were they similar to what you had used at  Silver Dollar City?  Silver Dollar City ones were store-bought and mine were free-standing.  They were built. I had to lay bricks. You had to be somewhat of a mason  to get everything level, build it up so it wouldn   t fall over. Things like  that.  9  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  What did you burn?  Propane. I   m still a gas potter.  Once you set up your studio, you began doing more booth shows? Did  you combine them with galleries at that point?  I started doing lots of shows all over the place, and I came across a  woman, I know you knew her. Jane Mauldin. Jane asked me what I was  doing, the shows I was doing.  Which were straight arts and crafts.  Right. Pretty contemporary. She says,    You need to quit doing those,  and you need to start doing Native shows.    It was her influence and her  pushing that got me to start doing Native shows. (Laughs) And I haven   t  regretted it. It   s been great. She became a great friend of mine. I started  doing Indian shows, started being picked up by galleries. I dealt with  galleries pretty much all across the United States, and this is all I do, just  Native shows. I used to do a whole bunch of them. Fifteen or sixteen a  year. Now I   m down to about six or seven a year, and I still do galleries.  It works out real good.  So what year are we talking about here?  Approximately early    80s.  There was a flourishing Indian art scene going on. Is that when you  started to incorporate Native designs?  Well, I had started doing that before that. I started remembering  dragonflies. I had studied or looked at a lot of pottery from Japan and the  Orient, and noticed that, occasionally, you would see a dragonfly in  there, which started me thinking about my grandfather. I wanted to first  do them in a stamp form where I could just stamp them on. But it wasn   t  doing anything for me. So, I started painting and learned how to paint  them on the way I do now. And it   s developed. The first Native design I  started using was a dragonfly. Then I started doing dancers, and then it  just opened up, to buffalo, deer, Indians riding horses, turtles, frogs,  jackrabbits, occasionally birds, things like that. That   s when it really  kicked in, in the early    80s.  Besides being just a powerful symbol for a lot of tribal cultures, you  have strong associations with dragonflies because of your grandfather.  10  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Yes. Having him tell me the stories of his early life   he was born in  1865. The year Lincoln was assassinated, my grandfather was born. So,  to honor Lincoln, they named him Lincoln. That was his name, Lincoln  Trotting Wolf. He told me all kinds of stories about the late 1800s,  having to ride on a horse to go anywhere, or in a wagon to go anywhere,  or walking to go anywhere. He talked about a date  with  his first wife,  on horseback. He had all kinds of stories about running into people who  ran into the Territory to get away from the law. (Laughs) He said,    At  one time I met Jesse James because he was running away from the law  and ran into the Territory.    He had all kinds of stories. He worked for  Charles Page over here as a stone mason and helped build part of Tulsa,  the original part of Tulsa, being a stone mason. He had all kinds of  stories. He was a funny man. And after dinner, at his house, he would  have a clay pipe that he always smoked out of. He had one bowl of  tobacco that he   d smoke a day, and it was after dinner. In the wintertime,  there was a big wooden stove, he   d sit around, and my folks and he  would talk. He would tell little things about his life then, too. It was  pretty interesting.  Were your markets stronger outside Oklahoma or in Oklahoma?  My markets seemed to be better outside of Oklahoma. I had a gallery I  dealt with in New York City, outside of New York City. That was  always a strong market. I would go there twice a year. I have a gallery I  deal with in Chicago. That   s always been a real strong show for me. I  always seem to do better outside of Oklahoma. (Laughs) I don   t know if  it   s because there are so many Indians in Oklahoma or what, but I do  better outside of Oklahoma.  There are some interesting Cherokee potters who work in very different  styles. Have you developed friendships with them or spent much time  talking with them?  Yeah, I know Bill Glass. I know Jane Osti and there   s Pat Gillian. I can   t  remember, but she was a local Cherokee potter. Anita Fields, who I  consider a contemporary with me. The ones I mentioned before, Jane  and Bill, are kind of traditional in a way. Anna Mitchell. After meeting  her and talking to her for a while, she says,    Well, you know we   re  related.    I said,    Are we really?    (Laughs) She said,    Yes. My maiden  name was Six Killer and I   m from Piney Creek area,    which is the area  that I was born in. I said,    So you were a Six Killer.    She says,    Yeah.     So, distant, distant cousins. Very distant, but we are cousins.  What kinds of art competition shows did you enter?  Red Earth, their competition. They   re usually competitions that have a  11  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  market to go along with them. Santa Fe Indian Market, the Heard,  Eiteljorg, the Tulsa Indian Arts Festival, the Tulsa Cherokee Art Market  and the Five Civilized Tribes Market. They always have little  competitions to go along with their retail shows. It works out pretty well  for me.  What is one award that is especially meaningful to you?  Well, it   s a small award, but I do the Five Civilized Tribes show and Art  Under the Oaks, and they have a competition there. I entered a piece     it   s been several years ago, five or six years ago or longer   and I got  Best of Show. Getting Best of Show, that   s really nice, but I found out  that Ben Harjo was the judge. Getting an award presented to me and  having Ben Harjo judge the show meant a lot to me because I respect  Ben Harjo   s work and enjoy it. I have several of his pieces. I really  respect Ben because I think he   s out there doing what works for him.  He   s a very talented artist. He works at it. I mean, people have an idea  that artists work when they feel the urge. (Laughs) You can   t do that.  You   ve got to get in there and you   ve got to work. I respect his work  ethics and his work, period. To have him judge my work, I liked that a  whole lot.  How about museum shows. Have you had many of those?  I   ve had a few of them. There again, they always coincide with markets.  But I   m having a museum show coming up in April of this year. It is  going to be at the Southern Plains Indian Museum in Anadarko.  And you   ll get a nice catalog. (Laughter)  Yeah, a nice catalog. (Laughter) That   s one of the very good perks about  doing that show. It   s going to be a one-man show. There   s other shows. I  did a show here in Tulsa for Living Arts. It was the inaugural show  for   they have a series for the Four Elements, Earth, Wind, Fire     and I was the only potter in that show of the four. I was one of the  starters  of  that show.  You mentioned the ceramicist, John Glick, as an influence. When did  you first see his poetry and how did it influence you?  John Glick is a potter out of Farmington, outside of Detroit, Michigan.  And his use of color   he has basic pots and then he goes back with  glaze, and does glaze on glaze. He does painting on glaze. He does all  these things, and I thought,    Well, I don   t have to strictly do glaze on  glaze and rely on that. You can get very nice effects that way but it   s not  saying anything about me to the people.    I didn   t study his work but I  12  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  liked the possibilities that he showed me.  You   re part owner of the Brady Artists Studio with Donna Prigmore,  who   s also a potter. When and how did you first meet Donna?  It   s been maybe ten years ago, I can   t remember. Memory is one of  those things that goes pretty quick. (Laughs) But they had a show. Do  you remember Gilcrease  Museum  having a show of the masters like   Thomas  Moran,  Wilson  Hurley? They had a big show of his and  Moran, and it brought in a lot of attention to the Tulsa area. At that time,  this was a very young gallery and studio. And they wanted to do a show  along with that, but a Native show. They asked, I think it was Anita  Fields, who was in the area, if potters in the area that might want to do  the show. Through her, they contacted me to do a show. Anita Fields  was in it, Jane Osti was in it. I can   t think of very many other people.  Mike Daniels was in it, and a few other potters that were in the area  were invited to the show. And I got to be friends with the owners, John  Weisinger, and Donna, and Lisa Kahn, and they were talking about how  they would like to expand their studio.  After  about twelve years of  living in Seligman, I decided I was getting tired of watching trees grow.  My studio was way out in the country, way out in the woods. No one  ever came in and no one ever came by. I was pretty much by myself  until the kids and wife came home, so I was getting a little burned out. I  contacted them and asked them if they would rent out studio space for  me. This little old box up here  points to room upstairs , they rented that  out to me. I worked here for about a year, and John and Lisa got an  opportunity to go to Tampa Museum  of Art  to work. They wanted to  know if I would be interested in buying their half of the studio. I came  up with the money and Donna and I have been partners for twelve,  thirteen years, so I   ve been here for a while. It   s worked out great.  You offer classes here?  Oh yes. (Laughter) We teach anybody who wants to do clay, doesn   t  have to be on the wheel. If they want to do slab work, we   ll teach them  how to do that. If they want to do coil work, we   ll teach them how to do  coils. Basically, we can teach you anything in clay. I   m the person who  teaches the wheel work because that is my expertise. Donna teaches  anything in slab built and coil built because that   s her medium. We have  one lady who drives in from Pryor, Oklahoma, which is about fifty miles  away. She comes in once a week. She has for the last ten years. She has  her own equipment, wheel and everything, but she still wants to come in.  She says we give her inspiration and teach her little nuances all the time.  (Laughs)   Teaching can be  a good way of supplementing your income. Was that  13  Cornshucker  Liittle Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  part of the reason for that?  No. I just wanted a place to work out of. (Laughter) I mean, I was  committed to doing lessons. And, in actuality, the students help pay on  the rent and pay on the utilities, so my out of pocket expenses for having  my own studio is pretty minimal. That   s basically it right there. Without  them it would be kind of tough going sometimes.  Have you gotten ideas from teaching?  There have been a few things like,    Why didn   t I think of that?    It   s not  like stealing but they   ve hit on a note that you can take, and you   re gone.  Already off on that note. They   re here still, but you   re off over here,  using that one note they hit upon.  What kinds of changes did you note in the Indian Art show scene from     80 to    90, specifically in terms of Oklahoma?  Back in the    80s it seems like the art markets in Oklahoma were pretty  strong. I had no problem making a living supporting my family, doing  shows and doing galleries in and around Oklahoma. They seemed to be a  lot stronger. I guess it   s like anything else, there   s ebbs and flows. It  goes up, it goes down. I guess I built up a little reputation that I can  weather out the low parts pretty good. They don   t affect me too much. It  seems like we   re in a little low area right now. (Laughs)  In 1990 the Indian Arts and Crafts Act was passed requiring artist to  provide proof of enrollment or certification by their tribe. I   m wondering  if you noticed how it impacted artists and galleries. .  Well, people started wanting to see identification that you were who you  say you were. And to be honest with you, I hadn   t thought about it. I   ve  always known who I was. Before. I didn   t think about it. It really didn   t  enter my mind about having to prove that I was Cherokee. When that  Act came in, I had to go back and prove who I was. That took me about  three or four years to do because there were times that I could not get the  birth certificates of my mom because the certificate was in the  courthouse in Jay. And it burned down, so there went her birth  certificate. I had to go and do all of this other paperwork to prove that  she was born and therefore I was born. It was just a big mess and I didn   t  like it.  I really didn   t care too much for the law. Then there would be some  would-be Indians with this much Indian in them (gestures), but they  could prove it, making a big issue of it out  at  the shows. That just  really irritated me that they did that. At the time, there were some artists  14  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  that are still around that can   t prove their lineage, but I know that they   re  Indian. I think that knocked a few of them out, but there again, it let  those little bitty Indians in. That just bugged the crap out of me. It just  really did.  We   re going to get to look at one of your house sculptures, and this may  not be the phrasing you use, functional pieces opposed to aesthetic  pieces. I like to call them sculptures. Are they raku or ceramic?  Well, everything I do is functional. Even my sculptural pieces are  functional. There   s a little bit of function there, so I call them functional.  For me, they have to have function. That utilitarian    you   ve got to do  something with this piece    has always been there for me. It   s always  stuck in my head. If you want to use this, you can use this. These pieces  I make are cone cone-tinned stoneware, which means the clay has the  ability to go up to the temperature of 2,381 degrees without falling apart.  That   s real high on the heat scale. If you   re looking into a fire, a  fireplace or something like that, and you see little flashes of bright  yellow, that yellow means, that little spot for a split-second is maybe  2,200 degrees. If you go into white hot, then you   re getting up into the  heat range for the pieces that I fire. I do raku pieces, which is pieces that  I fire up to around 1,800 degrees, which is 500-600 degrees lower than  other pieces that I do. And those are considered low fired.  But they   re still functional?  They are still functional if you don   t mind leakage. (Laughs)  I remember meeting your dad at one of your early openings here  and   family members. That must have been an especially wonderful moment  the first time they came to a show that you had in a studio you co-owned.  I have to say, when I first started out, my dad, for a real job, was a pipe  fitter. He was in the Pipe Fitter   s Union up in Kansas City. If I   d wanted  to be, I could have been a pipe fitter because I worked on the job sites  with him, being his apprentice, which made big money. And when I said  I wanted to be a potter, go down to Silver Dollar City and work, they  just didn   t quite understand that route because,    Let me see, you   ll give  up good money here to make minimum wage down there?    (Laughs) So,  they weren   t too happy, but when I was working at Silver Dollar City,  they came down. I gave them passes and they came in and watched me  demonstrate. There was kind of a lull in the demonstration and I heard  my dad say, nudge the guy next to him,    That   s my son down there  who   s making that pot.    And then I knew it was okay. After that,  whatever I needed help on, they were there for me. And when they came  to my first show, my one-man show here at this gallery, they were just  15  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  tickled, tickled to death. We got a son that actually did something.  In 2007, you were one of a number of Native artists who participated in  a cultural exchange with African artists. Can you talk about that  experience a bit?  This was through the Kellogg Foundation. They worked with the IAIA   Institute of American Indian Art  of Santa Fe. They wanted about forty  to forty- five artists in certain fields to go to South Africa to work in and  around South Africa  and in  some of the other countries like Botswana,  Zambia, Mozambique. I was part of a team who worked with potters.  There were four other potters and me. The other four potters worked in  traditional pottery and I was the only contemporary potter out of the  group. The selection committee   I don   t know how they did that, but I  got picked. So, I went and we worked in a little Zulu village and we  gave a workshop to the Zulu potters. It should have been more like they  gave us a workshop, because they were so talented and so sure about  what they were doing. All we could offer them was maybe a few new  ideas they hadn   t thought about, maybe try to think of different ways for  them to market their wares. That   s what part of our goal was. To  incorporate new ideas and to help them market   there was a better way  for them to market their pieces.  If a Zulu potter made a pot and she sold it for, let   s say,  20 at her  studio, by the time it got to the gallery in Durbin, it   d be about  120. But  she would still only get  20. So we were trying to figure out different  ways for them to market. And we came up with new designs as far as  making masks. I was involved with the gallery here  on Brady Street   when we started selling African pieces. I looked at African masks. So,  when we went down there, we came up with,    How about making clay  African masks?    It was a real inspirational moment because all of a  sudden this light goes  off  above all our heads.    We can make masks      And they had a ball with it. They made all kinds of masks. Not  necessarily representing their tribe, because every tribe had different  masks, just the free spirit of making masks in the way they wanted to.  And they make some really nice masks. So, if you see any clay masks  coming out of Africa now, that   s partly because of our influence.  And rattles. They had never thought about rattles. That one was my idea.  I started making rattles and showed them how to make rattles, and they  started making rattles after that. It was more  about  inspiration for them  because when it came to their ability to work in clay, they   d just blow us  away. Things we would make  that would  take us a week, they would  do in a day. Things they would fire up   we would wait two weeks to  fire ours up, they were firing theirs up the next day. Little short cuts they  would do. And tools. Here we   d go to the clay store, clay manufacturer,  16  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  and we   d buy little rubber ribs, wooden tools, little knives. What they  would use was broken butter knives, Purex bottles   the plastic   they  would cut those out and that would be their ribs. Their tools  were  little  bits of plastic they would use to help shine the clay up. Their methods  were very austere because they didn   t have very much to work with.  The village we were at had no running water, no electricity, nothing like  that. We had to bring in our own bottled water to drink. Lunch was  always an experience because they did their best to feed us. When it was  lunch time we would go down, and it was kind of like a little buffet  style.    Give me some of that, that and that.    One time I saw something  that looked like mushrooms, like the button side of mushrooms, so I  said,    Give me some of that.    The cooks looked at each other and looked  at me.    You want some of that?    They pointed down. They didn   t speak  English and I didn   t speak Swahili.    Okay.    They gave me some of that  and I take it back to my table, and I   m eating on it and eating on it,  chewing on it, chewing on it. (Laughter) There   s an interpreter, sitting  there, eating lunch with me, and I ask her,    What is this?    She looks at  me. She smiles. She says,    Stomach of a chicken.    I said,    Oh, okay.     (Laughter)    Real, real chewy     (Laughter) But we had crocodile, we had  ostrich, we had all kinds of things. It was quite an experience. And I  realized I wouldn   t want to live or stay in a third-world country very  long. I am too spoiled, far, far too spoiled by all of the conveniences we  have, that we take for granted. It   s just amazing about how people live.  And I thought,    There   s got to be a better way.     Have you traveled out of the country any other place besides Africa?  Canada, Mexico. That is about it.  With your artwork?  No. Because of it. I went to a show and I made money so now I can go  up to Canada.  (Laughs) You have a number of high profile shows including Santa Fe  Indian Market. Do you remember your first show in Santa Fe?  I do. I was sharing a booth with Gina Gray. Gina Gray talked to me and  said,    Get into Market and we can share a booth.    And so out of a five  by ten foot, those small booths, I had about this much space, about that  much length to display what I wanted to sell. (Gestures) Because being a  painter she needed all the wall space. (Laughs) I still made money. It  wasn   t much. Paid for my booth, paid for my expenses and everything.  And still came out with a few hundred bucks after that, but that was my  first show. I was really amazed at watching what goes on and how that  17  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  show is run. How early people come there. I mean early, before the sun  comes up, they   re out there with their flashlights.  Did you try and get your own booth the following year?  Yes, after that my main goal was to get my own booth. I eventually  moved in to my own five by ten and then they moved me into a ten by  ten, sharing with someone else. (Laughs) I felt real bad for anybody who  shared with me because I would overwhelm that person. People would  come in, and I   d have people standing in line to  buy  stuff and this poor  person, no one got a chance to see their work because of all these people  standing in my booth. That sounds boastful but that   s the way it was.  You have a lot of repeat collectors, especially for stoneware. Do you  think you get to know your collectors in a deeper way maybe than a  painter or sculptor?  Especially as you are starting out, people   I don   t know if they  recognize talent or they like what you do    but  I   ve had people who   ve  been buying from me from when I sold my cups for  12 dollars. And  now I sell my cups for  25, but they still have been coming up with me.  As I go up in price, they   ve come up with me and bought bigger pieces.  Let   s say a bowl. I would sell my bowls for  20, and now my price  range for my bowls is  80 up to about  400- 500. These people are now  buying the bowls for  400- 500. And you get to know them. I   m real  bad with names. I am real bad with names, but I use the adage,    Oh, I  know you, so I must be in Chicago.    (Laughs) I know them and I know  they   ve got a dog or little things that you pick up from talking to them  over the years.    How is your son doing? Is he still in college?    Little  things. You start talking, you build a rapport with them. They know my  family. They know my two kids.    How is your daughter? Is she married  now?    All of this kind of stuff.    Your son still in college?    You build up  a rapport, and because of that you build up a friendship. The nice thing  about it is they come along with you for this journey. My career. It   s  kind of strange in a way because I   ve never thought about it as a career  until about ten years ago. This is my career. (Laughter) This is what I am  doing. (Laughs)  You order your clay commercially. Have you ever dug your own clay, or  are you interested in that?  I   ve done that once. (Laughter) I   ve done that once and realized,    Oh  man, this is way too much work     I appreciate the traditional potters  who do that. There are a lot of traditional potters who will go out and dig  their own clay. I appreciate that and realize why their pieces command  such high prices. Because they   re so labor intensive, wow  I   m lazy.  18  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  (Laughs)  Dinnerware is kind of your bread and butter. What are the pluses and  drawbacks of that?  For the pluses, they   re pretty much no brainers. I just make them. I use  my designs. Each one of them is still an individual piece but it doesn   t  take very much thought, whereas my structural pieces, I think about  them. I put them in the back of my head and let them percolate or  whatever, and then they   ll come back out.    This is the way I want to  make them     That requires a lot more thought process. The dinnerware  sets and the functional pieces, I enjoy making them because I enjoy the  whole process of throwing a piece, taking it through the whole process  and, hopefully, coming out like I want them to. In the beginning I wasn   t  so sure, but I   m to the point now, I know what they are going to look  like. The majority of the time, I   ll already see them in my head.    Okay,  this one   s going to have this design on, and this is how it   ll look.     You don   t lose many in the firing process?  No. I might lose one piece out of, let   s say, three, four firings. And I   ve  never counted the number of pieces I put into a firing. My kiln is about  twenty-four cubic foot on the inside, so it   s a pretty good size. And  that   s stacking area. Maybe one out of 200 or 300, something like that.  Electric kiln?  Gas.  That quality of movement comes with all your designs. It takes good  drafting skills. It   s not like doing geometric designs.  Yeah, and without knowing it, when I was in high school I started     in eighth or seventh grade, I can   t remember   taking drafting classes. I  had no idea why. I just did it. And you develop a sense of spatial  relations. How, as you   re moving away from something, things should  be moving. That has been ingrained. But because of those drafting  classes, I can go back and say,    This is the way it should look as it trails  back.    The movement, I think, comes from that technical drawing. I  never thought, when I was taking it, that I could use it later on. But  everything you learn helps out. It doesn   t matter. I can go to painting  workshops and pick up something out of that painting workshop that  will help me in my work now.  Do you do that occasionally?  19  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  I do. I   ve gone to painting workshops at TU, watched other people in  other mediums work. I   ve gone to the glass blowing shop two doors  down, and I blew glass for a little bit. Nothing big, but understood the  qualities of the glass and how it works, and picked up dimensions, how I  want to incorporate some dimensional things in my work. Things that  I   m trying to work out now, ideas that you might see within a year or  two.  You   ve had some trademark color schemes which were blue, black or  brown. A green  and  brown. Can you talk a little bit about the design  process and your slips?  Well, I fire up to code ten, like I said. When you fire up to that  temperature, you   re starting to limit the number of colors you can work  with. I can work with green, I can work with brown, I can work with  blue underneath the glazes. Now, these are strictly underneath the  glazes. Anything else is going to burn out. I can   t work with yellows.  Yellows won   t show up or reds. Reds won   t show up. They   ll burn out.  But these three colors I can work with, and you have to think about your  designs in those three colors. As far as glazes, I can do purples. I can do  yellows. I can do reds. I just chose not.    Purple? I don   t know.     (Laughs)    Pink? I don   t know.    I can use those kinds of glazes. I use red  glazes as accent pieces, accent glazes. But purple and pink just don   t fit  in my palette.  You   re not using so much green anymore.  I use green and I mix my own glazes. Why I don   t use the green so much  is, I mix my glazes. All the elements I use to mix my glazes are natural  Earth, so they come out of the ground. They mine them. As you go  through a vein of, let   s say, copper. The copper has a certain molecular  composition, but it doesn   t stay true with all the copper that is mined.  There are some little nuances, always, in different areas of that vein.  Even in that vein of two feet, there   ll be little differences in it. That   s  true with all the elements that I use. Flint   I use flint. And marble,  which is calcium carbonate. There are always little variances and over  the course of the years, a certain kind of mineral will change because its  composition has changed a little bit. So, you   ve got to incorporate that  and you   ve got to figure out different things to counteract that. The  greens, the copper has changed since the first time I used it. So, now I  have to make adjustments on it until I get to the point I   m happy with it  again. Then I   ll start using it more. (Laughs) It   s always adjustments,  there   s always adjustments to make. You have to be somewhat of a  chemist to work with it. You know that periodic table you see up on  chemistry boards? (Laughs) I have to deal with that and it   s no fun.  20  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  What   s your creative process from the time you get an idea?  Creative process. On my shows I go to a lot of times, when I   m out in  the Southwest, I   ll go to places like Chaco Canyon, the Four Corners  area, and look at petroglyphs. I   ve been up in Missouri, looking at  petroglyphs. I   ve been in Arkansas, looking at petroglyphs, and seeing  those designs. Sometimes I draw them down. Sometimes I just keep  them in my head, and I will borrow from those. Not verbatim, not the  same design, but I will loosely use those designs. I   ll draw them out and  then I   ll do little mockups of that. See how it works. See how it works  with the color palette that I use, and try it that way. There are several  designs   a lot of designs are    Aanh  This isn   t going to work for me.     And then, I have to feel it.    I like this and it feels good for me. I can use  this.    But there are some designs that I tried, and I thought,    No  That is  not going to work for me.     Do you keep designs hanging on the wall as you   re trying them?  Or little strips of paper. (Laughter)    Oh yeah, that design  I like that  one     Things like that. (Laughter) A lot of times, they   re on the walls.  Sometimes, when I do sculptural pieces, I make baskets. I like to make  baskets   loosely called baskets   they   re clay. Anything that has a  handle and has an opening, I   ll call a basket.  So, I   ve made baskets. When I   ve gone to Phoenix and have come back  the southern route, there is a range of mountains called the Chocolate  Mountains. I like that layer of mountains where one layer is in front of a  layer, in front of a layer. And I   ve incorporated that into handles for  these baskets that I make. Just about anything I look at, I don   t realize it,  but you store it back. You put it back and when you don   t think about it,  it   ll pop up. That   s how I do a lot of my more creative work. I want to  make a man. I want to make a figure. I   ll think about it, of course. Think  about it, for lack of better term, in the front part of my brain, and then  send it back and let it percolate, then let it come back up to the front  again, and think,    Oh  This will work.    And then, I can visualize it. I can  turn it around three-dimensionally and  say,     Yes, that will work.    In  my mind, I   ll turn it around and think,    This is what I want to make.     And then make that piece. It   s not going to be exactly what I see, but it   s  going to be very close to what I see in my mind.  What is your creative routine?  When I come into the studio, I try to come in the mornings. I   m usually  here by nine. There   s always some things that you have to do. Computer  work. Check on things, like the kiln that you   ve fired the night before     electric one or the gas one. Check on things. Go up on the computer and  21  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  see if there   s anything I need to look at, messages. Just kind of slowly  start working into the process. And as I   m doing these other tasks, I start  thinking,    Okay,      if I   m making pie plates       You need to make pie  plates.    Set it in my mind.    You need to make ten pie plates today.    So,  I   ll go down there and get my hands on the clay. Start working up the  clay, start feeling of the clay. I weigh out the clay, I work the clay up,  then I set it aside and take a break. I   m real big at taking breaks.  (Laughs) Go do something else for a while, then come back down and  get ready. I   ll sit at the wheel, and I   ll do what I need to do to get it  done. Then take another break, or in between, take another break. There  are lots of breaks. (Laughs)  You   re problem-solving on your breaks. (Laughs)  Yeah, that   s it. Thinking about something else, unrelated to the clay.  It   s always a balancing act to have enough inventory for yourself for a  show, but at the same time supply the galleries that sell your work.  (Laughs) I   ll put it this way. The galleries probably would like to see me  more often than I choose to see them. When they have a show for me, I  will work for that show for them. How it   s been for the last number of  years is I don   t consign any pieces. I   ll do a show for you and I   ll give  you the option to buy whatever you want to after that show. Nine times  out of ten, I   ll do a show and whatever is left, they just buy outright  because they know they   re not going to see me for a while. (Laughs)  That keeps them kind of happy. I used to be able to take my January off,  or I used to be able to take July off and just do family things or think  about working. There   s a lot of thinking about working because you can  do it physically, yeah, but there   s times you need to think about working  and what you want to get done, what you would like to get  accomplished. I don   t know, maybe other artists do this but I have to  think about working. Then I   ll get in here, go through those spurts where  you   re just gung ho and you   re working. That feels good.  Have you ever sought any casino commissions?  No, I haven   t. There   s the Cherokee Casino out here, the Hard Rock.  And there   s a group of artists who seek them out and want them to buy  their work. I   m not one of them. If they want to buy something, great,  but I   m not going to seek them out and get them to buy. They seem to be  doing okay without me, and I seem to be doing okay without them.  (Laughs) I guess it would be nice for the notoriety, but that   s okay. I am  not worried about that.  Looking back on your career in terms of any real pivotal moments, what  22  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  do you see?  I think it   s been meeting people. I have said this for a very long time.  Meeting Jane Mauldin.  A Choctaw painter.  Yes. She was very personal able , easy to talk to, very intelligent, I  thought. And she was the one who really got me going in the direction I  have taken. She was a very big inspiration because she would  say ,    I  like this.    I would do things, and she   d say,    This looks good. I am not  too crazy about that. But this looks good.    (Laughter) She was critical a  little bit, not over-critical. But she would express her opinions. That said  a lot, that   s always said a lot to me. Because there again, I respected her  work. I   ve got a lot of her pieces.  And meeting other people, like Jane   s sister, Valjean Hessing. She was  always very supportive, and basically, they were my first two contacts in  the field I   m in now. Running into Ben. I   ll bring up Ben one more time,  Ben Harjo. I meet him at a gallery, Linda Greever   s  gallery . I was  selling pots to Linda because Jane told me to go see Linda and Ben was  hanging out there. Ben came out to my car and was looking at my pots     Linda had gone back in   and he said,    Why don   t you do traditional  pots?    I said,    Because I am not a traditional potter.    Little things like  that. (Laughs) He probably never remembered that, but for me, I thought     Well, I   m not a traditional potter, I   m a contemporary potter. This is  what I do.    He said,    Well, you do a real good job at what you do. But  why don   t you do traditional pots?    (Laughs)    This is it, Ben.    It   s  always meeting people...   Who  confirm the path you are on or make it clear for you?  Make it clear. Sometimes, not knowing it, they do show you this is the  way to go.  What has been one of the low points in your career?  When I burnt my kiln shed down. (Laughs) I was doing a high fire and it  taught me a couple of lessons. Don   t work till you   re just exhausted.   That  was one big lesson.  Was it in Seligman?  No, when we first got married, we lived in this little town called Nevada.  I had built a studio   well, a kiln in this old, very old, old, let me stress  that, old garage. (Laughs) The wood was, oh gosh, the wood was dry rot.  23  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  It was just barely standing. I   d worked all through the night and I was  doing a high fire, getting ready for a show. Something went wrong with  the kiln, caught the roof on fire. I   m sitting there watching TV and I   m  looking out the window. And I see this smoke start coming by my  window. (Laughs) So, I jump up and run out there and I   m seeing my  whole kiln shed just burn down. The fire department   s coming and it   s a  big hoopla. That was a very low point for me because my kiln was  ruined, that load I lost, the shed was down. It was just a miserable point.  How about one of the high points?  High points were getting into Indian Market and having a booth of my  own, a big booth of my own. (Laughs) Boy, that was a high point  because I thought,    Well, if I can keep this, I   m there.    (Laughs) Being  asked to go to gallery openings or having a one-man show at these  galleries has always been a high point. Being treated, for a lack of a  better term, like a rock star. Having people lined up, waiting for you, to  buy your work. There   s ten people standing outside waiting to come in  and buy your work. That   s always a high point. Yearly, it   s happened.     Alright  This is happening again  It   s still happening     I like that.  I   m thinking about what Bill Glass said about how nice it is to have  Cherokee families of artists who continue that art tradition within their  family. While your children aren   t necessarily engaged in the arts right  now, I   ve seen them at shows. How has that impacted your art, and what  kinds of things have they helped with?  My kids have come to shows with me. And my wife, also. Just their  support. They get a big kick out of going to my shows, and people  talking to them about me. And my kids and my wife talking to them  about me. They think that   s a pretty big deal. Like there   s one show,  Eiteljorg Indian Market, where my daughter would go with me on a  regular basis. There again, we talked about people, starting  friendships   they   d be asking    Where   s Morgan?    They   re so used to  having Morgan there and dealing with Morgan, because they know  Morgan can talk about my pots and things like that. And Lincoln  my  son , Lincoln has gone to several shows with me, and people start  looking for him and asking him questions,    Aren   t you wanting to get  into this?    (Laughs) They have their own paths to go. I   m not going to  try to get them to go the way I went. My parents didn   t try to make me  go the way they wanted me to go. It   s strictly up to them. But Lincoln  used to make some pieces, little pieces, buffalo that would hang on the  wall. He saw how easy it was to make these little pieces. He didn   t do  anything. All he did was made them. I took care of them for him. Fired  them and everything like that.  24  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Did you ever take any of them to the shows?  Oh, yeah, and he sold at shows. (Laughs) I had people,    Well, does your  son still make those buffalos?       No, he stopped. He is in college now.  He   s not doing those anymore.    (Laughs)    Oh, I was wanting to add to  my collection     (Laughs)  I   ve talked to Lincoln about it, especially, because he   s shown more  interest in the artistic part of the world whereas Morgan   s pretty  academic. We   ve talked about,    If you wanted to be something in the art  world, I   ve started a path. You could just step into that path and go. My  name   s not a big name, Cornshucker, but there   s some people who know  it and recognize it. You could go that way.    But he   s more artistically  inclined the music way. He likes music. It amazes me to watch him play  drums. I mean, to be able to do something with the right foot, do  something with the left foot, and beat on the drumsticks at the same  time. That is totally beyond me. (Laughs) I could never do that. He has  his own path and so does Morgan. Maybe grandkids. (Laughs) Maybe  grandkids.  Is there anything you would like to add or anything we forgot to cover?  No, I honestly think we covered a lot. I probably talked way too much  but I think I said what I wanted to say.  Well, let   s take a look at some of your work. Tell us about this sculpture.  This sculpture is number two in a series of boarding school places that  the government sent students to assimilate into modern society. This  one   s called    Journeycake Hall,    which is a building down in Bacone  College  in Muskogee, Oklahoma . What bothered me when I was at  Bacone, was there was a building, Journeycake Hall, and behind  Journeycake Hall is a cemetery. And the students who were sent there in  the early 1900   s   1914, 1915, 1916   about that time, there was a flu  epidemic. And instead of sending the bodies home, they buried them  behind Journeycake Hall. That   s what this represents. There   s an open  door. I don   t know if you can see through that, but you can see the  tombstones in the back, back behind the building. When I was there in  1970, there was a lot of tombstones. I went back about five years ago,  and they took a lot of the bodies or what was left and moved them back  to where they had come from. Arizona and things like that. That   s what  this represents.  I did one,    Carlisle Dreams.    It was another building similar to this, but  it had a picture window, a big picture window, in the middle of the  building. I had done little creatures with round humps on their backs,  25  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  Little Thunder  Cornshucker  and they were carrying back the dreams of the students that were going  to Carlisle School at that time. Taking dreams back home. So, that one  was called    Carlisle Dreams.    And there was another one,    Chilocco,     because my mom had gone to Chilocco as teenager. Gone to school and  didn   t care too much for the treatment  there . So, that was a very plain  building, because if you   ve ever been to Chilocco, there   s nothing out at  Chilocco. That   s what I wanted to represent, was the starkness. And  that   s a little series I   ve done. I keep thinking I   m going to do a few  more but the inspiration hasn   t hit me.  Let me make one comment about the last piece you saw, my  functionality. This a box. This is the lid. So, it does have functionality to  it. (Laughter) It   s not strictly a sculptural piece. You could put things in  here if you wanted to. It holds air real good. (Laughs) This I call     Guarding the Old Ways.    This is mostly a Plains setting. I watched a  special on George Custer and the Battle of Little Big Horn. I was  watching that, and I was listening to, I think it was Colonel Reno, and he  mentioned that coming up on to the campsite, the tipis were like blades  of grass on the prairie. And the bottom of this, these little spiky things,  represent tipis. For me, they represent tipis, and they   re guarding the old  way of hunting. The buffalo hunt. That   s what this piece represents to  me. There again, the functionality. You could actually use this as a  pitcher, if you wanted to, because it   s a big beaked pitcher.  You can see the movement of the buffalo there.  Yeah. Let me grab another one. This piece reminds me of going cane  pole fishing with my grandfather. The brown representing the Mother  Earth, dragonflies in and around the water. It sounds kind of far off, but  these little straps just remind me of talking, getting back to my  grandfather. The way he loved us. Whenever he saw us, he   d always just  hug us. That   s like him wrapping himself around us. Basically, that   s all  that piece is, just something that reminds me of my grandfather.  That   s wonderful, the dimensionality of it. The contrasting shapes.  He was always open. Whatever we were doing, he would back us up. He  was great about that.  Mel, thank you for talking to me today.  My pleasure. I hope it was worthwhile.  -------  -------  
