 L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  Today is February 26, 2011. My name is Latasha Wilson. I am with the  Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at Oklahoma State  University Library.  Also joining me today is Randy Wilson, who may  chime in with a few questions.  I am south of Altus near Hess, Oklahoma  at the home of J. L. Tucker. I will be interviewing J. L. today as part of  the Spotlighting Oklahoma oral history series. We   re here in the Red  River Valley. J. L., thank you for joining me today.  You   re welcome.  Let   s start out by having you tell me a little bit about your childhood,  about where you grew up and where you were born.  Well I was born three miles east of the Hess community on North Fork  River. My folks had a two-room shack and I was born there in 1924. My  oldest sister Blanche and I were born there. Had about an eighty acre  cotton farm and we moved from there over to what we call the home  place, near where your Dad grew up. We moved there in 1928 and went  to school at Hess until 1937 when the school was condemned. It was a  two-story stucco, brick stucco, and it wasn   t very sturdy. We merged  with the Elmer School District, which was six miles away and we went  to school at Elmer for a year. Then they condemned that school building  (laughs) and we went to school there in Elmer. The last year over there  in red brick buildings, which had been grocery stores and dry goods  stores and things. Some of the younger kids went to school in the  churches, in two communities. Then while we were doing that, they built  the school at Southside, which was exactly half way between Hess and  Elmer. I started school there in the fall of 1940. I was in the first  graduating class in 1941.  But to make a living, my dad was a farmer and us kids, of course,  worked on the farm and we chopped cotton, they called it. Chopped the  5  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  weeds out of the cotton in the summer and picked cotton or pulled bolls  that fall. That   s before they had the cotton strippers and cotton picking  machines that they have today. We had sacks behind us   ten, twelve  foot long sacks. And we   d put cotton in there and haul them up, weighed  them, dump them in wagons and use a team of mules to haul the cotton  to the gin there at Hess.  How did your parents come to this area? Were they born around here?  My dad was born about a half a mile south of the home place. He was  born near where your dad was born in a sod covered cellar. That was in  1897. He and I think a brother and a sister were born there.  And what   s his name? Your dad   s name?  Wiley. W-I-L-E-Y. Now my mother was Kate Mayo and she was born  in Tioga, Texas. The year she was six months old, the state of Texas was  giving free land to help settle this area south of here and her family  moved there in, I guess, 1903 and from Tioga, which is a long haul by  wagon. Apparently it was a very interesting trip coming up. (Laughs)  She said they, of course, had teams. They moved everything, all their  household goods, chickens, hogs, livestock. Everything they moved in a  few little wagons. She recalled they slept out at night under the stars.  The roads that they had then were strictly sand and dirt and she said the  kids didn   t ride very much. They just trotted along and played the whole  time. And I don   t know how long that might have been, 300 miles? I  suppose at least, the trip up there. So somewhere, she and Dad met up  there and they got married.  Do you know how old they were when they got married?  Oh, I think probably twenty-two. Yeah, I think. I no longer have their     one of my sisters has their wedding certificate. So I don   t know, but I  think that would be about right. My oldest sister was born in 1922, so     Why do you think your mother   s family wanted to come to this part of  Oklahoma?  Across the border there in Texas? Well, because of the free land. I think  they stayed in Texas, because  Texas  gave them 160 acres if they   d  settle over there in the sand and the sage brush and tried to farm it.  Which they did until the 1940s when they moved in to Odell   her  parents had lived  there . But, my Granddad Tucker and Grandma had  come up from Texas and they were down in   he was from Montague  County down in Texas and she was from McKinney, Texas, and they  met up somewhere. At any rate, they came here and it was for the free  6  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  land. I think the original abstract that I saw on his farm over there was  signed by Teddy Roosevelt. Back at that time, I think Teddy Roosevelt  was Secretary of Interior when he signed this and they got 160 acres of  free land here. From there,  they  gradually became owners of more  land.  So growing up, how many siblings did you have?  I had seven. I had five sisters before I got the two younger brothers and  that was quite an experience (laughs) because those five sisters all had  been as tough as boys, you know.  What was your house like? Where did you live?  We had a three-room house with the back porch screened in and a front  porch. It had a kitchen, living room and a bedroom. I slept in the living  room on what we called the daybed and the girls slept in the bedroom  with two beds in here. My parents always slept in the screened-in porch,  year round. Then when I got the two little brothers, I had a bed at the  west end of the screened in porch. My sister always said back there  during the dust storms in the    30s, not only did all the dust come through  the cracks, but the cats and the rats could run through the cracks in the  floors and the walls. And it wasn   t quite that bad but that   s not far from  the truth. That   s the way country houses were in those days.  Where were you in the order of children? Were you the     Number two, and of those children, seven of us are still alive. Four  sisters and two brothers are still living. So there are five of us in our  eighties. The other two are in their seventies.  What were some of your chores?  Well we worked in the garden, we milked the cows. As soon as I got old  enough to carry a milk bucket to the barn, I fed the cows and mules and  horses. I fed the chickens. That was from a very small age and as soon as  you got up to about ten years of age, the boys and the girls all went to  work in the fields chopping cotton and pulling bolls and those things.  And by twelve, you were hopeful that your dad would let you ride the  plow and quit doing this so-called manual work, but that was his job so  you kept chopping cotton and pulling bolls, but all the chores had to be  done.  As I told you before we started, what I   m telling you is probably not true  because old folks have a tendency to forget and if you don   t think so,  just go to one of your school reunions and see the appearance of people  7  L. Wilson  Tucker  now. But at any rate, my dad called me   Mom and Dad had an alarm  clock set and it went off at 4:30 every morning of the week, year round.  Dad would holler,    Boy  Get up  It   s time to build fires.    We had a pot-bellied  stove, a wood stove in the living room to heat the house. They  had a kitchen stove in the kitchen, of course. We were ahead of a lot of  people in those days because we had a kerosene cook stove. Most people  were still cooking with wood and always thought that would be great to  have a wood stove because they had to regulate the heat in the oven to  bake bread and had to regulate the heat of that wood and fire from the  wood to fry the food. We ate mostly fried foods. We always said that   s  probably why my Granddad Tucker lived to be ninety-four was because  every morning he had fried ham or fried bacon and then the grease, they  would fry his eggs and then they   d fry some potatoes in that and then he  had his biscuits and jelly and coffee. When you finished, if you wanted  to do things the proper way, you used a biscuit to sop up the grease off  of the plate and eat that. And that   s probably what killed him when he  was ninety-four was eating all that grease. (Laughter)  Do you remember your mom canning?  Oh yes. They were always canning and I hated that worst of all because  you were so confined. The children, we would pick peas, beans and corn  out of the field   field corn, not like this sweet corn we have today. And  of course, then you had to sit there and you   d shuck the corn, silk the  corn and could not leave any of the tassels on the corn   that had to be  cleaned. And you would sit there all day and do this and then you would  shell the peas out and snap the beans as they called it, and can beets,  cucumbers from pickles. Then in June, we always went to the river and  picked the plums to make jams.  We had a cellar near the house that had shelves, many wooden shelves  in it and those were filled. Now to feed a family this size, you   d put up  more than one hundred jars each summer of canned goods because you  had to get through to the next summer. We seldom   we were very self-sufficient,  I think would be a way to say this. About the only thing we  bought at the grocery store was salt, sugar, pepper and flour. We, at  times, tried grinding our own corn to make corn meal, but that wasn   t a  very good practice. But very few things we bought.  In the fall and the winter time, Dad and his neighbors   Dad would  always raise five big, fat hogs. They   d weigh about 500 pounds each and  had lots of fat on them. We   d butcher those when wintertime got there  and get up at four o   clock in the morning and get that fire going under  the vat and butcher the hogs and made sausage. The bacon, the ham and  the sugar cured the ham and we had a small, one room building out  there. So those hams and that sausage hanging in there in that one-room  8  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  smokehouse, by the next summer, they were not only rank, they were  rancid, and that was pretty bitter. But that and fried chicken was it. If  you wanted meat, you ate that. And of course, living on a farm there   s  meat, so     Did you ever eat fish?  Uh, no. Once in awhile   you see, back in the    30s, rivers went dry. You  could walk for half a mile right down the river bed before you would see  another little puddle of water somewhere. That was because of the  droughts back in the    30s. Then in the early 1940s when they began to  irrigate the cotton grounds south of Altus, the runoff from the fields  where they irrigated started flowing down the river, and now there   s  water in the rivers year round. But at that time, I would go down and fish  with cotton string on an old hook, but the only fish I ever caught were  four-inch channel catfish. There   s fish in the rivers now, but we didn   t  have any in those days.  Would your mom make all your clothes?  She made my shirts, but she made all the girls    clothes. I recently saw  Jean Shepard who was from Oklahoma, a country singer. She   s in her  eighties and she was telling that when she grew up in Oklahoma, that  she thought Purina Mills was probably the world   s largest clothing  manufacturer because everything that they wore had Purina on it. She  said that her drawers had Purina printed right across the backside.  (Laughter) I remember all the girls, their underwear was made of Purina  feed sacks. You know, you   d buy feed   we didn   t, we grew the feed.  But somehow Mom would buy, I guess from the grocery store at Hess,  they would get some of these sacks in and they were clean. They   d wash  them in lye soap and they were sure clean then (laughs), but she made all  the girls   all the girls that went to school had on their bloomers,  underwear were made of Purina feed sacks. They got to where they  would put the sacks of flour and feed in print, with printed things on  them so the shirts, the blouses the girls were wearing, the skirts would be  make of feed sacks.  What was bath time like with eight children?  (Laughs) It was a number two galvanized washtub and you didn   t just  get the one wash for you. One got a bath and the next one used the same  tub. You might have washed all   the children got a bathtub because you  only used two-part tubs of water.  Did the girls get to go first?  9  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  I don   t recall. Mostly Dad and I would get off work and during the  summer we would go to the river and get our baths. While we were  doing that, the girls were at the house getting their bath and often did  that.  And did you have an outhouse?  Yes, yes everyone did in those days. We did not have electricity until  1939. We didn   t have running water. We hauled the water in oak  wooden barrels. Vinegar came in those and the stores would sell the  vinegar out in a gallon at a time to the farm families. When it was  empty, I don   t remember where they sold those fifty-five gallon wooden  barrels. We, for example would have two of those on the back of a  wagon, with horses, and we went over   Granddad had a place east of  Hess on the river with a pitcher pump and you would pump the water  out of the ground into a bucket. You poured it in those until they were  filled and brought it home and you   d go and get water out of there. Now,  you hoped you didn   t have to do that because we had a cistern. Water  that ran off the roof had   eaves ran into a rain gutter, down the gutters  into the down spout and into the cistern. I was not really fond of that,  prohibitive, but that was our drinking water for most of the year and then  you had a pulley there that went into the cement. That was on our back  porch and we   d draw the water up out of there, two gallon bucket. That  was for dishes, drinking, ice tea, coffee. Everything came from that  source, including bath water.  Who was in charge of killing the chickens?  Well, that was my job being the oldest boy. It was my job, but Mama   I  had to catch them. Mama butchered and cooked them. One of the worst  things I remember was eating bologna sandwiches. Taking sandwiches  to school, day after day, week after week and then I got up there about  the time I got in high school, Mama came up with a recipe for canning  chicken. Put the hog lard in these quart jars and put chicken thighs,  chicken breast in there and then she would can these, can many jars at  that. Then, during school, every so often she   d thaw out one of those  jars, strip the meat off the chicken, off of the bones and use that to make  sandwiches for school and that was a big improvement over bologna or  the rancid ham.  How would you keep things cool?  During the summer months, the ice man came by. He had a Model-T  Ford and an old bed, like a pick-up might have today, and he would have  big blocks of ice out back, and the water was just dripping off wherever  he went. He would come by our house and all the neighbors around I  10  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  R. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  think once a week. Mama would take a fifty pound chunk of ice and  he   d take that ice and pick the chunk off and then he had the tongs. He   d  carry that and he had a place in the northeast side of the house where the  sun didn   t get to it and put it in there. That would last for a few days  except during extreme summer heat, so you could keep milk and butter,  some of that out there.  Did you churn your own butter?  Oh yes. That was another chore I didn   t like because again, it was very  confining. Sometimes you could churn butter and get it done in short  periods of time, but others it seemed   maybe I was wanting to go play  in the yard or something, but it seemed like an eternity sitting there  churning that butter.  Did you ever get to make ice cream?  When we went over to Doc Boyd   s house and Aubrey   s, your  grandfather   s. I went to their house and they would make ice cream on  the Fourth of July and we would often go over there. That was a lot of  fun because they   d also have Nehi strawberry and orange and grape  drinks. I always looked forward to that. Every summer we   d go over  there and we   d have ice cream. Oh, it was great having that ice cream in  the summer time.  Was it vanilla ice cream?  Vanilla ice cream always. I didn   t know there was any other kind.  Talking again about baths, we used to go across the river over near  Tipton to Uncle Doc Boyd and Aunt Ethel   s. That would be your great-grandma  and your grandpa was Aubrey Wilson. So we   d go to their  house and they had good underground water and a pump and they had a  bathhouse out there and they   d   I don   t know how they got that pump  up into the tank above this     Windmill.  Oh yes, a windmill pumped it up there. We looked forward to going over  there and we could get a bath, a shower. They had a shower head fixed  up there and it was great, but Aubrey Wilson would get you in there and  then he   d manage to turn on the cold water some way (laughs) and listen  to you scream when that started running. It was coming straight from the  underground and it was ninety outside and this cold water running, but  we did that.  And he was your cousin?  11  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  Yes, he was my cousin and a great human being.  You were talking about Fourth of July, getting together with friends.  Were there other specific holidays where you would get together?  At Christmas we always went to Granddad and Grandma Tucker   s.  Christmas Eve we were over there and Granddad   s extended family  would be there. They would give   you drew names, so there would be a  present for each of the children. Adults didn   t get it, but I remember,  again, it was during the Depression era and this one year I got this  rubber ball. I don   t know how old I was, maybe six? It was about the  size of a basketball and very flimsy and Uncle Doc Boyd, we were  sitting around on the floor watching people and he went to sit on it. He  was a large man and when he did, it exploded. (Laughs) My mother was  unhappy with him for years. That probably was the only thing I was  getting for Christmas (laughter) and he sat on it.  I remember another time we would put newspapers out on the floor and  us kids would write the name on the papers and put your shoes there and  sign it, so you would know which one was yours. And this one year I got  a red fire truck. A fun little toy, don   t you know. And it had a battery in  it. We flipped the switch and this light would come on and oh   I never  had a toy like that  We were going to my Grandpa and Grandma Mayo   s  that day for Christmas day, and as we started out the door, my Dad took  his foot and gently rolled the truck, my little toy, out of the way. It ran  into the wall and busted the light. (Laughs) Strange how you remember  those things, but when you just get one toy anyway and didn   t get  usually very much     What are some of things you would do for entertainment in the 1930s?  Games?  Same thing your daddy did, we   d play a lot of ball, and we didn   t have  real bats. We just used a piece of wood and my sisters were all athletic.  They were very thin and wire and we would play ball for hours. But  instead of baseball or softball, we   d have a rubber ball of some kind and  the bases of course were whatever you   d found, a piece of wood, but that  was our entertainment.  Did your parents talk about politics much?  No, no. My dad never, ever would mention politics. I don   t,    til this day.  Those are things that I can do nothing about, so we don   t discuss them in  my house.  12  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  Did you have a radio?  We got the first radio in 1939 when they brought the electricity in. We  could get one station and that was KWFT in Wichita Falls.  Did Roosevelt still have his Fireside Chats at that point?  Well, he didn   t start those until 19   he was elected in    36, wasn   t he? Or     32. Yes. I know he did, but I didn   t listen to them. We didn   t listen to  the radio much. In the morning when I   d get up, I   d turn it on and hear  some country songs out of Wichita Falls, but that was mostly it. And  then Dad turned it on at noon to hear the news and weather, but there  wasn   t much radio in those days.  Do you remember home demonstration agents coming to your home?  No, the home demonstration agent at that time was over at school, but I  don   t remember one  coming . They all talked about it, but I just don   t  remember one coming to the house. My sisters may, but I don   t.  Were there any railroad tracks near your house?  No, the railroad went through Elmer. Back in the    20s, Hess was a  thriving community and there were five school busses to take the kids to  and from that school there in Hess. It was a two-story stucco building  and then when the droughts and the Depression hit and the farmers  began to go broke, they not only couldn   t pay their bills, they couldn   t  find food. That   s when the big migration to California started. By the  mid-   30s there used to be a house on every eighty acres here in this area.  By the mid-   30s there was a house about every mile or so, and today my  nearest neighbor is a mile and a half from here. Pretty sparse out here  now.  So would hobos or gypsies come through?  Not here. Not in the Hess community. I understand they did over at  Elmer, which was six miles away, because the railroad line went through  there and I would hear them talk about it. But back in the    20s I  remember the Indian Reservation was over by Fort Sill. The Indians, I  don   t know and I don   t think any of us knew at that time, they would  walk from Fort Sill to Quanah, Texas which is what? Oh, it   s about  thirty miles west of here and Fort Sill being sixty miles to the east, they  would come through walking two, three or four at a time and they   d  walk over to Quanah. Then a few days later they would be going back.  They were just walking through the fields and pastures and wading the  rivers.  13  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  So you would see them?  Yes, often in the late    20s and early    30s, you   d see the Indians coming  and going.  Did people talk to them?  Some, most of them   not all of them spoke good English. The whites  were so afraid of the Indians at that time, don   t you know. Some of them  passed through, but no hobos. We just heard about hobos. They usually  followed the train lines.  Did you know many people that went to California?  Oh yes, yes. Many people from around here went out there. The ones  who thought they were fortunate were the ones who were able to save  their farms and stay on here and keep farming. The others in order to  have something to eat went and loaded up all their possessions from top  to bottom of a Model-T or Model-A Ford and went California. And of  course, so many of those broke down along the roads out there in deserts  on their way out.  Do you remember the government coming in and purchasing the cattle?  Oh yes, very well. I don   t remember the exact year, but I can remember  when they did. They came in and slaughtered the cows. You could  designate certain animals and they came down to our house and  Granddad Tucker   s and others there. They paid twenty dollars for a full  grown cow and ten dollars for a calf and they slaughtered them, they  killed them, but you weren   t able to eat that meat. Perfectly good meat,  but they were doing this to   there were too many cattle and the market  was so depressed for cattle that you couldn   t profit, so they were killing  them off.  I remember the day they did ours and many of our neighbors around  were there. They didn   t have any cattle. These were poor people and  they were wanting that meat so bad too, but the government agent who  was in charge of this wouldn   t let them take any.  So they would burn the carcass?  Yes, or leave it to rot down in the river.  Did they have rabbit drives?  14  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  R. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  Oh yes, how did you know about that? I didn   t think anyone would  know about that. We had so many rabbits that they would destroy the  wheat crops. Jack rabbits, cottontails   it was just unbelievable how  many rabbits there were. So they would stretch chicken wire with one-inch  mesh, they   d stretch along one end and one side of the wheat field  and then us boys in high school, they   d bring us over on the bus and  we   d wind up there with many farmers and start driving them toward  these nets.  With sticks?  Yes, well I had a stick and we killed off the rabbits.  How would you kill them?  With the stick. You   d beat them to death, but they were just  unbelievable.  And then would you eat them?  No. You know, I believe the correct name is tularemia is what the  rabbits had in those days.  Oh, rabbit fever.  Rabbit fever. I think if you were well-educated you said    tularemia.    At  which I   m probably mispronouncing it, but rabbit fever. They had big  sores on them, so we didn   t eat them.  Were you familiar with WPA projects or CCC projects?  Yes, yes. They did great jobs, great work. You can still see signs over  there, bridges and things still standing in this community, built by the  WPA. I think some of those will be standing another hundred years, very  well built. Then you get up in other areas like a little ways north of here,  the CCC, Civilian Conservation Corps for young men. They built a lot  of trails and bridges and things up in the mountains north of Altus and  those are still there today.  Was there much dust that stirred up during the Dust Bowl?  Oh yes, yes there was. I felt so sorry for the women. They   d get up in the  morning   those dust storms were a real mess. They just kept coming,  and you   d get up in the morning and all the dishes would be covered  with a layer of dust. She had to clean all those before she could ever start  cooking. The pots and pans full of dust, the dishes you ate off of,  15  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  everything had to be cleaned before she could start cooking breakfast  and before you could eat. It was on the sheets and the covers.  I told you earlier about sleeping out on the porch, the screen porch, year  round. In the winter time when we had snow, it would filter through this  fine mesh and you   d wake up in the morning and you might have two or  three inches of snow on the covers and you   re sleeping under them. Well  you shook that   you took it outside and shook that snow off outside, so  when it melted, it didn   t go out down into the bedding.  Were your covers usually quilts your mother made?  Quilts. Mother made those quilts, yeah. We couldn   t afford blankets, but  lots of quilts, good quilts. Didn   t have air conditioning or indoor heat.  (Laughs)  Did you ever get lost in the dust storms when you were walking to  school?  No, apparently I managed not to do that, but I know there were times in  those dust storms, there were two different times   those old Model-A  Fords on the road which were dirt roads, you know, and dirt fields on  either side and the front and back and they ran head on (laughs) into  each other because they couldn   t see each other twenty feet apart, you  know. And even if they had they didn   t have any brakes on those  anyway. But, that was the main problem was trying to drive down the  roads during the dust storm.  Did you have many tornadoes come through?  No   yes, I guess so, but they didn   t have any rank. I remember once  being out in the yard and I looked back to the southwest and there was  this tornado. Now it was churning dirt and it was coming and I ran in the  house screaming and I just a little child. I run in the house screaming to  my mother and sisters to get in the cellar and this one sister is saying,     Oh, J. L. just wanting attention or something. There   s no tornado.    So I  never   I just went back outside and went in the cellar by myself, but I  think that   s the only one I ever saw. We went to that cellar many times  in bad storms because when a storm was approaching, Dad would be  very   he   d stay up at night and watch for a storm at night time and if it  was getting serious out he   d call us and we   d all bail out of bed and run  across the yard barefooted and go down that old dirt cellar with the  scorpions and other unfriendly visitors and stay in there until it was over.  They tell the story about they had a cellar at school down south of here,  Forks of the River, and that had been built by the WPA in the early days,  I guess.  16  R. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  South Burns?  Was it Glendale or what was the name of that place? So, at any rate,  went there one time and went to the cellar. There was supposed to be a  tornado coming here or something. So when they left and went home  someone says,    Where   s Joyce?    or whatever the child   s name was and  (laughs) they had left her in the cellar. That story, we often heard. I don   t  know how true it is.  Would you generally go to town on Saturday evenings?  Never. And I remember how much I wanted to go, and Dad   Saturdays  we worked in the fields, no exceptions. Some of our neighbors would  drive by. I   m going to tell you this, whether people like it or not. They   d  drive by and they   d wave to us. That would fry my skin. They were  heading to town to go to a movie or something. And this one time I  complained to my dad because we never got to go. He said,    Boy, we   ll  have our farm and they may not always have theirs. Just let them go.     And you know what? He was right. He was right.  Now, speaking of eating, at some point there (I was probably    this was  probably in 1937) we took some calves to the stockyard in Oklahoma  City. My dad   s brother   I don   t know whose trucks were involved, but  we took two truckloads and hey, that wasn   t very many. Those trucks  were probably old Model-A Fords with kind of a rack on the back, don   t  you know. And that was 135 miles to the stockyards. My dad was riding  in one truck with one driver and I was in there with my Uncle Bud and  the other driver, and we stopped over on the highway. We stopped to get  supper at probably around Chickasha, and there was a roadside  hamburger place there. I had never had a hamburger. Thirteen years old.  I had heard of it, but I had never tasted one. I had never had ketchup, but  I had heard about ketchup.  So we go in there and I get to order a hamburger and my Uncle Bud was  there next to me, and I see this bottle over there that   s red. There was red  stuff in it, and I said to him   I just knew it would be ketchup. I asked  him to pass that to me and he did, and never said a thing. I shook that on  my hamburger and I took a bite and it set my mouth on fire  And so I  thought, well. I put some more on there, and he just watched me and oh,  it was hot. Finally I picked it up and looked at it, Tabasco Sauce. Well  when you   re a kid and you   ve never had anything like that in your life,  it   s ten times as hot as it would be for me today, you see? I was very  upset and he said,    Well, I was just teaching you to read things before  you eat it.    And I said,    Well can I have another hamburger?    He said,     No, that one cost a nickel. That   s it. You   ve had your supper.    I learned  17  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  a valuable lesson. Ever since then, I learned to read what I was eating.  (Laughs)  We were talking about your grandparents some and working for your  grandpa. What do you remember about that?  Well I didn   t work for Granddad very much, but I remember   I think it  was 1936. At that point he would have been seventy-seven and was a  tall, very skinny old man. He had several hundred acres there and it was  all farmed with horses and mules, of course. And this one time, I was  twelve years old, and he asked me if I would harrow the cotton field  northwest of his house, eighty acre field there. Had the cotton planted  down in the furrows and walked behind the horse and mules, four horses  and mules pulling harrows, which were quite wide, and I   d walk along  behind them. Well, I trotted behind them. It was in the summer. I  remember it was terribly hot and these rows were a quarter of a mile  long. By ten o   clock that first morning that I was out there, Granddad  came out and those horses, their sides were just  heaving . They were  panting terribly, the sweat dripping off of them. He was furious  My  Grandpa was furious  I was trying to make a good hand because I was  reared that if you go work, you ought to work. And I was trotting, trying  to get this done. He was going to pay me twenty-five cents an hour and  he said,    You   re killing my horses. When you make a round, you stop in  this heat and you let them cool off before you go again.    He wasn   t  concerned about this boy who was trotting behind him, but he didn   t  want his horses dying, I guess. (Laughs) So at any rate, instead of doing  that eighty acres all in one day, it took me two or three days because I  had stop and let those horses get a rest.  So, was it just you and your siblings working the cotton fields or did you  have any help?  We did everything until the fall of the year when the cotton bolls were  ready to be pulled. Granddad always had one Negro couple who stayed  over there by his house year-round and helped them, because he farmed  many more acres than we did. By then, my dad   s brothers and sisters  were all grown and out on their own except for Dad   s youngest brother,  and there was too much ground for him to take care of, so they had help  year-round. But in the fall, Dad and Bud would hire two Model A  trucks. They would go to Hugo, Oklahoma, down in the southeastern  corner, and they would bring up two truckloads of Negros, men and  women. Sometimes there would be teenage kids that would come with  them. They would be packed in the back of these like a bunch of cattle,  in the back of those trucks. And you know, there were no stops along the  way. I don   t know what they did when they needed to use bathroom  facilities. They would come up and they would pull bolls until the crop  18  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  R. Wilson  Tucker  was out in November. Then they would pay them, and load them up and  take them back to Hugo. This went on each year, and they were still  doing this in the early    40s when I left here. I went to the service in  World War II, and I don   t know what they did after that.  Where would they stay?  Actually, we had a smokehouse and some would stay there, but my  granddad Tucker, he had several shacks over there. We   re talking about  shacks, and there would be several families that would stay in those.  Do you have any idea how much they would get paid?  No, I don   t remember. I think it was something like   it wasn   t much.  You got paid by the number of pounds or bolls you   d pull, and it  couldn   t have been much because I think that the cotton then was only  bringing four or six cents a pound when you sold it. So, how could  you   you couldn   t be paying much, could you? Just a few   I don   t  know. The conditions weren   t good.  Then, we didn   t have very good crops so there weren   t a lot of bolls  there to be gathered, so you had to go in there and trot to, almost pulling  bolls from morning till night in order to make any money doing this. I  know that later I heard in the    40s, a good hand could pull 1,000 pounds  a day. I remember back then if someone, if he would pull 400 pounds, he  was doing good because it was so sparse, the plains were.  So you would sell the cotton in the boll?  Take it up to Hess and they would dump this into wagons and haul it up  to the gin at Hess. Hess had two gins at one time there, and one burned  down. You   d take it up there and drive it under this big suction tube and  it took it in. It separated the burrs from the cotton and it separated the  seed. The burrs went one place, seed the other and the bales of cotton  came out. These were bales that were handled by hand. They weighed  500 pounds. So they had a couple of burley hands that were dragging  these bales out and they   d roll them off in the back of an old Model-A  pick-up type and haul them out in the yard and kick them off out there.  Someone would come along with a bigger truck and haul them away. I  think they   ve always gone to Houston from here, from this area.  Do you remember the burr smoke? The burning of the burrs?  I don   t remember what happened to the burrs back then. The seed was  saved. For one thing, dad would save the cotton seed and we   d store that  in the loft of the barn. We   d feed some every morning to the cows,  19  L. Wilson  Tucker  R. Wilson  Tucker  double hand full for each cow, and it was so full of oil and protein. Then  you   d have seed to plant for the next year, but I don   t remember what  they were doing with the burrs in those days. Later on, I knew they  began putting them in the pasture and the cows would manage to eat a  lot of seeds that was still left in the burrs. The cows would eat those  clean and look pretty good.  Do you have any stories about your grandparents or that they shared  with you about anything?  Well, I know that my Granddad Tucker was born in Joplin,  Missouri . I  was there one time talking to him. He was a quiet man, but this one time  he was talking to me and I asked him about his parents. He said that his  dad left    So my Granddad Tucker was born in 1858, just before the  Civil War. He said when he was first born that his dad went to the gold  fields, and I don   t know whether this would have been to California or to  Colorado or to South Dakota. But he went to the gold fields and was  going to make a fortune and come back, and they never heard from him  again. And then I think when he was two years old, his mother died and  he was orphaned. And his mother, who was Jane Osborne, had a brother  who was an old bachelor farmer and Granddad moved with him and he  raised Granddad. Granddad said times were tough. When he got up to be  twelve years old, an uncle on his father   s side, his father   s brother, was  moving his family down to Montague County, Texas and Granddad  went with him and lived with him until he was, I think, twenty-six. They  were farmers and ranchers down there.  Then Grandma  Roberts , she was reared in McKinney, Texas, north of  Dallas. Somewhere they got together along the way. At any rate, they  came up here for some of this free land in 19   well they came here  though, I think in 1888, long before. So I don   t know what they were     times were tough, don   t you know (laughs) because they moved into that  cellar over there with the sod roof, or thatched roof of some kind.  How about Granny Tucker, her .22, tobacco chewing, rabbit hunting  and all that?  Both of my grandmas dipped snuff. It   s what they did in those days. I  can remember each of them, they   d see a woman smoking and they  would just have a fit while they   re sitting there dipping their snuff.     Those hussies  Look at them, smoking cigarettes.    Well, at any rate,  my Granny Tucker was a very small woman. She was probably four feet  eleven and very slender, but she could shoot a rifle. She had this .22  Winchester pump. I remember one time when I was ten years old or so,  somewhere in that era, she and I got on a horse. I rode behind her and  we rode over to North Fork River, in a pasture over there, and she was  20  R. Wilson  Tucker  shooting cottontails. She wasn   t a young woman, you understand, and  could still shoot like that.  They had a screened-in back porch, just was great there, that old house,  and they lived a half a mile north of us. They said that (I was never  there) the crows would come in here in the winter time by the hundreds  of thousands. Hundreds of thousands   just thick. In the spring, by  March, they   d go back north. They said Granny would scatter some  crumbs and corn out in the yard, sit there on that back porch, screened-in  porch, and the crows would go out there and she   d sit there with that .22  and pick them off. And speaking of these crows, they got to be   they  was filthy. Those salt cedars there a quarter of a mile northeast of our  house down in the river bottom, that was   the government wildlife  department estimated there was 150,000 crows that roosted in that one  area there in the salt cedars.  I was probably fourteen and this one night we   re sitting at the supper  table and I thought the house had blown up. Everything in that house  rattled and the dishes. I didn   t know what in the world  was going on .  Dad knew, because the federal wildlife department had come by and told  the farmers what they were going to do and said,    Don   t tell the kids.     They went down and had strung wires throughout there, miles and miles  of wire and attached sticks of dynamite, just sticks of dynamite all  through there. They set that off and don   t you know, that rattled houses.  So Dad says,    Come on, boy.    It was just getting dark and we took a  kerosene lantern, the only one we had, and we went down there.  Neighbors came from all around. We went down through there and there  was just crows, the ground was just covered with dead crows. We went  through with a stick and went to killing the crippled ones, getting rid of  them. And this one, understand it   s night, and this one I keep hitting it  and it   s not coming out of trees. Someone said,    You   re hitting a stick of  dynamite that hasn   t gone off      At any rate, they got rid of many, many crows. Now the reason they did  this, those crows were destroying everything they could find to eat,  crops of all kinds and wheat. The disease   apparently the chickens were  all becoming   farmers were losing their chickens from the disease.  When you put that many together in a small area, you know there has to  be a lot of disease. So got rid of a lot of crows that were     I had heard Granny Tucker would shoot flies off the screen door with  that .22.  Yeah, the story was that Granny Tucker with that .22 would shoot a fly  off the screen, and I believe it because I saw her shoot sparrows out of  21  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  the trees out there at a considerable distance. That little old woman had  to be tough, didn   t she? The way they grew up.  So when you were sixteen, you set off for Wichita Falls with hopes to  join the Army?  Yeah, we won   t talk much about that, but two friends and I went down  and hitchhiked to Wichita Falls. Well, there didn   t appear to be much  future, don   t you understand, so we cut school one day. After all, the  Army was paying twenty-one dollars a month and this was more than we  ever had any hopes of earning. So we hitchhiked to Wichita Falls to join  the Army. We got down there and the recruiter took one look at me and  said I couldn   t be a day over fourteen. So he wouldn   t have any part of  that. Lonnie Briscoe, he thought maybe he was sixteen, which he was,  and Bruce Hardcastle was with me. They thought maybe he was  seventeen.  So at any rate, they told us to go back home. Now that was seventy-five  miles away. The roads weren   t the best in those days. So we were  hitchhiking back home and we got up to Vernon, Texas, just about dark.  I remember we had fifteen cents between us, fifteen cents, and this  terrible snow storm struck. We got out to Pease River, which was on the  north side of Vernon, and we got down under that cement bridge. One of  the boys had some matches with him and we tried to keep the fire going  under there that night, but the wind was blowing fiercely out of the north  and was whipping us around. By the next morning, we got up and we  didn   t have any choice. No motels, we didn   t have any money. So we  walked home. From there to Hess to our houses was about thirty miles,  and we just walked all day. But before we left, there was a service  station right there at the north end of the bridge where we spent the  night. We stopped in there and we each got a five cent chocolate  Hershey bar and we had that. That was our food I guess for the two days  that we were gone. We walked home in that and got home just about  dark at night.  And how deep was the snow?  The snow down there in the   I imagine it was ten inches of snow. But  mostly the wind, the way it was blowing, the road was relatively clear of  snow, the road way. But it piled up in the ditches and the fields. That  summer came, and I still had scabs on my forehead, my ears, my nose,  my hands, fingers from frostbite. But we survived it.  So what year did you graduate high school again?  1941.  22  L. Wilson  Tucker  And then what did you do after that?  Well, I went up to Oklahoma A M. Vernon Wilson was my roommate  and we were going to try and make the baseball team when spring got  there. But the counselor asked me what I was planning to major in and I  told him I wanted to be a vet. He looked at my transcript and he said,     You don   t have any chemistry background at all.       No, what   s  chemistry?    I asked. He said that was like science, multiplied a few  times. And I said,    Well I can learn anything.    He said,    Well I think  you could.    So he let me try. Now you remember, World War II started  and the Japs bombed us in Pearl Harbor in December of that year. So  Vernon and I, after the first semester there were sitting in our room and  of course I have an F in chemistry, terribly embarrassed. We had worked  to pay our way. Our folks didn   t have money to send us up there, so we  had to pay for room and board. We had washed dishes and cleaned the  tables at a boarding house there. I wish I still remembered the name of  the nice lady who had that boarding house. She had a daughter about my  age. Room and board, I believe, was thirty-three dollars a month, but she  paid us the equivalent of twenty-five cents an hour. We didn   t get paid.  That was applied toward our room and board and we washed enough  dishes to set tables and things that we each could earn our room and  board.  Well at any rate, after that first semester we   re sitting there that day and  we   re both disappointed in ourselves. Our folks had not paid for school,  but we didn   t want anyone to know that we   d failed at something. I said,     Let   s go kill the Japs.    Which was okay to say at that time, don   t you  understand. And so we got up and we hitchhiked from Stillwater to  Wichita Falls, Texas, because he  Vernon  said that he had a cousin who  was a Master Sergeant in the Marines and he was their recruiter, chief  recruiter in Wichita Falls. We went down there and took all of our  belongings in very small suitcases and with our suitcase went in thinking  they will take us and we can just go right on. We go in and see his  cousin and he said,    Now Vernon, I can take you because I promised  you a year or so ago I would and you   re kinfolk, so said I could do it, but  I can   t take J. L.    Well I was terribly disappointed because I was a very  healthy farm boy and I had failed chemistry and here I was being  rejected by the Marines. He said he had 3,200 on the waiting list. Now,  you see, when the war started after we were bombed, people went by the  hundreds of thousands across the country to sign up. So, I didn   t go in as  a Marine, and that   s the last time I saw Vernon. I walked across the hall  and there was the Navy recruiter. They were happy to take me. So, at  any rate, that   s how I got out of Oklahoma.  Could we go back a ways with this? I think it was in 1937, Jeff Briscoe  23  R. Wilson  L. Wilson  Tucker  was the cashier of the First National Bank in Altus. In those days, the  cashier ran the bank. No question. Not the president, the cashier.  Everything was under him. He often came out. He was from Hess and he  would come out and he and Dad would wolf hunt. So one Saturday Dad  and I were up there at his house, for what reason, I don   t know. I said,    I  have to use the bathroom.    And he said,    Well you just go in the house  there and go down the hall and there   s a light switch there.    I had never  seen indoor plumbing. I had never seen a telephone in a house. I had  never seen electric lights in a house. I came out of there thinking, you  know, these bankers have to be rich. (Laughs)  So when I got out of the service in California, I think it was by the next  day I was down at Bank of America in San Francisco at the head office  applying for a job. A woman who was interviewing me said,    Well we  only have the one opening right now.    At that time, that was the world   s  biggest bank and probably is still the second biggest today. She said,     The only thing we have open is in the international department. You  think you   d like that?    I had no idea what the international department  was. Now I never pretended to be smart, but I must have had a great  personality because they hired me and put me in there. After a few  weeks, they were amazed that I could pick this up so soon. I   m talking  about fractions, from sixty-fourths to whole numbers and that was pretty  simple. So at any rate, my career was in international banking.  Granddad Tucker helped you out there. He was a good finance guy.  How long were you in San Francisco?  I was there for two years and I married, had one baby daughter. They  said,    How would you like an overseas assignment? We   re going to be  opening offices in Shanghai, Tokyo, around the world.    And that was  almost unheard of then, you know. Yeah, that   s just what I wanted. I, of  course, was still not too fond of the Japanese, but I guess that I thought if  I   d go out there, then maybe I could help cement some relationships, I  really felt then. So, I took the assignment in Tokyo. That was in the  beginning of 1948. After three years then, I got to come home on  vacation and I   d been home about three months, and had just turned  twenty-seven years of age. I got a phone call from headquarters in San  Francisco, they had found me. They said,    Things have really gone to  pot out there and we need you to go back.    They said,    You   re the only  guy that got along with the GI, the generals, the Japanese and  everybody. So could you cut the vacation short and go back?    Well I  wasn   t that big a dummy. I knew I had pretty good pull.    Yeah, I want to  be a full officer of the bank and an entitled manager.    We had 106  employees out there. And finally they said okay. So I was the youngest  manager, the youngest officer at that time that Bank of America had ever  24  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  R. Wilson  had. I don   t know whether that record still stands or not. But, at any rate,  for an old boy from the cotton patch in Oklahoma, who didn   t have  much of an education, I was pretty good at arithmetic. And as I said, I  must of have had a personality.  But, eventually the banks in California went together and they set up a  program with the University of California at Berkeley. These major  banks could select four people each year to go get a degree and I  eventually got a master   s degree from the University of California-  Berkeley. What we would do, three afternoons a week they had the  program there in San Francisco, the instructors came over in San  Francisco and we went there. My degree was in banking and finance.  Everything from finance to psychiatry.  I remember the course in psychiatry very well and this might be of  interest. What I remember most about it was the ink blot test. You drop  the ink on this piece of cardboard or whatever it was and you opened it  up and tell them what you saw. What do you think I saw? The most  perfect pair of cowboy chaps I had ever seen. What do you see? Well the  others had seen butterflies or moths or wasps. I said chaps. Those fools  in there with me going to school, they   re in their thirties and they didn   t  know what a pair of chaps was. So at any rate, I saw chaps and I still can  picture a pair of chaps. They were pretty fuzzy, you understand. At any  rate, I finally got a degree.  And when did you retire?  I  retired from banking  in 1974.  My first wife had died, after a long  illness. I eventually remarried, and started a new family. For a number of  years I worked as finance manager for a friend of mine at his GMC  distributorship, and finally retired in 1989. I   ve gotten by just fine.  Is that when you moved back to Oklahoma?  I came back here. I never outgrew Hess, Oklahoma. I   ve lived in San  Francisco, Los Angeles, Tokyo, but I always wanted to come back  home. So by 1989 I told my children, they were scattered from  California to Kansas City, Missouri, Florida. I said,    I can   t live where  all of you do. I   m going back to Hess, Oklahoma, where I grew up. I   ve  got a house there and you   ll just have to come and visit.     That   s the way  it   s worked out. Now my oldest son retired from IBM several years ago  and they bought a house over east of Tipton and have a few acres there.  He and his wife live there. I   m pretty sure the reason they did this was so  they could look after me, but he has a hard time keeping up with me.  You probably look after them.  25  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  L. Wilson  Tucker  They wouldn   t want me to say that I look after them, of course, but  except for the fact that I lost my eyesight, I   m very active for this age.  People tell me that I   ll tear down barbwire fence in the morning just so  I   ll have something to do for that afternoon when I rebuild it. And that   s  about the truth.  Well having lived several places, what does Oklahoma mean to you?  Well, I don   t know about most people, but it   s my birthplace. I came  back here   I   ve been here now for twenty-one years. Over twenty-one  years. If I go away, I never lock my doors. I wouldn   t think about  locking it. It   d insult the neighbors, I think. That   s the kind of neighbors  I have here and we look after each other and I wanted to come back to  that kind of atmosphere. I can no longer see well enough to drive up to  town. I drive these dirt roads and scare my neighbors to death, I think,  but someone always takes me grocery shopping or takes me in  to town   for those things. I have a woman over in Elmer who   s come over for  twenty years now and she does my washing and ironing and she does  most of my shopping and those things. It works out very well.  Can you think of any more stories or anything I haven   t asked you about  that you   d like to share?  Well, I hadn   t thought about this. You know, I told you in the beginning  that they say half of what us old folks tell is untrue because our memory  fades along the way. (Laughs) But, of course, we remember those days a  lot better than we do last month. I suppose that would be true because  we don   t have anyone to say we were wrong.  A question we generally like to end on is whenever history is written,  what would you like it to say about you?  Why didn   t you ask me that before we started this so I could have been  thinking about it? I don   t know, I   m true to my birth right. I like where I  am. I like the people, I like the family and I   m not a bad guy. I didn   t say  I was a good one, just not a bad one. (Laughter)  Well thank you so much for letting me talk with you today.  Latasha, you   re quite welcome. I   ve enjoyed visiting with you.  -------  -------  
