 Simpson  Hunt  Today is May 27, 2011. My name is Lynne Simpson, and I am on the  faculty of the Oklahoma State University Library. I am in Boley,  Oklahoma to interview Mr. William Hunt as part of the Oklahoma Oral  History Research Program   s Spotlighting Oklahoma Oral History  Project, and our topic today is Boley, Oklahoma. Thank you for meeting  with us.  My pleasure.  When and where were you born?  I was born in Tulsa, Oklahoma in 1943, and I moved to Boley,  Oklahoma when I was six months of age.  Could you tell us a little about your youth and growing up in Boley?  Boley was a very nice place to grow up. I grew up in the country. Now,  when we say Boley, you remember Boley is a collective. Boley is the  center, but you had all these farming communities that were satellites to  Boley. We all say Boley, but I   m really from Chilesville. All right, you  had Chilesville, you had Rusk, you had IXL, you had Sand Creek, you  had Prairie Bell. You had all these satellite communities that were  around Boley. They all had grade schools, and once you graduated from  the eighth grade, you came to Boley. So we say we   re from Boley, but  actually I   m from Chilesville, which is four miles north of here, directly  north of the town of Boley. But I grew up in this community.  Did you go to elementary school in Chilesville or in Boley?  Yes, in Chilesville.  5  Simpson  Hunt  Simpson  Hunt  Would you describe your family, your siblings and extended family in  the area?  I   d be glad to. I   m almost related to everybody in Boley. I come from  large families on both sides. My mother, her maiden name was  McCloud, and her mother was a Johnson, and there   s boocoo Johnsons  in this community. Johnsons and Marzetts, and it goes on and on and on,  and on the other side of my family, it was McClouds. It was eleven of  those, so it was about twelve on one side, eleven on the other and then  the family tree just exploded from there because we   re sort of a rural  community. People tend to marry folks that they know, not people they  don   t know, and so the people that you grew up with and you associated  with, you went to school with, you ended up marrying those folks.  That   s how my family tree exploded so large.  Tell us about your education at Boley, your teachers.  Boley gave me an excellent education. Even before I came to Boley, at  Chilesville, I   d like to go back to talk about that just a little bit. It was  basically a two-room schoolhouse, and my teacher, at that time we  called it pre-primer through fourth grade, was Mrs. Grubbs, Para Lee  Grubbs. Excellent teacher. Very dedicated to her students and she did an  excellent job of preparing us. I started out in pre-primer by myself. I was  a class of one, so she didn   t want me to be by myself. Mrs. Grubbs really  accelerated my growth education-wise, and so then I moved up to the  first grade with the other students. She gave me an excellent foundation  in one through four.  From that you moved to the second room, which was five through eight.  You had fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighth grade, and that was Mr. Prince  Webb. Again, excellent teacher, excellent, and they made certain that  you stayed focused, that you, in fact, learned the subject matter and the  curriculum that was particular to your grade, age, growth level. They  didn   t let students fall behind. If you fell behind, then the ones that were  a little better, their job was to help those that weren   t quite as smart.  So, it was sort of a culture type thing where we all knew each other.  Everybody knew each other. Every family in that school knew each  other, and they cared about each other. So, it was sort of a community  that raised the children. I must admit, in grade school, I was not the best  student in terms of behavior. I got in at least two fights every day, and I  got two whippings every day, and then if my mother found out about it, I  got a third whipping when I got home. This actually happened. One of  those fights I got in before I got to school in the morning. Eugene Teagle  and I, for some reason, we just didn   t see eye to eye, and we got into a  fistfight every morning. I got a whipping. Then at recess time, James  6  Simpson  Hunt  Green and I   I was the instigator. I was the one that picked on him, and  we got into a fight, and then I got another one. Then when school was  over, I was also an instigator. Sammy Ray Kirksey, I would shove him  into the pool of water or whatever, and if Mr. Prince Webb saw me, then  he came down and he gave me another paddling. And if my mother  found out about it, I got another one. So the rod was not spared on my  behalf, and there was never a whipping that I got that I didn   t deserve.  (Laughs)  What was your high school experience at Boley?  My high school experience was   I quit fighting. (Laughs) I was a good  student in grade school. I was one of the better students all the way from  pre-primer through eighth grade. My folks, they were farmers, and it  was just my dad, mom, and me. I had no other brothers or sisters.  Coming from the farm, we did a lot of farm work, but my mother, who  finished the eleventh grade, insisted that I go to school. She would not  take me out of school to do farm chores or miss school. Other families  would do that. In fact, in Oklahoma it was very common in the fall to  just turn school out for a month or two while they harvested crops, and  they did that throughout the south because if they held school, none of  the kids came. The parents all held the kids out to help with the chores.  My dad, he got a third grade education, so he was a farmer. He knew  how to farm, but he was very good to me. There was never a problem,  and I was not abused as a child. I told you about all the paddlings, but I  was not abused. I deserved them. But my childhood in Chilesville  prepared me to come to Boley, and when I came to Boley I stopped  fighting, and I concentrated more on my class work.  When I got here, Mrs. Ashley   I absolutely, I won   t say hated, but I  deplored that lady when I was in high school, but that lady gave me one  of the best English educations I   ve ever had. I   ve been all over the  country, and people are just amazed at my ability to use the English  language both in verbal and in writing, and it   s because of Mrs. Ashley.  She didn   t let you get by with anything less than your best, and at this  point in my life, I really look back and I appreciate what that lady did for  all of us.  Mrs. Ashley was my English teacher. Mr. Lawson was the math teacher.  I was not in band. I played baseball when I was here, not basketball. Mr.  Holloway (it was Mr.  Ernest  Holloway at that time, he   s Dr. Holloway  now) was a science teacher, and Mr. Marshall Gamble, M. E. Gamble,  was the vocational agriculture teacher.  Now, coming from the country, remember the satellite communities, we  7  were put into a category by the teachers, who were basically all right  here in Boley. They lived in Boley, so they were preparing the country  kids to be farmers. They figure that   s what you   re going to do. You   ll  finish high school, and you   re going to go back and be a farmer. As a  result, they categorized us country bumpkins as people that had to be in  vocational agriculture. You could never take industrial arts, for example,  even though that   s related to ag. They conflicted because they were at  the same time. Vocational agriculture was four hours in the morning.  Industrial arts was like two hours in the morning, but it was at the same  time, so the country kids, the boys, we couldn   t take that. I tried to, and  Mrs. Ashley saw my registration card, and they took a personal interest  at that time, and she came and grabbed me by the ears and she said,     You   re not taking no industrial arts. You   re going to go back into  vocational agriculture.    (Laughs) And I listened to her after she turned  my ear loose, and so I signed up for vocational agriculture. It was NFA.  You probably don   t know what NFA is. NFA, and you have to be  careful when you tell people about NFA because they get the wrong  impression. It was the black counterpart of the FFA. FFA is the Future  Farmers of America. Well, in the seventeen southern states, we couldn   t  belong. Black kids couldn   t belong to the FFA. We belonged to the New  Farmers of America. It wasn   t the Negro farmers. It was the New  Farmers of America. That was some of the best basic education I   ve ever  had in terms of teaching you leadership, in terms of teaching you public  speaking, in terms of teaching you parliamentary procedure, in terms of  running and conducting meetings and taking minutes. That was the best.  I served in every office capacity when I was here at Boley High School,  including chapter president. I was also the state president, state of  Oklahoma president, and went to the national convention in Atlanta,  Georgia, and that prepared me for my education that I got when I went  to Langston.  When I went to Langston, there was no doubt in my mind that I was  going to major in agriculture because I was good at it. I came from  agriculture, I liked agriculture, and when I got to Langston, I majored in  agricultural economics. Unfortunately, along with my habit of fighting  early on, it   s the truth, I liked girls quite a bit. So, after my first semester  in school, my wife now, who was my girlfriend then, she was pregnant  and we got married. So that changed my whole speed of education. My  folks didn   t have any money. I got the Robert S. Kerr Citizenship  Scholarship Award. The Robert S. Kerr Citizenship Award of three  hundred dollars to go to Langston, and that was basically a book  scholarship. Mr. Jeff Irons, I have him to thank for this.  You know, in June, when you   re getting ready to graduate, in May,  you   re kind of wandering around as seniors and you don   t have anything  8  to do. Mr. Jeff Irons, who taught typing here at Boley High School, that  I never took (I wish I   d taken that also), saw me wandering the halls. He  said,    Hunt.    He said,    What are you going to do after high school?    I  was an honor student all four years in high school, and I said,    Well, Mr.  Irons, I don   t really know.    He said,    Well,    he said,    Go with me.    He  said,    I   m going to take you out and see if we can   t fill out some  scholarship applications, financial aid.    We went to Oklahoma State  University first, and we filled out an application. Then we stopped by  Langston. I never heard anything back from Oklahoma State. Now, keep  in mind this was 1961, and we were still having a lot of problems in  1961 in terms of race relations.  After my first semester at Langston University, I   d completed it, I finally  got a letter from Oklahoma State that said,    Well, we think we might be  able to offer you something,    but I never got it. But at any rate, I   d  started at Langston, and I   d decided then I was going to stay at  Langston. The first semester at Langston, a number of teachers took a  personal interest in me. They didn   t know me except that they saw my  grades. I made two C   s when I was at Langston University, when I  graduated. One was in physical education, and the other was in math,  Mrs. Clements. Whenever you get your grade cards together, I guess the  teachers out there evidently look at them also, because I had a 3.2 grade  point average out of a 4.0, and she   s saying,    Well, how did you get  that? I mean, you did rather poorly in my class.    She gave me a C, and I  deserved it because I didn   t do that much. But after that, she says,    Well,  now, are you going to be in my trig class next semester? I   m expecting a  lot more out of you than what you gave me in this basic algebra class.     So, doing that with Mrs. Clements and the pressure she put on me, I  decided that I was going to do better, and I did. That   s the only class I  think I   ve ever taken   no, there were two   two classes I ever took that I  made 100 percent on every examination, and I made a 100 percent on  the final examination. There   s only two out of Langston that I did that  with, and the other was with Mr. Simpson  James Allan Simpson , your  father, and it was chemistry.  I made a straight    A    average that year. Well, when you make a straight  A average, Langston had a policy that they will pay your tuition for the  next semester. So I made a straight    A    average. I received a National  Defense Student Loan to go to Langston, that   s a student loan, to go the  first year, and I also worked cleaning up, at that time, the science and ag  building. So I worked to get my room and board, and my parents gave  me food that they received as the commodities. You know what  commodities are? All right. They gave me that, and then I took a hot  plate out to Langston University. We had chickens at home. My mother  would give me a sack of eggs, and I would take them back to Langston  University with me. I would get a bag of popcorn, and that first semester  9  Simpson  Hunt  Simpson  Hunt  I ate out of my window. I didn   t have a refrigerator, all right? And the  other guys, the football boys in particular, when they were going to  breakfast or whatever, they   d smell the popcorn, of course. You can   t  hide popcorn smell, and they   d say, banging on my door,    You   ve got to  give me some of that popcorn.       No, you   re not getting any popcorn.     After that first semester, I also worked in the kitchen. I washed dishes.  After the first semester I got a job, thanks to Dr. Sims out at Langston,  working down at the piggery. My job, my room and board was paid by  me picking up the garbage every day from the university and taking it  down to the farm, cooking it and feeding it to the pigs. You had to live  down there, which I did. I tell the story now to the young folks, and they  can   t believe it. Of course, at that age, you want to make a favorable  impression on girls and so forth, and here they were laughing at me  riding through the campus on this tractor with these greasy pants on  picking up garbage from the cafeteria every day. I had to do it three  times a day, but that   s how I got my education paid for. I continued in  that job until I finished, but I finished in three years. When Langston  decided that they were going to pay my tuition for the next semester,  being the guy that I am, I took twenty-one semester hours the next  semester. Wouldn   t you?  I did.  I mean,    You   re going to pay for all of it?    And so I did, and my grade  point average suffered. I went down from a 4.0 to, I think, a 3.5 or  something like that. And that   s when I got my second C, in elementary  typing. These high school girls had had typing all these four years in  high school, and here I was trying to learn the keyboard, and here they  were typing already at a 120. There   s never been a class that I worked  harder for, for a C, than that class, elementary typing.  Who have your role models been?  I had a lot of role models. My mom was my role model, and Mr. Gamble  here at Boley was certainly a role model. People that were instrumental  in helping me along were Mr. Irons, Mrs. Ashley that I mentioned  earlier. I could say all the teachers. I really could. I mean, they sincerely  cared about the students here at that time. They were role models. You  didn   t see them smoking, drinking or carousing around the community.  They were like little gods and goddesses to all of us kids, and I think  that   s very important, to set positive role models. Now, I   m sure that  came at a high personal price for them, but those folks were exemplary.  To this day I don   t know how they did it, and they were very, very  excellent examples. Beyond that, when I got to Langston, Mr. Sims was  a role model for me and Dr. Battle.  10  Simpson  Hunt  Huey J. Battle was a role model and Dr. Holloway was always a role  model. I mean, he was always there. He was Dean of Student Affairs, I  guess, at that time, and he wanted to make certain that these country kids  had a level playing field, and he helped us along. And there was a lady at  the bookstore, and I don   t remember what that lady   s name is. She was  an Indian lady, and she was an old Indian lady, but she ran the  bookstore. I can see her face, but I can   t remember her name. But that  lady, whenever I took classes, I would always have problems getting my  money for my books. She would say,    I   m going to give you these  books, and you come back and pay me.    And I did when I got the  money. One year, a young fellow decided he was going to get really  ingenious. He stole all my books, and he went to the bookstore to sell  them, and that lady recognized those books and she had him. She said,    I  know where these books came from, and I   m going to report you.    And  she did, and she kept my books for me, and she gave them back to me.  So she was a role model. Beyond that, when I went to grad school, Dr.  Jimmye Hillman at the University of Arizona was a role model. Had it  not been for him, I would not have got to the University of Arizona. I   d  already planned to go to the University of Maryland.  What are your degrees beyond Langston University?  University of Arizona, I got a Master of Science in Ag Econ, and I got a  MPA  Master of Public Administration  from Harvard in 1972. So those  are the people that were really my role models in terms of education.  Jimmye, Dr. Hillman, he just pestered me. He called me all the time  trying, he was a gentleman from Mississippi, of all places, but he was  the chair of the Ag Econ Department at the University of Arizona in  Tucson. He called me and called me and called me, incessantly, on the  dorm phone. We didn   t have any cell phones personally, and we didn   t  have any phones in our room, but they   d call down, say,    Hunt,  somebody   s trying to call you.    So, they   d come down to get me, and I   d  go down and answer the phone. Thanks to that man, I went to the  University of Arizona and it turned out very great. And beyond that,  there was a Dr. Stubblefield at University of Arizona when I got my first  job working with USDA  United States Department of Agriculture . Had  it not been for him, I wouldn   t have been able to go to my first job.  When I was looking through my papers the other day, you know what  my graduate assistantship was back then in 1964? I paid income taxes on   2,279, and I had a wife and a son, so  2,279, okay? We laugh about  that now, and you ask,    Well, how did you do that?    Well, when you  have a wife, my wife comes from the same community, that is very  dedicated and she comes from meager means. We made things work. I  mean, we ate a lot of chicken wings, and we ate a lot of bologna and we  11  Simpson  Hunt  ate a lot of    (Laughs) But that   s how we made things work. Made ends  meet. Plus, I had to pay rent, all right? At the University of Arizona. So I  got an assistantship to pay for my tuition, that type of thing, but my  books and other things, I had to pay for out of  2,279. That kind of tells  you how prices have changed since 1964, and now you make more than  that a week. (Laughs)  Tell us your career path.  My career path after I left the University of Arizona is I got two job  offers from the USDA. One was to work with the National Ag Statistic  Service in Tucson, Arizona. They wanted to offer me a GS-5 salary,  because they said I had some statistical deficiencies that wouldn   t allow  them to hire me at a higher grade. That was one offer. Let   s put that on  the table. The second offer was from the Soil Conservation Service, and  they offered me a GS-9 salary at  7,220 a year. So here I   ve got this one  that   s coming in at about  4,000,  5,000 a year, then I   ve got the other at   7,000. Poor kid that has never had any money in his life, and now I   ve  got two job offers. This to work as an ag economist, this is to work as a  statistician, and which one do you think that I took? (Laughs) All right,  so I went to work for the Soil Conservation Service in Reno, Nevada. I  was their state economist. Again, I don   t want to inflate things, but I was  a pretty good student. I mean, I graduated in the top of my class even in  grad school. So I worked with them for five years in the state of Nevada,  Reno, Nevada, and I had all kind of studies that I initiated there that I   m  sure are still there somewhere in the library.  After that, I got an offer to go to work with the Economic Research  Service (ERS) in Davis, California. The job offer was to get your Ph.D.,  and I had another offer from the Soil Conservation Service, the agency I  was working for, to go to Upper Darby, Pennsylvania as an economist  and also promote me and transfer me. So again, with a little uncertainty  about the ERS, having a family, I made the decision to go to Upper  Darby, Pennsylvania as the assistant regional economist, which I did.  Worked there for two years, got an opportunity through the agency to go  to grad school again, and went Harvard for a year. That was in 1972.  I was the first black employee to ever go through the graduate study  program through the Soil Conservation Service. We finished there, went  to Washington, D.C. as a management analyst for the agency. Left there  and went to Ohio as the assistant state conservationist. I stayed there for  four years. Left there and went back to Pennsylvania, but this time in  Harrisburg as the deputy state conservationist. Stayed there for fifteen  years. Left there and went to Minnesota as the state conservationist and  stayed there for fifteen years, also. So we   ve been a lot of places, done a  lot of things. I   ve learned a lot, and hopefully I   ve passed on some things  12  Simpson  Hunt  to others.  I had a great staff when I was in Minnesota. I had close to 400  employees scattered throughout the state. You have the same thing here  in Oklahoma. Every state does. It   s not called the Natural Resources  Conservation Service. They changed the names in 1994. I love my work,  but I just decided after forty-four years of working for one agency it was  time to go. The last day that I worked, I was a salary employee so they  don   t pay me by the hour, but I worked ten hours that day. I finished my  work, I left, and I   ve never been back. And I don   t ever intend to go  back. It   s nothing against the job. It   s the best job in the world, but once  you leave, you go. You don   t go back.  And I find the same thing about places that we   ve lived. We have very,  very pleasant memories about the places that we   ve lived, but you don   t  go back because those memories are better than the actuality of it and  what has happened since you left. In other words, just leave and go with  those good feelings about your friends and your neighbors and  everybody else and just keep those good memories. Even coming back  to Boley, you know that old swimming hole that I used to love to swim  in all the time? It   s just a mud hole. It   s just a tadpole hole. (Laughs) It   s  not anything like what I remember. And my old girlfriends now, I   ll just  say, they   re not what I remember them being like, and I   m sure I   m not  either. (Laughs)  Do you have a fondest memory of Boley?  The fondest memory was just being in Boley. Being in a nurturing  environment here in the Boley community, and again, just remember,  when I say I   m from Boley, I   m from Chilesville, but I   m from Boley. I  mean, I don   t have a hat that says Chilesville on it. It says Boley on it.  The memories I have, we worked hard as farmers, and then on the  weekend, everybody came to Boley, in town, to do their shopping.  The worst thing that ever happened, and it   s horrible to say and I  probably shouldn   t say this while you   re recording, but I   m going to say  it anyway, is integration. We used to do business with each other, and  people came to Boley to do their shopping because when you went to  Okemah, you couldn   t go in those stores at Okemah to do your  shopping. They didn   t want you there, and I tell folks now that  experience of having   Okemah is the Okfuskee county seat here, and  Prague and the rest of the towns are the same way. It was prejudiced. It  was.  Segregation was legal when I grew up here. When you went to the  courthouse, there were four toilets in the courthouse. There were two  13  water fountains in the courthouse. You know what those four toilets  said? You know. No, you don   t know. You   re not old enough to know.  (Laughter) Well, one said,    Colored men.    The other said,    White men.     The other two said,    Colored women    and the other said,    White  women.    The two water fountains, one said,    Colored,    and the other  said,    White.    And there was an old rock. I don   t know where they got  that thing from, they just pushed up to the colored water fountain. And  you didn   t dare violate that policy or that procedure that they had.  When I went to Okemah, I went to the back of each one of the stores to  eat. My dad took me back there. We couldn   t go to the front. When we  went to the movie theater, I had to go upstairs to the balcony. We  couldn   t go down in the main part. This is kind of a sideline, and I don   t  want this to be a negative, but in 1954,    55, Emmett Till was killed in  Mississippi. That   s when it all sprung on me then,    Why are we being  treated different? I mean, all we   d want to do is be part of the human  race. We   re spending our money, and yet we   re being treated different.     And so that was the year that I went to Okemah, and I went in the front  door of the caf  . I   ll never forget this white guy who was so nice to us  when we went to the back. He turned as red as a beet and he said,    What  in the hell do you think you   re doing up here?    And I said,    Well, I want  to get something to eat.    He said,    Well, get your blankity blank back in  the back where you always have been.    I said,    I   m not going to do that.  I want to order something, and I want to eat it here.    He says,    You   ll  never eat anything in here. You get out of here now.    And he used some  very choice words for me. And so I left.  Went down to the movie theater next, and I bought my movie ticket, and  I went through the center door and boy, did they come out of the booth  in a hurry.    Whoa  What are you doing?    I said,    Well, I   m going to see  the movie. I paid for it.    They said,    No, you can   t go down there.  You   ve got to go up into the balcony, you know, where you always go.     You went outside, you went up a set of stairs and you went to the  balcony. Okay. That was where the black folks, the colored folks went at  that particular time. I said,    No, I   m going to watch a movie, and I   m  going to watch  down here .    I was by myself, and he said,    No, you   re  not going to watch it down here.    He said,    Here, you take your money.  I   m going to give you a refund, but you don   t come back anymore.    And  I never did. And those stuck with me, those instances.  The only other negative thing is that when I graduated from college at  Langston University, I was trying to earn enough money to go to grad  school, and I almost got killed in Sapulpa, Oklahoma. A guy put a gun to  my head and he cocked it because I was in a caf   with a soda after hours.  I had a suit and tie on, and I was selling American People   s  encyclopedias. I   ll always remember that. We sold them door to door,  14  but it was a team of us. They would drop us off, and at night we had to  go back to one central location to be picked up. But we stopped at this  place, and this has never been recorded anywhere, but let me just say  that we got there. It was a white guy and myself. He   d just graduated  too. His name was John.  I don   t remember John   s last name, but we met there, we were sitting  there with our little briefcases and our suit and ties, and we were going  to get a soda. And we noticed this big guy, merchant policeman, he  walked by. I mean, he was just as red as a beet now, but so what. I mean,  we weren   t doing anything. We   re just sitting there having a soda. He  walked by, and he said something to the store owner, and then he walked  out the doors. And he came back and that   s when he put the gun to my  head, and he said,    You get your black ass out of there.    Whoa  I said,     Sir, do I know you?    He said,    No,    he said,    You get up and get your  black ass out of here now.    So John interceded, he said,    Well, what  have we done?    And he said,    I hate you worse than I do him.    And then  he used a phrase about a    lover    and John and I, that   s when the store  owner came by. He said,    Fellows, please.    He said,    I don   t want any  problem here.    And I said,    Well, we don   t want any problem. We   re  just drinking our sodas, you know, waiting for our ride,    in our little  suits and ties and briefcases. And so he said,    Well, why don   t you guys  just go outside.    He was trying to calm this guy down.  Nothing looks larger than a gun to your head, and so I went outside and,  you know, I   ve got a college degree at this point in time. I   m a graduate  of Langston University. You can   t treat me this way. All right? So what  would you think I would do? I called the local police and reported to  them what had happened. What do you think they did? They sent an  officer out, and we told him what happened. I guess he knew this  merchant policeman, and his almost verbatim words were,    You better  get your black ass out of here, and don   t go back in there, otherwise  you   re going to get shot.    He got in his car, went back to the police  station. All right?  So that   s one of my bad experiences in Oklahoma. I   ve always  remembered it, any time you get a gun drawn on you. And I mean, that  guy was just as red as a beet. I mean, he was about the color of this, and  I knew that I was very close to   my degree wasn   t going to mean  anything with my brains blown out over this caf  . So, I left Oklahoma at  that time.  I have an affinity for Boley, but I was telling her earlier, I wish there  were some things that I   d never experienced, but I did. How do you  erase what actually happened? That   s one of the experiences that I had  that actually happened to me in Oklahoma. Now, you ask me about  15  some of the beneficial things, coming to Boley on the weekend was one  of the most joyous times and occasions. People were like one big family.  We all came from IXL, Rusk, Sand Creek, and Chilesville, and all these  places. This was a time, one time, that all of these people got together on  a Saturday. I mean, there was just frivolity. An old home week is  basically what it was, and I just wish that we   d never lost that.  I may be getting ahead of you, but what happened is Boley didn   t have  the right foresight. They didn   t plan for the future. We had a few  families that were the dominant families in this town. The young man  that just left, his father was one of them and his grandfather was one of  them. The Lees and the Ashleys were part of it, and there   s nothing  wrong with what they did except they didn   t have a succession plan.  And as a result of not having a succession plan, when they died, the  town started dying because there was nobody to replace them.  To this day, they don   t have a vision, they don   t have a strategic  plan ,  they don   t have any type of plan of where do we go from here. What do  we want to look like in a year from now? Five years from now? Ten  years from now? That never happened, so as a result, when Mr. Moon  died, and when Mr. Charlie Truelove went out of business, and when  Ben Kees died, the death ended the businesses that they operated. I  mean, it was over, and slowly, this thing has been pulling back like  tentacles on an octopus, and slowly the town has been dying.  Unfortunately, the people who live here, they can   t see it. But it   s like  being in a paper mill town. If you live in that town, you don   t smell that  horrible odor. It   s when you come into it that you smell that horrible  odor. Your senses, you get desensitized to it when you   re there all the  time. I just wish there was something that could be done to revitalize  Boley and again, for everybody to see we need to have a succession plan  that   s not one or two families, that   s not three or four families. We need  all the entrepreneurs that we can get, but unfortunately, the people here  won   t support each other financially. And that   s horrible, and it   s  horrible to say, but it   s true.  And there   s no reason in the world that the high school  should be  closed  but once we got integration, I mentioned to you integration  earlier, once we got integration, people started to say,    Well, I   m going  to send my kids to Paden. I   m going to send them to Prague. I   m going  to send them to    You know, they   re not teaching them anything over at  Boley.    All right, well what did you do to prepare your kids to come to  school in the first place? And I realize that Mrs. Ashley and Mr. Lawson  and Mr. Irons and all those folks died, but we should have had a teacher  succession plan.  16  Simpson  Hunt  Bringing self-renewal is what I   m saying. And it never happened, and I  still don   t see it happening. Henrietta Hicks is about the only thing that   s  left here, I mean, to be thinking about how the town would grow. The  rest of the folks, they have limited abilities and limited visions. They can  do work, but when you have a town that has no business and a reported  reputation of having drugs and prostitution as your only source of  income, that ain   t no way to build a town. I mean, this is a retirement  community is what it is. You don   t even have a full time sheriff here. I  mean, he comes on the weekend. What do you do when you need  somebody on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday?  How did your family decide to come to Boley?  Well, my family decided, because they were farmers at the time, you  have to go back to my great-grandfather to find out how they came here.  They all came from Georgia, a little town called Garfield, Georgia, and  it was a whole trainload of folks that were trying to escape some of the  oppression of the South. They all came together, and they settled out in  Chilesville in a place called the Georgia Line. Just remember that, the  Georgia Line. And what it is, it   s a section line where all of the folks  from Georgia built their homes, and so my grandfather came from  Georgia. I never knew that he had a number of brothers and sisters until  I got to doing a little family tree work myself, a genealogy, and I went  back and I found some of the folks. I found, I have got boocoo folks  there in Georgia that I didn   t even know anything about, and that was  then.  Back then, people didn   t travel very far. If I lived in Chilesville, I didn   t  travel to Sand Creek. I didn   t travel to Prairie Bell. We didn   t have any  means of transportation, so you kind of were stuck in your own little  community, and they came as farmers. They came trying to escape  oppression. They had heard about Boley, Oklahoma. It was a haven to  black folks, and so they came to Boley and they settled. But they were  all farmers. Every one of them were farmers. They didn   t do anything  else. Now, when farming went out of, well, I shouldn   t say, farming  didn   t go out, but when we got to the Depression, a lot of people left.  The kids left and if you worked hard all day for little to no wages, the  first chance you got to be a librarian at the Oklahoma State University,  you   re going to take it, all right? (Laughter) I mean, the pay is a lot  better.  My dad was a farmer, but we worked for other white farmers in the area,  and they paid you fifty cents an hour. They paid you for the kids under  sixteen, you got twenty-five cents an hour. Well, that   s slave labor. I  mean, that   s one step removed from slavery, but their wives and their  kids never worked out there with us, and so we did it. It was honest  17  Simpson  Hunt  Simpson  Hunt  Simpson  Hunt  Finchum  Hunt  work. I have no regrets about doing it. I mean, our families did what we  had to do to survive, and it wasn   t any stealing, and it wasn   t any  mugging and thugging and raping and all that. Everybody knew each  other. We could keep our houses open. Of course, we didn   t have  anything anyway, but you didn   t lock your house. Once our house  caught on fire and thank goodness somebody drove by and they just put  it out for us. (Laughs) I mean, that   s what neighbors do. Everybody  knew each other. We knew everybody for ten miles around.  Who were your neighbors and what was your neighborhood like?  Well, my neighbors   how many do you want me to name?  However many you   d like.  Well, I don   t think you want me to name all of them, but I could name  you Mr. Conway. Clarence Conway was our neighbor next to us, and  then we had the Holloways up on the hill, and then Tom Bass. Then we  had our church, we had the Bibbs, we had my uncle, Tot Hunt, and then  we had Mr. Golden. We had Mr. Tommy Haynes, we had Mr. Green, we  had Aunt Lou and then we had Frank Williams. We had Uncle Albert,  we had the Marzetts, we had Tom Williams, Prince Webb, Uncle  Tommy McCloud. We had Mr. Connelly. I mean, you could just go on  and on and on. In the little village of Chilesville we had Meddie Crump,  we had Mr. Green again, we had Mr. Bright. And Mr. Bright, every  morning at seven o   clock he   d get up and you didn   t need a clock. He  got up singing so loud that everybody in the community could hear him   (Laughs)  What kinds of things would he sing?  Well, it wasn   t anything in particular. I mean, it was just a religious song  you might sing real loud, all right, and so it wasn   t anything negative.  Oliver Watts, Nardine and Clifford Tryon, Annie Tryon, Mrs. Mandy  Trine, Mr. Truelove, Mr. Green, I mean it   s just     How many of these were from the Georgia Line? Part of the Georgia  Line?  The Georgia Line, if you go down the Georgia Line, it was Annie Dixon  and then there was Mr. Prince Webb was on the Georgia Line, and then  you had James Williams, I didn   t mention to you earlier. He was on the  Georgia Line. Then you had Tom Williams, then you had the Marzetts.  Mrs. Marzett, she was a widow, then you had Frank Williams. Then you  had Uncle Albert Harris. They were all on the Georgia Line. Then you   d  have some who had moved at the time.  18  Simpson  Hunt  Back in    41 I think it was, a tornado came through and had wiped out the  Georgia Line. It just went right down the Georgia Line and killed half of  the folks. They all built their homes with tin, all right. Tin in a tornado?  That   s a bad combination, and some of the folks were decapitated. Some  were cut in half, and so a lot of folks lost their husbands, their wives in  that tornado. After that year, everybody built a storm cellar. You folks in  Oklahoma have forgotten about that now, but those were the Georgia  Line folks. My grandfather, he was on the Georgia Line also, and Mrs.  Neata Smith, she was on the Georgia Line. And then Annie Williams,  she lost her husband. She was on the Georgia Line, but they had moved,  and Rev. Walt Williams, he had moved, and then Frank Parker. I mean,  you could just go on and on.  These were folks that had lived there, and they farmed, and they were  just good people. The good thing about it is as a kid, I was always telling  you about me fighting all the time? If I went to somebody else   s home,  and it could be three miles away, if I acted up and they had to say  something to me, when I got home, I got it. My mother would always  tell them,    Next time he acts up at your house, you put it on him, and  then you let me know.    (Laughs) It was a village that raised children  then. It wasn   t that I can go three miles away and I can do something  and get away with it. Man, you didn   t get away with anything. I could  come to Boley and if I did something, you didn   t get away with it.  Who makes up that community and the Boley community today?  Very few folks that are left. Back at that time, in all these communities,  and this is just a fact. I   m not saying it   s right or wrong, but all the black  farmers are gone now, and white folks have moved in and bought all the  land. Back when I was a kid, I could go out with a rifle, and I could hunt  all day in any direction, and there was no posted signs, you know,    No  Hunting,    or anything of that nature. Everybody knew everybody. I go  out there now, and there   s no place out there, other than the five acres  that I still own, that I can go anymore. Everything has got barbed wire  all over the place. It   s posted. You can   t go anywhere anymore, all right?  So our community, it changed completely. The black folks left, and the  black farmers left and the white farmers moved in. White ranchers  moved in. But that made up part of the Boley community. But those  folks, they don   t have any affinity to Boley. I mean, they don   t.  There   s nothing in Boley for them to have an affinity to. I mean, what do  you  see , what   s here? You can   t buy any groceries, I mean, you can   t  buy a sandwich. You can   t buy water or a glass of soda. What is there  here in this town to attract anybody, for anybody to have any affinity to  this town? And I   m not saying this to put the town down. I   m saying that  19  Simpson  Hunt  Simpson  Hunt  Simpson  Hunt  you   ve got to have something here in order for people to have an affinity  towards. How can you identify with something that   s close to nothing?  Look at all these old buildings around here now. I mean, you   ve been up  and down this town. They need to be knocked down. But if you destroy  them, what   s going to be left?  Well, would you walk us through what Boley was like, maybe, forty  years ago?  Boley was thriving   well, I can go back a little further than that.  Like when you were in high school, at least. Just tell us the buildings  and businesses.  Well, at that time, and I always use the analogy, any town that doesn   t  have a beer tavern, it   s dead. And we don   t even have an operating beer  tavern in this town, all right? And that on the end of the street is outside  of Boley. But at that time, you had, let me just walk you up the street  here on both sides of the street. Where do you want to start? On this side  or that side?  Whichever side you   d like to start on.  All right. On this side over here, you started out with a used clothing  store, and next to that was Charlie Truelove   s hamburger shop. That was  the best hamburgers in the world. World famous hamburgers, if you   ve  ever been to Boley, all right? Next to that was Dewey Clark   s beer  tavern, famous beer tavern, and then you have an open space. But next  to that, you had Mr. Moon. Mr. Moon took care of your shoes if you  needed your shoes repaired. Mr. and Mrs. Moon, very nice folks. And  next to that we had Big Rich   s funeral home, and then next to that you  had Ben Kees    place. Kees    and Babb   s is what it was called. And next  to that, right across the street was an operating hotel. The building  structure is still there. And next to that hotel we had, let   s see, you had  an open space, and then you had another beer tavern. And that was   Arthur Herron   s , you had another beer tavern. Next to that you had  another clothing store and next to that you had Mr. Myer   s Hardware  Store that   s now run by Robert Shelton, right? Robert and Francis  Shelton. Next to that you had a bank.  We had an operating bank. I remember I put some money in there, and I  lost it when I was at Langston. But at any rate, next to that there was  again an open space, and you know the history of the henchman. You   ll  hear people say Pretty Boy Floyd. It wasn   t Pretty Boy Floyd. It was  some of Pretty Boy Floyd   s associates, henchmen that got caught up  here in this town. Then we had the T. M. Haynes building, which is right  20  Finchum  Hunt  down the street here. Some people would tell me that it would operate,  but as a kid I can   t remember it ever happening. Down on the end of the  street down there, which is outside the city limits was Theodore  McCormick   s at the time. Pookie McCormick now operates that.  Coming up the other side, we had Theodore McCormick and by the way,  when I was mentioning those families, basically, for good or bad, they  ran the town. The McCormicks were part of that. You had the Bernice  McCormick place, another beer tavern. Next to Bernice there was an  open field. We had Mr. Roscoe Young. I keep wanting to say Mr. Moon,  but it wasn   t Moon, but the gas station down here. That was the last time  I remember ever going to a gas station and people would actually, he  would wash your windshield for you, and he would check your oil for  you.  Full service.  He had a full service filling station at that time. Mr. Roscoe Young is his  name. Next to that was the post office, and next to the post office, that  was a place called    The First and Last Chance.       The First and Last  Chance    was on this end, I   m sorry. This was the    hand jive    club. It  was run by the Danny Walkers, and it was a teen place. We had places  for the teens to go, and the police station   s always been about where it is  right now. Next to that you had a grocery store and that was run by Sam  Williams, and right across the street we had another grocery store that  was run by Sarge Moore, and next to that was another beer tavern and  next to that was Miss Hattie McCormick. She made the best barbecued  ribs in the world right there, and next to that we had Big Jack Ramsey.  He had a taxi stand. We actually had a taxi here in town, and a taxi  stand, and next to that was an open space, then you had Mrs. Langford.  She was a beautician, and then next to that was a barber shop. In fact,  my dad was a barber in there for a while, and Crip Hicks, who is Gene  Hicks    father, was a barber there as well. Next to that you have a brief  open space and you had The First and Last Chance. All of us people my  age remember The First and Last Chance, okay? (Laughs) Well if they  don   t remember it, they   re in bad shape. But that was basically the key  part of the street.  Excuse me, there was a dry cleaners also owned by Mr. Ben Kees,  because I worked there for one summer. There was a dry cleaners there,  a dry cleaners and then the funeral home. So that was the Boley that I  remember. And you had some fine homes, and they were well  maintained and kept up going out Main Street. The Main Street was  going directly out toward Chilesville, and Judge Dolphin, he had one of  the prettiest houses and well maintained houses around. If you   ll see it  now it makes you want to throw up. I mean, it   s gone.  21  Finchum  Hunt  Finchum  Hunt  Around that corner, someone referred to it as Hunter Corner?  Hunter Corner?  As you make the curve?  Oh yeah, yeah, well it was. You got two corners, and I   m trying to   think , the second one was called   my uncle, he got drunk and he  forgot to turn at the corner. He almost plowed right through the people   s  home. Back then people would drink and they had a good time, but it  wasn   t violent type stuff. Nobody harmed anybody, and something  happened in the late-   70s, early-   80s. Things changed. You got a  different breed of folks that wanted to hurt people and wanted to rob  people. The town complexion changed, and I think it all happened  because parents stopped being parents. We want to put the responsibility  on everybody else.  The teachers aren   t teaching anything, and the law enforcement folks  aren   t treating people right. Well, we   ve got to internalize a lot of that on  ourselves. What do we do? You go to the parents/teachers association  (PTA), by the way, now it   s called grandparents/teachers association  because the grandparents are the ones that   s taking the kids to the  teacher   s meeting now. All of a sudden parents stopped being parents,  and they wanted to be forever young and they wanted to be irresponsible  and they didn   t want all that responsibility on them. As a result a lot of  the kids grew up without fathers, without mothers.  There   s a series of young people here that I know that their parents were  on drugs so bad that the young girls had to   and they were young girls, I  mean, they were ten and eleven and twelve and they had to raise  themselves. They   re almost offered up as sacrifices for  their parents  to  get some drugs. That   s the worst thing that ever happened to black folks  is drugs. We never should have, I don   t know who brought it in here or  why. We always want to blame the white folks for bringing it in here,  but I don   t blame them. I blame us for taking it. I mean, you can put all  the drugs you want on this table and you watch how much I take. And  you can leave it here and you can go and you can come back and you  can come back five years from now and unless it evaporates, you won   t  see me taking any of it. I don   t know one person that drugs have ever  done any good for. I can name you a lot of them that it   s destroyed their  lives, their families, and their careers. You name me one that drugs has  made a better person as a result of being on cocaine, whatever else they  take. I can   t think of any. Maybe you can help me out. Do you know of  any?  22  Finchum  Hunt  Simpson  Hunt  I don   t.  And you know, I even look at some of our top actors and actresses  today, how much better off they would be if they had never experienced  this. I mean, I look at Whitney Houston today, the most beautiful voice  that I   ve ever heard in my life, and she   s just ruined it. She has just  ruined it.  Yeah. My daughter is fifteen and she just said to me,    What is the big  deal with Whitney Houston? What   s the big deal anyway?    I found the  YouTube video when she sang the national anthem at the Super Bowl. By  the time the clip was over, Sidney was just    She said,    What?    I said,     Crack.    These kids trivialize drug use. Switching topics, what can you  tell us about Cooperative Extension here?  Well, Cooperative Extension was a subculture here in Boley. Now,  remember when I told you earlier, we were a segregated society back  when I grew up. So we had the regular Cooperative Extension agent who  was white  in Okemah , and then we had another Extension agent who  was a black Extension agent. That was Mr. Coleman, here in Boley. I  don   t know, I think they probably had that type of a system all  throughout the South. Mr. Coleman had us in 4-H club. I was in 4-H  club, but it never was what it could have been, and should have been,  had we been able to access all the potential of Extension. The vocational  agriculture part of that was related but it wasn   t related to Cooperative  Extension.  When my dad farmed in Chilesville, and all the other black farmers, we  couldn   t get any help from the USDA. The NRCS, the people that I  supervised in Minnesota, they are called district conservationists there,  were working conservationists at that time. That job is to go out and  work with individual farmers and producers on a one-on-one basis.  Basically, help them conserve the soil and improve their crop production  and produce more and protect more. Well, I saw those trucks when I was  a kid going back and forth by our house, to go to the white farmers     place, and I vowed then that if I ever got in a position that I could do  something about it, I would never let anybody, white or black, brown or  red or anybody else suffer the indignity that we had to suffer as a result  of us being a minority, and I lived up to that.  There   s never been an Indian farmer, a white farmer, a black farmer,  anyplace else when I was state conservationist in Minnesota that ever  was denied any assistance. You got the same assistance that everybody  else did. In fact, I gave them more because we had legal authority to do  it on a farm bill. With limited resource producers and beginning farmer  programs, we could offer greater cast-share systems to those people. It  23  was by law, and I did. So that was one of the advantages of growing up  in Boley, but the vocational agriculture system didn   t give that to me.  Mr. Marshall Gamble gave me that, who was my NFA teacher. You  remember NFA, and don   t say Negro Farmers of America; it was the  New Farmers of America. All right?  Of all the education I received, my training under Mrs. Ashley, the math  training I got, the training in the vocational agriculture Mr. Gamble gave  me in NFA, I have used that so extensively over the years. That   s helped  me to participate in business meetings. Most people don   t know how to  even make a motion, carry a motion through on the floor. And I mean,  it   s sad. I go to churches and I go to other organizations, and people, it   s  just chaos. If you follow basic Robert   s Rules of Order, just follow them,  you don   t have to be fancy about it, and you just follow that, you   d be  surprised how expeditiously you can carry out your meetings and have  done them in a professional way, that they   re defensible. That if  somebody ever comes back and questions whatever happened, and so  that part of, if you want to say that   s Extension, that really wasn   t  Extension, it was vocational agriculture by Mr. Gamble here in Boley  that gave me that.  I was in the parliamentary procedure contest. I won it at the local and  state level. I was in the quiz contest. I won it at the local and state level.  I was in the public speaking contest at the local, I won that. Those are all  things that   and again, let me just say that in 1965, the NFA and the  FFA merged. That was the worst thing that ever happened for our black  youth, because they lost opportunities to hold elected office in great  numbers, and they lost opportunities to have leadership positions within  an organized organization. I look at the FFA conventions now and it   s  not that it   s not white against black, it   s just there are more white folks  than there are black people. And if you   re going to have an election, I   m  going to vote for my friends, and you   re going to vote for your friends.  And so you lost out a lot of opportunities.  At that time, when you had Boley, Haskell, Beggs, McAlester,  Okmulgee and so forth, you had all these local chapters, you had to have  black leadership. They forced you to be a leader whether you wanted to  be or not, and somebody had to step up, and that   s fortunate. You know,  I was for the convergence of the two organizations. I must admit, I was.  But in hindsight as I look back, it hurt us more than it helped us, and I  hate to say that, but it   s true. And I don   t know, you can   t get it back.  You can   t get it back, but there   s too many people willing to sit in the  last row of the auditorium and listen to what   s going on as opposed to  being up at the front row or up on the podium of the stage and causing  things to happen. I don   t want this to sound like I   m against white. I   m  not against white people. I worked with them all of my life. In fact, most  24  of my staff were white, and I respect them greatly. But all I   m saying is  the reality is we as a group of folks, black people, lost the opportunity to  demonstrate leadership. Some of us were intimidated and we need to be  from where you are to where you want to be, and sometimes you have to  take small steps to get there. Maybe you   re not.  I know that the education that I got at Langston wasn   t the same as I  would   ve got at Oklahoma State University. I admit that. Hey. I   m just  putting it on the table. But I got a good education at Langston University  that served as a foundation for me to go to the University of Arizona and  to go to Harvard, all right? (Laughs) And I finished, and I finished with  honors at both places, and some of these people that want to tear down  Langston University now, that would be the worst thing that you folks  could ever do. These 1890s, you created them for the wrong purpose, but  they serve a tremendous function and purpose. I   m reading some of the  things that you folks are, as money gets tight, state budgets are tight  now, and people are,    Well, how can we have two land-grant  universities in the shadow of one another? Why don   t we just tear  Langston down and have Oklahoma State?    Well, I wish you   d have  thought about that back in 1862 when the university was first formed  and not created in 1890 and created opportunities for everybody to go to  one land-grant university.  As President Lincoln said, it   s the people   s university. It   s the people   s  department. People   s university, and if we   d started out right, we   d have  ended up right, but if you tear down the Langstons and the historically  black colleges and universities, folks, I   ll tell you, there   s a lot of   it   s  not just black kids that are going there now. I see a lot of white kids and  I see a lot of Indian kids going. We need every opportunity we can get  for every kid that we can imagine of whatever income level to get an  education. Everybody can be somebody, but you need to work from  where they are to get them to where you want them to be, and it   s not  going to be one big leap. Success is a cinch by the inch, it   s hard by the  yard. So just take them from where they are to get them to where we  really want them to be. I mean, if you don   t educate them, then you   re  going to have a bunch of folks that aren   t educated, unemployable, and  they   re going to be committing crime because they   ve got to make a  living some kind of way.  You know, I always look back at the movie Sounder, you know the  movie Sounder? They shot the man   s dog and put him in jail because he  was trying to steal a piece of meat to feed his family. Well, what he did  was wrong, but he did it for the right reason. What do you do when your  family   s hungry and don   t have anything to eat? What I   m saying, don   t  put people in that position where they have to do that. I   m saying the  same thing with education, our HBCUs  Historically Black Colleges and  25  Simpson  Hunt  Universities . In other words, a lot of limited resource people that, like  me, I didn   t have two nickels to rub together to go to college, but you  need to make certain that anybody and everybody, I don   t care what  race, creed, color, whatever, that wants to go to school, we encourage  them. We do not only make it available, but we encourage them. Make it  hard to fail. Make it easy to succeed. I probably didn   t answer your  question.  It   s perfect. What were some of the other organizations in the town that  had an impact on the community?  On the community? There was a Chamber of Commerce here in Boley,  and again, even if they were alive I don   t want to offend anybody, but  they were too exclusive. They weren   t inclusive enough, and if I could  do it again and I could raise these folks up, I   d talk to them. I mean, they  might not want to hear it, but I would tell them that you need to be more  inclusive. Include more interests and prepare the town. A town should  live forever. Each one of us has a finite time on earth. Each one of us,  we   re going to die. But a town shouldn   t die, and I   m asking, well, I  shouldn   t ask, but I   m asking these folks that are dead, if I could bring  them back, because they had great ideas. I mean, they were brilliant  folks. But it was too much building themselves up and not building the  town up. It was,    I   m Mr. Big. I   m Ms. Big.    And you can   t build a  town and keep a town going on that.  You need to be inclusive enough to bring some young folks and help  them get started, not only allow them, but help them to get started. Have  a succession plan. Not just your kids, now. A lot of their kids, they  moved on. They left, and whomever would prefer to come here and do  business, we need to have some type of an incubator process to help  them get started, and that never happened. As a result of you having all  this knowledge, all this power, when you died, we buried it right out  there, six feet down. Nobody else had what you had. Mr. Lee, the bank  owner, that man had a photographic memory. He could read your book  and give you verbatim, word for word, on every page that you had in  there. The only problem is, he had two sets of bank books, and he was  gone when the bank auditors came, and they gave the bank auditors the  wrong set of books, but the man was brilliant. He was brilliant. Mrs.  Ashley, the McCormicks, they all had something and they gave it to  Boley, but unfortunately, when they died, it went with them, and that   s  not good. I   d say the same thing for Langston, Stillwater, or Oklahoma  City. It wouldn   t make any difference where you are. You have to have  this incubator of not only ideas, but also make it possible for people to  come in and to succeed. Some communities do it through tax advantages  and benefits, but whatever it takes.  26  Simpson  Hunt  If I had to ask you, and I   m not, but if I had to ask you on the basis of  what you see here in Boley on this Main Street now and excluding the  rodeo   well, you can even include it. There   s about a four letter word  that you could use to describe this town. It starts with D and it ends with  D, and it won   t be very long. I come back once a year, once or twice a  year, and I see. I don   t stay in this paper mill town every day, so I see. I  see what   s going on. The people who live here, they don   t see it. It   s  like, and I   m talking about me now, but it   s like gaining weight. You  don   t see it, because it doesn   t come onto you,    Boom.    I mean, if it did,  you   d say,    Hey, whoa, wait a minute.    It comes on a little bit at a time,  and the folks that are here, it   s happening a little at a time. So this  gradualism is resulting in them being basically blind. I mean, it   s a band-aid  approach here to do things as opposed to really a systemic plan and a  cure here. We   ll maybe patch the streets up. We   ll do something about  the water system, but it   s more. They need more. They need a  comprehensive plan, development plan for this town. Really, they   re on  life support now. They don   t realize it. I can hear a death rattle in this  town. I mean, a distinct death rattle.  What were some of the community traditions like and are they still being  celebrated?  No. The only thing that   s being celebrated is this rodeo, and the rodeo  doesn   t bring in nearly the revenue to this town that it should. Again,  look up and down Main Street, where do they have opportunity to spend  any money? When you bring these outside people back to your town,  what are they going to buy? I mean, you   ve got some vendors here. You  pay a hundred twenty-five dollars, whatever it is, to get a vendor   s  license, but that   s no money. You do it one time a year. I mean, we need  something year round. That   s the only tradition that I see that   s still  going on in this town.  There are a number of families that have memories such as I do, pleasant  memories, of Boley and the surrounding communities. We all say Boley,  and we have family reunions, come back here for family reunions every  once in awhile. Every once in awhile, it   s not every year, they   ll have an  all-class reunion. But the high school   s closed, and so we don   t have  anything really, the glue to hold us together anymore. We   re all doing  our own thing. This rodeo is the last hope, and they   re under threat now  to have the post office closed. I could see this coming, and I talked to  folks about it when they had the senior citizens center and the high  school. I could see the high school closing, and I can see the post office  closing. Folks, if you   re not utilizing these resources   the senior citizens  center, all these senior citizens wouldn   t come over and participate in the  hot meal program. Well, why not? I mean, it   s to benefit you, and people  sending their kids to Paden and to Prague. Then you wonder,    Well, why  27  Simpson  Hunt  are they closing our high school?    Well, I   ll tell you why they   re closing  your high school. Because you   re not supporting it. Now, why would  you ask that question?    Well, they   re not teaching them anything over  there.    Well, what are you doing in terms of getting on the school board  to make certain that we get good teachers and that we have good  programs over there? What are you doing as a parent to get your child  prepared for not only high school, but elementary school? That   s where  it really starts. You   re in high school, it   s about gone.  These kids, they are not getting good supervision at home. There   s  drugging and thugging. I   m sorry, if your child is drugging and  thugging, you   re not doing your job as a parent. Okay? And I   m saying  that you ought to know where your child is, and you bring them up in  the way they should grow, and when they   re old, they shall not depart  from you. But if you start out letting them run rip loose whichever way  they want to go, then you wait until they get sixteen and now you want  to exercise some authority over them. What   s the chance of you doing  that? I plant trees in my yard, and I can stake them when they   re little.  But if I let them grow for about fifteen years, what do you think I can do  with a stake? I   m wasting my stake. I mean, you can   t bend it, is what  I   m saying. It   s grown too big and too strong.  I   m glad you said that statement. What was the role of the church in  Boley when you were growing up?  We had parents that were very religious when I was growing up and they  saw that you went to church whether you wanted to or not. Well, it   s  true, and I   m glad they did. It   s the same as I told you about Mrs.  Ashley. I didn   t appreciate her when I was here in school, but I won   t  say,    hate.    That   s a strong word. But boy, I didn   t like her at all  because she was too strict. But I sure appreciate her now, and every day  I thank her for everything that she did for me and for all the other  students as well. The church was a central part of the community.  Everybody went to church. I can   t think of a family that didn   t go to  church. We   ve slipped, and now church is sort of a by-product of just  being here. They   ve got all these little small churches here in town. And  I told you, we don   t have a beer tavern. We   ve got churches coming out  the kazoo. I bet you there are probably eight or nine churches right here  in town, some that you know and some you don   t know. They   ve got  them all up and down the highway and here in town on the main street  and Antioch and Amos Temple and New Hope.  You   ve got churches all over the place, but you would think and hope  people would get together to say,    You know, we can   t have four or five  people going to each church. I mean, if we all went together, we could  support,    but then that would be eight ministers that wouldn   t have a  28  job. That   s what they   re looking at. Everybody wants their own, and,     I   m the pastor of this church. I   m the pastor of that church.    But the  little collection that they get, I don   t know how they   re making ends  meet. I really don   t. You   ve got four or five people that go to each  church each week, and they   re not putting much in the collection plate.  But to answer your question, the church was a central part of our  community in the beginning of life, during life, and at the conclusion of  life. The churches were strong, and we had good leadership in our  churches. The families believed in their ministers and their churches,  and we helped each other. That   s another thing. There was no money  that exchanged hands. If you needed something and I had a garden, you  stopped by and you picked you up whatever you needed, some potatoes  and some greens or some green beans or whatever and you just took that  home to your family. If you would have offered somebody money, you  would have insulted them, all right? And if I had melons going and you  needed some, take it home to your family. When my dad built a cellar,  my grandfather and others came up and they worked and they dug that  cellar, put the timbers down, put the earth over it, and there was no  money that changed hands. He didn   t have any, first of all.  When we slaughtered in the fall, the neighbors came by. They saw the  big puff of black smoke going up and that was from the tires burning.  When you wore those tires out, you used them for fire. They really  would burn hot, and they saw that and they said,    Old Allen Hunt   s  down there slaughtering. Let me go down there and help him out.    They  came and they helped and as a result, we gave them part of the meat.  They needed that for their families. But when they did the same, we  went up and helped them, and that   s what   s lost also, is everybody   helping and sharing . Money is ruining everything. Nobody does  anything for free. You can   t even get your own kids. You want them to  take the trash out,    You going to pay me?    (Laughter) Well, I   m serious.  And, back then, you never even had thought about asking for no pay or  anything. It   s just people cared about each other. We don   t care about  each other anymore. We go to church, and we go through the process of  worshiping, but when you come out, and the rest of the week, if you ask  me,    Am I demonstrating those Christian principles that we talked about  in church?    The answer is,    No.     Most of us don   t know our neighbors. If you live in an urban area,  you   re afraid of your neighbors.    I don   t want to know them. I don   t  know what they are like.    Where I live now, I know my neighbors on  two sides of me, but I don   t know the rest of my neighbors. I   ve lived  there for sixteen years, and I don   t want to know them. Now, that   s sad,  because I   m afraid of them. And even my church, I   m afraid of a lot of  people in church. I   m afraid to find out much more about you and invite  29  Simpson  Hunt  you into my home. I don   t know what I   m opening myself up to. And  that   s sad that, as Christians, we   ve become so frightened and afraid of  each other, you know? But everybody that   s in the church is not a  Christian. There are a lot of folks in there that are casing you out. The  devil is in the church and, excuse me, but the devil is always busy, and  the church is the main place he wants to be. He   s already got those on  the outside. (Laughs) All right, go ahead, I   m sorry. I   m getting you off  here.  Describe the interactions with neighboring towns, both black and white  neighboring towns.  We had great interaction with the other black communities that I just  mentioned to you. It was like a circle around Boley, and the circle was  Rusk, West End, Chilesville. These are all schools, by the way.  Henderson Chapel, IXL, Prairie Bell, Sand Creek, we were all one big  village, and they were all farmers, all right. They were all farmers, and  there were lots of folks. Our interaction, we needed the county  government in Okemah, and we had minimal contact and help from  people other than ourselves, and that was because we were not accepted.  I mean, when you   re rejected, why do you keep   if you   re going to keep  rejecting me, and you   re not accepting me, why do I keep putting myself  in front of you?  So the Okemah folks, we saw them when they needed our vote for  election. If they had a tight election, they would come out and really  speak to us, and promise us all this great stuff and we would vote. We  had strong emotions for candidates too, by the way. I mean, I   ve seen  fistfights at political rallies among black electorates. I   m for Emil  Montgomery and you   re for someone else, all right? But it wasn   t a  lasting thing, and when it comes to Oklahoma State, when it comes to  OU, when it comes to Langston University, thumbs up. When it comes  to Okemah and Prague, they didn   t want us, and we knew it. They  showed us over and over that they didn   t want to be around us. As I told  you earlier, I   m glad things have changed, but at that particular time, in  the late    50s and early    60s, they did not want to be around us.  Oklahoma is one of the most Jim Crow states that you   ve ever met in  your life. Really, a lot of it started here in Oklahoma, and I grew up here,  so I didn   t realize the difference until I left. But all I   m saying is that our  interaction with the rest of the community, with the other communities,  Boley was a haven. Boley was where you could go and you could feel  wanted, you could feel friendship, you could feel sincerity, and you  could feel like,    This is ours, and I don   t care if the larger world rejects  me. In Boley, I   m somebody and other people accept me as somebody.     30  Simpson  Hunt  Simpson  Hunt  Did you have a lot of fairs and sporting events that invited in the other  towns?  The only thing that we had is at our high school, we had a baseball team  and we   d play baseball against other schools, and we did not have a  football team when I went to school there. They had one way back  when, but they didn   t have one when I went, and basketball, we had a  basketball team. We did play basketball against other communities as  well, and they had a strong class B championship team here in Boley.  They won state championships. But Boley was known, when I went to  Langston and the other kids would tell you, Boley was known for two  things. When all the other kids find out that you were from Boley, they  knew that number one, you had pretty girls that came from Boley, and  number two, that all the people that came from Boley were    smart.     You didn   t have any dummies that came from Boley, all right. And Mrs.  Ashley, Mr. Lawson, Mr. Holloway, and those folks, made certain that  when you went, you went forward. You were at least at or above the  level of all the other students that went out of Langston University. They  knew you were smart. I mean, you had good academics, and so those  were the two things that other students from other schools  knew about  us . Now, we didn   t have great basketball players, of course. We didn   t  have a lot of great athletes, but academics and pretty girls were what we  were known for, and we did have pretty girls. (Laughs)  What traditions or customs do you preserve from Boley?  Well, the traditions that I preserve is with my wife, we try to have a  family reunion here in Boley because this is really where it kind of all  started. Even though our families, you go back far enough, they   re from  Georgia and from Texas, but in terms of my generation and what we  knew, and our parents, it was started in Boley, and started in Chilesville.  It started, okay? Chilesville-Boley, that   s one and the same. And the  other is that every year I come back to the rodeo. I may or may not  participate in the rodeo, but I come back because I want to see folks that  I haven   t seen in a long time. I wish we would have more class reunions,  but younger folks don   t participate in the class reunions. We need to get  to know some of them as well. And last but not least, every year I come  back to the Langston University Homecoming.  I don   t go to the University of Arizona Homecoming. I don   t go to  Harvard Homecoming. I don   t even know if they have one, and I don   t  care. What I   m saying is I have some good memories, I have some good  feelings. I   ve got some good associates and so forth that came out of  Langston University, and I maintained those. Once you get to graduate  school, you kind of get on your own. You   ve got to get to be a loner, so  31  Finchum  Hunt  Finchum  Hunt  Finchum  Hunt  Simpson  to speak. I have that strong affinity for Langston, and I   m a life member  of Langston University Alumni, and I   m a life member of the University  of Arizona. I   m not a life member of Harvard. I   ve never been back to  Harvard since I left. I   ve never had a desire to go back. So those are the  things that we connect back to Boley, and I say Boley, Langston. Dr.  Holloway was there for, what? Twenty-five, twenty-six years. So he   s  ours. I mean, that   s a Boleyite.  Does your son come back with you?  No. My son was born in Boley, but he doesn   t really  connect .  Remember all these places that I told you that we lived? He doesn   t have  any connection to Boley, other than the fact he knows that he was born  here. So no, he doesn   t come back. My daughter comes back every year,  and she wasn   t born here. It   s strange, and I   ll digress just briefly to say  that girls maintain a stronger affinity to their parents than boys do. My  daughter, there isn   t a day that goes by that she doesn   t call us. She lives  in Maryland, we live in Minnesota, at least once, twice, three times, or  four times a day. My son, if he calls once or twice a year, that   s probably  the best we   re going to hear from him. That   s probably his mom   s  birthday and my birthday, but that   s just a fact of life. I don   t know why  it is that way, but boys don   t maintain the contact and they   re not as  good of communicators, and a desire to communicate as girls do. Now,  when I say girls or boys, I   m using that in a general way, okay?  Thank God for my daughter. I mean, I   m not saying that because it   s you  two here. I mean, my wife will tell you the same thing. I could be dead  for six months and my son wouldn   t even know it, and the same for his  mother. But they get all full of their own thing, and it   s something. I  can   t put my finger on it, but maybe you librarians and sociologists can  tell me what it is, why women are communicators and connectors than  we men are. (Laughs) Somebody, it ought to be a project that somebody  would do a thesis or a dissertation. It   s something there, and it   s not just  me, now. I   m noticing it in a lot of families. The girls will stay in  contact, but the boys, we don   t contact each other. We don   t phone each  other and call and, you know, talk. You haven   t noticed that?  I have a son, so I   m hoping that what you   re saying   s not true. (Laughs)  Well, do you have a daughter?  No.  Well, you   re in trouble. (Laughs) You better get     Do you have any special family traditions from growing up that you can  32  Hunt  Simpson  Hunt  Simpson  Hunt  Finchum  Hunt  Finchum  Hunt  Finchum  Hunt  talk about?  No, we didn   t have any special family traditions. I was trying to think.  As kids, we had school plays, and that was more than just a family  tradition, it was a community tradition. Every grade school had an  annual school play, and all these schools that I mentioned to you, they  don   t exist anymore. You know, the place that I went to school is gone.  It   s been gone for a number of years. Oh yes, we always had community  baseball games. It wasn   t a high school game. It was a baseball game,  and we   d try to bring in folks from other communities; Iron Post, Gypsy  or Okemah or whatever. It was a sandlot thing is what it was. That was  so long ago, we didn   t wear batting helmets. No, we did not. (Laughs)  But you didn   t have aluminum bats, so     We didn   t have aluminum bats, but the ball was just as hard then as it is  now, but that was a tradition that we had. And on Saturday nights in  Boley, that was a real shindig, folks. Everybody in the country wanted to  come to Boley on Saturday night. They wanted to come Saturday and  Saturday night. Do you remember, well, you probably don   t, maybe you  do, a record by Little Richard called, Saturday Night and I Just Got  Paid. (Laughs) Well that was it. You got paid, you came to Boley, but  there was no, nobody got killed or robbed or anything. If you drink too  much and you get drunk, people would lay you down someplace, but  nobody would roll you or rob you or anything. Everybody knew each  other, and,    Old Bill, you know, you   ve had too much to drink. Take  him to       Even if they put you in jail, they didn   t charge you with  anything. They were just taking you out harm   s way.  That   s nice. What were the special food traditions in your family? What  was a typical Sunday dinner like?  Typical Sunday dinner? Chicken, fried chicken.  Did you have to kill it, or did your mother?  I generally had to kill it. I had to do the wringing of the neck.  Did you have a special method?  Yes. (Laughs)  I   ve heard different versions.  There was a time or two we got the ax and we cut the chicken   s head off,  but boy, you better get that chicken in the bucket and hold them down  33  Simpson  Hunt  Finchum  Simpson  Hunt  Simpson  Hunt  Finchum  Hunt  and put something on top of it because if not, you   d have blood  everywhere. Have you heard the expression,    You run around like a  chicken with its head cut off?    Well, that   s a true statement. You cut a  chicken   s head off and you don   t put it in a bucket, it   ll run. It will  literally run around the yard. Blood spewing everywhere. So that  expression, operating like a chicken with its head cut off, means you  don   t know where you   re going. You   re just running  (Laughs)  That was our Sunday tradition. We also had a tradition of different  families would invite the pastor to their home for Sunday dinner. It  wouldn   t be the same family every Sunday, we rotated. Unfortunately as  children, you didn   t get the choice pieces of the chicken. You didn   t eat  until after the pastor had eaten, and that meant sometimes you got the  chicken feet, and there   s not much meat on those chicken feet, but we  didn   t think that much about it, you know. If need be, we   d kill more  than two chickens because the pastor could eat a chicken by himself.  (Laughs)  Wow.  Did you do that in Tennessee?  Sure did.  What family heirlooms or keepsakes do you have from when you were a  little boy?  I   ve got memories, I   ve got photographs. I still keep the home place  property that I grew up on, the five acres of land that we grew up on,  where the home site was. My mother had an old sewing machine, and  I   m trying to think   was that a Singer? But my wife has kept that, and it  still operates today. And we did keep what was called a flying cloud  clock. It was a big wooden ship that had a light in it and a mast and  everything, but we finally got rid of that. My wife, every once in awhile,  she makes me throw out all the junk, and I   ve got a lot of junk. We need  to have a garage sale. When we have one, I go to a garage sales, I go and  bring back more than what I sold. So I   m accumulating stuff.  But you saved the sewing machine.  We saved the sewing machine. It   s a dark brown and a light brown  sewing machine that we saved.  Did she use it very much, your mother?  Yes, she did.  34  Finchum  Hunt  Finchum  Hunt  Finchum  Hunt  Simpson  Hunt  Simpson  Hunt  Made your clothes or hers?  Oh yeah, yeah. Well, back then, these mothers made a lot of clothes for  us. After you finish eating your flour, and you didn   t have to go through  this, but they made dresses out of those flour sacks, and     Did she quilt?  You better believe it. My grandmother quilted, and had them sawhorses  there. All winter she   d be collecting these pieces and putting them  together, and you talk about something beautiful. I don   t know how  these women put all that together, but they quilted these pieces  together     Do you have any?  I think I have one. One.  What world events had the most impact on you growing up, and did any  of them personally affect your family or Boley?  I mentioned to you the Emmett Till killing in Mississippi. That had more  impact on me. It brought me to the realization of who I am and what   s  thought of me and what people think my boundaries are. Do you know  who Emmett Till is? Okay. Well, you   re a historian. You   d better know.  But, at any rate, that changed my life, and the other was almost getting  killed in Sapulpa, Oklahoma. That obviously changed my life a great  deal, also. So those two events, I   d say, were the most troublesome and  traumatic events, and then the death of my mother in 1966 was very  traumatic for me, also. She got killed in a car accident.  How did you learn about the Tulsa Race Riot and other aspects of black  Oklahoma history?  Well, I did not learn from it through the history that I was taught in  grade school. I did not learn about it through the history I was taught in  Oklahoma history in high school. That   s not where I learned about it. I  learned about it through reading about it in some books. I never knew it  even existed, and I don   t know that it was being kept a secret, or, it  should have been taught to me. It should have been taught to all of white  and black, and, I   m not white, so I don   t know, but I don   t think it was  taught to the white kids as well. And I think it was something that we  wanted to sweep under the rug and something, they said,    Well, that   s  too profound, too provocative for kids to know about.     35  Simpson  Hunt  Simpson  Hunt  Simpson  Hunt  We need to know our history, and I didn   t learn about it. I didn   t learn  about it at Langston. I had American History at Langston, and I didn   t  learn about it. It   s not in the book. I can guarantee, it was not in the  history books that I read. So I learned about it through some articles, and  then I got a book, Acres of Aspiration. That book described it better than  anything else. There wasn   t even a word of mouth amongst black people  about the race riots in Oklahoma. I don   t understand that, why they kept  us in the dark. I mean, what were we going to do? I mean, yeah, we  should have known about that. And that was horrible.  And it   s still not automatically taught.  Not taught in the history curriculum? No?  What was the town reaction or your reaction to the assassinations of  Martin Luther King or John F. Kennedy?  I wasn   t here when Martin Luther King was killed. I was on the job in  Nevada, and I was at Langston University when John Kennedy was  assassinated. I remember that very vividly, and there was a lot of  remorse and a lot of blaming of white people. There were some that  even had a conspiracy theory beyond the United States, but I never saw  anything or heard of anything at Boley that was any uprising or  anything. Through the years we   ve learned to survive as a town by  accepting things, and sometimes you accept too much. You need to get  upset sometime. Unfortunately, some folks felt that they were protecting  us by not getting you knowledgeable or upset about the things.  At that time, if there had been any type of uprising, the white folks in  Okfuskee County would have burned this town down completely. And  that was just the time, and I was surprised when back then, not too long  ago, some white guy from Paden, I think, got hung here in Boley. They  claimed, well, they say he hung himself, but if there   d been a white man  hung in Boley when I was going to school, we   d have all had to get out  of   Chilesville wasn   t far enough. (Laughs) It was not. But that was just  the time, and that was the mentality. It was like the hanging of Laura. I  mean, that was the time.  The hanging of who?  The hanging of Laura, a black woman and her son that were hung here  in Okfuskee County back about the time of the Tulsa Race Riots, and  they hung them over there. She had two sons. One was a baby and one  was a teenager, and he was accused of saying something to a white  woman. As a result, they put him in jail in Okemah, and the white men  in Okemah, the Ku Klux Klan, decided that they were going to hang  36  Simpson  Hunt  Simpson  Hunt  him. So they went to the jail to hang him. The mother found out, and she  went down to protect her son, and they said,    Well, you feel that  strongly about it, we   re going to hang both of you.    And they did. They  hung her and the boy over the river down here, and they left them up for  a long time. There   s pictures of it. Look under lynching. It was in  Okfuskee County, and there   s a book called The Hanging of Laura.  The baby, they did not hang. The Berry family in Okemah, the woman,  she interceded and she says,    No, you   re not going to do anything to this  baby.    So they, in essence, kept the baby. I don   t know if they adopted  him, but his name was Booker Berry, B-O-O-K-E-R, Berry, B-E-R-R-Y.  They ran the Berry Chevrolet place in Okemah. But in order to do that,  they had some girls of their own, so in order to allow that to happen,  they castrated the boy so that he couldn   t have any relations with those  girls. So he grew up between here and Okemah, and he grew up as part  of their family. I   m not certain if I were him I would have wanted you to  do that to me. I mean, just take me on out. But at any rate, they raised  him, and they took care of him, and he died. He lived in a place out here  between Okemah and Boley. He never had any interest, of course, in any  females, and of course, he never had any family.  Thank you.  Oh, I thought you already knew this.  I didn   t. Thank you. Why do you think people maintain such strong  connections to Boley even after they   ve left?  Because you had so many good experiences here. You have so many  good memories of things that happened here in this town. I don   t mean  in Okemah, and I don   t mean the hanging of Laura. I don   t mean that. I  don   t mean being almost shot. But this was kind of like, this was our  world. I mean, I can come back in here and this is ours, and everybody  needs a sense of place. Everybody. I mean, you find a people that don   t  have a sense of place, and they   re lost. They   re lost people, and  unfortunately there are a lot of people today that don   t have a sense of  place. They don   t have a sense of belonging, and as a result you   re like a  nomad. I mean, you   re just nothing. This is our sense of place, Boley.  We remember when. You   ve got so many great memories here in town.  I don   t want you to leave here thinking that everything that was here was  bad. It wasn   t. In Boley, I had great experiences. In Chilesville, I had  great experiences. In IXL I had great experiences. It   s just that you stay  in your world. As the folks would say then,    You stay in your place.     And this was our place, and my place, even though I   ve grown beyond  the confines of this physical circle in terms of what I can and cannot do  37  Simpson  Hunt  Simpson  Hunt  or what my rights are or they   re not, I still come back to Boley. It comes  back to Boley.  When I was growing up as a kid, you could say,    Well, picking cotton  all day and slopping hogs and all that, why in the world is that great  experience?    Well, it is. I mean, it   s what I did, and can I deny my  existence? No. Not even trying to, and you know, we had other families.  It wasn   t just me. It was us, and that was a big thing about the    us.    A  lot of other places that I   ve been that I don   t have that feeling of    us.    I  mean, I lived there, but that   s not my home. Boley is my home.  What do you think is the most important thing for people to know about  Boley?  You mean outsiders or inside Boley? Or both?  Let   s do both.  Well, outside, I hope that people come back here and see that Boley  needs help. There are some things that we can do, and people on the  inside need to be willing to accept that help. As I frequently say, you go  to the doctor and you   ve got problems, he gives you a prescription and  you go fill it, and you put it on top of the refrigerator. That hasn   t done  you a damn bit of good. You don   t take it. And I   m saying that I think  right now, Boley needs some outside help. I don   t think they can do it  inside. And some folks inside have to be big enough to allow that  outside help to come in, to accept some of the recommendations. Some  of it   s going to be somewhat critical of the people that are already here.  But you   ve got to be big enough to accept that, and I   m not certain that   s  true. The saying amongst some of the citizens is,    Well, we   ve got to  have such and such die before things can change.    Well, that   s because  there are some people that are not going to accept change that doesn   t  involve them as a key ingredient.  I would like to see people like the Resource Conservation and  Development folks in Okemah come to Boley and do an inventory, do  an assessment and to work with them to create a plan. Maybe a small  plan, and some low hanging fruit that you can all of a sudden have some  success on and the community can have some success. Re-instill in folks  the fact that you can do some things and we can do them together, and  we can succeed, and it   s going to require some outside help. I   m not  saying it   s just got to be all people from Boley. There are lots of  resources available if you know how to access them, but it   s going to  take some vision.  The Resource Conservation and Development folks, they   re already  38  Simpson  Hunt  being paid. You don   t have to pay them anything to do this. They do it  for other communities, and Boley needs the help with things that are  going to bring young families back to Boley. Grandparents are not  having babies. Well, we   re not, all right? And for young folks to be here,  they have to have some reason and a good job and a good education  system, a good police system, a good fire system. You   ve got to have a  lot of this community structure in order to come here. Why would you  want to come here? You   ve got all those things missing. Your water and  sewer, and the streets and so forth, and you have to have an adequate  level of income. Your wife isn   t going to let you come to some place  that you   re making ten thousand dollars a year and you want to send  your kids to college. She wants the same thing that the other wives want.  I just have one question left. Did you have anything else that you wanted  to talk about?  I want to talk about jobs for this city, and I want to talk about some  development here in the city. Something that   s going to bring jobs, and  let me just say, I have some ideas but, I don   t know how well they   d be  accepted. Somebody needs to flesh them out. But there   s one industry in  Oklahoma that   s thriving, and Boley needs to be part of it, and you know  what that is? Gambling, casinos. And you know, Boley was formed by a  donation of a Creek freed woman of the land to Boley. All right. Now, I  think you   ve got an Indian connection there, and I   m saying,    Why  couldn   t we have a casino in Boley?    Every one that I see in Okemah  and Clearview and everyplace else, they   re all doing booming business  and they   re growing, and you need something that   s a self-generating  income and self-generating of jobs. It would bring a lot of income and  activity to the city, and it would also bring some jobs to the city. And so  that   s one of my ideas that I have for Boley is to bring some jobs back.  I don   t know, if you have a home mortgage or anything, a credit card,  and you call someplace to get some information. Who do you get? What  country are they from? Panama or someplace. With the fiber optic  network that is running right through this town, why couldn   t a town like  Boley, or any other small community for that matter in the United States  of America be that call center for these mortgage companies, credit card  companies, or others? With the wages that are being paid here now in  Boley, I can   t imagine that they   re any less than what   s being paid to  those Indians and the people in Panama. All I   m saying is take  advantage of technology here, and those are things that again, I think  would bring some jobs and some economic opportunity to the town. You  don   t have to build a big building, and when I call, I have no idea where  they are. I hear all this clatter in the background when I call these call  centers. They could be in a barn for all I know, and it doesn   t matter to  me. But I   m saying that it   s things like this that we need to actively  39  pursue as a 8(a) contractor.  We need to get registered with the Small Business Administration, and  some other folks, and see if we can   t bid on some of these opportunities.  We need to market ourselves, let other folks know what we can do, that  we have these resources here. I think there are people out there and there  are businesses out there, if they knew what it is that you   re trying to do  and they could see a comprehensive plan and they could see some future  in it, I think they   d be willing to do that. I mean, what do you have to  lose, okay? So those are just two ideas that I have that off the top of my  head I think that Boley, a small community, ought to take advantage of.  I don   t see us attracting much other business, but the high school that   s  abandoned now, that building could be used by some industry. I know  Dickies and some of those places left Okemah, but if you had a  workforce that you could train, and you don   t need a Ph.D. to be a  seamstress or whatever they do. We need to market the fact that we have  these assets, and that   s part of that inventory that I was telling you about.  Inventory and assessment of your skills and then what are your needs  and how do we meet those needs? And what kind of decisions need to be  made in order to implement those needs? And I think if something like  that were done, but you can   t just go and say,    Would you come to  Boley?    No business is going to, they don   t know how to respond to  that. They   ll give you an audience, but, thank you, they need to see     everything now, you   ve got to have a business plan. You have to have a  business plan. And maybe you   ve seen it, but I have not seen a business  plan for Boley. I   ve not seen a strategic plan for Boley, all right? I see  things going on and things happening, but I don   t see it all coalescing  into,    Here   s where we   re headed,    and the community as a whole says,     Yeah, this is what we want to be when we grow up. And a year from  now, this is what I   d like to see this town be like.     Most of us that I know of eat, and what I   m saying is why couldn   t you  have a cooperative, a community cooperative grocery store in Boley  where the people here that frequented that business, that supermarket or  market or whatever it is, at the end of the year, you give out dividends  on the basis of how much you participated in buying from the  cooperative? Kind of like the old Rural Electric cooperative. Used to be,  when you   re on the REA cooperative, at the end of the year, they sent  you a check for your cooperative proceeds. We made a profit and here it  is. So all the profits went back to the people who actually did business  with the cooperative. Well, why not have a community grocery  cooperative? I mean, everybody eats. I can   t think of anybody that  doesn   t eat.  Renewable energy is a big item, not only in Oklahoma, but nation-wide.  40  Simpson  Hunt  Finchum  Hunt  Simpson  Hunt  Now, you   d need a little infrastructure, but why couldn   t Boley have, as  they have out west, wind farms here within the city limits or on the  outskirts of the city limits? I mean, that   s a renewable energy. In fact,  most states, they have a requirement, my state has a requirement that 20  percent of all their electricity has to be from renewable energy sources.  That   s part of this    go green    type thing. And so, again, why not? I  mean, I dream of things that never were and wonder,    Why not?     We   ve got to have some vision. One of the things that we generate in  this country more than anything else is junk. Why not have a solid waste  incinerator and a low-level waste facility here at Boley? Would you take  it from other communities? I mean, you have to be in conformance with  EPA guidelines, but all I   m saying is,    Why not?    Got to have it  someplace, and this, the low level hazardous waste   what they   re  talking about, folks, empty paint buckets. I mean, come on. It   s not     It   s not nuclear waste.  It   s not nuclear rot, the reactor rod or anything of that nature. Why not?  Again, all of that being part of    we need to do some things and we need  to agree together.    We need to do some things together to bring  enterprise, business and activity to Boley. Boley is dying. Boley is  dying. I can   t think of anybody anyplace that has any foresight  whatsoever, and Ray Charles can see that Boley is dying and he   s dead  and blind. (Laughter)  So I take it you   re not retiring here?  No, I   m not going to retire here. I   d like to contribute some ideas and I   d  like to see the town grow even though I   m not necessarily a physical part  of it. I don   t want the town to disappear. And if you retired here, again,  what do you do? I mean, you talk about medical. When you get old, you  need medical facilities, all right? And you need police protection  because you   re not as young and as strong as you once were. You need  fire protection and you need all these things. That infrastructure has to  be there or you have to have a plan for that infrastructure in order to  attract anybody to be here, all right? And I probably told you folks more  than I should have, but I just want Boley to live forever, not just for my  lifetime and not just for your lifetime. I want the town to grow and to  live forever.  How would you like to be remembered?  Nobody remembers me now. (Laughs) Well, I   m serious. I come back to  this town, other than the older people, and they   re getting fewer and  fewer, these younger people don   t know me. They don   t even know that  41  Simpson  Hunt  I grew up here. I   d like to be remembered as somebody that made a  contribution for the continuity and the life of Boley forever. I don   t need  to be remembered. All I want is the town, it   s not about me. It   s about  the town. Pastor Rick Warren wrote a book called The Purpose Driven  Life, and one of the key passages in there, over and over again is,    It   s  not about you.    And that   s true. It   s not about you, and that   s part of the  reason why the town is dead now. There   s too many people who thought  it was about them, and when they died, that was it. It   s not about you.  You   ve got to have a higher calling, and, of course, Pastor Rick Warren  was referring to God, but it   s not about you.  If you haven   t read that book, I would really recommend it. I don   t care  what denomination you are, but it   s called The Purpose Driven Life. It   s  good for any failing in your life. It doesn   t just have to be religion. So I  don   t have to be remembered. I just want the town to be remembered.  No, I don   t want it to be remembered. I want the town to live on forever  and be a thriving, productive, self-sustaining town just like any other  town. And don   t get hung up on race. It   s not about race. It   s not. I  mean, folks, it   s hard economics now. Okay?  Well, thank you very much for meeting with us today, Mr. Hunt. We  appreciate you sharing your afternoon.  Well, you   re very, very welcome. You be certain to tell your dad I said  hello.  -------  -------  
