 Finchum  Hoerth  Today is December 16, 2011. My name is Tanya Finchum. I   m with  Oklahoma State University, and I   m in Billings, Oklahoma to speak with  Pat Hoerth regarding her parents, Shirley and Henry Bellmon. Henry, of  course, was a former Oklahoma governor and U.S. senator. Thank you  for having me.  Thanks for being here.  Let   s start with learning a little bit more about you, starting with where  you were born and when.  I was born on March 11, 1948. I was born in Enid. We were living here  in this house at the time. It was part of our story that that day was a  record breaking blizzard. My parents headed out for Enid in the blizzard  and got stranded west of Billings on the highway and couldn   t get  through the drifts anymore. So, they stopped at a farmhouse and called  my mother   s parents, and they had a new Studebaker, and it had that  giant grill on the front. They brought the Studebaker and plowed their  way through drifts and got Mom and Dad to Enid. Mom, of course,  stayed, and my grandmother stayed, and my dad and my grandfather  Osborne came back to my grandfather   s farm.  It was lambing season, and so he was very concerned about the lambs in  that blizzard, but they got stuck again five miles from the farm and had  to walk through blowing snow, waist high drifts, stopped along the way  at different farms and got warmed up, but eventually made it back to  Grandpa   s house. The next morning my dad discovered that his father,  who lived a mile east of here had been very cold and stoked his stove so  much that the chimney caught the house on fire and his house burned  down that night. Neighbors about a half a mile away saw and came to  his rescue. March 11, 1948 was a memorable  day . My birth was the  least of the concerns on that day. (Laughs)  5  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Eventful.  Yes.  So your parents were living in this house at that time?  Yes. This is the house my dad and his, well, his nine  half-  brothers and  sisters before he was born lived in. He was the oldest of four boys, and  they all grew up here. I was in the fifth grade when we moved from here  to the new house.  You have good childhood memories?  Yes, this is a great, great place.  Where did you go to elementary school?  I was scheduled to go to Glenrose, which is the school a mile and a  quarter north of here. There were three of us to be in the first grade and  all three families opted to go to Billings, and that was the beginning of  the end of Glenrose School. It was a one-room schoolhouse so I went to  Billings School, Billings Elementary.  Had your father gone to the Glenrose when he was younger?  Yes, they had gone, all of his siblings had gone to Glenrose, but he had  graduated from Marland High School. He went to Marland High School.  Is Glenrose the one that   s as you turn in coming down the street?  Yes, barely, just almost a pile of bricks, now.  When you went to Billings, how many were in your class?  We had a big class. I think we had twenty-five or twenty-six.  Did you graduate from high school in Billings?  No, I graduated from Classen High School, the old Classen in Oklahoma  City, because Dad was governor by then.  And then after high school, where did you go?  I went to Oklahoma State University, majored in journalism and  eventually got a master   s from Phillips Theological Seminary, a master   s  6  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  of theological studies, and then later a master   s in divinity from the  seminary.  What year did you graduate from OSU?  1970.  Did you live on campus?  I lived in Wentz for three years. That was fun. I loved it. Worked on the  O   Colly, as a journalism major, of course.  Let   s do my math, when your dad ran for governor the first time, you  would have been     I was in the ninth grade, the middle of my ninth grade.  So fifteen, sixteen, somewhere in there?  Yes, when he was elected and we moved it was in January of my ninth  grade year.  Was that hard switching schools mid-year?  It was, well, that wasn   t the biggest change. The biggest change was  going from a town of about 800 to a school of about 800. It was a much  bigger school and that was an adjustment to make, really.  Did they treat you differently because you were the governor   s  daughter?  Other governors    children had been to school there so it was no big deal.  We made friends quickly, and I enjoyed going to school there a lot. We  always came back on the weekends until I was a teenager, older  teenager, and didn   t want to come back on the weekends anymore. But I  still had friends here, and we   d come home on the weekend and see  them and eventually got involved more with friends in Oklahoma City,  and so it was all wonderful. Really, it was not as hard as you might  think.  Those were calmer times. You drove through the governor   s mansion.  People could drive through the driveway. The gates weren   t locked  except at night, and you could drive under the portico. It had graduate  students, law students and med students were the guards. There was one  guard in the house at all times, and they became like our older brothers.  So, low, low, low security and no need for any more until the night of  7  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  John Kennedy   s assassination, they sent security. After that, I think it  began to change a little more. By the time Dad was governor the second  time, there was a guard house with highway patrol people there, more  than one, all the time, and the gates were locked. The first time we lived  there, it was real low key and real easy to make that transition.  Still a little bit different from being on the farm.  Yes, different from being on the farm.  Did you do 4-H?  We did. We did 4-H in Oklahoma City. Still have friends from those  years, Rodd Moesel, still a friend. He spoke at our dad   s funeral. We see  him from time to time because he is in the horticulture world, and so we  cross paths quite a bit and consult with him some, too. Our 4-H years  extended to Oklahoma City. It was different, but I   m glad we got to keep  doing it.  What are some of your memories of campaigning for the 1962 election?  Well, that summer, that   s what we did. We had a station wagon, I don   t  remember what year. It had fin-like things on the back, and I think it was  light green and some chrome. We had matching outfits, red white and  blue pleated skirts and different dresses and shorts outfits that were all  red, white and blue that we dressed alike, didn   t like that so much as we  got older. And we were in that car every day, and Dad would drive  somewhere and we would, to some town, and he would hit Main Street  and go into the newspaper there and all the shops and the co-op and the  businesses. Mom would drive us into the neighborhood, the residential  area, and let us out on one corner and drive to the end of the block and  wait for us, and we would hand brochures and we would knock on doors  and say,    Hi, I   m Pat Bellmon, and I   d like you to vote for my daddy,  and he   s running for governor,    and hand them a brochure, and we did  that all summer. Hard to believe we did that, but we did. (Laughs)  Oh, I think a time or two we got some dramatic handing of the brochure  back to us, or a time or two we got kind of in the path of an angry dog.  The idea of sending children out, we probably wouldn   t even do that, but  it was perfectly fine and certainly was a bonding experience for our  family. We would get tired and, of course, we ate out all the time so we  learned a few things about eating out, like you don   t go to a restaurant if  there are no cars there. That was one of Dad   s rules. You go to the  restaurant with the most cars. We learned to sleep sitting up. We would  say,    I   m going to take a nap now,    and then we   d just pretend like we  were conking off because we would just   we were going a lot. We  8  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  learned to sleep, take naps, in the car and all three of us in the back seat  and how to situate ourselves so we could do that.  There were a lot of meetings. We attended a lot of meetings. Some very  early breakfasts, which we were always pretty grumpy about that, and  Mom was having to fix our hair and get us looking presentable and  acting presentable. Leon McAuliffe was the band that was with Dad a  lot. Somebody was asking about that. What else about that? It was a  bonding time for our family, and I think it helped. I guess it helped. I  mean, how do you know, for sure? But it was definitely a warm, fuzzy  way to approach people and get Dad   s name out there. We did the two-party  tea parties. We went to jillions of those, eating cookies and  listening to Dad say the same thing over and over again.  What would the kids do while he was talking?  We just sat and listened. There were places, as time wore on, as the  summer and the fall wore on, there were people who we would stay with  and sometimes they would have swimming pools and we   d get to take  the afternoon off and swim. So we had some perks that came along as  well as quite an amazing education for us, but it was fun. I think we all  enjoyed it a lot and never questioned it. It was just what we were given  to do and we did it. (Laughs)  Any mishaps along the way?  Not that I remember. I think there was a mishap with, I think it was Gail  and a dog. I think she got bit, maybe. I can   t remember. I   d have to  check. And I think somebody slammed a door in our face, one of us, I  can   t remember. But considering how many doors we were at, that was  not much.  Had your mother made the outfits?  I think she made some of them, and then she bought some of them. I  don   t remember us wearing Bellmon Belle dresses. She, of course,  designed those and helped make them, but I don   t   maybe we did, but I  think we had other things, other dresses that we wore, and shorts. And  then during that summer, Koalani Han, from Hawaii came. When I was  in the fifth grade, we went to Hawaii as a family for six weeks and lived  there and went to school there at   I forgot the name of the school. I   ll  think of it  Kealaho School . Dad had been stationed on Maui and had  friends there and wanted us to experience Maui, because it had been so  important to him.  When he and Mom married, they didn   t drink or smoke so they saved  9  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  what they thought would be their alcohol and cigarette money and put it  in savings bonds. At the point where we could get on a ship and Dad  would pay whole-fair, Mom would pay half-fare and each of us would  pay quarter-fare. Right before I got old enough to go into half-fare, they  cashed in all the savings bonds, got all the money they saved, and we  went to Hawaii and went to school, Kealaho School, and it was a public  school. We were in the minority. We were white kids and most were  Polynesian children. We weren   t Catholic, most were Catholic. We went  to school there, and in Gail   s class was a young woman named Koalani  Han, and we went to her house to take hula lessons. We took hula  lessons, and she became a good friend so that summer we were  campaigning she came for a month or two. On those flatbed trucks when  they   d have campaign rallies, Koalani would do the hula as part of the  entertainment. (Laughs) And she traveled with us part of the summer in  the car, too, and knocking on doors so that was pretty fun.  Folks probably enjoyed seeing that, since it   s something they didn   t get  to do every day.  I don   t know how people responded, really, I mean, how that made any  sense, but there was a band. I   m sure Dad, I don   t remember what he  said, but knowing Dad, I   m sure he made a very strong connection with  her. We learned a lot in that experience about human rights and  prejudice and how to be with people that are different from you. We got  to go to a lot of Japanese people   s homes and sit on the floor and eat  Japanese food. That really was an experience that propelled Dad into  politics, because during World War II, he was stationed on Maui, and  then they made friends with all these Japanese people. Then he   d go to  Iwo Jima and Sai Pan and Tinian and kill Japanese people, and that was  a real strong disconnect for him, and he vowed to himself that he would  do something about that if he ever could. So, he wanted us to experience  these warm, wonderful island people, which we got to do, and then he  also did have a chance to, in lots of different ways, to bring about  some   I mean, not completely, obviously, we   re still in war   but to do  what he could to help people see that we   re all the same and should be  treated equally. I don   t know what he did on the campaign trail about  Koalani, what points he made, but it was great fun for us to have her  along, a fourth sister.  When he was doing the speeches, were they the same from each town to  town?  You know, I don   t remember the speeches very well. (Laughs) I think he  made the same points, pretty much. As time wore on and there were  debates with William Atkinson, and those were great fun. I loved sitting  through those. As the issues percolated to the surface, he would address  10  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  those.  Do you have memories of election night?  Yes. Election night was an important event. We met with the staff for  dinner at Jeanette Baxter   s house in Oklahoma City. She would become  Dad   s secretary, I guess she was during the campaign. Jerry and Jeanette  Baxter, we ate at their house with the whole staff, and then we drove to  the Skirvin Hotel where the victory party was to be. It was raining really  hard, and Dad told us that it looked like he would be elected governor  and that our lives were about to change in a very big way and that what  he wanted and what he thought would be best for us is to stay who we  are and to be the girls we   ve always been.  Then we got to the Skirvin and changed clothes, and there were  photographs and all that stuff, and then we went down to the party. And  I do not remember the party at all. I remember being in the, kind of the  suite in the hotel, and they did a picture, kind of a portrait of the family  there. I remember that, and I do not remember anything after that. I do  remember something at the Civic Center. Maybe we went to the Civic  Center. Maybe the party was at the Civic Center. I do remember being  there, vaguely. It   s interesting what you remember and what you totally  have lost.  And inauguration day?  Inauguration day was memorable. (Laughs) I was the drum major for the  Billings High School band, and Dad wanted the band to lead the parade.  So, I stayed with a friend in Billings the night before, and we had to get  up at some horrible hour in the dark and get on the band bus and drive to  Oklahoma City. It was really freezing cold, and so we got the band lined  up, and we did the parade. I had on lots of socks and my boots, white,  just white leather boots, and it   s a wool drum major   s outfit and a big  hat, and so I got to lead the parade and remember going by and Dad just  beaming   makes me cry   but I was frozen. We were all frozen. And  when they picked me up and took us   Mom and Dad were staying at,  oh, it was a hotel on Lincoln Boulevard, a motel. I can   t remember the  name of it. When I went there, so that   s all the parade I saw, or all that  was being in it, and then went to the hotel.  Well, we couldn   t get my boots off. My feet had frozen, were so cold  and swollen that we couldn   t get my boots off. Mom had to figure out  what to do about that. They put me in a tub of warm water and got me  really warm, and finally we got the boots off and got some shoes on that  would match the dress I was wearing. The other thing that happened  right then was I think it was a Tulsa Tribune reporter asked me ahead of  11  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  time to make a statement and be interviewed. Dad had worked up my  statement, of course, which I was glad for, and his statement was that I  said,    I wish you old folks would find an easier way to choose the  people who run the government,    or something, which was Dad   s humor  all over that.    I wish you old folks would find an easier way to do this.     That was the quote that they used in the article, and I think it was Frosty  Troy. I think it   s when he was working for the   I   m not sure, but I can  go back and look. Anyway, later, I got a letter from somebody saying I  shouldn   t call people old folks. (Laughs) So, that was pretty funny.  Then we went to the capitol and it was sunny and warmer. We watched  Dad be inaugurated and then went to a reception, I think, in the Blue  Room and then the ball that night, we were there for the ball, which was  just huge. I think Mom and Dad were the only ones that got to dance  because it was so crowded. It was dangerous, actually. They were  worried about the rotunda collapsing. So many people were there.  Somebody actually had a heart attack and died and was so packed that  they didn   t know it because that person couldn   t collapse because there  were so many people crowded together. It was a tragic moment in time,  but they were very happy. Mom was nervous, I think.  I can imagine.  It was a bigger adjustment for Mom, I think, than it was for any of us.  A far cry from being a farmer   s wife.  And she was still pretty shy. When Dad started to run for governor, Dad  signed them up for Dale Carnegie courses, a Dale Carnegie course. He  wanted to be better at remembering people   s names, and so he learned  some of their techniques, like the first person you meet is riding a horse  and second person you meet is doing something else, tricks to help him  remember names. Mom had to overcome her shyness, and that was  supposed to help her do that. When Dad was elected to the state house in  1947, Mom was really shy and they chivareed them on the House floor,  put her in a wheelbarrow and all, had pots and pans and made all this  noise, and she was just kind of mortified, just so shy. It was hard for her  so she had to ease into all this public world she was stepping into. That  night was wonderful, but a very public moment for her.  Had she made her own dress?  She made her own dress. She looked really beautiful, and I think there   s  a photograph of her biting her lip while they   re dancing. It   s really  beautiful. It speaks to this world she was stepping into. The campaign  had been part of it, but I don   t remember her speaking, doing public  12  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  speaking during the campaign. She was more engaged with people one-on-  one or in private conversations. Her public persona came more  gradually.  She didn   t knock on doors, you girls did. She wasn   t practicing that way,  either.  She was in the car waiting and watching and making sure we were okay.  And then when did you move into the mansion, soon thereafter?  I can   t remember if we moved in before the inauguration. No, because  we were at that hotel/motel. It was right after that, I guess. I remember  moving in on the south door, the truck, some truck, I don   t remember if  it was a farm truck, was backed up to the south door. There was a porch  on the south side, coming in there, and we all had to choose our rooms  and had heard stories about which other children had lived in which  rooms. I don   t know how we ended up choosing. Gail   s room was on the  west, these were all on the second floor along the north end of the house.  Gail was on the west, in the corner room on the west, I was in the middle  and Ann was on the corner room on the east, northeast. We were all in  the same area. Gail and I shared a bathroom, and Ann had her own  bathroom. And Mom and Dad were on the south, in the master bedroom.  You think as the oldest, you would have had the room with the     You would have thought I would have the room with my own bathroom.  No, I don   t know how that happened. I don   t remember. I know that  Raymond Gary   s daughter lived in my room, the room I lived in, and she  had a poodle which she would   this is the story, whether or not it   s true  or not   she would put it in a basket and lower it out the window and let  it go for a walk and then it would get in the basket and she   d raise the     that   s all I know about that. (Laughs) It was a blue room. Gail   s was  kind of red, I think, and Ann   s was green, maybe.  Already painted, or you got to choose?  I think we got to choose. I think we got new bedspreads and stuff like  that.  And meal times, did you discuss politics or not?  Yes, I   m sure we discussed our own personal stuff, but as I grew older,  Dad and I had lots of conversations about issues. I was more liberal than  him and more idealistic, he would say unrealistically idealistic. (Laughs)  He was much more the pragmatist. So yes, we had lots of great  13  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  conversations about not so much politics, but issues. Not the  personalities of   but more about issues. One summer when I was in  college, I think it must have been my freshman year so it was his last  year as governor, no, I don   t know when that was. Maybe that was when  he was running for the Senate. He was on the road campaigning, and I  was with him, driving and keeping him awake when he drove. He drove  more so it was a matter of keeping him awake and being an assistant to  him. That was when I was at OSU so that was a little bit later, but those  were times when we had really big discussions about things.  When it was time for you to vote for the first time, was there any  discussion working up to that?  I didn   t question it at that time. I just registered as a Republican and  voted that way. Honestly, that   s changed as time   s gone on. But at the  time, I didn   t even question what side of the fence I would be on, and I  don   t remember talking about who to vote for then. Certainly in later  years, we talked about that, but I think I was pretty   just kind of  followed along. I was pretty loyal about being who my father was for.  Well, once I got in college, of course, that was right about then, I guess,  I began to think on my own. I remember writing in, when nobody was  running for president that I wanted, I wrote in somebody so that wasn   t  very helpful, I   m sure. (Laughs)  He was more interested in you voting, period, just voting.  Yes, he was great about letting us   well, not letting us, encouraging us  to think on our own. Even if he disagreed with what we thought, which  he did a lot, he never tried to  be imperial . He could make you feel like  you really don   t know very much when you   re saying some of these  things that he thinks is      You really should think through that  differently.    (Laughs) He   d let you know that, but he wasn   t imperial at  all or authoritarian, just,    Use your brain well and think this through and  talk, let   s talk about this. Have you considered this, and if you think like  that or you want this to happen, have you thought about this?    He wasn   t  trying to force us into any kind of action or inaction or supporting  somebody or not.  While you were in the mansion the first time around, you probably  weren   t much for the second time he was governor. You were already  married.  I was here living in this house and did spend some time there, but I  didn   t live there.  Well, the first time, did you spend much time in the capitol? Could you  14  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  go and come to see him however you wished during the    60s?  I didn   t. I think Ann did some, but I was in high school and occupied  with band and friends and 4-H. We still did some things we needed to do  with Dad, and we had open house once a month at the governor   s  mansion, and that   s one place they did force me to do something I didn   t  want to do, which was play piano, because they were paying for my  piano lessons. (Laughs) I enjoyed playing piano, but it was a little bit  nerve wracking to play for people, but mostly they ignored what you  were doing anyway. So, I did play piano some during those open houses,  and we served, and we did public things, but we also carried on our  private lives and our high school and friends and 4-H and band and all  that stuff.  While he was being governor, can you talk about some of the things your  mother would be doing during that time?  Mom, the first time, of course, she was busy with 4-H and getting us  raised. That was probably her primary job, then. She struggled in the  beginning because she had never been around staff members. There  were people who entered our lives and that was challenging at first, but  she then became really good friends with staff, and they became like  family to us, especially to Mom and Dad. She was involved that first  term really a lot with us, and I think she had some kind of   what do you  call them, causes, and I don   t remember what they were.  The second term she was very much involved with small home-based  businesses and did a lot of work supporting people in that, because she  had developed in the interim years her own home-based business, and  she had had a couple of them. One was making dresses that had painted,  like Scissor-tails, they were silk dresses with painted things on them.  They were Shir-Lee Designs, and that was in the basement of our new  house. She had developed her own home-based businesses. She really  did a lot to support other people and worked, I think, with OSU and  helped get that going and had a bazaar once a year at the house and then  eventually at the Harn Museum in Oklahoma City to support people  doing home-based business. That was one of her causes. She also  worked with    Don   t Lay that Trash on Oklahoma,    and the  transportation department and getting some wildflower plots planted  along the interstate highways. The second time, we were all grown and  out of the house, and she had grandchildren, which she was definitely  involved with. She had more time to do some things that she really cared  about the second go-around.  Were the grandchildren old enough to know what was going on?  15  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Oh, yes. Well, three of them. There are four boys. My son, Will, is the  youngest, and he was born in    87 so he was born right then. But the  older boys loved being at the governor   s mansion and Will did, too. He  loved doing his little skateboard that he had and that long sidewalk and  big driveway, lots of cement to play on. (Laughs) The boys loved being  in the basement of the governor   s mansion and on the third floor, which  at that time, there was a lot of room to play, and they loved being there.  They had a great time just because of the size. A lot of space to play  around, and the second time there was a swimming pool, not the first  time so that was fun for everybody. And they can get boisterous, and we  had to calm them down and had to help them be realistic about    Yes,  there   s a staff here to clean up and provide food, but you have to do  what you do when you   re at home, too.    (Laughs) So, yes, but we had  lots of fun there the second time around because the boys were old  enough to enjoy being there. And Dad and Mom loved having them  around. It was a lot of fun to have them come visit.  Did they go to the inauguration?  Oh, yes. Well, Will wasn   t born yet, but Brok and Ben and Elliott, they  were like five, six, seven, in there, and they all three stood up at the  podium alongside Burns Hargis, just in case there was any problem, and  led the    Pledge of Allegiance.    The night before there was lots of  instruction and nervous mothers and is this going to work, and they did  it great. There   s a wonderful picture of the three of them and Burns all  standing there doing the    Pledge of Allegiance.    (Laughs) And there are  great pictures of them in the Blue Room also, all dressed up and just  kind of ornery looking little boys getting ready to do this thing and  meeting people. A lot of family was there, Dad and Mom   s brothers and  sisters and their families so it was a great celebration, great time.  Have they gone into politics themselves, any of the grandkids?  Not at this point. Ann   s boys are in Denver. They   re both entrepreneurs,  have their own businesses.  Like Grandmother.  Like Grandmother. And Gail   s son is in Denver, too. All those boys are  in Denver, all three boys are in Denver, and he   s in the insurance  business. My son is in LA. He   s a photographer, working on building a  photography career kind of in the art end of it. So, at this point, none of  them have expressed an interest in entering politics.  But creativity seems to run in the family, too.  16  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  A lot of creativity in all those boys.  And your mother did stained glass.  She did stained glass and all sorts of pottery. She tried a lot of creative  things. And Ben, Ann   s youngest son, does stained glass and uses  Mom   s equipment. He took that on. Elliott has a penchant, or does great  gardening, in which Mom and Dad both did. Brok is a thinker, and he   s  someone who   s going to solve some of the world   s problems through his  different enterprises. Ben owns his own roofing company, and he   s quite  good with working with people and getting people to work together and  administer a company. And Will, who   s the youngest, I think he   s torn  between doing art photography and doing photojournalism, the kind of  photo journalism that shows some of the brokenness of the world. He   s  trying to figure all that out right now.  Come at it from a different angle, but it still runs in the family. When  your father ran for the Senate, how was that campaign different from the  first governor campaign?  We were all older. I was a sophomore, I think, at OSU when that started,  so we didn   t do what we did before. We didn   t knock on doors. We did  do a little bit of speaking ourselves now and then. But we were all in  college   well, I was in college and they were in high school, so that  limited our campaigning. Dad was so well known by then, it was a  whole different thing. We weren   t out there laying new ground trying to  introduce him. We were involved sporadically, and they didn   t have to  tend to us every day, either. (Laughs) It was very, very different for us.  Did you spend time in D.C.?  When he was elected, I graduated from OSU in 1970 and moved to D.C.  When I graduated I went to work for The Washington Star newspaper as  a reporter   or not as a reporter, I was an action line reporter. Those were  days when there was an action line so I lived for eleven years in D.C.  and worked at The Washington Star until 1981. I took a year   s leave of  absence from The Star in, I think, May, and in June they announced they  were closing in August. So my days at The Washington Star ended very  suddenly. I never moved back. I went back to visit and sell my house  and stuff, but stayed in Oklahoma after that.  So that was the main reason you decided to come back to stay?  That was the reason I came back to stay. I loved D.C., and I loved my  work there, but there was always a pull back to Oklahoma. I mean, from  the first year, I was trying to figure out if it was time to move back.  17  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  (Laughs) Really, I probably would have not stayed, but every summer  when I   d come to visit for a week, I   d have to call the paper and say,     I   m staying for two.    They would just be waiting for that call because  after a couple of years, they knew that I would stay in Oklahoma longer  than I   d planned. So, really, The Star   s closing just finally gave me the  answer to that question. I had come here for a year to write a book about  farming and that took longer than a year. When The Star closed, that was  the answer to that question, finally.  And did you come back to Billings or Oklahoma City?  Came back to Billings. I wanted to write the book about farming by  following three farmers for a year, so that   s what I did. I followed three  farmers in Billings, one of them was Dad and then two other farmers in  this area, each day. I spent time with them each day and wrote that book,  which never has been published, but still have the manuscript. I mean, I  finished it. It just wasn   t a very sexy topic for any publisher. So, I still  have the manuscript, but it   s never been published. (Laughs)  There were several books written about farming, then. One was called  Three Farms, actually, although they were farms in three different parts  of the U.S., but that one was very popular. I mean, no farming book is  going to be real popular, but that one was a successful book. And then  there was another one about that time, too. I have read it recently. I  mean, I   ve looked at the manuscript recently, and I   m glad for the  experience, but I do think it   s written well, and maybe I should pursue it  again. I don   t know, and take some work doing that, but it was a great  year because I got, in regards to Dad, because I got to spend time  learning about farming from him and his approach to farming and just  the time every day, some time with him. My windshield time, as one of  the farmers put it, the tractors and the pickup trucks, so it was a great     I   m glad I did it, even though it wasn   t published.  Other rewards.  Yes.  Was he surprised when you came back to live?  That was the year they moved back, too, so I don   t know if he was  surprised. I think he was very glad. Having all the chickens in the roost  is a pretty good thing.  Were you surprised when he decided not to run for a third term as  senator?  18  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  No. Well, I don   t remember if I was surprised. I mean, it   s not like any  of these things happened suddenly because you   ve been talking and  knowing what it   s like for him. He wasn   t thrilled about living in D.C.  He was home almost every weekend, which was hard. He liked being on  the farm. He liked governing as governor better than as a senator.  Although, I think he did really good work as a senator. But I think he  had had enough. (Laughs) I think we knew that. And he, later, said one  of the reasons was he was going to be chair of the budget committee,  finally, because he was in the majority. But Reagan had just been elected  president, and he was not a Reaganomics guy. He would have had to  defend Reagan   s economic policy, and he couldn   t have done that as  budget chair. He was right there in the thick of it. It   s kind of ironic  when you finally have the position, but you couldn   t follow the  philosophy of the administration. That was a major factor in his leaving  when he did.  When he left, was he already thinking governor again?  No, no. I think he was glad to come home to the farm, and he had bought  another piece of land, a large piece of ranch land over on the Arkansas  River east of here about twenty miles, twenty-five miles and was really  excited about improving that and was working on that and enjoying that.  And then these other jobs kept coming up, the Cowboy Hall of Fame job  and then the DHS job, and he knew those were kind of short term things,  but would do those. And then it just seemed like there was this longer  term job that he needed to look at. Dad never ran for office for the sake  of running for office. It was always because there was something  important to do, or there wasn   t anybody else that was in line to do it  and he needed to step in. That was certainly, I think, the first time  around, he was state Republican Chairman and they couldn   t find  anybody else to run. So they finally said,    Why don   t you?    and he had  to think about that, and finally did.  He could have run for governor a second term when he came back? I  know he couldn   t the first time, but the second time?  The second time, he could have, yes.  But by that time, he was in his sixties, I guess?  I don   t know if this happened at the end of his term or right at the end or  right afterward, but at that point, it was becoming clear that he had  Parkinson   s, and he knew that would make things more difficult.  Although, as his Parkinson   s turned out, the medicine really helped  alleviate his symptoms, and he never lost his clear thinking. Well, he  never lost his memory. I think maybe judgment was affected somewhat  19  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  way later, but his Parkinson   s was a slow progression, and it didn   t turn  out to be as debilitating as he thought it could have been when he was  first diagnosed.  At that point, too, he was still working. He went to do some things with  OSU and was involved with research and     Yes, he still was helping companies connect with universities, both OSU  and OU, to make those partnerships work.  Made trips to D.C. to lobby?  Made trips to D.C. to lobby, wrote a book. He wrote his book. I guess  that was during the second governor   s term. Yes, all sorts of little jobs  came up that were   and he taught, too. He taught political science at  OU, OSU, and maybe OCU, I   m not sure. But yes, both OU and OSU.  Where did he get his energy? He was an early riser from what I   ve  heard and read.  He was an early riser, great napper.  Power naps.  Power naps. (Laughs) Sometimes with not great timing. I think he was  not a high energy person. He wasn   t hyper, but he was definitely  motivated by something deep inside him and loved ideas and was a very  creative thinker, loved working with people and figuring things out and  trying to make them go and was really dedicated or committed to  improving the world. It sounds like a clich  , but I think that   s what  drove him. He never complained of being tired or any of that sort of  thing, but he was a pretty placid, low key, person.  I think he was deeply affected by his mother, he would say that, who  was a school teacher in a one-room schoolhouse out here in the country.  He admired her a lot. She would go to school at five in the morning and  light the stove and put on a kettle of soup for the kids, and I think he was  deeply impacted by her sense of justice and care. He was not a bleeding-heart  liberal in any sense of the word, but there was something very deep  inside him that wanted to make the world a better place and did it every  chance he got. And his creativity, he was always suggesting things for  somebody to do or,    Have you thought about this?    or,    I heard about  this, and that could work here,    maybe partly just an intellectual  exercise. He really got charged by thinking about things and trying to  make them work.  20  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Some of these he   d get while he was out on the tractor?  Yes, thinking on the tractor. That was his very creative time for him.  Clearing your mind, but getting ideas. It was also a time where he really  connected with the land and earth. He would bring home baby rabbits  and birds that would come when he would be plowing. He would disrupt  nests and he would bring them home. He   d made a large cage, that part  of this house used to have a screened in porch, and he made a cage so  when he brought wild things home, we could all enjoy them and get to  know them. He brought home a snapping turtle one time, put it on the  back porch. We would forget it was there and run through there, oh my  gosh  (Laughs) Could have been dangerous. So he did a lot to teach us  about caring about the earth and that   s ingrained in us now. Are you  hearing the same stories over and over again?  A few, but not for the most part. When you stop and think about your  dad   s legacy for Washington, D.C., for the country, does anything in  particular come to mind? I know the Panama Canal issue was a big  thing, but anything else?  Yes, that was a big thing. I can   t think specifically, but from time to  time, people tell stories about some program he put into place or  supported and also just personal stories of how he and his staff  interceded to help people. But I think policies, I think those are much  more hidden in the Senate, the things you do in the Senate, those things  are a part of the bigger picture, and you don   t always know about them.  It   s been kind of surprising to hear stories sometimes. I   m sorry I can   t  think of any specifics, about things that he thought of or supported and  tried to put into place. He worked a lot with agriculture. They traveled a  lot   not a lot, but some, and he always got to know other agricultural  methods and where things were needed, where he felt what we knew  might be helpful to people in other parts of the world. I know he was  involved in that. He was involved in the energy and some of that,  looking at those oil things in other parts of the world.  He was very good at crossing party lines, too, even at the state level,  too.  Yes, he kind of had to. That was a different time, too, a much better time  for that. I know he and Ed Muskie, who served on the budget committee  together, they became really good friends even though they weren   t  always in agreement. But he was able to work with people. He didn   t  cast you aside because you were on the other side. In college, in his  book, he tells a story about having a roommate who they just were not  on the same page. Dad found him insufferable in the beginning, and  realized that he   d better change his attitude about this other student, and  21  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  did. They remained friends, and he said that was a really important  lesson, never to burn bridges and to come to understand the other person  and figure out how you can get along with them. That was an early  lesson that stood him well all the way through his life.  I think his relationship with Ed Gaylord was another example of that. Ed  Gaylord would, on the front page of The Daily Oklahoman, just brutalize  Dad. Yet, they would go hunting together, which may have seemed  dangerous. (Laughs) They would have dinner together with Mom and  Mrs. Gaylord, as a social time, not in a big group but in a private dinner.  His ability to hear and listen and communicate and work together and he  did not give in, necessarily. He would just find creative ways to work  through the problems.  He had appointed Hannah Atkins, a Democrat, to a position and took a  lot of heat for that, too, but did it.  Yes, I think he did appoint Democrats. If they were good people, he  didn   t hesitate to do that.  Best person for the job.  Yes. The other thing I think he was really good at that helped him be a  good government person was whatever he was doing   he could have a  lot on his mind and be involved in twenty things at once, but whatever  he was working on, whoever he was talking to or whatever committee he  was working with, he could be totally present to that and put everything  else aside and really focus on that one program or problem or whatever  they were working on. He was really good at compartmentalizing things,  holding a lot of balls in the air and staying very creative and focused.  He was somebody who, in his personal life, I think, if he had something  that was troubling him, it would be tractor time or fishing time, and he  would not talk about it much, even if you knew it was bothering him, or  maybe you knew something was bothering him, but not what. And then  when he worked it out on his own, then he would come forward and say,     This is what I   m thinking about,    or maybe you knew what he was  thinking about, but eventually he would resolve it in his mind about  what steps to take. He had a lot on his mind at many times in his life, but  he was able to put a lot of things to one side and really focus, and that  was a great gift to have in those positions.  Changing the subject a little bit, I understood he was never comfortable  in a tuxedo?  He said he wasn   t. Eventually, he owned one because you   d have to rent  22  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  it too often. He looked great in a tuxedo. I don   t know why   well, Dad  was very unpretentious, so it wasn   t a physical   maybe it was physical,  but it was the pretention that I think he thought a tuxedo was. That was  what made him uncomfortable. But I think over time that became less of  an issue. I think he was uncomfortable in it even when he owned it, but  over time, he got over that.  Maybe the economical factor came in.  Yes. (Laughs)  Do you have any special memories of things the family would have done  in D.C. or here in Oklahoma?  We didn   t all live in D.C. at the same time. Ann lived there in high  school, Gail finished high school in Billings after Mom and Dad moved  to D.C. She stayed with our grandparents in Billings and finished there. I  was already in college, so I moved there. I was there longest with them, I  guess. They did a lot in D.C. with staff. The staff was really important to  them. That was where they spent their time, really.  And once you worked for them, you were always with them?  Yes, staff is still     It   s amazing, and I don   t know if you could put your finger on why is  that.  Dad was good at picking people to work with and there   s a loyalty there.  They   re probably better able to speak to that. And then on the weekends,  they would be back in the city, back in Oklahoma a lot of weekends. I  was a journalist then, and so I think our times together were more at the  farm, more of the best times together were here in Oklahoma. It was  good for me, writing Dad   s book was a good time. He was governor the  second time, but through the years, he had dictated stories about people.  He would choose a person and dictate what he wanted to say about that  person. Over time, his secretaries had transcribed all those things he had  talked into a Dictaphone so there were these large pieces of paper, piles  of them, with stories about different people.  When Council Oak Books decided that they wanted a book from him, he  handed me those typed pages. We began to put a book together from  that. So, it meant, for me, during the week, I would go through those and  then write up, type them out. This was during the computer era so I  would type them up on the computer and edit them and work them into a  chronological time. I   d work during the week, then when he   d come  23  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  home on the weekend I   d hand him what I had done, and he would hand  me back his corrections of what I had done the week before. In that way  over about a year, we put together his autobiography. That was really a  fun thing to get to do.  My job, from the editors at Council Oak Books, was to keep his voice,  make sure this was Dad   s voice. It was a great. We knew we had  succeeded when we turned in our little disk and they read it and we went  for the meeting, they said,    We really appreciate that this is in your  voice and we can hear that.    He was a great storyteller so it was pretty  easy work, just editing and cutting and forming it into a storyline. But  that was really great for me that he let me do that, not somebody else.  Was there something that you wanted to keep in, that he didn   t, or the  other way around?  The only part that I felt needed to be fleshed out   there were a lot of  things that didn   t get in, but there was just a lot of information. But I  think we did a pretty good job of choosing what to do. But the one place  that I wanted more, and so did the editors when they read it, and we  didn   t get anymore, was the moment my dad   s mother had been dying of  leukemia while he was in World War II in the Marshall Islands. He  asked the Red Cross to send him home, and they wouldn   t let him come  home before she died. Then he got the telegram that she had died, she  was in a hospital in Wichita and he knew that, and had letters from there  about that, from his father. But he finally got a telegram that she had  died, and in the book he writes that he took the telegram and went into  his tank, he was a tank platoon leader, and read the telegram and cried  and that was that.  I just wanted to know more, and so did the editors, and that was all we  ever got. And that was so typical of Dad that   as he got older, after  Mom died, he was more forthcoming about his emotional life and what  he went through. He was very stoic, as his mother had been, actually, so  he came by it honestly. That was the only thing in the book that I wish  we had more of, but we never got that. But that was Dad.  He was pleased with the final version?  He was happy with the final version.  Did he autograph a copy for you?  Oh, yes, for all of us. He did want to write another book with more  things in it, some that were left out and some that he had never talked  about before because it was too sensitive. But he never got up whatever  24  Finchum  Hoerth  it took to do that so we don   t know. I mean, I think those stories exist,  but everybody   s version   s a little bit different. There   s some things we  won   t ever have written down.  Do you feel like you don   t know as much about your mother, having  done this with your father?  Mother was more forthcoming in her private life, so we knew Mom. I  knew, I think. I don   t want to speak for Gail and Ann, but it was easier  to know Mom   s emotional life and personal life because it was out there  in front of us all the time. (Laughs) Not that she was unhealthy about it  or anything, but that was just who Mom was. She was mad, you knew it.  If she was sad, you knew it. If she was struggling with something, you  knew that, especially as we became young women ourselves. We were  good friends. It was fun to watch her after Dad became governor again  and after the last of the public life stages. She was over her shyness.  When they lived in Washington, she became really involved with the  other Senate wives. She was in the Red Cross. They got together once a  week and made things for the Red Cross to send off. She also had her  own business there with Ann Stevens, who was the wife of Ted Stevens  from Alaska. They bought old buildings on Capitol Hill and refurbished  them and sold them, which was a major undertaking. She had good  friends among the Senate wives and among Dad   s staff, so she really  enjoyed that period.  During the second governor   s term, she was very involved in her  projects and her grandkids, and she was very happy then. The very last  of her life, she opened the caf   in Billings, and she was having a ball  there. It wasn   t easy. Running a caf   is hard work, but people would  come there and eat there from all over the state. The wall, there was a  blank wall which she painted white, and everybody would sign it with  different colored markers and write things, and it was called the First  Lady   s Caf  . She also established tours so you could take a tour of the  Bellmon museum and also another museum in town, in Billings, an old  house that is part of the Cherokee Strip Historical Society   s museums. A  lot of people came to Billings to do that on busses so she felt really good  about helping the town be a little more alive and bring in some revenue.  She was really having a really good time being there every day and kind  of had the queen-of-the-ball sense about her then.  It was sad when she died right in the middle of that, but what a way to  go out. She was very happy, she was her own person. Her shyness was  many, many years behind her. She was much loved, very caring and  sweet and friendly, just easy to be around. I heard great stories about her  after she died that I never knew, ways she helped people that she never  25  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  told us about. And she had her doll factory. She was making dolls down  the street. She had two businesses going, and she was employing people  in that.  And she was over sixty-five at this point.  Oh, yes. She died when she was   I think she was eighty.  She didn   t sit still     Well, no, maybe she was in her mid-seventies, I think. Maybe Dad was  eighty when she died. I can   t remember, but yes, she was going strong,  very strong. Too strong, probably. (Laughs) But she was happy.  What was the favorite thing she liked to make food-wise? What was her  dish?  Well, our family   s favorite was her chicken and noodles on mashed  potatoes. And she died in   we were all on a family vacation in Cape  Cod, and she took with her some of our aunt   it would be her aunt   s,  Aunt Ruby   s recipe for cinnamon rolls. She carried them on the airplane  with her to Cape Cod so that we could all have Aunt Ruby   s cinnamon  rolls that week. So that was a big   but the chicken and noodles, now  Elliott, actually, and Gail have carried on. They   re the ones that make  those. The rest of us don   t even bother because they   ve really learned  exactly how Mom did it.  Did she keep recipes or was it just all in her head?  She didn   t have a recipe for that, I don   t think. You had to be there and  watch her repeatedly to get that exactly right.  She made her own noodles, then?  Oh, yes.  Her mother had done that previously?  You know, I think so. I   m sure, but Grandma was famous for her fried  chicken. Nobody could make fried chicken like she did, but Mom was  more famous for her chicken and noodles.  They all have their little niches, don   t they?  Yes.  26  Finchum  Hoerth  Well, as we wind down, are there one or two things you would like for  them to be remembered for or remembered as, for each, mother and  father? How would you like them to be remembered?  Well, I guess the lessons from Mom   s life for me are what you can do  even though you   re not inclined to, that   s not your natural tendency. Her  shyness was considerable and she evolved, and really, they did it  together. Dad was very supportive and encouraging and careful and  sensitive to her needing to overcome that, and she just blossomed and  became more of who she was, became more fully who she was. She was  a very happy person. She cared about people and she cared about the  underdog. She rubbed shoulders with famous and rich people, but she  really did, there were a lot of people she cared about that were not fancy  people. I think she   ll be remembered by those people really well, and by  people who were more   even the public people knew her as a friend and  as somebody who cared about them. I think for Mom, her gift to the  world is a very warm presence that was really nice to be around and that  you can do what you   re called to do in this life, even if it   s a challenge,  that you can do it and you can really become a great glorious person.  Dad   s known for his integrity and his ability to stand for what he thinks  is right. I think Dad had a great sense of humor, very dry, loved a good  story, loved a good laugh. With the Parkinson   s, we lost his kind of belly  laugh. It kind of gives you a mask, but when he would break out in a  deep smile, a deep   when he would get tickled at something it was just  the greatest thing to see. So, to see him enjoy people    At the end, he  really   some people came around just to visit with him and go over the  stories and he really, really enjoyed that. His gifts in government are  many. Certainly, he felt reforming education in Oklahoma was  extremely important to him. I guess I   d like people to remember that he  did care.  Recently, we went to the Human Rights Commission celebration,  because that   s being kind of shut down and being taken down to the  attorney general   s office. To hear those stories, that commission was  established before the Civil Rights Act in the government, a year before.  I think it was 1963. And how he handled integration in this state and  pretty much behind the scenes so even though there were sit-ins and  protests, that was fine. But it really helped me come to understand   and  a lot of this was foundational out of his experience in World War II, that  he really did carry through. There was something really deep, a deep  sense of justice and what   s right in him. I   ve become more aware of that  as time has gone on. He did a lot with that that is kind of quiet. We know  about the Panama Canal and bussing, but there were a lot of things that  happened that were much quieter. I wish all those things   I wish I knew  all of them. I   m glad he contributed all he could, which is considerable.  27  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  Finchum  Hoerth  He left a good legacy.  Yes, yes.  And he left three good legacies, for sure.  Well, we are really fortunate and grateful to have had Mom and Dad as  parents. That was extraordinary good fortune. I   m glad for our children  because they send their genes, too, in their upbringing. I think each of us  has some of what they had, a desire to help out and care and continue  what they started.  A love for the land, still.  Definite love for the land. That is high at the top of my list. That   s  become my work, is to see what can be done to care better for this part  of the Great Plains.  Well, if there   s nothing else, I   ll say thank you for sharing.  Thank you, thank you. I enjoyed it.  -------  -------  
