 Little Thunder  Greever  This is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is October 2, 2012, and I   m  interviewing Linda Greever on behalf of the Oklahoma Oral History  Research Program at Oklahoma State University. Linda, you   re the  longtime owner of The  Tulsa Indian  Art Market, one of the first Native  fine art galleries in the state, and you   ve continued to handle some of  Oklahoma   s best-known artists. Thank you for taking the time to talk  with me.  I   m happy to do it. It   s a pleasure.  Where were you born and where did you grow up?  I was born in Winfield, Kansas, and grew up on a farm fifteen miles  from town. Went to a one-room schoolhouse. It   s been a long time ago.  Your mother and dad were both in farming?  Right. My mother was a housewife and helped my dad. He was in World  War II, and after that he returned to the farm, and they farmed. My dad   s  still on the farm.  What are some of your earliest memories of seeing art?  Well, I went to this little schoolhouse, and the art teacher there, that had  been her first job, to teach in this school. It had been much larger, but  there had been an oil boom in that area, and the oil field camps, there  were lots of kids. Like, there were seventeen in my first-grade class, and  by the time I got to the fourth grade, there were only ten children in the  entire eight grades. So we were just kind of like a small family, but we  had an art teacher that came and spent a half a day a week with us. I  always had art from the time I started to school. She was a really  wonderful teacher, and she felt like she had ties there, so she worked  5  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  with us.  Did you continue drawing on your own at home?  I did, but I   m not really an artist. I can paint, but I   m not good at making  up things out of my mind. I can copy things, but I   m not an artist.  How about anybody in your extended family? Any artists in your  extended family?  Not any professional artists. I have an uncle that   s a doctor that has  painted always and still does but not professionally.  How about in high school, any exposure to art there?  Well, I did take some classes, but actually they were so much less than  what I   d had before, that they weren   t very interesting to me because we  started out in the first grade with crayons and drawing, then you went to  watercolors in the third and fourth grade, then charcoal pastel in the fifth  grade, and then oils through the next three years. We had a pretty good  background.  That   s a wonderful knowledge, basic knowledge, of the different media.  How about college, what were your interests in college?  I was a library science major, so it didn   t really have anything to do with  my art background. Then I got married and had three children and really  didn   t pursue   I did take some classes when they were small, but I  really didn   t do anything with art during those twenty     You took some art classes when they were small. Was this here in Tulsa?  In Tulsa, yes.  At Philbrook?  No, they were at Rathbone   s Flair Flowers. They had classes.  Interesting. (Laughs) So what was your first exposure to Native  cultures?  Well, actually, my cousins were Native American. I didn   t ever realize it  because there was never anything said about race in my family. It was  just you were who you were. Then when I moved to Oklahoma, there  was a lot more Native American things that went on. After I bought the  art gallery, I wanted to be able to handle the best of the best, and the  6  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  thing that we could get the very best of here was Native American art.  So that   s what I decided to specialize in, and that   s how I   ve gotten as  well acquainted with Native American people in art as I have.  You initially purchased, as I understand, the gallery business from  another owner.  It was called The Art Market, and it had been in business six months.  The people that started it were employees of Sears, and their wives had  started the gallery. It was imported oil paintings. Why I did this, I don   t  know. It wasn   t the best idea because the people that were interested in  art came in, new gallery, and that   s what it was. The over-your-sofa type  of painting. We stretched hundreds of oil paintings, but that   s not what I  wanted to do.  So mainly European artists.  They were all starving-artist types of paintings. Yes, they were.  (Laughter)  I understand you made the acquaintance of Ben Harjo and Robby  McMurtry pretty early on while you were selling the European     I did. Actually, the first Native American artist that really talked to me  about getting started was E. G. Thompson. I met him at the Children   s  Medical Center show that they had every year at the fairgrounds. He  started coming in, and he helped me organize my first art show, which  there were four artists. It was him, Ben Harjo, David Williams, and  David Stevens. That was the first show that I had.  Were you collecting a bit of Native art, too, before you     I had collected before then. Not a great deal, mostly baskets. I had some  really nice, older Cherokee baskets by people like Ella Mae Blackbear  and some of the older artists. That   s what got me interested to begin  with.  So what was that first art show like? And this is 1976, when you opened?  Seventy-four, I believe. You know, it wasn   t David Stevens. It was  Robert Annesley was the fourth artist. Then about that time is when I  met Robby McMurtry and several others. I   ve found through the years  that other Native American artists are very supportive when we have  shows, and several came to the showing. I got to know them from that  and developed working relationships with them.  7  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Was the turnout good on the part of the public?  It was pretty good, yes.  You had advertised?  I had done newspaper and direct mail and, yes, I had advertised. Radio, I  think.  So your children were still fairly young, right?  I purchased the gallery when my youngest child started to kindergarten.  How did you manage to run a business and    (Laughs)  Well, it wasn   t always easy. (Laughter) They grew up in the gallery. I   m  always amazed at how many   because when there   s an art show or  something, why, I   m busy, and the artists spent a lot of time with my  children. I really didn   t realize how much time and how many stories  they shared. (Laughter)  Yes, I know many of them become good friends with the children, as  well. Who were some of the artists who got their start in your gallery,  that really hadn   t been showing much other places?  Well, like Ben Harjo, Kathy Henderson, Robby McMurtry. I   m trying to  think. Merlin Little Thunder, he told me that I bought his first painting  when he came to Tulsa. I didn   t realize that. Bill Rabbit, he came to me  and asked if he could be in my show, and I said,    Well, I guess it   ll be  all right.    (Laughter) That was in 1980.  He   s said many times since then that he was so shocked when he got  there. He had just started, and all the other artists were well-known  because in the late    70s and early    80s, we had some really fantastic  shows. We would paper the front windows on the gallery and close for,  like, two or three days before an opening, and then people would line up  in the parking lot waiting to get in. Times have changed a lot. But there  were some wonderful artists. I worked a lot with people like Woody  Crumbo, Solomon McCombs.  Did they come into the gallery, or did you meet them at other shows?  They came to the gallery. They came to the gallery a lot. In fact, my  oldest daughter had thought about doing her doctoral thesis on Woody  Crumbo. The kids grew up with these people. They were very important.  8  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  I   m not sure that the habit of having shows was really particularly that  well established, having receptions, having shows. It was kind of a new  territory, wasn   t it?  It was new territory, and when we first started having shows, there really  weren   t any other shows around. I mean, the Philbrook Annual was  wonderful, but that was about the only Native American show around.  Then when the economy started going down in the late    70s, every little  organization had Native American art shows. Then our shows became  less special because people were used to them, and they have gotten less  and less viable for the gallery.  But in those early days, like you say, when there were only the  competition shows and that was sort of the only game in town and you  were buying from the artists, were you planning multiple shows to help  the artists out?  I did. At that time, I was having four shows a year, which was a lot. Like  I said, we   d have real large crowds of people, and it was always fun and  entertaining. I   d have as many as thirty-five artists at a show sometimes.  Wow. In addition to artists coming into the gallery, did you also visit  other shows and find artists or recruit artists a bit?  I really didn   t do   I did go to other shows because I was interested in  meeting people, but mostly the artists came to me. I mean, it seems to  get around if there   s a gallery that handles Native American art,  especially one that buys. (Laughs) There   ve been a lot of galleries in  town, but I guess I   m stubborn. I   ve stuck to it longer.  They   ve come and gone, and you   ve endured. (Laughs) Did you go to  any of the Philbrook annual shows?  I sure did. I did go to the Philbrook Annual. In fact, I used to volunteer. I  worked with the reject room. (Laughs) They used to have a room at  Philbrook that when they had their show, when the artists sent their work  in or brought it in, there was a place on their paper to check. If they were  juried out, did they want their artwork to be for sale in the reject room.  It was a wonderful thing. A lot of artwork was sold out of that reject  room. I   ve always wondered why other museums and other places didn   t  do that because artists that didn   t quite make the grade for the show still  had an opportunity to sell. Of course, that increased the crowds and was  real helpful.  So it was partly about making the grade, but was part of it if they were  9  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  doing something that was sort of outside the boundaries of what the  annual was open to at that time, or no?  Well, the Annual really was pretty widespread. I mean, originally, back  in the early days, Indian art was pretty much flat style. That was pretty  much it, but as it progressed, Philbrook progressed, also, and their show  was remarkable. It was the best-known Native American art show in the  country for many years and always made money for the museum. They  had a different curator who just decided he didn   t want to do it anymore,  and they quit having an invitational show at that point.  Did that impact the gallery, do you think?  Not that much, no. People that are interested that are collectors will find  you. I   m still surprised after thirty-seven years in the business that every  single day, someone comes in and says,    I didn   t know you were here.     We   ve advertised a lot and word of mouth. You would think everybody  in Tulsa would know we were here, but they don   t.  Do you remember what was going on at Gilcrease at all during the    70s,  maybe early    80s?  They had very little interest in Native American art at that time.  Once the city had acquired the  collection , which they had had since  the    50s.  Right. They didn   t have Native American art shows or anything like  that. They just really didn   t have any interest in it at that time. Since  then, they   ve developed a lot more of an interest and have acquired some  wonderful things.  In terms of some of those early artists, David Williams and Woody  Crumbo, are there a couple of artists who really stand out in terms of  having brought a lot of information to you about Native art, the history  of Native art, etcetera?  Well, Woody Crumbo was a major influence because at that time he was  the best-known Native American artist in the world. Part of it was his  marketing strategies. Still, to this day, we get inquiries from the  Internet every week, wanting to know values and things on Woody  Crumbo   s silk screens. He was amazing, and he was so interesting to  talk to because he knew so many things. He had beliefs that were  different than mine, but he taught me a lot of things.  What were some of the marketing strategies that were so successful?  10  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Well, actually, he was kind of a genius. He quit painting right around  1950 and did not paint again until, like, two or three years before he  died. The reason he stopped was he said there were two ways to become  famous. One was to die, and the other was to quit painting. So in order  to get his artwork to appreciate in value, he quit painting, but he  contacted libraries, museums, universities. He built these wooden cases,  and he had sets of silk screens and sets of etchings that he would send  out.  He also had some offset reproductions. He would pack these cases up  with one of each and send them out to wherever it was that he wanted to  have a show. They would show his work for a month to two months, and  then whatever was left, they   d pack back in the case and send him the  money and pay him. He   d fill the case up again and send it out. People  all over the country knew Woody Crumbo   s work.  He had this wonderful silk screen studio out in New Mexico, even  though he was an Oklahoma artist and was from here. They did the best  silk screening of any place because at that time, it wasn   t photo silk  screening. It was hand-cut screens, and they were really exceptional.  Thanks for sharing that. I had not heard that. I know that you dealt with  Willard Stone quite a bit.  I did.  Can you describe how you first encountered his work?  I guess probably through the Philbrook show, and then he came to see  me and brought some of his work. I sold a lot of his work through the  years. One of the first things that I remember selling were   he carved, I  guess, the butts of the gun. I don   t know what they   re called. But  anyway, he carved a number of those that I sold to different people for  their guns, and then, of course, regular sculptures. He was delightful to  work with.  I remember being at his house the day that they shot the President. They  tried to assassinate Reagan, wasn   t it, at that point? It looks like I could  remember. I was there that day, and Willard was so upset about it. We  all went in and watched television and watched all the goings on for  several hours. It was something to see how   he was very patriotic but  not necessarily political. He supported whoever was in office, like we all  should. (Laughter)  How did your gallery business change from the    70s to the end of the  11  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder     80s?  Well, things had slowed down a lot. There were some real, real close  years that we struggled, but we   ve always managed to scrape by.  (Laughs)  Did the artists also change?  Yes, I would say they have. There are very, very few flat-style artists  anymore. Most of the artwork is European style. The flat style took so  much time, and people didn   t understand it a lot. I   d have someone come  in and look at a beautiful piece of flat-style work and say,    I could do  that,    or,    My kid could do that in the third grade.    They had no idea  how difficult it was to do the color against color, no blending, to achieve  the results.  You hardly find any of that anymore. I   m always real excited when I  find a nice piece of flat-style art. The other thing is that back when I first  started, it wasn   t unusual for me to have things with house paint and oil,  and then it turned more into acrylic and gouache. The early painters  mostly used tempera. Now, they mostly use acrylic. It   s a lot easier to  use than the tempera was to achieve the same results.  You   ve been asked to judge art shows, also. What are some of the  challenges of being a judge?  Well, the fact that I   m not Native, I get a lot of criticism for that, not  necessarily from the artists but from people saying,    Well, what does she  know?    And I don   t always know. I try to judge on the quality of the  work and the historical accuracy of the pieces. I don   t hesitate to ask  people that know the history because I think that   s real important to be  sure the regalia is correct and the time period   s correct and that sort of  thing because nobody knows everything.  Do you prefer to judge by yourself or in committee?  Oh, I like to do it with other people. Then you have a chance to discuss  things. Like just recently, I judged (I   ve had several shows this year)  at Five Tribes Museum. The person that won the People   s Choice award  was a little upset because as judges, we didn   t give him an award. The  reason we didn   t is because his work was not Five Tribes. When I judge  a show, I want to see that the artist has worked toward that show, they  haven   t just stuck something in there because they had it and wanted to  enter a show, and you can tell.  A lot of galleries can have a visual art focus or a sculpture focus. It  12  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  seems to me, you   ve always dealt sculpture from the beginning.  Well, not really because I   ve always thought we were more paintings.  I   ve always done both. Parker Boyiddle was a wonderful addition to our  gallery, and Will Wilson, and the Crowles brothers  Junior and Sonny .  I   ve dealt with a lot of sculptors, too.  The Chaddlesones.  The Chaddlesones, oh yes. Sherman paints, mostly, now. Allie does the  sculpture. So many of the artists are gone that I   ve worked with, like for  example, Parker Boyiddle, Bill Rabbit, Robby McMutry, Woody  Crumbo.  What was one of your most rewarding or unusual relationships with a  collector?  Oh, my. My friends have all developed mostly through the gallery  because that   s where I   m at all the time. I   ve done a lot of trips with  collectors.  To look at art?  Well, yes, partially to look at art but also just because we   d say,    It  would be fun to go to Santa Fe,    or we   d do that kind of thing. I   ve also  done those things with artists.  Yes, I know that   s been a big part of your life. In 1990, the Indian Arts  and Crafts Act was passed, and I   m wondering what impact that had on  the Native art scene and your gallery.  It had a huge impact. At that point, that was when we really slowed  down as far as sales because there was so much bad publicity, that  people were saying they were Native when they weren   t Native, and  people were afraid to buy things because people didn   t have their cards  and that sort of thing. We lost a number of very good artists through that  because there were some that, even though they were raised Native and  had Native relatives and all this, they didn   t have their cards and they  couldn   t prove it.  The Arts and Crafts Board and the Attorney General   s office were really  on top of that and watched for everything. The head of the Arts and  Crafts Board came to my gallery and went through, and they passed me.  I passed with flying colors. (Laughter) In fact, when the lady got back,  she ordered a painting from me. I thought,    Well, hey. That   s nice.     (Laughter) Also, I did go and speak in front of Congress when they were  13  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  working on that bill. That was an interesting     Did you go with some Native artists, too?  Well, they held the hearings in Oklahoma City, and I went to Oklahoma  City and spoke in front of the Congress, which was kind of scary.  (Laughter) I was happy that they asked me.  What did you say?  Well, I said that I felt like the bill and the new law had kind of split the  industry and that we needed to pull together and get back. While I knew  the purpose of the bill was to do away with the things that were coming  from China and Japan and other countries, what it did in Oklahoma was  divided the artists, and it made it very difficult for a lot of people.  When did you establish your gallery in Muskogee, and what led you to  open another gallery there?  Well, I think it   s been about   I know it   s been twelve years. I go by the  age of my grandchildren, and I have one that was two at the time.  (Laughter) The reason I opened it is because Muskogee had always been  so active in Native American art. There were so many good artists from  that area and from that region. The only frame shop in town was closing,  and so the lady that had that frame shop talked to me about it and  suggested that I open.  There was a building right across the street from where she was, and so I  went ahead   she was losing her lease. They were tearing down the  building; that   s why she was quitting. So I leased that and was there.  I   ve made a move in Muskogee. I   m in a different location, but I   m still  there twelve years later. We do all of our framing there because we have  so much more room.  You   ve also spent a lot of time appraising art in the last decade or so.  How has your appraising impacted your art business?  Well, the appraisals have supported the art gallery a lot of times  (Laughter) because there are always appraisals to be done. I do as many  as time allows. In fact, I spent Sunday down here working on appraisals  this week because there are not that many people that do it. I enjoy it if  people will be patient until I can complete things. (Laughter) That   s my  only problem: There   s not enough hours in the day.  Do you continue to do the free appraisal day at the Gilcrease Museum?  14  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  They haven   t had one for a long time. I did do that in the past and also at  Philbrook and at the Jewish Museum  Sherwin Miller Museum of  Jewish Art . I   ve done a lot of those.  What prompts you to volunteer your time?  Usually, somebody asks me. (Laughter)  Have you seen any interesting things?  Oh, I   ve seen a lot of interesting things. You hardly ever go to an  appraisal without learning something and seeing something that you   re  interested in. This afternoon, I went, and the man had four very large,  old Indian blankets, chiefs blankets, that you don   t see very often. They  were absolutely beautiful. I was excited.  I   ve noticed that the secondary market seems to be booming these days.  Why do you think that is?  Well, I think it   s the economy because the people that had money still  have money, and they tend to spend it more on the more expensive, not  necessarily better quality but more collectible things. Used to be, we  sold a lot of prints and framed prints, things like that. We hardly ever  sell those anymore. We do sell the originals a lot more often than we do  prints anymore. That   s just a sign of the times because the people that  used to spend two hundred dollars are spending it on their kids    lunches,  not pictures.  We had a lady in this week that had been   she was in her golf clothes.  She   d been playing golf, and she had been to Oklahoma City the day  before, playing golf and everything. She looked around at artwork, and  she said, well, her price range was more like forty dollars. It   s hard to do  something nice these days for forty dollars. It just showed, you know,  it   s wherever your interest is.  I   m thinking, too, that a secondary market, pieces that have already  been purchased and they   re being put up for resale, shows that  collections are changing hands.  It kind of goes on a rotating basis. As people die, their objects come for  sale again, and a lot of times there are things I   ve sold three and four  times through the years that are very, very nice pieces. Maybe the  children can   t afford to keep them, or they are not interested in them.  People retire and want to clean out their offices. We get things back to  sell again. (Laughter)  15  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Have you noticed any other trends in the market today?  There   s really nothing new under the sun. You get a new set of artists  that think they   re doing something brand new. Occasionally, there is  something new, but most of the time if you really check into it, it   s been  done before. (Laughter) The quality is the most important thing, and the  originality.  Oklahoma Native artists have relied on galleries to purchase their work,  and this purchase has made a real difference in whether or not artists  could devote their time and energy to their art, but they   re also risky for  the gallery owner. How do you decide what kinds of work to purchase?  How do you choose one piece over another?  I primarily go by quality. I   ll have to admit that I   ve bought some things  because the people needed to sell. If I had the money, I felt like that was  what I should do. I can   t always buy, but when I can, I do. That   s one of  the main differences between Native American art and other types of art  in the country. Most art galleries do have mostly consigned work and  Native American artists because they   ve needed it to survive. The  galleries normally buy Native American art.  How important is it for you to know a lot of cultural information about  the artwork?  It   s pretty important. I always try to talk to the artists about it and know  the stories behind the pieces. Sometimes it   s hard to give all that  information to your employees. Jerry  Watashe  that   s here now is really  good about that. He   s Native, and mostly through the years, I   ve had  Native employees that do, a lot of times, know more about it than I do.  A number of times, you   ve had artists, too. What are the pluses and  minuses of having an artist work part-time in the gallery?  Well, it depends on the artist. Some of them just want to sell their own  work, and some of them don   t ever even mention that they   re an artist.  Generally, it has worked out fine.  How important is it for you to give feedback on the artist   s work when it  comes to style or technique?  I don   t do a whole lot of that. I have to be really close to an artist before  I will make any comments about their work, and then I don   t do it very  often because you   re kind of walking on eggs when you do that. If I can  look at a piece of art and realize,    Boy, there   s something really wrong  going on,    I might say,    Is there a problem? What   s happening with you  16  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  that this isn   t your usual quality?    But normally, if an artist brings in a  piece, I ask them what their price is, and they tell me, and I say either  yes or no. There   s no dickering because that   s a no-win situation. I can  either afford it or think I can sell it, or I can   t.  I was wondering if you   d ever offered any advice or feedback about  marketing and pricing, which is kind of tricky.  Well, I have to a certain extent. Mainly, I used to go to Bacone   University  and teach a class each semester to the students on how to  market their work and how to show it to a gallery because that   s  something that   s not normally taught.  An artist goes out to sell their work, and they don   t have a clue,  sometimes, how to go about it. It   s real important to discuss with an  artist how you expect things to be done. I asked an artist to leave the  gallery last year because they were bringing things in and giving me the  price because the artist always sets the price on the artwork. This  happened to be an artist that was willing to consign. He was fairly new.  I always tell them that if they want to have work in the gallery, they  need to keep their prices level because if they take it out and sell it  somewhere else, they should get paid for selling it just like I get paid for  selling their work.  Well, this artist had two tickets on their pieces. They had a thing across  the corner. On one side, they had the price that I had to sell it for, and on  the other side, they had the price they were selling it on the street at the  shows they   d been doing. I said,    Why would you do that?    They said,     Well, we were just trying to recycle.    (Laughter) We can   t do that. It   s  really important. It makes us look real bad, and we do work for our part.  How long did you teach that class? That sounds like an interesting class.  At Bacone? Oh, I don   t know. Ten years, probably. A long time.  Each semester?  Yes. I   d just go one day each semester. I enjoyed it, and it was  interesting.  Did you acquire any artists that way, too?  I don   t know that I ever did. I know one of the interesting things that I  have to laugh about now (I didn   t think it was funny at the time) was that  Dick West was there. He wouldn   t speak to me in English because I was  a white woman in the Native American art field. (Laughs) It   s funny  17  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  now. I didn   t think it was very funny then. (Laughs)  Who brought you in?  Ruthe  Blalock  Jones and Janet Smith. I was there through several of  their art instructors.  You   ve had a few health challenges since your  car  accident. Was that  three years ago?  Yes.  Someone else might   ve just said,    Forget it, throw in the towel.    What  has kept you going?  Hunger. (Laughter) No, I could qualify for disability, but I don   t want to  be disabled. I want to do everything I can. I love the business. I have a  lot invested in it, and what would I do if I didn   t have the   . Yes, I could  stay home and watch television, but I did that while I was disabled there  for a little while. That   s not a lot of fun. (Laughter)  What are a couple of things that make your work worthwhile to you?  It is fun to go out or have people   people bring in interesting things  every day. Some things I know nothing about, and I say,    I   m sorry.  You   ll have to go to Michael O   Shea  Gallery  or someone else.     (Laughter) I get to see so many wonderful things. I really do love it, and  the people are nice. People come in here mostly because they want to  purchase, or they   ll just come in to look around. People say, well, they  like the atmosphere of the artwork. People are always welcome. I enjoy  visiting with people, and that   s why I have to work weekends because I  spend too much time visiting with people. (Laughter)  As you mentioned, there   ve been several galleries in Tulsa and Sapulpa.  At one time there were, maybe, four. Is it more desirable, do you think,  to have more galleries? Is there anything you miss about that?  I don   t know whether it   s more desirable or not. Competition is always  good. The thing that has happened so many times and through the years  is a gallery will come in and stay for a year to ten years, and then they  go out of business and dump everything on the market. That really hurts  business and hurts the artists and everyone connected with it because  that messes with the value.  Have you ever gone to auctions or things like that and tried to protect  the artists    prices by buying things?  18  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  I have done some of that. I   ve bid things up sometimes. I don   t go to  auctions very often. I hardly ever get anything at an auction because if I  bid on it, people think,    Oh, that must be worth something. She knows.     So it   s not any fun. (Laughter)  We   ve also talked about how you purchase things, but once in a while,  even though you accumulate a lot of inventory   and I think everybody  does, and sometimes they   re not always moving, but once in a while  you   ll sell a piece that you   ve sat on for a long time. Do you have any  good stories about that?  I was telling somebody this week   they were looking at a very large   Stephen  Mopope painting, and it   s just beautiful. I said,    Well, my  price on that is firm because it   s worth what   s on it. I don   t have a lot in  it, so I can afford to sit on it.    Because this young woman came in   this  has been at least five or six years ago. She had worked in an office, and  they were closing the office. Her boss had given her the opportunity to  buy some artwork for very, very little money, so I bought several things  from her and paid her reasonable prices.  She came in with this Mopope. It was out of the frame. It had fallen out  of the frame. She said,    I   ll take a hundred dollars for it,    and I said,     Sold.    I paid her the money, and then she said,    I want you to know I  just paid a dollar for that.    I said,    Well, lucky you     The piece was  worth ten thousand dollars.  I don   t ever ask people to come down, but if somebody walks in and  tells you,    I want a hundred dollars for this,    how can you say no?  (Laughter) You might feel guilty, but how can you? She was happy, and  I never told her because, why? She was happy, and I was happy. If I  have to live with that the rest of my life, I   m still happy. (Laughter)  That   s a great segue into my next question. Most gallery owners have a  personal collection that they just don   t want to part with. How important  has it been to you to keep some of the pieces over the years?  It   s been real important. Mostly, I have things that I   ve purchased that I  have kept, and then I have a lot of gifts that people have given me that  are really   I don   t sell gifts. About a year ago, my house was broken  into, and a number of things were stolen, a number of my paintings. I  was able to retrieve most of them. I figured out who had stolen them,  calling around. Part of them the police confiscated, and another gallery  had bought a number of them. I bought them back from them, rather  than cause hard feelings with another gallery. I was really happy to get  those pieces back because they did mean a lot to me.  19  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  You   ve had a pretty good relationship, I think, with some of the tribal  museums around here, too. Can you talk about that a little bit?  I   ve mainly worked with the museums in this area, with the Cowboy  Hall of Fame and Gilcrease and Philbrook and Five Tribes Museum and  Tsalagi Museum.  Is it both for when they   re acquiring acquisitions and appraising?  Both. I   ve done a lot of appraisals for all of those museums, the Creek  Council House, whenever they ask. I don   t go to them very often  because I think they have a lot of people coming to them.  To market work.  Yes, and I don   t want to interfere with the artists selling their own work.  When I do sell to a museum, it   s usually for deceased artists    work  because they don   t have the opportunity to find those other places.  Are there any other things you   d like to talk about, something that we   ve  forgotten to address about gallery business?  There are ups and downs. (Laughs)  What would you say to somebody who was thinking about going into the  business?  You really have to love it and be willing to put the work into it. I think a  lot of people think there   s really nothing to gallery work except just  walking in and looking at beautiful things. There   s a lot of elbow grease  behind the gallery work, especially. Like I said, I do the appraisals and  the framing to help the gallery. We do a lot of picture framing. I   m  always glad to do those things, though, because I need a little release of  working on hammering something or doing something once in a while.  (Laughter)  Looking back, what   s been one of the high points of your career so far?  I guess I   ve been in it so long that I do get some acknowledgment of the  time that I   ve spent in it. So many times, people don   t appreciate things,  like the rugs I was looking at today. I said to the man, (they   re in his  office) I said,    Isn   t it amazing how many people come in that have no  idea?    He said,    Yes, but every now and then, someone comes in that  really appreciates it.    We talked about that because it is, it   s great when  people really enjoy what you do and what you   re doing.  20  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  How about a low point in your career so far?  Just when times are hard and the time of the Indian art law, when artists  were so unhappy and pitting themselves against each other. They were  all my friends, then it was hard. It was hard to tell people that did not  have their cards and things that I really couldn   t carry their work as  much. Some of the artists, because they had shown for a long time, I was  able to grandfather them in, but some of them, I couldn   t. When I have a  new artist, I like to spend time with them talking about their  backgrounds and to know whether or not they really   just because they  have the blood, doesn   t mean they necessarily know their background,  and that   s what   s really important.  Know their culture.  Know their culture, yes.  If you don   t have anything else to add, we   ll go ahead and take a look at  a couple of pieces that you have in here.  That   ll be fine. Thank you.  What can you tell us about this piece?  This is a piece that Bill Rabbit did in 1980, and that was his grandfather  who was sitting on the porch in front of the hills with a crystal in his  hand. His grandfather would foresee things with the crystal. That   s what  the painting   s all about, which I think is really neat.  He said that he can remember his grandfather sitting on the porch. That   s  a piece that I had at home because Bill quit doing that style shortly  thereafter, and it was always my favorite style of his. It was so different  from what anybody else did and what he became known for, to begin  with.  That   s really wonderful.  This is a Parker Boyiddle painting, Mother Earth. He did a number of  the Mother Earth paintings. Some of them were nudes, where he had the  mountains and the hills and the valleys. In fact, the first time I met  Parker, he was at an art show in Oklahoma City. He   d been invited to do  the show, and when he got there, his Mother Earth painting was not  hung. He asked them about it, and they said,    Well, it wasn   t  appropriate,    because it had the nude female. He stayed through the  show until the end of the evening, and then he packed up all of his work.  21  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  I was sitting out in front of the building as he left and started talking to  him, and we worked together the rest of the time until he died. That   s  how I first met Parker. He was carrying out his   .  While I worked with him, I sold a number   he was one of the few artists  that really did the erotic Native American art, and we sold a lot of it to  people. I was always surprised. It wasn   t terribly obscene or anything. It  was more erotic, and people did appreciate it. Actually, he has paintings  and sculpture all over the world. He did most of the animals on the    Tree  of Life    at Disneyworld, and he did the big sleeping bear that   s the  center of the Disney theme park in California. People recognize his work  that don   t know anything else about Native American art.  How about this painting?  This is a Terry Saul painting. Terry is the only one of the Master Artists  from Five Civilized Tribes that I really did not know. He died   he was  the first one to pass away from that group. He was Choctaw and  Chickasaw, and this was a painting that he did for a bank just north of  Bartlesville. It hung in a bank building, and when the bank started going  under, I bought this piece. It   s a buffalo hunt piece, which is really a  beautiful, large piece.  Terry was the art director at Bacone College for a number of years, and  there   ve been a lot of really good artists that studied under Terry Saul.  He turned out some really good students. I know Joan Brown has  commented that he was a major influence in her art career.  I called the Choctaw tribe about this painting because it   s so large and I  think it would be so beautiful in one of their buildings. They told me that  they didn   t know him, but if he would like to submit some photographs,  they   d be happy to have him in their summer shows. That was their art  buyer. (Laughs)  How about this piece?  This is a Brummett Echohawk piece. Brummett was Pawnee. He lived in  Tulsa the last part of his life. He was a big war hero, and he liked to tell  his stories about it. He did a lot of covers and backs for Saturday  Evening Post and Look and Life. He was known all over the country, for  sure, possibly the world, but people in Oklahoma really didn   t know  Brummett. He didn   t market his work here.  He sold mainly in New York and places like that.  He sold out of New York. He was delightful. I got to know him fairly  22  Little Thunder  Greever  Little Thunder  Greever  well, and he was a funny, entertaining person. This particular piece is a  dance, a Christmas dance. One of the interesting things about it is that  they   re having such a good time here. When I was researching this piece  after I purchased it, because Brummett was dead by then, I found  another painting that was probably two hours later of the same group of  people in the same room. They were fighting, and the guns were going  off. I thought that was so interesting. I wish I knew where it had been  published.  Brummett did a lot of artwork for Leanin    Tree, the cards and the  calendars and things that people have had in their homes all through the  years, but he was best-known for his magazines.  It   s just a superb piece.  It is beautiful, isn   t it?  Well, thank you so much.  Thank you for coming. I appreciate you doing this, Julie.  -------  -------  
