 Little Thunder My name is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is Friday, November 21,  2014. I   m interviewing Demos Glass for the Oklahoma Native Artists  Project, sponsored by the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at  Oklahoma State University. We   re at the Glass Studio in Locust Grove   Oklahoma , where Demos shares working space with his ceramic-artist  father, Bill Glass. Demos, since you started showing professionally, you   ve  won a number of awards for your semi-abstract sculpture and mixed-media  pieces at Eiteljorg  Museum , Red Earth  Indian Arts Festival , Trail of  Tears  Art Show , among others. You   ve also collaborated with your father  on a number of large public works projects, and you seem to be headed  towards doing bigger and bigger sculptures at the moment. Thank you for  taking the time to talk with me. Where were you born, and where did you  grow up?  Glass I was born in Tahlequah, Oklahoma. I grew up right here in Locust Grove,  Oklahoma. Got a football game tonight, so going to root on Locust Grove  High School team tonight at the state playoff football game.  Little Thunder Good for you  I think your dad   s creative influence will probably be a theme  throughout the interview, but what about your influences from your mom?  Glass My mother   s been the cornerstone of the studio here and throughout. I can   t  even   I owe her a lot of respect and credit because she has helped us. She   s  a good art patron, and she   s helped us make it.  Little Thunder What was your relationship with your grandparents on either side of your  family?  Glass I was fortunate enough to have a good relationship with my grandparents on  both sides. My grandfather, he was an influence because he worked in  metal.  5  Little Thunder On your dad   s side or your mom   s?  Glass Yeah, my grandfather, Bill Glass Sr., worked in BIA  Bureau of Indian  Affairs . He set up schools and things like that for welding instruction, and  then as he got older, he became a metalsmith. That   s one of the really fond  memories. I inherited a lot of his tools, so that   s something that helped me  get started. I had to learn, somewhat, what to do with them, but they were  tools that I learned. The unfortunate thing is that I didn   t a chance to work  with him in his studio, but at the same time, I was going through school. He  had passed on whenever I was in the university studying.  Little Thunder But you have memories of seeing him work?  Glass Yeah, absolutely. Then I got some of his pieces back and got to admire some  of his pieces and actually dissect some of his pieces and try to fix some of  his pieces, things like that. There was a large learning, technical learning  parts because of his process. He was a good rigger. Grandpa Bill was a good  rigger. My Grandma Jean, she   s a wonderful lady. She taught me a lot of  things about character. My mom   s mom and dad, their name   s Gatz. They  just were very supportive art patrons, and there   s been times that they really  helped us through. Art patrons, there   s not enough art patrons, and they   re  definitely good art patrons.  Little Thunder How about growing up around the language. Did you grow up around that  at all?  Glass No, not as much as others. My grandma and grandpa, I can remember them  sitting down to relearn what they could relearn as they were older. Through  Grandpa going on his travels with the BIA, they might be in different states,  and it just seemed like that   s where it got lost right there for our family.  Little Thunder What are your earliest memories of seeing Native art?  Glass That   s an interesting question for me because I can remember many, many  times going to the different art shows and seeing   my idea was to see as  many images as I could see throughout the two hours or three hours. There  was different openings and different things that Dad had to go into, and my  plan was to see all of it. I got flooded with all kinds of inspirational arts,  ever since I was probably four or five. I credit that a lot. That upbringing  was very special, and I don   t know many others in my shoes at this point  because I got to enjoy it. A lot of them were my friends, personal friends.  Older guys my dad   s age were buddies and still are. That   s a very fond  memory, and it   s inspired me quite a bit, just as much as me and my dad  have, working right now. It   s inspired me the same.  Little Thunder What are your earliest memories of making art?  6  Glass I began making art pieces whenever I was probably five or six. Ben  Shoemaker, he had lived just over there, south of the property, and we were  all hanging around. I made a piece, my first one.  Little Thunder What was it?  Glass I think I dropped it. I think I dropped it, and it kind of made it to where I  squashed it down, put a little bit of a face on there, and then I think I even  pinched a penis in there, and just made it where it was a guy that was  peeing. (Laughter) That was the ongoing joke. Ben Shoemaker, he has that  one in his collection.  Little Thunder It was already three-dimensional stuff. (Laughs)  Glass Yeah, that was the going joke, the artist joke, for a while. I can remember  that was a winter day where we were all just cooped up, but that was the  artist joke for a while.  Little Thunder What kinds of art experiences did you have in primary school, in elementary  school?  Glass Just the typical art teacher and different contests. That   s one thing, Dad  always kept me kind of going. That   s something we could work on together  a little bit. He   d give me something he enjoyed. We   d stay up late nights  cramming for the art contests whenever they came up. One time it was the  Statue of Liberty that I drew or something like that, just various things.  Sometimes I didn   t always win the prize, but that gave me a good test, taste  of the artist   s life early on. One time, it didn   t come back from   I think I  entered one in Flagstaff, and it just disappeared. That one didn   t even make  it back home. I don   t know. I might have made some money on it because  they paid it off, but I don   t know. We could just send it in the mail. It was a  nice piece. It was some turtles, I believe. Them things happen. They  probably didn   t like no Cherokee guy coming up there and making a nice  piece.  Little Thunder My other question was when you sold your first piece of art. Would it have  been at one of the competitions?  Glass Yeah, yeah, probably that one, that very first one, whenever Ben Shoemaker  bought it from me. I think he had to have that one. He thought it was such a  good joke piece. He   s collected   he   s probably got my best collection of art  now, too, so that   s been nice. I was making some pewter vessels for the  longest time, and he   s got a good collection of probably fifteen. They   re  nice. They   re nice pieces to showcase like that. That   s what I had planned is,     Oh, somebody   s going to collect one, and then they   re going to fill a  7  cabinet up with these things.    He   s the one that did. That   s always nice to go  back and see them.  Little Thunder How about your art experiences when you got to junior high?  Glass Oh, junior high, it was always just art teaching, typical art teaching at the  school. We had a good teacher. He helped us along, many of us. Mostly  drawing, though, he liked to teach us drawing techniques. Mr. Sinclair, he  was out of Tahlequah, and he was the art teacher there in Locust for many  years and on into high school.  Little Thunder High school is sort of the same thing?  Glass Yeah, he was the same instructor.  Little Thunder Whole lot of continuity.  Glass Working here, though, he always knew my dad had, I had an art studio at  home to work in if I wanted to. He always liked to put a little bit more  pressure on me to do better pieces than a lot of the other guys. Two, if I had  to, I   d come home and work on the clay here and bring him back a piece a  little bit finer polished, little bit more finished. That   s my whole goal as an  artist is to finish, finish the work. I don   t get to tell the work when it   s  finished. It tells me when the work   s finished.  Little Thunder In terms of you mentioned traveling with your folks to art shows, what were  some of your responsibilities at the art shows as you got older?  Glass Hand signals was one. (Laughter) If I seen the hand go down kind of close  to my whereabouts, that means,    Be quiet. I   m trying to make a sale here      But general things, unloading the material, unloading the tables, unloading  some of the fragile things. I got to learn how to handle pieces and knew not  to break fragile pieces because I knew how much work went into them. Just  help set up.  Little Thunder How early were you putting work in?  Glass I   d put work in anytime. I would always have something around, just try to  make a little bit of money, even if it was a beaded headdress. Those are the  ones you used to hang on your mirrors. I used to make those at the shows or  whatever. I   d do a little bit of something, sometimes crafts, crafty stuff, but  if there was an art show involved, too, I   d try to enter the art show that was  with it.  Little Thunder You became a really good wrestler, too, I think, during high school. Then  you were offered a scholarship at Southern Illinois University. I wondered  8  what were some of the reasons you decided to go there, besides the  scholarship?  Glass That   s all just the journey that I   ve been led on. I picked that particular  school because they were giving me   . I knew wrestling was such hard  work, I felt like I should be compensated for it. I wanted to work hard and  earn something. They gave me a good opportunity to go to that school, so I  took it. I didn   t really realize that it would be so meant to be because they  had a cutting-edge art department. It was the School of Arts and Sciences,  and the art department was fairly new. At first, I was not going there to be  an artist. I figured I would be education, a coach probably. Then I realized  how much time I was spending in the art department whenever I didn   t even  have art classes, and I realized,    Hey, I could probably make some good  grades in these classes.    I went ahead and hang out in the art department  because it was what I figured I was best at. That   s what all   it just led me  that direction.  Little Thunder What   s the most useful class that you took there for your career?  Glass Metalsmithing was my favorite. I had a double major in metalsmithing and  sculpture, and they were both   I took the fabrication end of both of them.  There   s a couple different processes. You could carve, and then you could  cast. You carve a wax and cast, or you could do some castings in the  sculpture department, but what I did is fabricated. I figured it was a good  way to   I like the strength of fabrication. Everything always comes out with  a strong value. It seems strong to me, and I liked the simplicity of what  fabrication meant. You weren   t going to really get into some really technical  pieces. You can, but I chose not to. I liked the simplicity, and I just knew  that it would relate well to some of the Southeast designs. You don   t have to  have a whole lot of intricate things to create a modern, simple, Southeast-influenced  piece. You can get a Southeast influence in fabrication real easy  just because of the line quality. That   s where I started seeing the simplicity  and the relation to simplicity and primitive art.  Little Thunder What were some influences that you absorbed there, in terms of either  maybe individual artists that you admired or movements?  Glass My teacher Paulette Myers was an incredible metalsmithing teacher. She  knew many, many techniques. I worked in her studio some, not necessarily  to get paid because she didn   t pay me a whole lot, but just to hang out with  her. She was a little lady, and, boy, she was a great metalsmith. She   s known  for her experimentation in reticulation. There was some really technical  things, and she always did a great job of getting outside artists in, bringing  visiting artists. She was always bringing us new people to just feed our  curiosity. Workshops all the time. That was my main instructor, professional  professor, influence there, I would have to say.  9  Little Thunder Reticulation is   .  Glass That   s a process where you use the torch. The torch moves the metal, and  then you can make almost like mountains in the metal. It   s interesting. It   s  like a tool. You use the torch as a tool, and there   s certain amounts of prep  that you have to do to the metal before you get there, but once you get it and  then once you get the right flame, you just move the metal in with the torch,  and it builds all kinds of nice texture. She   s been studying that ever since I  knew her. She liked that reticulation just so much, and she would get all  excited about it. The last time I talked to her, about three or four years ago,  she said,    Yeah, I   m doing   .    She   s just excited as she ever was. I always  thought maybe that something was wrong with her at times, (Laughs) but  she was just as excited as she always was, so I knew that she was just the  same. She said,    I   m pretty sure that I   m doing something that nobody   s  ever done before.    I was like,    That   s just right. I   m glad,    because it was  always a passion, reticulation, for sure, and fabrication. She was a great  fabricator, too.  Little Thunder What kind of a degree, then, did you graduate with?  Glass I didn   t. I didn   t finish the degree out. I had screwed up the scheduling, of  course, and it was going to take me a year. In the meantime, I   d already  showed at Red Earth and did a few things, and that was one of the things I  needed to have done was a graduate art show, not a graduate but your thesis  art show. I already did an art show, and I sold a few of my pieces, so I  figured I   .  Little Thunder You won an award that year?  Glass Yeah, I got First Place in sculpture that year. I don   t know. I may have got  best in division. I   m not for sure. I couldn   t tell you. To me, that was my  student art show. I just decided to go and get in there with the rest of them,  like I   d always grown up doing. That was my show is what I figured.  Little Thunder It   s interesting because artist parents feel this pull because they want their  kids to be artists, too, but they don   t want them to go through the hardship  and financial insecurity. I know your dad was hoping you   d always come  back and join him at some point. How did your mom feel?  Glass Like I said, Mom, she   s always been a supporter of artists. She   s done a lot.  She   s kept us fed and entertained, and anytime anybody comes, she   s helped  out. She   s glad to have me as part of the team. She wasn   t worried. At first,  maybe, but then I made a few pieces, and she realized that I had chance.  Little Thunder What was an early award you feel was really important to your career?  10  Glass I guess the First Place at Red Earth was a nice award. Those were the pieces  I brought from college. Those were all the pieces that I made in the studio  that I collected. I wish that I had some of those pieces back that I don   t have  no more. Those were pretty important. That was a pretty important first  show, just to get out there and feel like,    Yeah, these are pretty good  pieces.    That was important. After that, you   re only going to be judged on  the awards. That   s never something you can hang your hat on because it   s  only a perception. A judging is just that guy   s personal view. It   s really hard.  It   s really hard to take that as defining your career, to me.  Little Thunder When you came back home, had the studio already been enlarged, or was  that something that you undertook with your dad?  Glass No, that   s been the goal. Once I went to school, it just worked. An idea  worked out. I called my dad, and I said    Hey, I think I   m going to get into  the studio classes.    He said,    That   s cool.    He said,    What do you like?    I  said,    I like metal. I like doing metal.    He said,    Well, that   s great. We can  collaborate. We can make metal pieces that have ceramics in them.    I said,     Hey, that   s interesting.    I knew that I didn   t have a lot of time to study  because I was on the wrestling team, and that took up a lot of time, too. The  arts, they were like lab classes. They weren   t like just a regular three-hour  class. If it was three hours, it had to be six hours. That was the initial plan. I  was going to go and get into fabrication so then I could come back and help.  Once I came back, we enlarged the facility because we needed a mixed-media  shop. It was no longer just a ceramics shop. It was for mixed media.  That   s whenever we enlarged the facility in 2002, 2003. That   s about the  timeline on that.  Little Thunder From what I remember, you   ve always liked the really streamlined forms,  the kind of abstracted forms. You   ve never been into figurative work very  much. You found your style pretty early.  Glass Well, to me, it   s the symmetry of the Southeast designs and how they fit into  fabrication and geometry. It   s fairly obvious to me. I   m limited on what I  can do as a fabricator at this point. That   s why it   s interesting to me, the  whole study, because then I can go into more form. I   m still going to reach  those goals. Maybe I have to change a medium, a metal type. Maybe I go  into aluminum investigation. Right now, I   m investigating stainless. Before,  I did a lot of research in pewter. I   ve done some research in mixed media, a  little bit of jewelry stuff, but it   s based on what I can get away with, with the  material. Truth in materials is always something that   you have to know  what you can do and what you can   t with this particular material that you   re  studying with at the time. Eventually, things will change, but right now it   s  just what I have to do to accomplish a nice piece right now, what I feel like.  11  Little Thunder How important have galleries been to your career so far?  Glass I   ve not really showed in galleries too much. I would like to, and I intend to,  but right now I   m still studying. I   m studying a lot about my craft. I study  every day. I   m learning machines and learning processes. I   ve already been  through a few phases that I think I   ve filed away. I know those certain  things, and then I just go and study a different material. Metal, it   s a  different metal, mainly metal. My investigation into metal right now is what  I strive to do for some reason. It   s not necessarily calming, but it   s just what  I like to do. I like to always dig into a different process in metal and try to  feel comfortable pulling it off. I   m not ever going to master it, and probably  that   s why I picked it. I picked it because I knew I   d never master it. I just  wanted to investigate. My time is spent doing that. I intend on finishing up a  little studio over there closer to home so I can roll out of bed whenever I got  an idea and work on it, too. There   s times with this metal, the scale that I   m  doing right now, I   ve known that I have to attack this scale at this point in  my life. If I don   t spend my time working in a larger scale now, it   s not like  I   m going to start doing it in fifteen years.  Little Thunder Because it   s a strength. There   s a strength element, too.  Glass Yeah, it   s just demanding. That   s where I   d like to have another little place  that   s smaller for metalsmithing, and I got it over there. I just need a little bit  of extra time to get it going. Once I get that going, I   ll have a little bit of  smaller, intimate pieces that are just   . I can stay warm and stay cool easier  and make a few of those along the side.  Little Thunder Speaking of smaller pieces, I saw a couple of, they   re like stands you  created for Sharon Irla   s paintings, as opposed to conventional frames. Do  you remember those collaborations?  Glass Not really.  Little Thunder Okay. I just saw them on the Web.  Glass I didn   t really realize   I must have just made those for   got onto doing  what I was doing, probably. (Laughter)  Little Thunder Okay. They look good. (Laughs) How important are commissions for you?  Glass That   s been what we   ve been working on. That   s what I see as the way to  really change people   s perception. Art is a powerful thing. It   s nice for  somebody to have an art collection, but if we can get the art to the people  publicly, I feel that that   s as powerful of a vision that you can give  somebody. I heard somebody say,    I feel rich whenever I admire my pieces.  I   m surrounded. I have a richness in my soul,    is what she was saying.    I  12  have a richness in my soul because my art pieces surround me.    I said,     That   s cool.    That was a nice perception that she had, Virginia Stroud. I  read that she had said that. I like that idea, but let   s put it out there for   .  We   re in Oklahoma. We   ve got to reach the masses of people that can start  to have appreciation for it.  We need more people to appreciate art around in this community. Two, my  philosophy on public art is if it   s big enough, it can   t be denied. You   re in  the space of the art. If you   re in the presence of that piece, it changes.  You   re in that piece   s space then. That   s the feeling that I   m trying to  convey to people is,    Whoa, wow, you   re existing with that thing then.     That   s what I like. That   s what I like. I often said that whenever you go back  to see an old piece, it   s like revisiting a friend or something, but this is a  really good   . I don   t know exactly what happens there, but if I can get it  across to other people, the way I feel, that   s all I   m trying to do.  Little Thunder Is it right that The Passage was one of your first big public sculpture  projects that you did with your dad?  Glass Yeah, that   s the one. We built this shop, and then we were fortunate enough  to get an opportunity to create The Passage, the art that goes in The  Passage. Hargreaves Associates were the architects, and I think they   re  known for outdoor themes. We partnered with them to build the art pieces  that goes inside their public events area. I was the metals, in charge of the  metals. I was the metals leader on the team, and Dad did the ceramics work.  We had a team of artists, and Robby McMurtry designed a portion of the  pieces. His was cut out by a friend of his, and then he powder-coated those  and put them on there. The other section was seven six-foot medallions and  then an 8    by 12    water spider that was down in the wading pool at the  bottom. All the metal work was my pieces. Then the ceramic work was  Dad   s part and co-designed by   . The whole thing had a theme. The whole  idea was a theme. All the pieces were stylistic interpretations that were  found within a fifteen-mile radius of the Chattanooga area, so it was actually  bringing back a history on what kind of art was there.  Little Thunder You   re talking about examples of older designs that were found within  that     Glass Yeah. There   s stylistic interpretations that   s just   . If you go and research a  gorget or whatever your inspiration might be but then you   re changing it  around and you   re putting your own twist on it, that makes it fresh again.  You   re just using the old designs. You   re showing your heritage. You   re  putting some of your heritage into it, but then you   re putting your own  personal taste into it. That   s important. To me, that   s very important. As  long as you   re influenced by something and not direct copying, it   s a good  study. It   s a good practice. Sometimes I   ll see a very small segment of  13  something I see out of a book, and I   ll make a complete sculpture out of it,  and it won   t really have any reference directly. I can only tell people what I  did there. It might just be an eye area or   . It   s just kind of a fun little thing  to do, to me. It   s like,    Hey, I   m going to do that, and it   s going to be non-subjective,     a lot of people will think, but then it might just be a little bitty  portion of a design that I   d researched.  Little Thunder What was it like to be there at the opening or just to stand back and really  see the whole thing?  Glass That   s a nice collection of artwork, and I know it can be done now. I know  that those kinds of things can happen, and I know that we can make it  happen. I really would like to see, I would like a chance to do something  like that again. Lots of times you have restriction on public art, though, too.  It   d be nice to say,    All right, here   s the space. Let   s let it rip. Let   s see what  you guys can pull off.    I want that challenge.  Little Thunder At the moment, when there are calls for proposals, do you and your dad  share that responsibility? Have you done much of that since the  Chattanooga...  Glass Yeah, we team up and come up with concepts, collaborate as much as  possible. We   re close enough we can sketch on each other   s pieces. If I see  something in there, I can sketch on that.    Here.     Little Thunder You   ll exchange sketches?  Glass Yeah,    Here   s my idea,    and I throw it over there, and he looks at it, and he  sketches on it, and I bring it back. I sketch on it. It   s a very fortunate thing.  We can talk art and be buddies, art buddies. It   s good that we have a team.  We don   t have a secretary, which would be nice to have. We can barely fill  in the blanks on all that other stuff. We get by. The two of us get by, but my  wife, she   ll come in and help a little. Mom will come in and do what she  can. We really try to, we try to get by with what we got.  Little Thunder Family effort. Do you have other employees here right now?  Glass I   ll have a guy come in and help me, D. J. Bowen. He   s a childhood friend;  he lives right down the road. He   ll come in and help me from time to time, a  lot of heavy stuff. He   s a strong guy. He can come in here and help me do  certain things that need to be done.  Little Thunder When you   re working on a big scale, you must be spending a lot of money  on materials. How do you do that and still manage to survive while you   re  trying to finish a project?  14  Glass That   s the hardest part. That   s the hardest part. You   re trying to do these big  ones, and they take sometimes a year out of your time. They happen slowly  at times, but then they need to go fast at times, too. It   s important to just pay  yourself as little as possible and try to make it, through. (Laughs) We keep  the money, and we don   t   . We might make a piece on the side here or there  to kind of help make it, but we   ve got to make the money stretch so we can  finish the job. Lots of times there   ll be checkpoints. You get to this stage,  and then we write off. That   s just part of the process we   ve developed,  phases. You get this area complete, then you get to go to phase two and get  some more money to run through that. It   s a bit of a process that we   ve  learned, too.  Little Thunder What   s been one of the most frustrating public works projects, maybe not  artistically, or artistically, but either artistically or   in terms of the logistics  and the people?  Glass They   re all frustrating at times. It   s a grand scale. It   s a large-scale piece,  and anytime you   re doing something that   s big, there   s going to be  frustrations. Still, the reward on all that is actually getting in with your  hands dirty. That piece of art might fight you, but it don   t really talk back to  you. I can appreciate that because you   re still working with the piece and it   s  not talking back to you. It might be stubborn, but it   s not talking back.  That   s one thing I know. It might take time, even, but you nurture it, you  bring it along, and once you know it   s finished, you   ve got it.  Little Thunder What   s another, maybe, outstanding memory from a public art project that  you have?  Glass The main one was we put together a team to create that Chattanooga job. At  that time, we had about nine guys in here working. That was a good one  because it was getting on it, and that was our first one. I know what we can  do here at this shop. We can make it happen, but that all happened just  perfect. It was a blessing that everything   s happened just the way it   s  happened. Even now, everything   s just happening, so I   m just going to  continue to let it happen as much as I can. I   m not going to strangle anything  right now. I   m just going to let it happen. Some good things will come of it,  I   m sure.  Little Thunder It wasn   t hard to share your creative space? Was that a strange feeling at  first to have people coming in?  Glass No, it was intense. It was so intense that it was great. I had a good staff. I  was able to put together my staff. There was three of us in here. Off and on,  there was probably five or six in there working on it. This was about all the  space for three guys was good. We worked together, and we did some tough  work on the metals end.  15  Little Thunder Have you taught any sculpture workshops?  Glass No, I   ve never done workshops. I   ve wanted to have an apprentice. I think  that   s the best way I think I could help anybody is a serious apprentice. I   ll  always be open to having an apprentice as long as they want to be an artist  whenever they   re done. They can stay as long as they want, but I think that  would be a really cool way to try to   because you can do workshop, but I  can   t tell nobody how to do anything in a week, not even a few hours in a  week. You got to respect art enough that you   re going to be a lifer, pretty  much. (Laughter)  Little Thunder What   s a project you   re working on right now that you   re especially excited  about?  Glass I   m excited about getting these Prayer Feathers out, stainless steel  fabrication, about eight and a half feet tall, eight foot four, I believe. To us,  it   s a symbol of peace. It   s a peace symbol, but we   d envisioned they would  go out to the  Indian health  clinics and create just a nice feeling before  people went into the clinics. Lots of times, whenever you go to the clinic,  you   re kind of nervous, and that   s where we   re getting   this is getting to be  our concept. Our concepts are starting to be rich because they get to be in  the public. That   s where I see, even whenever we did Chattanooga. I feel  whenever we go and do the public art pieces, we got to come up with a  really good concept because you got to nail it. You got to nail it. It   s going  to be right out there. It   s with everybody else. They share its space, and you  share their space, so you got to come up with something that   s a nice  concept that   s got strength in it.  Little Thunder What honor or accomplishment do you consider the most significant in your  career so far?  Glass Just being an artist. A lot of people have to work and do different things, and  I   m very blessed to be able to be doing this still, hanging in there. The more  I hang in there, the more I think that I   m going to be able to make it, but  then I know, again, an artist   s career, you   re still going to have times  whenever it   s going to be rough. Every day I hang in there. I   m learning  more about art, and that   s all I   m trying to do. I   m going to eventually make  some bigger and better things. That   s my whole goal. I want to make things  that are big to the point where you   re just there. That   s what I envision.  Little Thunder You have a younger child. Is he showing any interest in art?  Glass Yeah, he   s pretty talented, gifted. He   s real smart, and he likes, it   s a modern  kind of art. He   s taking on to the gadgets and things like that. Things are  changing; that   s what I see. Art is changing, but he still draws and things  16  like that. I   ll give him a shot. (Laughter) It   s about time. He   s about eight.  Like I said, I   m going to have that studio over there, so I figure I   ll get him  going with some light-gauge fabrication before long, get him in there, see if  he can solder or do some technical things. If I could teach him a few of  those things, that   d be good.  Little Thunder Let   s talk a little bit more about your process and techniques. You  mentioned stainless, pewter, carbon steel, and sterling silver. What types of  qualities does each different metal have that makes them useful for that  particular project?  Glass The research in metal is such a vast   at first I said,    I   m going to master this  metal.    You can have a grasp of it, but you   re never really going to feel like  you   because there   s so many different applications. You can only just do a  little bit of that application and get used to it. You might have mastered that  one particular application, but it doesn   t mean that you mastered that metal.  There   s always tons of different things. Even if I got to where I could move  on to the next metal, kind of graduate from that metal, then there   s still  another process. Just like I said, my teacher, she did reticulation, and then  you can cast, and you can do granulation. You can do all kinds of different  techniques. It   s just a lifelong study.  That   s all I try to do. I try to expose myself to different metal, just to see, but  just exposing yourself to a metal doesn   t mean that you   ve grasped it.  Doesn   t mean anything. Like running a bead, a guy can say,    Yeah, I can  weld,    but, yeah, you just welded. You just got a bead and ran it on a piece  of metal whenever it was already prepped for you and everything. That   s  just one particular usage. That   s not in this particular orientation, when  you   ve got these two things lined up. It   s a lifelong investigation. Probably  anybody that works with metal constantly can say,    Yeah, it   s something  that takes years and years.    One of these days, I   d like to be able to consider  myself a master at it, but I   m not trying to go there anytime soon.  At first, I did think that. At first,    Yeah, I   m going to master this material,  and I   m going to become   ,    but it   s not. It   s just a constant   . I   m finding  that you got to take more of a diary about what you   ve learned. You gather  your notes, and it really does have to be hands on. You got to have that  relationship and feel each metal. Each metal   s different. Some may be used  for jewelry instances. Some might be for longevity. That   s why I like the  stainless. It   s going to hold up. These types of structures that I   m building,  these stainless steel pieces, they   re going to be here for a long time.  Little Thunder In outdoor weather, they   re going to have their color, and they   re   .  Glass Yeah, they   re going to be here just like whenever I installed them. They   re  going to be here just like that for a long time.  17  Little Thunder I was thinking of your pewter boxes, too. I remember those because they   re  very striking, and hopefully we   ll get a picture of them, but I   m wondering  why you chose pewter for the boxes.  Glass Oh, that   s just a nice material to investigate. It   s got qualities that you can  mold it a little bit easier. I can use the same fabrication techniques that I do  with my larger-scale pieces, stainless steel or carbon, but I can do it in a  small-scale investigation. I   m just trying to work out some kinks, and do  some study and design, and come up with a plan.    Okay, I can fabricate   .     It   s steel sheet fabrication. That   s what   s intriguing about that. That   s my  theme, I guess, so far. It starts in a sheet, and I use geometry techniques, not  much, just a little compass and doing some things, going with how I think  it   ll work, and trial and error.  That   s where I really feel like I did go further in my education in university,  but I   m still just a guy that sees it for what it is. If it works, I try it, and if I  don   t know how to do it, I try it anyway, and I mess up. That   s how our  people did. That   s what I feel like is a gift that   s been given to me. We  experimented in different things. We had the luxury of having a stable  community to where we could adorn the things that we had, and we learned  how to do it with what we had. I   m doing the same thing. That   s where it  gets into being a contemporary versus traditional idea. I   m just using the  tools that are available and creating things, pushing it. That   s what I   m  doing.  Little Thunder I notice some of your early pieces, you were combining sometimes stone or  wood with metal or shell or glass. What was one of the favorite  combinations that you worked with in that regard?  Glass I like wood and any metal. I really like ceramics in with the metal, too. The  ceramics along with the stainless is nice because it   s got a presence at  nighttime that doesn   t even take much light. Any kind of light that floods  into the area, it gives it a really nice, it shows up so nice at night. It   s  amazing to me how Dad   s glazes that he has, and then the stainless steel  combined with it, it   s almost like the stainless helps to light. It just plays  together well with low light. I like the wood, too. Wood with pewter is nice  because it   s got a real warm feeling. I like to bring out the idea of duality.  Once you use something like a white metal, and then you use something real  earthy like a wood, if you can pull that off, it seems like it   s a good  combination because it   s industrial in with the organic, and that   s really  interesting as a concept.  Little Thunder I remember seeing a few of your dad   s pieces that were more, they were  actually more streamlined and kind of semi-abstract, and I wondered if the  influence went the other way sometimes. I don   t know when the pieces were  18  made, but they reminded me, it was almost like what you were doing, and he  was sort of picking up an element of that and getting a little more abstract. I  don   t know if   .  Glass Well, he   s always done some. He   s done many, many. It   s a way to build,  too. You can slab build with ceramics. Artists have got such a visual mind  that you pick up on things. That   s one thing I was always kind of, I wanted  to try to make my own, but I   m not worried about that. I   m just worried  about learning, learning new things and if I can keep building and getting  things out there. It   s too slow already. I   m not going to worry. I   m not going  to worry about who or what   .  Little Thunder It   s good to have those influences. It makes it more rich.  Glass I   m influenced by a lot of things. I   m not going to act like I   m not ever  influenced by anybody.  Little Thunder Are there any dangers in working with some of the metals, and how do you  approach that?  Glass Yeah, absolutely. There is safety issues. Hopefully, it don   t make you sick  before you learn, and it has. I   ve gotten metal poisoning. One summer, I was  down with metal poisoning quite a bit. I thought I was sick; I thought  something was wrong. Finally, I got off of working with the pewter, but now  I realize it   s just safeguarding. You got to use gloves. Pewter   s one of the  worst, though. Those are just pieces   but once you finish the pieces, it   s the  actual grinding it up and getting it done. I haven   t used pewter as much as I  used to because of that reason.  Little Thunder You   ve mentioned a little bit that some of the research you do, you keep  track of some of the research you   ve done and the results in a book, and also  that you get ideas sometimes from just looking at something. You   ll take an  element of that and end up using it in a piece of art in a totally different way.  What other kinds of research do you do for pieces?  Glass I   ve found it very fun to have to see something in an object, also. I   m lucky  enough to be not in an urban area, in a rural area, so I want to see as much as  I can from the nature part of it. It may not lead to a piece of mine because of  some of the elements that I   m using, but I do like to sketch nature and do  different things. They   re just sketches. I   m not a two-dimensional artist. I   m  a sculptor, and they   re just notes and doodles. What I do really find  interesting is that I can start to combine the mediums. I can add a metal-type  element in with a organic-type piece of material, and that   s where I feel if I  can study the organic things, then I can   . It doesn   t happen very often, but  whenever it does, man, it   s really a nice outcome.  19  Little Thunder Can you take us briefly through the process of creating one of your  sculptures? We   ll do a bit of filming, too, in terms of your   I forgot what  you called it, the frame?  Glass Yeah, that   s just a welding jig.  Little Thunder Your welding jig. I   ll shoot it in a little bit and then the Prayer Feather again  on the video tape. If you were creating a midsize sculpture, the process you  would go through, say, in stainless steel.  Glass You start with a sketch. Sometimes I might use a computer and animate it to  help design my sketch, my vision. I can sketch it, out and then I   ll have what  my vision   s going to end up to be, but then I got a means to the end.  Sometimes I have to get things trued up more, so I get it to the point where I  can send it over and have somebody cut it. Then they cut the pieces out, and  I might bring them back here and fabricate them in my studio. That   s one  way. There   s other ways to make patterns. You start out with something like  a buck, (it   s called a buck) then you make patterns of it. You   re building a  model. Then you take patterns off that model, and you enlarge them. That   s  another way you can do it, but then you can still have them cut the pieces  out if you design that out.  There   s ways, and that   s part of the next things that I   m trying to learn, too.  Whenever you add form into it, you   re stretching the metal, you   re shrinking  the metal. That   s my next main focus. I want to learn how to stretch and  shrink and build contours and orbs and things like that so I can go into an  even more   you   ve been saying abstract, but I   ve just been seeing it as  contemporary form. If I can break the plane, that   s where I think I   m going  to end up. Just a few more machines. (Laughter) I got to get a hammer to  help me do some of the work. It is a industrial art application. What I   m  doing is industrial art application. I like it. I like the strength. Whenever it  comes out, I like the strength of what it has. It   s strong. It   s just strong.  That   s what I   m after.  Little Thunder You   ve talked a little bit about your creative process, but from the time that  you get an idea, are there any steps we   ve missed?  Glass I think about it all the time. The technical portions of   from what I see in  my mind to the finished product takes a long time with planning. I   ll come  to where there   s road blocks. Then I   ll have to contemplate on what to do  next, how to get this little bitty problem fixed, or how to fix a problem, a  mistake that I made. Along the way, you   re learning the whole time, though.  You   re learning how you messed it up once and how you   re going to fix it,  so there   s a lot of ways that you   re growing. There   s a lot of times I go to  bed scratching my head, trying to figure out how I   m going to do this stuff.  20  Usually with a little bit of rest, you wake up and,    Well, I might have this  option, or I might have this option.    You pick the best one. You go for it.  That   s where I   m still at. I   m getting to the point where I   m getting to be  confident with my choices. There   s usually a good answer and a pretty close  answer, so you got to still outweigh what   s the right direction to go. It   s a lot  of trial and error, most everything I do. Like I said, I went to the institution  side and figured out how to go be a student, but that didn   t really prepare me  for what I had to   . Lucky enough to go to a place that taught me the  ground level, but for the most part, your investigation as an artist is a lot of  self-taught.  Little Thunder What   s your creative routine? Do you work at night or in the morning? Do  you listen to music? What   s your routine?  Glass It doesn   t matter. I   m fortunate enough that I can come over here and work  whenever I think I can work a little more that day, whatever. It   s just being  around it, being around it as much as you can. It   s taking time to be able to  prioritize and try to get yourself to the point where you feel like you   re  around it enough. Your goal is to be around it, but you got a family, and you  got a kid. You got other obligations. I need to fulfill those, too. I do  appreciate my wife for being understanding because there   s times whenever  I need to hang out, and my family   . It takes a family that   s going to help  you and support you and understand your process so you can keep those  weird hours and do things unexpected. That   s how we are. We got to be able  to do it. I think an artist sometimes feels there   s not enough. At least, me, I  know I feel that way. There   s not enough time for me to get it all done. It   s  just so hard. It takes a lot. It takes a lot, so whatever it takes is my goal. I  mainly just want to get faster. I mainly just want to get faster at achieving  the final product.  Little Thunder Looking back on your career so far, what do you consider a pivotal moment  when you could   ve gone one way and you chose to go another?  Glass I don   t really think there   s been much of one. I   m pretty blessed that I   ve  just been led on this path. I can honestly say I didn   t really intend to do what  I   ve done up to this point. Everything that   s happened in my career   s been  the way it   s supposed to be. I   m getting better at understanding that that   s  my path. At first, I started trying to think that I was going to be   it   s like  you   re young and you   re going to do whatever you want to do, but really  I   m understanding now and embracing the fact that it   s my journey. I   ve  been guided to do   . This is my journey, but if I cooperate, it   s going to be  better than if I try to think that I   m really put myself in a certain position or  take myself out of this. I   m just going to go with the flow and continue to try  to make things as much as possible and see where it leads me.  Little Thunder How about one of the high points of your career so far?  21  Glass We   ve built a piece out of the studio, and I was overseeing of the metal  fabrication. We contracted with a small-fab shop in Kenwood, and we built  a tower that was, like, forty foot, forty-five feet tall. It was interesting. The  process was interesting. They wanted something that was like a polygon, so  we put panels, art panels, on it. It was   .  Little Thunder Ceramic?  Glass No, they were powder-coated steel art panels. It was a whole process of just  making things fit. We had to have it designed out to the T before we started  the project so that once we started laying these big pieces of metal on there  that they all worked, all the holes matched and everything. That was quite a  challenge, and whenever that thing was getting raised up by the crane and  we were setting it, that was pretty nice. That was pretty nice. It   s all the  same. After that one was done, I was like,    All right, now   .    It   s like that  fix. That was like a fix, and I was like,    Well, now what?    As they were  tightening up the bolts, I was like,    Back to the drawing board,    is what I  thought it my head. That   s a nice accomplishment. It feels like you   ve  accomplished something whenever something like that goes up, but as soon  as it   s over, you   re ready to do something else big. Those don   t come along  all the time. I got a few that I   ll have planned out to the point where I   m  ready. If anybody ever was interested, I   m going to make some more of  those big ones because they   re the funnest. A crane setting it up there, that   s  pretty cool.  Little Thunder That was at a casino. Remind us the location?  Glass At Ramona.  Little Thunder I want to see that. What   s been one of the low points in your career?  Glass Oh, there   s no low points. You   re very lucky to be an artist, and I feel like  I   m very lucky. It   s hard. It   s hard. There   s nothing that   s easy about it, but  you get used to that. You get used to what it takes to try to accomplish these  goals.  Little Thunder Is there anything that we   ve forgotten to talk about or anything you   d like to  add before we take a look at the Prayer Feather and also your machine over  there?  Glass No, I really feel like this is a blessing, to be an artist and to be a creative  personality. I just appreciate all the people that   s helped me along the way:  my parents; my grandparents; my wife, Pam; and I thank the Creator for my  family. I   m just going to keep doing what I   m doing, and it   s all going to be  fine because that   s the way I   ve done so far. Like I said, I   m feeling more  22  comfortable in that, with that responsibility now. I   m starting to feel like,     Okay.    I knew it was some level of responsibility, but now I   m really  feeling that I   m starting to be comfortable with it.  Little Thunder So here we   re having a look at your Prayer Feather piece. Anything you   d  like to add about this? I remember you talking about possibly adding some  ceramic on the sides at some point, too.  Glass This piece is going to be like it is. Those are options in the future for  different art pieces, but this piece is nearly complete. I got a little bit of  polishing to do. It   s the strength. I feel that a lot of the pieces that I   ve been  doing and have always done is just strength. It has the amount of strength; it  just has that presence and strength. That   s one. Right now, I   m really  enjoying the white metal because the whiteness, to me, symbolizes a purity,  so that   s nice. I   m always attracted to the white metals a little bit more  because of their purity. It goes good for this one. It   s to symbolize a prayer  and to comfort people that pass by. It   s a fabricated stainless steel, welded  and polished.  Little Thunder I was looking at the design on the base. The measurements, again, is it  fifteen?  23  Glass No, it   s eight foot three inches, roughly eight foot four.  Little Thunder Eight foot four. Wow, it has a presence that   s even bigger than that. Well,  thank you very much for your time today, Demos.  Glass Yeah, thank you. Thank you for your interest.  -------  -------   
