 Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State Library.  Today is Saturday, June 13th, 2009. We   re in Stillwater, Oklahoma at the  Stillwater Public Library interviewing John Carpenter. This interview is  being conducted as part of Spotlighting Oklahoma: Life in the 1930s  Oral History Project. Thank you for joining us today.  Thank you for letting me be a part of your program.  Let   s begin by learning more about you. Can you tell me a little bit  about your early life, where you grew up, and about your family?  Yes, I was born and raised in Ponca City, Oklahoma back in 1922. I was  born on my grandfather   s farm that he acquired in the Cherokee Strip  opening back in the 1800s. My father was a farmer by trade and he  raised all of us children up to the effect that farming was the mainstay  and all of our lifestyle. When I was growing up and educated in the  Ponca City school system, I was very aggressive to studying people in  the respects of diversity and I loved to travel. I made a lot of unexpected  runaways in my day to places that I was interested in. I would let the  folks know that I would return in two or three days and not to worry.  My major trip was buying a Model T Ford in 1935, remodeling it,  putting equipment in it with a bed attachment. It was a two door, 1925  Model T. In its complete overhaul, I proceeded to travel to Colorado  Springs, to climb the top of Pike   s Peak was my ambition. I made  several attempts, but in so doing, the knowledge I acquired was much  more significant because I only made the elevation of timberline. I never  made the top. So that   s sort of a story to my life. I never made the top.  I   ve always been to the point of looking over at the top and in so doing,  in those days, things were much different. I provided all of my food  from the farm on the trip. I was gone eight days and in so doing, I only  5  had  20 in my pocket. I had carried extra equipment for the Model T and  the repair for the brakes and the bands and such, and in consequence, all  I had to buy was ten cent gasoline. I had all my oil and I made the trip  and I got back home with less than 50 cents. So I felt that I was a  success in being conservative in those days, but in the end counter, most  of my expense was trying to attain the unaccomplished goal of getting to  the top of Pike   s Peak and looking the world over.  But, in consequence of that, I learned thrift. I met a lot of wonderful  people. This was prior to the major war and there was young people  camping at the campsites where I stayed. I encountered three dust storms  on my way out and my way back home. I had a layover one day in  Guymon, Oklahoma because you couldn   t see the roads because the dust  storm had blown the dust tremendously deep and the fence lines along  the side of the road were the only way that you could know that you  were in the road or not. Some places didn   t have fences so you had to  navigate very carefully. The top speed of my Model T was probably 20  or 21 miles an hour. We were always safe in that factor in those days, to  not speed and to create accidents which we see so much of today.  Basically, I could go on and talk about my experiences in the early days  of my life, but I rather didn   t take to my father   s will and his liking that I  was to stay on the farm because it was a 26 hour day every day. It was  month in and month out, with no relief. The only time I could get relief  was when I ran away from home. And in those times, I gained the  knowledge of the outside world and the people that were in the same  situation that basically we were in the    30s. It was a very, very difficult  time. It was a fascinating time. Growing up in the   30s gave us an insight  into the teachings of our Sunday school class,    Do unto others as you  would have them do unto you.    All of those concepts, that we are the  caretaker of our universe, of our planet and respect to our religion. We  knew other people were in the same situation of lifestyle.  As I was growing up, basically, I cannot remember a day after 1929  when the Depression hit and we lost all of our money. All of us kids and  the family had little piggy banks and we   d take them to the bank  occasionally and would deposit 50 cents or a dollar. I still have my little  bank, but that   s about the only basic thing I have left of those days when  the banks closed their doors and my father still had a mortgage on the  farm. We were worried that we   d lose the farm in those days like people  are losing their property this very day. It   s similar, but today is  exaggerated compared to the    30s. But the devastation of family life in  those times was just as drastic as what it is today.  I cannot, as I repeat myself cannot, remember a night that I didn   t see  travelers. I will say that they were in transit. I will say that they were  6  Okies. I will say that they were bums. I will say they were people that  were striving for a better life   like Steinbeck wrote about the Okies.  These people left because they had no alternative. They went west  mostly, from Oklahoma, Arkansas and Missouri and the central part of  the United States and we got to converse with those people. Our barn set  adjacent to Highway 60 over by the Bose D. Art Creek, or as we called  it, the Bo Dock Creek. We weren   t so French in those days. So  consequently, the people would come with a little bucket or a cup to the  barn when we were milking and we would give them milk. If the  chickens happened to have an extra egg that day, well they would have  an egg because they were very, very hungry, starving people.  My mother always had a big five gallon pot on the stove boiling with  something in it. Whether it was potatoes or whether it was just back ribs  or whatever, people would come in our home and we had an enormous  rock bench under a pear tree between our house and the barn. They  would sit on that rock bench and partake of the corn bread or the biscuit  or whatever we might have for them because these people were  destitute.  But my father was a man of very few words. My father was a dedicated  person to farm and consequently, he came in from the field and he  stated,    This is going to stop. I cannot feed everybody and keep going  with my own family. And if they   re going to eat off of me, they   re going  to work for me.    So he made us boys go out and gather all the shovels,  the hoes, the rakes, the axes, and every piece of working equipment we  had and line it up beside the old pear tree. If anybody came and knocked  on the door and said they were hungry, they went out with a shovel or a  hoe in the garden and logged the hard-line or the fence and trimmed  weeds or whatever was available or cleaned out the chicken houses  which helped me considerably because that was my job. But in  consequence, they did earn their food and consequently, we knew who  were really sincere and who were just bumming around.  In those days, to me, it represented the most trying times for people to  seek the level of being secure, like we were with our home there on the  farm. When we could we would go to town to buy our meager supply of  possibly just sugar, pepper, and salt and maybe coffee because we  produced the rest on the farm. If we didn   t produce it, we didn   t have it.  We did dig a cellar and we did have storage for things to provide for the  winter season which didn   t let us produce very much except our  livestock and our poultry and the swine that we had provided and we did  our own butchering.  All of our relation, more or less, in those days lived in the town. Like my  grandmother and my aunts and about 20 different cousins would come to  7  the farm. They would help my mother clean the house, they would help  with any chores they could. But in a sense, we supplied them with their  livelihood of food going back home. But as we would go to town, and it  was terrible to see because we went back to my place of birth which was  just half a mile out of town, and Grandpa Grimes that owned the  property. We would sit there and he would say how terrible things was  with the farm life because he couldn   t sell his hogs because in the early     30s we had another president that made social work just the same as  what we are witnessing today with the WPA  Works Progress  Administration  and the CCCs  Civilian Conservation Corps  and all the  other government interventions in our American way of life which  destroyed the inside and the initiative of hard working people. We are  witnessing that very same thing today. So it   s a replication of the    30s  that we are witnessing today.  I sort of get off of the track in talking to you, but in a sense, I witnessed  several hundred people that were riding the rails. We could call them  various names   hobos, rail hounds and various other uncomplimentary  names, but before they came into town where they would pick us up or  freight from the depot they would get off of the train. See, my  grandfather   s farm, a railroad ran adjacent to it. And there would be as  many, I am positive, as several dozen or even a hundred people. Once in  a while there would be a child, once in awhile it would be a woman, but  basically it was men, going from one place to another, trying to find a  way to provide for themselves and their families. When you talked to  them and wanted them to come help you do work in the alfalfa field or  anything, they were all willing. And one older man, particularly, he  stayed and lived in our barn and he worked for us, just for our food and  my mother made blankets and things for him to be comfortable and he  could use our outhouse or our smokehouse for accommodations in the  winter.  Speaking of outhouses, we were very fortunate. The only value I   ve seen  from President Roosevelt   s time of his socialism was we got a new  outhouse with two-hole stations. In this sense, it improved us from our  old one-hole outhouse. It doesn   t mean very much to people today, but  in our day it meant a very, very different situation because it was a very  stable, well built outhouse. We had other names for those kinds of  things, but we   re not interested in them today so much.  But then I got a good education. That was the important thing about it. I  got an education because we had a wonderful man in Ponca City,  Oklahoma. His name was E.W. Marland. Marland discovered oil in our  area. One mile from our property was the Molly Miller Lease. The  Miller was a 101 Ranch, Miller Brothers. Marland was in association  with them and he had worked over a year before he finally discovered  8  oil on the Molly Miller Lease. From there on, his wealth and his fortune  began to grow and he established a refinery in our town and he shared  his wealth with everybody that worked for him. My father, against his  will of leaving the farm, took his team of horses and helped make the  dykes around enormous tanks, what was what we called the Continental  Conoco, E.W. Marland Oil Company Tank Farm which covered a whole  quarter section. In consequence, my dad was able to retire his horses and  Mr. Marland gave him a job, taking care of all the water pumps on the  river, on the Arkansas River, to pump water to the refinery. So my dad  was able to make as much as 27 cents an hour in those days, which was  a considerable amount of money, and later on he retired in 1951 for  13  a month. He lived until 1983 at the age of 90 some years old   91, I  believe.  He always stated that his most beloved job he had was tilling the soil  and producing food for his family. We used to have excessive amounts  of turnips and things on the farm that we would put up by the road side.  In those days, nobody had much money and we didn   t charge anything,  but if they left a dime or a quarter, it was an honor system in a little cigar  box. Today we still have one of those kinds of operations in Ponca City  and its out by Lake Ponca. The man raises tomatoes and I bought some  onions off of him the other day for a dollar and a quarter a pound. We  would have sold a bushel of onions in my day for as little as 25 cents a  bushel. Our peaches were a little more; sometimes we got as much as 15  or 25 cents for a little batch of peaches in those days. Things were so  different in respects to our inflationary spiral that we have come out of  in the years gone by.  My education was very thorough. I was a very good student. I had  trouble with one teacher because I had a friend and the teacher called  him a bad apple in a basket. And I said,    Don   t you talk about him that  way because he is not a bad apple spoiling the other students in your  class.    I was sent to the principal and the principal, he got me by the  shoulder and shook me and said,    What do you mean talking back to the  teacher?    I said,    Because she degraded my friend. She told us he was a  bad apple. And bad apples, to me, smell rotten and we don   t eat bad  apples. It shouldn   t have been referred to him whatsoever.    And Mr.  Lester, the principal, went and talked to the teacher and she apologized  to me for sending me to the office and it scared me to death. That was  my only encounter in my education that I recall to say that I wasn   t a  very good boy to be talking to an adult in those days because we were  taught at home to be seen and not heard when we were in company. We  all had to sit in detention when company did come to our house until our  folks released us and said,    You children can go outside and play.    We  were disciplined. We understood what the discipline was. We got  rewarded by love and attention from our parents.  9  I have substitute taught in Ponca City schools and it isn   t the students  that I worry so much about. It   s the parents because the students reflect  the inadequate care and love and attention that the students are getting in  our school system. We can   t throw more money in the school system  until we change the attitude of the parents to the students so the students  will be able to take hold on their own because the young minds will  develop much easier without stress and with more love and more  attention than what we   re giving them today in our society. All of this  has started, in my perception in the    60s, when we had the change of our  social and our economic situations which made it so that we are so  diversified and so critical of our society.  In comparison with the    30s and with today, we   ve lost the sense of  being more patriotic, more attentive to the other citizens in our area, in  our home particularly. We are too critical today. We have too many  dissensions in various, they talk about liberals, they talk about  conservatives, they talk about the political parties   we should all  remember that we are Americans and we have supported the world. And  we have enemies of the world that come and take our lives which we  have no business being involved in other countries and supporting their     evil empires    as some of our presidents have called them. But in  comparison with the    30s when I grew up and now, because I entered  World War II in the early    40s.  I was getting a higher education in Stillwater, Oklahoma at the A M  College, but I have to admit, the ROTC wasn   t my cup of tea. I resented  the fact that I was told when to get up and when to go to bed and the  other commands that I had to live by. So I quit college to my real regret  today. If any young people listen to this, set your goal, stay with your  goal, and don   t deter from it whatsoever. Because if you do, you will  have consequences as you grow older. You will have regrets when you  grow older that you aren   t able to offset in your youth. Because your  youth is a God given thing that you have to accomplish and develop in  its own stay. Like we did in the    30s, we had to be very creative on our  own because we didn   t have fancy cars. We didn   t have a means of  communication like you do today. Everything was more basic. And we  had to adjust to do that.  But then I   ll have to admit that I do not believe in these wars today that  sap our economy. And takes an innocent life of our service people.  Every day that I witness on the newscasts about another soldier or  another group that some infidel created a destruction of a dozen people  or a church or just a marketplace. It   s inconceivable in my perspective to  think people could degenerate to destroying other lives that are just as  important as theirs on account of being a fanatic religious situation.  10  But I have to admit, back in the    30s, we did have ministers that came  through our town that advocated all the things that are being advocated  today. We would sit on benches with bales of hay supporting the boards.  And the preachers would give up and point to us and say,    You   re  sinners    and you   re this and you   re that and,    You   re going to hell.     They didn   t know we were going to hell. But they assumed that we were  all not of their faith or not of their belief and so my impression in the     30s has rather drastically changed to being a dedicated Christian which  I am today. But everybody   s religion to themselves, it hurts me  tremendously to think that we have church and state separation because  of our forefathers, the men that I have studied about: Jefferson, about  Adams, about all of the men that were of the Constitution, their whole  perspective was that we are a pseudo Christian nation. We weren   t other  religions. Other religions can participate. But basically, our Constitution  brings us to the fact that our governments should provide by the  standards that the Constitution brought about for what we endured or  provided for us for many, many decades and in so doing, today we let  parts of our government control us socially, economically, and basically  physically, by sending young men to their death in wars that I don   t  believe is essential to the protection of America.  In other words, I   m going to state my course. I believe in my older years,  I have become a definite pacifist, if there is such a word. I don   t know  how to spell it perhaps, but I believe it. That it isn   t worth what they  contend that we need to fight elements of other races in other countries  that do not believe our perspective or our lifestyle here in America. It   s  so valuable for our expression of freedom, our expression of  individuality. A person can set their own goals, set their own time limits  and set their own particular interest to their own benefits and to their  friends and to their loved ones. I know I   m getting pretty preachy, but  still, I could speak hours upon hours in comparison with 1930s with the  Dust Bowl, the terrible Depression, the war element compares today  more or less as a soliloquy to a reoccurrence.  I hope that if we talk maybe 50 more years down the road that it doesn   t  occur again, that we have actually been able to find out today that we  have to judge by the past to support our dreams of the future. For the  next generations coming on, I have much concern still in thinking about  them. I   m sure that there   s going to be a sense of responsibility, a sense  of dedication to the principles that we were taught in the    30s that we are  people of God. We are people that can stand up like Paul Revere or  Daniel Boone and like the other men that we admired in my day as a  youth. I know their efforts and their concerns for our country were just  as positive as some people today. I know the youth of today, there   ll be  other people that come up in generations that enlighten that.  11  What we have today in our politics and what we have today in our  government as we know it, these things will change because people will  change proportionally to make them change. We are a divided nation  today because of the elections. Like in my hometown, in Ponca City,  sometimes the vote isn   t even 50 votes apart. We are so equally divided.  Basically it   s those that have and those that do not have. This is a  situation that we need to look at and to bring about more understanding,  a situation compared today with the    30s. We can really realize that  things can change when we all have a program or have a plan or have a  meeting to the affair of people coming together.  I   d like to say one more word about the    30s in comparison to today. My  brother was seven years older than I. Things were so bad he tried to start  a little business of a magazine exchange. Walking around town with  magazines and trying to exchange them in our day was our TV. That  was our radio communication was magazines. We had the Liberty  Magazine. We had the Ladies Home Journal even in those days and the  ladies just loved it. But he couldn   t make a very good profit of it and he  was dissatisfied with the farm too and he told my father,    I am joining  the Navy.    We thought the world was about to come to an end when my  brother was going to join the Armed Forces. But we drove him to Enid.  He passed all of the physical and tests that they provided. He went into  the Navy and they sent him to San Diego, California. In so doing, he  earned  21 dollars a month. He sent home, every month, five dollars to  support anything that would be necessary in our livelihood back in 1937.  We, in consequence, bought fruit trees from the Stark Nursery in  Hannibal, Missouri and established a five acre orchard. And in so doing,  his five dollars helped pay for the trees and after that we were able to  can fruit for the winters, and we were able to have fruit for the summers.  This was after 1929, so we lived on the farm without the wonderful,  luscious taste of an apple and how wonderful it is to wipe the fuzz off of  a peach and take a bite and enamor how wonderful nature has created  such fantastic sweet things to eat. This was an accomplishment beyond  my young imagination in those days.  And so today, we   re going to have to revert back to producing our own  ideas of how we live, maybe not from the orchard but we   re going to  have to produce it in a fashion where we   ll be more responsible for our  own taste and our own involvement in today   s world so we   re not so  dependent on commercialization and going to the local grocery store  because a tragedy can happen just as we see it since January 21st, since  we got a new administration. We   ve seen, they call it socialism, but you  can call it any name you want. But it is the essence of destroying the  American way of life because it was always if you didn   t succeed, you  retracted and you tried another source to succeed at. It was an  12  opportunity unlimited for your chances of taking opportunity.  They   re killing opportunity in America with our automobile workers,  especially with your insurance companies, supposedly, that I had never  actually heard of until this year of AIG. If they were so important around  the world, we should have let them fail, so the world could see how  important it was to put all of your eggs in one basket and stumble and  drop the basket and break all your eggs. This is the fact of life. AIG,  whoever manipulated it, whoever controlled the situation should be  responsible and held responsible for its failure. Not the American people  that are dependent on their own initiative to work and to make their way  of life with what education they have. We do not need to transfer wealth  from one section of our economy to another.  While I   m talking about it, I hope whoever happens to hear this will take  a torch up for it. We   ve lost the wonderful, wonderful middle class of  people that we had in the    30s. We now have those that control and we  have the masses. Our individual middle class, the average working  family, the person that didn   t rock that boat as far as politics were  concerned, they were basically family orientated to church, to education,  to the simple way of life, we have lost that situation with our  government taking away the value that the middle class established in  the    30s. We today have so much dissension within our borders with our  population diversity. This is what made America great in the original  immigration of Europeans and world people from all over. It was a  tragedy, I assure you, when slavery was involved. But the generations  after that had no course in that particular time. It was from very, very ill  gotten profits from slavery and now we have another situation in the  United States, that if I say something against one of my black friends, I  am a racist. That isn   t so.  We aren   t racist people, the middle class people. We speak our piece of  truth of what we know and are involved in. Over the years, I have  developed many, many homes for black people that didn   t have any  means of being able to own any property. Today, we have a Latino  situation, whatever Latino is: it   s Mexican, it   s Puerto Rican, it   s people  with a little different way of life, but they   re trying to come to America  to get the dream that we all have and our fathers and our grandfathers  had. These are middle class people. These kinds of people are now held  in subjection to those that have enormous, big corporations that control  the farming in your major states of California, Florida, and Arizona and  places. They would like to have this cheap labor. These are people that  are probably somewhat uneducated in the sense of the American way of  life. But, they are held as subjects to the big companies that farm, the big  companies that control labor. I   m getting too far off the subject of my  lifestyle of the    30s. These things I have perspectives of that I hope will  13  bring about a change in our way of life here in America.  If we could just have another wave of patriotism, not just a flag, but I  mean of the hearts and dedication of the souls of the people that are  involved in trying to raise a loving family and trying to be decent to the  neighbor as my father did, many years ago before my time. He spent  over eight months away from home, helping people that were in the flu  epidemic after World War I. My father was very fortunate that he didn   t  contract the flu epidemic. He dedicated himself to helping these people  by going around and providing them food and staying with their  families. When they had burials, he told us that they went out and dug  many, many graves for the people that couldn   t afford to have burials  properly. In our area was a very, very tragic time prior to the    30s.  Actually it was in the teens before I was born in 1922. But the stories  that was related to us and our family gave us significant insight in that  we were responsible to look after each and everybody regardless if they  were personal friends of ours or not.  Thinking back, I spoke of Marland. And anytime you come to Ponca  City and you want to get my name and give me a call, I will take you to  what I   ll call the    Palace on the Prairie,    Marland   s home that he didn   t  lose to JP Morgan in 1920. JP Morgan was a financier in New York City  that got on the board of the Marland Oil Company. He loaned Marland  money to develop oil in Mexico which we know it is there today,  Marland knew it was back in the    20s. But JP Morgan had other ideas  and I   ll just say it in a very simple word, that he confiscated E.W.  Marland   s empire of oil and his leases and his wealth, which he was one  of the seventh wealthiest men in the world before 1929. And in so doing,  he left Ponca City, my hometown, the legacy of our churches, of our  schools, everything was Marland   s foundation of making in his  executives. But when JP Morgan brought Continental Oil from Denver,  Colorado, which was a kerosene company. He converted it into a money  empire of his own and the leases and such that were in our area was  taken over by the JP Morgan Company.  As I have traveled somewhat, I have seen other effects of JP Morgan  around the world and now they have exchanged hands many times and  they call it JP Morgan Stanley. If you ever go to New York City, it   s  worth your time to go to Wall Street, the enormous buildings of the  stock exchange, the enormous buildings along the avenue that professes  to control the world, there is a little, tiny two-story building on the  corner of Wall Street, the JP Morgan Company. It still controls Wall  Street whether we like it or don   t like it. What you read in the paper  about the bailouts and the situation, we still have the undercurrent of  financial pioneering of JP Morgan. I have studied his lifestyle over the  years. Of course, JP has passed on like many others in the    30s. The  14  generations following in his footsteps and the way they were raised in  the    30s is the way they are putting the pressure on the economic and the  capitalistic system today. The capitalistic system in the United States is  one of the most important things that our ancestors gave us. You have to  have capital, you have to have the middle class provide for its    own. If  you don   t have capital, you have lost your country. This is my big  concern in comparison today with the    30s.  We have foreign nations that control most of our economy in the sense  of Wall Street, of our treasury bonds and bills. They control the Panama  Canal, which our people of the past so bravely constructed. China owns  the Panama Canal. China owns our main port out of Los Angeles, San  Pedro. China owns basically the paperwork in the United States today  and in consequence, it   s still a country that doesn   t respect freedom. It  doesn   t respect equality. And if it continues the way it is, the  indebtedness, the only thing we could survive in is to say that we have  power with the atomic energy which they haven   t relented to China, as  of yet.This is another total subject that I   m very, very concerned with.  And I cannot prophesy. I have no crystal ball. But it   s time somebody  awakened to the fact that we   re in a very vulnerable situation in the  world that controls masses of people, masses of armies, masses of  devastation with atomic energy and atomic energy is just one factor in  the many other sciences developed, laser and other factors that we   re  encountering today.  Just today, you and I across America on June 13th, 2009 have witnessed,  we have more analog. We have another perception and when I drove to  Stillwater today I noticed at least a dozen towers that represent  communication, but those towers are insignificant to the satellites above  your head, in the skies above us. This is an infant development that will  materialize and will become dynamic for the control of all facets of our  lifestyle in the entire universe. Analog is an antique now. One day we  will have ideas, we will have dreams for the young people to assimilate  and to accomplish more that the generations will ever be able to face.  It   s incomprehensible, a word that has no definition really to me,  because its expanse will cover every facet of life and lifestyle. Young  people, you must realize and look at what the future holds for you in the  world of tomorrow in respects of living much different than I did in the     30s, much different than you do here in the year 2009. I think I   ve said  too much.  This young lady has been watching me and wonders when I   m going to  shut up, but nevertheless, I made an offer awhile ago, if you ever come  to Ponca City, give me a call. I   ll take you to the Marland Mansion. I   ll  give you the history of the Marland Mansion. It   s unbelievable history of  how he succeeded and he fulfilled his dreams. I was there in 1941 when  15  he passed away. I had taken mail to the post office from the Ponca City  High School and picked up the mail. I was a very privileged student  because I had gone to summer school every summer so in my twelfth  year, I could what they called    free lance    and I got to take the mail and  I got to be on the radio, I got public speaking. I was antiwar even back in  1941. But Mr. Marland, every time I had seen him at the post office, he  would say,    Good morning, young man.    I was so inbred with the basic  things that I was not to speak to my elders that I would just nod and  thank him. Good morning, I would not say good morning to him because  I was taught to be seen and not heard by my elders. I respected Mr.  Marland because I thought he was the main reason that my father was  able to succeed on the farm and to be able to buy a tractor, to be able to  have other equipment to bale our alfalfa and things like that. If it hadn   t  been for that, we would have still been using the hoe and the shovel in  the    30s.  And I   ll tell you, I   ll close with one last thing that I hope you never  encounter, my mother, when I would get home from school, would take  blankets and sheets and I would pump water at the well and she would  douse the blankets in the bath tub and then we would proceed to hang  them up over the doors and windows because the drought in the    30s  was unbelievable. It was almost devastating to be a farmer in Oklahoma  in my area, particularly. But the damp towels and the damp bed sheets  kept the dust from sifting through the windows and the doors in the old  farmhouse that we lived in. We would go out and we would see a little  white, cumulus cloud and we would just sort of say a prayer under our  voice,    Please get together and give us a drop of rain.    But all we would  get would be what we called the heat lightening. It would be an  electrical storm and it would be the east electrical storms happen, it  would be from dust particles that will be in the air and you would see  them travel from one place to the other. Our fences were made of barbed  wire and many a time with the heat lightening, I   d see an electric fire  going down the lines and cattle had a tendency to get against the fence  and they would be electrocuted. This happened two different times in  my life in the    30s.  From the dust storms, the wind that blew, we would see an enormous  cloud to the west of us, it all came off of the Rocky Mountains down  across the panhandle of Oklahoma and we would see these black dust  clouds and they would encompass and actually you couldn   t see but a  very few yards in front of you when they came. We  would  put cloth  around our mouth, wet cloth so that we would not breathe the dust  because it was predominant. Because they would have what they called  dust pneumonia, or consumption in those days, from breathing too much  dust. And our cattle, we always had to try and get them in the barn, away  from the dust storm as best as possible. But still in all, I hope you never  16  Nykolaiszyn  Carpenter  encounter such severe extreme weather that we   ve had here in the  Midwest.  We never had any bailouts, we didn   t have any subsistence from  anybody in those days and we just survived daily, by each and every  day, giving a little thanks when we did get a rain drop towards the end of  the    30s and in the    40s when the war came on, then the weather came  and our cycles changed and Oklahoma basically isn   t the Tornado Alley  anymore. So you   re safe here and we don   t have the wheat fields that are  plowed up in the cycle of the summer which created major dust storms  because the pasture lands in those days, the sod was turned and the dust  was predominant. But still in all, I understand to the west of us, in  Arizona and New Mexico, they still have dust storms and the last word  I   ll say, I never appreciated those dust devils. We would step out and it  would be whirlwinds in our field that would cycle across the field like  little tornadoes and they would be so strong that they would pick up  leaves and corn shucks and things and we always stayed away from the  dust devils. So be careful and never encounter them.  Well I have some questions. First off, how big was your family? You  mentioned your older brother.  My brother was seven years older. I had a sister eight years older. I had  an adopted sister that was five years younger than I was. We had taken  in cousins and we raised Nell Rose and Helen May which was my  cousins from my mother   s sister   s side. She passed away and we had  taken them and raised them. Nell Rose and I were inseparable. We were  a year or two apart, but when we   d go out and pick black-eyed peas, we  always got a little for ourselves. Helen was the one that stayed in the  house and did the dishes and the laundry and things like that. But Nell  Rose and I, we were brothers and sisters personified. We worked  together. We played together. We went to school together. And in later  years, of course, all of my relations and my brothers and sisters have  passed on. But we always were very, very close in those days. We were  almost like twins. We did everything together, more or less.  One great accomplishment was black-eyed peas in the shell don   t weight  a whole lot. You could have a whole gunny sack full and it only weighed  ten, 12, maybe as much as 15 pounds. But you shell them and you set in  the barn and keep shelling black-eyed peas out of those long stems,  which were four and five inches long, you can eventually get five to  eight to ten pounds of black eyed peas. You could take them into town  and get as much as 15, 18 cents a pound. And we got enough peas to  make ten dollars   ten dollars in our day was an absolute fortune. We   d  taken the ten dollars and went to the Kress store on Grand Avenue in  Ponca City, which was the haven for every kid in the candy store. But  17  we bought ten dollars worth of chinaware dishes, a whole big box of  dishes. It was an eight piece setting. It had the most beautiful morning  glory flowers around the base of it. The cups even had a little flower on  the cups. We were so proud of that and my grandmother, Grandmother  Oliver that lived in Mineral, Arkansas (the town population was ten),  we   d taken her a set of dishes because they didn   t have dishes to eat off  of. They ate off of tin plates and their cups were out of Quaker or  Mother Oats. She threw all of her present dishes away and she set the  table with the chinaware that we bought at Kress Store. It was such a  memorable occasion that Grandma had said,    Well I   m coming to see  this Kress Store where you bought it.    It was the first time that she ever  left. The folks sent her money and she came to Ponca City, Oklahoma  and stayed with us a week.  But on the way home, she passed away at McAlester, Oklahoma, which  was such a shock to us because we had enjoyed her for over a week. But  in the    30s, my grandmother, I heard her repeat many times,    I don   t  know what we   re going to do for the winter because we haven   t laid by  anything. The winter is going to be difficult.    I had an enormous family  in Arkansas. My mother   s family and consequently, there were six other  uncles that never got married and lived with Grandma and worked in the  mines down in Miami, Oklahoma. They worked in the timber business  in the early days to survive. In Arkansas in my day, it was all trees and  rocks and wasn   t much tillable land. They didn   t encounter the dust  storms like we did. But after 1930, my dad bought a Model A car and we  went to Arkansas with a car load of a 50 pound sack of flour, a 50 pound  sack of sugar, anything that we could pile into the car besides the seven  kids, all of us, in that car packed and we sat on each other all the way to  Arkansas. We had to stop every once in awhile and straighten our legs  out, but we got there to Grandma   s house.  Right at the big spring there below her house, she had a big patch of red  raspberries and seemingly, each and every time we went to Arkansas, we  picked those raspberries and Grandma would take them in and cook  them down and then she would bake the biscuits in that old wooden  stove, big trays of biscuits, because my six uncles loved biscuits.  Grandma   s biscuits stood up at least two or two and a half inches high,  baked in that old wood stove. You never tasted anything like it in your  entire life. And you would take that raspberry jam and smear it on those  buttered biscuits and by the way, the butter, she would save the cream to  have butter when we would get there. But ordinarily they didn   t have  butter to put on the table, but that would be a special occasion when we  came to Grandma   s house to have butter for the biscuits and such. I still,  today, love red raspberry jam and occasionally I can talk my wife into  baking a pan of biscuits.  18  Nykolaiszyn  Carpenter  Going back to the 1930s, when did you first start feeling the effects of  the Depression on the farm?  We went to the farm after 1929. I was born on the Union Street farm.  When Grandpa died, Grandma gave us the mortgage and the farm on the  Bo Dock Creek. It was 80 acres bottom land. Very rich bottom land. We  moved in the old farmhouse which was dilapidated, a very despairing  place. We had to dig a well to get water. We had no communications, no  telephone. We had outside facilities for restrooms and stuff. The barn  was the only main structure on the property that was very well built. It  was a two-story barn that held 70 tons of alfalfa and it held ten stalls for  milking cows and it had a horse barn part of it.  When we got to the farm, I was about seven, eight years old. Things  were so hard, so difficult. Because to take a bath on a Saturday night, we  didn   t have the facility other than a woodstove to heat the water and we  pumped the water out of a dug well, it was 28 feet deep. We had to use a  bucket to draw the water from the well because we didn   t have a pump  originally, to pump the water. After my brother had sent money home  and we made a little money in the late    30s,    36 or    37, we did build a  well house and put an electric pump in it and had a pressure system so  we could have a shower bath outside.  Then eventually, it was in the late    30s,    39, Dad added on a room to  those old house and made a bathroom where we had a bathtub and lived  like    white people,    Dad would say, and in so doing, realizing the  Depression, realizing our situation, we were very fortunate because we  were able when we moved to the farm to have a cow, to raise a pig that  would grow with our efforts and our work and we had chickens. We  raised our own poultry from the baby chicks in February on through     we would have anywhere from 300 chickens to provide eggs and  occasionally we would eat a chicken, but we never really had enough  chicken. We never really had enough to go around, but we did eat the  little roosters when we had 100 to 150 baby chicks that we brought  about. But as a child growing up, we just took things in stride for what  they were worth. We didn   t worry about them to the extent.  We were comfortable in the sense that we had a good bed. We were  comfortable in the sense that Dad always provided for us. We lived two  and a half miles from town. I   d taken violin lessons and walked to violin  lessons three times a week, Monday, Wednesdays and Fridays. So I  wasn   t really deprived. We didn   t understand that. My brother was more  concerned with making a living than I was. He was much older and it  affected him much more. He did finish Ponca City High School. He did  join the Navy in 1937. He did realize our situation and I would see Mom  would get a letter with five dollars in it from Lloyd. It would sort of  19  Nykolaiszyn  Carpenter  make my heartache to think he could have probably spent that very  easily out there in San Diego, but he became an aviator. He was on the  Langley aircraft carrier. He was in the war. He became a lieutenant  commander and he was very, very successful.  How did you father feel about Roosevelt?  Oh, mercy. Dad loved Theodore Roosevelt. We had a big picture. He  bought it from Sears and Roebuck when him and my mother were first  married. That was before us kids all came along. And that picture was at  least three feet high. It was at least four or five feet wide. It had  Roosevelt and all of his family with all of his children. I can   t remember  how many children there are, but growing up, I always went up to that  picture and pointed to Mr. Roosevelt because my dad thought he was the  greatest man because he set a piece of land aside over in Arkansas for  Homestead Exemption. My dad lived there five years cutting ties off of  that property. And he gave credit to the first Roosevelt. There was  nothing but good about Theodore Roosevelt.  But when Franklin Delano Roosevelt came along, my dad was just like I  express now. We had probably as many as 20 or 25 piglets and they  made us kill them because the market was surplus with pigs and we  could not raise pigs. They told us what we had to do. They brought out  people to check our milk and Dad didn   t like that either. We sold milk to  the people, a lot of times we gave it to the people, but they tested it one  time and they didn   t like the milk the way it tested. I don   t know  whether it had Bang   s disease in it or what, but they condemned our  whole herd. We had to send them all to Wichita, Kansas to be  slaughtered. I think I   m right, Dad got three dollars a head out of 20  some head of cattle, going to Wichita. So he had no good words for the  Roosevelt Administration.  My uncles came to live with us from Arkansas because things were so  hard up. Three of them worked out at Lake Ponca Park at the CCC  Camp and they paid them 12 dollars a month so they would come back  home, back to our house when they got leave, but they had to live there,  they had to work there. They built the park and the area and the dam at  Lake Ponca. Dad says that the only thing good that came out of  Roosevelt, it let my uncles have a job and build that beautiful little lake  out there.  But in high school, throughout my years of history, of studying the  Roosevelt administration, I have no good words to say. In fact, I wrote  several oratories and I won several Loving Cups for my oratories here in  Stillwater and Norman and Oklahoma City, Blackwell   different places.  But I never really criticized the President of the United States in a sense  20  because I still think the President is a man of honor and he should be  respected, even the one that we have today. I do not understand his  philosophy. He was a community organizer. He wasn   t a person of  importance to the middle class people. This is just me talking.  So consequently, Roosevelt didn   t get many points from my dad and he  didn   t get any from me whatsoever because he unsorted the  government   s control over many, many facets. And then I remember the  radio program that said,    To the mothers of the United States, I will  never send your sons to war    and within one year we were in war over in  Europe. It was an unnecessary war at that particular time. The British  declared war in 1939. We could supply the British with armaments, with  aircraft, with ships, and let them fight their own war and let them protect  themselves, which basically Germany had pretty near whipped England.  Pretty near impossible, if we hadn   t interceded, England would have  been a part of Germany.  We still have those tyrants today. We still have those ego type people  that are just impossible to understand why they ever got in control in the  first place. How people let such ideology take over their life and I   m  afraid that   s what   s happened in the United States. We   ve become  masses of people that don   t create our own initiative, to be our  individuality, our freedom of expression of our desires and our interests.  We   re letting somebody take the course. This thing of government is so  complex. And involved in so many facets of our lifestyle that you really  can   t speak out against one and make it affect another. It   s just  absolutely too  big , I just don   t know the descriptive adjective to give in  the sense of what I feel is happening to the American lifestyle. Basically  back to the Constitution. I wish we could just stop everything in its  tracks today and bring the Constitution up to say,    The Supreme Court,  you   ll have to be elected  to abide by the fore fathers intent on taxation,  foreign policy, immigration, justice system, entitlements, and Pentagon  military . Our Navy and our Army, all of our Service people can be  brought back home to the extent of protecting our homeland, our  shores.     And then develop the military to the extent that they become instructors  and teachers because my grandsons that have gone into the Marines and  to the Army, they come out sergeants. They come out educated. One of  them came out for  33,000 of college education after he served four  years in the service. This is what we need in the service of our Army and  our Navy and our Marines is to take our young people and educate them  and give them the opportunity to get a college degree in any field that  they want. So, I   m too extreme when it comes to our government   s  involvement in every facet of the world, of our lifestyle in America. I  think we ought to retract. I think we ought to stop what we   re doing and  21  Nykolaiszyn  Carpenter  reevaluate our whole political, economic, religious, every facet of our  lifestyle so that we could readjust to a more sensible, common sense. A  common purpose for everybody and everything and that everybody  regenerate their spirit, their cause.  If somebody wants to have a certain lifestyle, let them have it. That   s not  our responsibility. But they don   t have to impose it on the others. If you  want a certain religion, let them have the religion, but it don   t have to be  my religion. In other words, don   t impose their religion on other  people   s religion. I think our government should get out of everybody   s  business, religion and otherwise in order for us to be able to say,    Thank  you, Mr. Jefferson. Thank you, Mr. Adams. Thank you all the men that  supported the Constitution as free people, as we once knew it.    I believe  in the Constitution 100 percent.  Going back to when you were a young man in 1935 and traveling to  Colorado, did you run across many people moving west?  It was untold people walking, pushing carts. I   ve seen cars like  Steinbeck with the mattresses and with every earthly possession, even  the chicken coop on the back of them going to California. Our  Oklahomans that left us, the people that migrated from the other  southern states that came across Oklahoma that proceeded to the west, I  seen it so drastic. Pushing carts with kids, even with pets, even with a  goat. There wasn   t a night under the Bo Dock Bridge, from the early     30s to the mid    30s, late    36,    37, that there wasn   t somebody sleeping  there with a bonfire trying to keep warm. Trying to get out of the  weather in the winter, to have a place to stay at night to protect  themselves. Yes, I stopped at three different times with dust storms on  my trip return from Colorado.  At the filling station, I can   t say where it could be, but the man had five  little children. They were just little stair steps, from probably two years  old up to six or seven. And I said,    I can   t go any further. I can   t see it.     He said,    You pull your car over there and you come in here and sleep  with us. Don   t you stay out there in that car.    Because he says,    Nobody  can see it and they might come and hit it.    He said,    You park it there  and you come in.    I took my bedding and went in and laid it down by a  counter and the little children, they were so enamored with me, they  came and they laid beside me because they hadn   t had very many people  stay with them. He was a very poor man. His wife fixed us a little bowl  of soup that night. I did have some slab bacon left and I had some  potatoes left. We sliced that bacon and fried it and then we put the fried  potatoes in it and they all thought it was the best meal they ever had. He  was very nice to me and the next morning, we could see down the road  maybe a half a mile and so I cleaned the windshield off and got my  22  Nykolaiszyn  Carpenter  blankets all shook out, but the dust had filtered under the door at the  filling station where we were sleeping that night and he helped me and I  got the dust all straightened around where I could travel. I filled up and  tightened my bands and such. But I never will forget that night that I  spent with that man and his family and on the way out, there were two or  three cars at his filling station. He had a one pump filling station and  they were trying to sort out enough money to buy a little more gas to go  a little further west.  People today cannot possibly conceive of the destitution of the people   s  determination going to California. I was very, very fortunate to be able  to go to California in 1950 at Ukiah, at Barstow, at Riverside, all of  those people were from Oklahoma. You talked to one, they   d tell you  about somebody else. In fact, I met two families that were from  Blackwell and one from Ponca City, they were from Oklahoma, that  made it during the Depression during the    30s to California. They built  all the apricot groves. They built all the chicken places. They built down  in the San Juan Valleys. The Okies, excuse that   I don   t believe in  Okies. There   s no such a thing as an Okie. It   s an Oklahoman. We are  true, died in the wool Americans that we don   t need a slur term that was  referred to us back in the days of a Steinbeck story. We are strong  people that went into the other regions of Arizona. Arizona caught it too  with the orange groves and such. And people from Oklahoma.  What did you think of the Steinbeck novel when it came out?  I hated it. I read it. The Joads, the visionary that they could be treated so  terribly but that other people were already established there in  California. But after being in California, I can understand it a 100  percent and came home and read him again. Then I appreciated what he  wrote. I was bitter when I first read it. But I was enlightened after I had  visited California. California, today, is a consequence of the United  States. California, today, is suffering the pains of anguish, of devastation  of the attitude of people that weren   t considerate to other people. I   ve  always told the other family members. My oldest son, he   s a doctor, he  lives in California; I have visited with him several times. But I say these  people in California aren   t normal. They are beyond a common sense of  decency of respect, of interpretation of my principles of Christianity.  They are self-centered. They are self-serving. And in consequence,  California is paying its price because Governor Schwarzenegger can   t  make them come about with their crookedness that is going on in  California in politics to pay for what they   they are actually bankrupt.  They are actually beyond repair. Whenever if this government today will  try to bail out California, we   ll all go down with California. Because  California can   t be bailed out. I can elaborate on that story beyond your  imagination, but my son is out there. He owns three places. He bought  23  Nykolaiszyn  Carpenter  Nykolaiszyn  Carpenter  property to speculate and now the market has dropped out. And I said,     It   s good enough for you. You ought to have known to keep your  money.    They   ve lost a small fortune, but they didn   t lose anything  because they didn   t have it to begin with. But he is a doctor, so  consequently he   s still practicing. He   s 62 years old and he   s still  swindling his patients.  Are there any other memories about the 1930s you   d like to share with  us today?  Well, I could talk to you all day. You bring back different memories of  the    30s, of growing up with my friends. I never spoke about them.  What would you do for fun? Surely there was time for fun.  Okay. We built a boat and put it on the Creek   Bose D. Art Creek.  Water in the creek in the spring time and all of us kids, my cousins Nell  Rose and Helen. My other cousins that lived with us, we   d put our  overalls on. We   d go down to the creek and would bait a trap to catch  minnows. We would put a piece of lard or anything in there and  minnows would come in and then we would take the minnows and we  could catch catfish and our pastime, we   d catch little catfish and catch  enough for everybody to eat and then somebody would fall overboard.  We had a big flat bottom boat, there was five or six of us that could be in  there fishing. If we were fortunate in the spring to have a chicken bone,  we could catch crawdads and we could get a gallon bucket full of  crawdads, pinch their tails off, shell them and my mother would cook  them and they would be about the size of your thumb. And we passed  our time on the creek, considerably when we weren   t gardening, when  we weren   t studying, when we weren   t milking in the morning, in the  evenings, when we weren   t slopping the hogs and feeding the chickens  and cleaning the chicken houses out and cutting the hog weeds to feed  the hogs.  Then we would at night, sometimes, take a gunny sack and take a lantern  and I had a wonderful friend, Trixy, my dog. She was a white haired rat  terrier and she could climb a tree that was at a little angle. We would  take her and four or five of us would go up on the creek after dark and  we would catch possums and we would catch coons and sometimes we   d  catch a skunk (laughter) but we were very careful. But that was our past  time in the    30s.  Then I was very fortunate to be able to make a little money picking  black-eyed peas and I was able to buy a Hawthorne bicycle and my  friends in town, Billy Ray Stevens, Buster Woodburn, Roger Hawk, we  all had bicycles and on Sunday afternoon after church, after lunch, after  24  dinner, after the Sunday meal and everybody cleaned the dishes, they  would let us ride our bicycles until milking time, until 4:00 or 4:30. We  would go into town two and a half miles and ride from North Park to  Garfield Park back and forth, dodging, chasing each other, playing.  Sometimes we   d have a flag and whoever had the flag, we   d try to  capture the flag and things like that. We all had activities that kept us  going all the time.  We never lacked being able to   I built dozens of tree houses. My dad  happened to get some cable from some place and we put it up in one tree  on one side of the creek and about 150 feet over, we   d put it in another  tree and Dad got a pulley that you could put over the cable and hang  down and you make a rope seat. You did it and you go from one side of  the creek and you go clear to the other side. Well that got to where it  wasn   t so much fun because you couldn   t get back. So you had to walk  all the way around to the highway, Highway 60, and back home. So we  went up in them trees and we put swings and they were way high. We  could get on one bank and swing across the creek to the other swing and  grab it and come down and we could take that and swing it back across  the creek. Now that was in the late    30s. That was    37,    38,    39 because  we were older children and we were stronger, but we developed muscles  that you wouldn   t believe by playing on the creek with our swings and  with our cable that went across the creek one way. Whenever we had to  go across the creek to get the cattle which was on the other side  sometimes, we would use the pulley to go across the way and then we  would drive the cattle across the crossing just below the bridge to get  them into the barn. So we were occupied considerably doing things of  our own creativity.  The creek was a fantastic place to experiment with nature. We had a  berry patch that was probably eight feet high blackberries that went  along one bank and we just kept planting them and planting them and of  course the birds by the hundreds were there and in my teens from 12 to  20 I was a Boy Scout. I was a Scout Master, I was a Cub Master. We  studied birds. We could list all the birds. I   ve got an Eagle award with  five palms on it which means that I accomplished over 50 badges above  Eagle with being on the farm, being a farmer with my bird study, with  my civics, with my social studies, with my schooling and with  everything. I had a big sash that my mother made for me. I   d go to all  the different meetings that the scouts have there in town when they  become Eagle Scouts and I   d show off my sash to show,    Now you guys  can do this.    But I   ve never found one yet that had more sashes, but we  do have a lot of activity in the Boy Scout work. If we would make every  boy from the age of eight and every girl too to be in the Boy and the Girl  Scouts. The trouble is to find sponsors or to find people to take them on,  to take the time to be a Scoutmaster. But if we could teach them, the  25  Nykolaiszyn  Carpenter  Nykolaiszyn  Carpenter  Handbook of the Boy Scout:    On my honor, I   ll do my best to do my  duty to my God and my country and to obey the scout laws to keep  myself physically strong, mentally awake and morally straight.    That is  it and if you don   t like that, a scout is trustworthy, loyal, helpful,  friendly, courteous, kind, obedient, cheerful, thrifty, brave, clean, and  reverent. That   s what I did in the    30s.  Is the farm still in the family?  My dad sold our home, the old home place, to Mr. Butrum for  32,000.  And us kids every night going to bed, we went to bed every night with a  Molly Miller Lease a mile south of us going    bump, bump, bump,  bump    those wells pumping oil to make Mr. Marland richer by the day  and night. My dad said,    If there   s oil down there, there   s surely oil  down here.    But my dad was a farmer and he didn   t want his land ruined  by an oil well, the overflow. Mr. Butrum bought my dad   s farm for   32,000 in 1952. He had it six months and he put two oil wells on it. He  was an oil man. The highway between Interstate-35 and Ponca City was  started. They made an exit and they didn   t have enough dirt to fill in the  low places, so Mr. Butrum sold the back half of our old farm to take the  dirt out and they dug the dirt down 20 feet because it was at black  gumbo and when it packs, it packs like cement and they put that on that  road up there and he made more money (how much more I don   t know)  than the  32,000 what the farm cost.  Then to top it off, OGE, Oklahoma Gas and Electric, put a big plant in  between Stillwater and Ponca City and put a power line on the east side  of Mr. Butrum   s old home place on the east side. A big power line. He  got so much for those big power cables, I don   t know how much, but I  imagine it was in the neighborhood of several thousand dollars. But he   s  passed on today and they built the highway up after Dad sold it. The  reason Dad sold it, they built the highway up and put a new bridge in  and it floods. The Bo Dock bottom floods and it went clear to the ceiling  of our old home and so they tore it down and the old barn, there was  people   I wasn   t there   but there was people sleeping in the barn and  apparently they were smoking or had a lantern or something and they  caught the hay mound on fire and it burnt the barn down. So there isn   t  any indications of anything on that farm today except two oil wells  sitting there pumping.  Wow. Well thank you for coming out and talking with us today. I   m sure  we could go for hours and hours, but your wife may not like that very  much. (Laughs)  It   s been an hour and a half. I probably wore you down, and I know you  were going to ask me more questions, but I told the wife, I said,    I   d just  26  like to tell my story.    The old lady next door, she says,    John you go to  some place and you get that wrote down what you know about  everything here in our town.    Well I ran for Mayor three different times.  I would never make it because I am too radical, but I ran for mayor to  change our town. And I tried it three different times. We did only have  three commissioners. When I got through there were seven men that ran  for mayor and Ernie Trout won it. Kenneth Holmes, a lawyer, he came  in second. I came in third out of seven. So I thought that was pretty  good. So Ernie Trout came to me and he says,    What do you want this  city to do?    I said,    I want representation. I want it where people can  meet at five o   clock and six o   clock in the evening and not at twelve  o   clock noon. People are working. They can   t get there at twelve o   clock  noon at their lunch hour.    And so they raised it to five, and we do have  representatives in our town today that listen to us. But they all run by the  Chamber of Commerce and they overlook the average working person in  our town and so I   m going to have to run for mayor again and straighten  them out to try to see if we can   t   we   re paying for economic  development, we   re paying for Main Street, we   re paying for everything  that doesn   t benefit the people.  -------  -------  
