 Wilson  Pemberton  Today is December 8, 2011. My name is Latasha Wilson, and I am with  the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at Oklahoma State  University Library. I am in Oklahoma City today at the home of Robert  Pemberton, talking with him about his family   s grocery store, Crescent  Market, in Nichols Hills. Thank you for joining me today.  You   re welcome.  To get started, would you mind telling us when and where you were  born?  Okay. I was born in Fort Worth, Texas, on February 19, 1960. Had a  short stint there, about two weeks, and then have been in Oklahoma City  ever since.  And your parents ran the grocery store, Crescent Market.  Yes, my grandfather and my dad both ran it at Plaza Court, down on  Thirteenth and Walker. Then we moved to Fifty-ninth and May for a  brief stint while Nichols Hills Plaza was being built, and then when it  was ready we moved over there, about 1963-4, right in there.  So when you were young, do you remember   do you have memories,  your first memories of being in the grocery store?  Yes, definitely so. I   ve got a picture of me down at Plaza Court.  Apparently, there was a phonograph shop right next door to the store,  and they had an RCA Victor dog statue out front. My first picture was  taken down there standing next to that thing. Then I started working,  basically, in the grocery store when I was ten. Started sacking groceries  and would work up there during summers, and as I got older, would start  working after school. Then as I got even older, I would start taking  5  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  people   s places while they were on vacation and worked all the different  departments, usually for about two weeks at a time, from meat cutting,  produce, frozen food, dairy, grocery, in the office. So I basically got to  learn all aspects while I was growing up.  Were you an only child?  Yes, I   m an only child, just me.  Well, do you know much about the history of the grocery store?  Yes, I do. It was started in 1889 on the day of the land run. It started on  Main Street in Oklahoma City in a covered wagon. That was the first  location, was just basically in a covered wagon. Then we actually had a  store front. We had two of them on Main Street, 323 West Main, and  then another one. I can   t remember the other address, but we were there  until Plaza Court was built, and then that was the new innovative design  of all the shopping you needed to do in one area. It was kind of basically  like a little mall, that you   d call a mall now. We moved in there and  from basically   well, we didn   t. It was already there when my  grandfather bought into it, but they were there from the early    30s to  almost, well, early    60s. Then we moved to our present location about  1964.  So who were the owners before your grandfather?  There was a Mr. Thompson and a Mr. Wyatt and a couple of other ones  that they were different partners in it, not necessarily active partners but  still had investment in it. There are two names. There   s a couple other  people that I can   t remember right now.  Well, how did your grandfather come to Oklahoma?  Well, he was the son of a grocer man. His dad had Art Pemberton  Grocery on Main Street in Muskogee, and Grandfather always was  working. When he was little he would get combs and toothbrush and  little note pads from his store and take them down to the train station and  sell them to the soldiers that were coming through on the train for World  War I, and he would make a little money on the side. He   d sell them  newspapers and the toiletry stuff, and then he   d go back to work at the  store, at the market. His father, my great-grandfather, passed away at a  young age and kind of left him holding the bag there at the store, and he  heard about the Crescent Market having, maybe, an opening for an  investor/buyer in the early    30s. So he packed everything up from  Muskogee and moved to Oklahoma City and bought into the store. Since  1942, it   s been our store ever since.  6  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Did he know about it because he was in the grocery business, or did  people across Oklahoma know about this store?  It was pretty much a statewide-known store, but the larger hubs that had  the railway stations like Muskogee, they were a little bit more of a  metropolis. They had more information as far as what was going on in  like Tulsa and the other cities because the train travel made it so quick,  you could catch up on the news fairly quick that way. So he   d heard  about the store, and it always had been a good reputation, and he was  really interested and got into it.  You knew your grandfather?  Yes, yes, I worked with him for probably about thirty years.  Okay.  Yes, he worked there until he was eighty-five.  Wow.  Yes. He didn   t want to retire, and he didn   t believe in taking vacations.  (Laughs) He was the old school, hardworking, always there. I learned a  lot from him. Dad, of course, worked with him in the office, and I got to  do all the other stuff, the hard work, and they did the pencil pushing.  Eventually, I guess about fifteen years, sixteen years ago, I bought Dad  out. He   d brought me into the office probably about ten years before  that, so I got to learn the basics of it, and then he retired. He did retire,  and he did like to travel, so that   s what he did.  Well, did you hear many stories from your grandfather about the early  days of the store when it just opened or when he just took over?  Yes, I heard quite a few. Some of them were about his dad   s store in  Muskogee, and then also a lot of them were about the ones here at Plaza  Court. We   ve had a few exciting moments at the Nichols Hills location,  too. One story that he told me about that, when he first took over his  dad   s store in Muskogee, he bought a bunch of turkeys from one of the  local farmers for Thanksgiving. They had to, of course, clean them and  dress them out, and, probably, he said about 120 birds that he sold to his  customers. The day after Thanksgiving, he started getting people coming  in saying that their turkey tasted like fish.  At first, the first couple, he was just kind of writing it off as they just  didn   t know what they were talking about. Then after about the fifteenth  7  Wilson  Pemberton  or twentieth one came in, he made a trip out to see the farmer to talk to  them about the turkeys. The farmer said that the creek had dried up in  June, and the turkeys went down there and ate all the minnows, but he  thought that the taste of it would have been out of their bodies by that  time. It wasn   t, so all the turkeys tasted like fish, and he lost money that  year on Thanksgiving and had to refund a bunch of money.  But that   s how he kept his customers, and that was his philosophy.  Things can   t always go right, but if you keep them happy they   ll come  back. And eventually, over the long run, you   ll get your money back  from them, but you had to give the refund to them or whatever. He said  just keep them happy and do the things you can, personal service, and  that   s what keeps your customers. I learned that, and that   s the way the  store was based.  Then we had a couple times there in Nichols Hills Plaza, just different  things as far as one time, one of the meat cutters had a little too much to  drink at lunch. Drinking and knives usually don   t go too well together,  so Grandfather had to let him go. Well, turns out the guy got kind of  violent after he   d had a few drinks, and he was chasing Grandfather  around with his knives throughout the store. The office was upstairs, and  so Grandfather thought if he could get to the stairs and get the door shut,  everything would be okay. But he couldn   t get up the stairs, and he  turned around to defend himself, and the guy took a slash at him with the  knife and cut his pocket. He said all of his change fell out, and that  distracted the guy long enough, all that noise and the stuff going on, that  my dad came up from behind and hit him with one of our folding  delivery boxes, which was made out of wood and quite heavy. He saved  his dad from getting cut up by the intoxicated butcher.  But they finally got rid of him? (Laughs)  Oh, yes, (Laughs) because he   s laying there unconscious, I think they  carried him out. I don   t know if Grandfather called the police or not. He  usually wouldn   t get the authorities involved if he thought he could take  care of it, just less worry about it. But, yes, just different things that  happened, customers, irate customers. At our new location at Nichols  Hills, we   ve had a couple of drive-throughs. One time I think I was  about ten or eleven and got a call at ten o   clock at night from the Nichols  Hills Police Department saying that somebody had driven into the store.  Apparently, the lady had a broken leg, and her husband had put in a  handbrake and didn   t do it right. She was zipping across the parking lot,  and, fortunately, went in between the two steel beams that supported the  building. The front of her car went through the wall. The bad part was it  was on our glass aisle, and so all the honey, the olives, the jams, jellies,  mustards, mayonnaise, all basically just kind of accordioned. The first  8  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  one would fall off, and it wouldn   t break, but the second and third row  would break on top of those. Anyway, Dad and Grandfather made some  calls, and we opened for business by nine o   clock the next morning.  Wow  (Laughs) Was that aisle roped off?  No because it was the entrance aisle. It was right there as you first  walked in. It was basically cleaned up. I think we had to divert them  through a checkout stand to get to the store at first, but by the end of the  day they had the shelving back up, just waiting on product to get there.  We also had a fire back, I think, in 1974. We had a fire that was started  up in the attic where we stored our paper goods, and the whole roof  above the meat market eventually caved in. We were closed for about  two weeks from that deal and back open again.  When you   re in the business seventy years, there   s all kinds of stuff that  happens. We had, one time, one of the package boys, I guess, was not  being faithful to his wife. The wife found out about it and was chasing  him around through the store, waving a gun around, and ended up  shooting him in the foot right there. He thought he was safe if he got to  the office, too, and he ended up getting shot in the foot right there in  front of Dad and Grandmother.  Oh, my gosh. So this man was shot in the foot.  Yes, shot in the foot. They did have that lady arrested, but that was just  really lucky that nobody else got hurt. I don   t know if he learned his  lesson or not. I think he might have lost his job over that, too.  What does package boy mean? What is that?  Actually, the carry out. They would actually sack the groceries and carry  them to our customers    cars. No matter if it was one sack or five sacks,  that was their job. A lot of other grocery stores have their sackers front  shelves and stuff when they   re not busy, but we always wanted  somebody there to carry out somebody   s groceries no matter when they  showed up or how many showed up. Our package boys, they always just  hung out up front and always made sure that they   re ready to go when  somebody came up.  And was that until this year?  Yes, we   ve always had it.  In 1942 when your grandfather bought this business, do you know how  many employees there were?  9  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  He had forty at that time, and we also had delivery. We had, I think,  about six cars that would run over the city to deliver groceries. Here at  Nichols Hills, when we first moved there, we had nine operators. That   s  all they did was answer phones and take orders, and we had fifteen  delivery trucks that ran basically from nine to six. That was back when  the products that were offered, there weren   t as many. You only got like  two different kinds of cans of green beans. You didn   t have the less salt,  no salt, French cut, Italian cut choices, and so the deliveries was a lot  easier then. Then as the gas prices rose and insurance prices rose, we  eventually got out of the delivery business in 1970.  Some of the other grocery stores didn   t survive giving up their delivery  business. That   s what kept them going. If they did give up their delivery  businesses, a lot of them went out, went out of business. We didn   t.  Grandfather was very tactful and worded a really nice letter explaining  why. We had one or two accidents a week at least, and he would have to  fill out these accident reports, and we   d have to get them. Then the  insurance would start going up, gas prices went up, so it was just  feasible to get out of the delivery business.  What year did the market move to Nichols Hills?  Nineteen sixty-three,    63,   64, right in there.  Do you know any of the big competition at that time in the    40s,    50s,     60s, other grocery stores? Were there a lot of other grocery stores?  Yes, there was about three or four what I call regulars that people always  were loyal to. One of them was Corsen   s, one of them was Kamp   s, and  then the Crescent Market were the three main ones back in the    60s.  Let   s go back in history a little bit. Do you know how your great-great-grandfather  came to be in Muskogee?  No. I can   t actually tell you that. I   m not sure. Originally came from  Georgia, but I   m not sure why they stopped in Muskogee. Maybe that   s  where   actually, the store was in Muskogee, but they lived in Summit,  which is just right outside. It wasn   t very far.  And Muskogee was pretty bustling?  Yes, and a lot of Native American business because there was  apparently a couple of reservations around there. I remember one of the  stories that Grandfather told me about his dad. The chief would come in  and would get a cigar and light it and smoke it, and his dad would end  10  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  up selling the rest of the cigars. Charge him for the box and sell the  cigars individually after that and then also charge him for the box of  matches because they didn   t have to pay. They   d just walk in and sign,  and then the government would pay their bill.  Oh, wow  (Laughs)  Oh, another story was it had been raining quite a bit, and Grandfather  was headed back to the ranch on his pony and came across one of the  Indian chiefs    car in the ditch. The Native American said that he wanted  to trade him, swap him car for pony. Grandfather said,    Great, sure,  here, take my horse. I   ve got a car now.    So he walked on another two  miles back to the ranch and said,    Dad, we   ve got to get the team of  horses and go back up here. I   ve got a car now.    His dad goes,    What do  you mean?    He goes,    Well, one of the chiefs down there got stuck in  the ditch. He wanted to trade that car for my pony, so he   s got my pony,  and I   ve got his car,    and his dad informed him that he didn   t own that  car. It was government owned. They pulled the car out of the ditch,  drove to the reservation, and Grandfather had to ride his horse back from  the reservation back to the ranch. It was apparently five or six miles  more than what it should   ve been, than he would   ve had to do.  Just different stuff as the times changed. Also, they apparently had food  rationing back sometime in World War II, and he was good friends with  a meat packer here in town. Louis Ishoff was his name. He would get  bacon and stuff kind of on the side so he would be able to keep his  customers in product. Even though it was allotted type of food, he could  get it through other channels, so to speak. That way he kept his supply of  bacon. His philosophy is if you could sell them bacon and coffee, then  everything else will fall into place, so he always ran deals on bacon, and  he always ran deals on coffee, plus gave away free coffee. We always  had free coffee and cookies for our customers.  And you had deals on bacon through the end of this year.  Yes, all the time. Yes, sure did.  Boar   s Head bacon.  Yes, buy one get one free. Yes.  Wow. So that went back to the Muskogee store?  Yes, yes.  Wow.  11  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  He learned all his marketing techniques from his dad, and it was one of  those deals that I learned from my dad and my grandfather in kind of a  combined teachers and their basic philosophies. I mean, things changed  throughout time, but these are very basic. If you keep your customers  happy, then that just doesn   t change. If the customers are happy, then  they   ll come see you. Our personal service is always one of our  outstanding qualities besides our good food. (Laughter)  And these days, when the trend has migrated to big box stores, that is  something that was definitely lost.  And now, actually, the trend is going back to smaller stores. It   s back to  just the meat market with some groceries or just a small grocery store  with frozen foods and produce. The big stores have kind of come and  gone. People don   t like to spend an hour in there looking around for one  thing. They like to be able to go in and get something and get out and  not have twenty-five different checkout lines and only two of them  working and twenty-five in each line. So the smaller stores are coming  back into the picture.  History always repeats itself. It   s if you can just find the spot that has  enough rooftops to support it. That   s the whole thing is finding that area  that   s got enough rooftops that you can get the people to come to you  and then remain loyal. It   s tough when you   ve got Sam   s  Club  and the  Wal-Marts all around. I mean, they can buy a case of paper towels for  what they could buy six rolls at my store for, and it   s just the way the  buying power is with the bigger stores. Wal-Mart buys so much that they  get a lot better deal, even on Coca-Cola and stuff. We would have to  always call our Coke rep and say,    How come they   re selling it for  cheaper than what I   m buying it, my cost is?    It   s just their buying  power. That was one of the disadvantages of being a single store, but it  was a good store. It was a good mom-and-pop store.  And there   s a lot of attention now to buying local.  Yes.  That   s kind of come back into being popular.  Right, which we always carried local stuff. We always had at least  fifteen or twenty different products from locally owned people.  Did you see an increase in people interested in locally grown products  specifically in the past just few years?  12  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Yes and no. Some of the problems were the local growers, of course,  have to fight the Oklahoma weather, and so their crops are made or  break on the weather. Just like this last year, we had the drought, and a  lot of the farmers, their crops were over with by mid-July, and usually  they sell into September. That   s the only problem with the local was the  inconsistency. We would have people that did like their local products.  The ones that were mainly produced and not grown were the more staple  ones because it was a factory kind of a deal. It didn   t really depend on  the weather.  Like what would that be?  Oh, some of the peanut butters and honeys. Some of the honey came  from Norman. Some of the peanut butters come from Blanchard. Our  Mason   s  Pecans and Peanuts  is down on Highway 9, just outside of  Norman. It   s those kinds of things that are consistent, and then that   s  what the people would really like and request.  How would you make those connections with the people producing that  down the street?  Usually, they would come to us. Usually, they would solicit us to sell  their products. Here lately, they   ve got more of a say in the market.  They   ve got representatives that will represent the guys from Fairview  and from Hugo so those guys don   t have to drive in and spend their gas  money and their time away from their business to promote their  products. They have guys up here now that are basically a distributor  and do that for them, and all they have to do is make a trip once a week  to deliver the product. Then they   ve got the other guy up here that lives  up here that distributes it and also pushes it. Like I said, as they have  more of a say in the market, then they become easier to be accessible  just because of the middle man. Even though the middle man makes  money, it   s feasible for them instead of driving up from the panhandle,  that kind of stuff.  And they   re still making enough money off their products.  Yes, yes, because the more they can sell, the more money they   re going  to make. Their set cost is to the distributor guy, and then he   ll put a little  bit of markup on it but not too much because if it doesn   t sell, then he   ll  lose the product. He   s got that fine line that he can get as much out of it  as he can but yet not actually gouge or hurt the sales.  Well, do you know much about   the market officially opened on the day  of the land run in 1889 in a covered wagon. How long did it stay in a  covered wagon?  13  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  It was in a covered wagon for about three months, and then they had the  store built by that time. It started off as Crescent Grocery because there  was no refrigeration, and as time passed and there was ways actually to  keep the meat fresh, then it became Crescent Grocery and Market. Then  in, probably, I   d say, the mid-   30s it got changed to just Crescent  Market.  Okay, and the person that originally opened it in 1889, do you know  where they came from?  Not without reviewing my store history, no, I don   t. (Laughs) I   m  thinking Kansas. I   m thinking they came in from Kansas.  I wonder how many grocery stores opened on that day at the time.  Maybe they didn   t make it very long, but     Right. Yes, that   s a good question, too, and in Oklahoma City. They  could   ve stopped in Guthrie, or they could   ve stopped in Stillwater or  Perry or anyplace close to the border when the land run started. They  made it down this far and thought this was going to be the best, the best  place. Then, of course, the City acquired the statehood capitol from  Guthrie one evening, that the people of Guthrie weren   t too happy about.  Yes, and that probably made people more attracted to Oklahoma City,  automatically.  Oklahoma City, yes. It was always a grocery store that would try to keep  the products that were hard to find. We had the first Rich Lou canned  goods when they first came into the state. We stocked those. There   s a  lot of brands that we stocked that are no longer around, but there are  some that are still around.  Do you recall some of those that aren   t around anymore?  Gosh. Not right off the bat.  If you think of any, let us know.  Yes, okay. Okay. (Laughter)  What was one of the biggest sellers of the market, like what type of food?  Our meat. We were known for our meat, and we always had a personal-service  meat counter with five or six meat cutters back there to talk to  you, to help you decide which cut of meat you want. If it wasn   t thick  14  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  enough, we would cut you one thicker. If it was too thick, we would cut  it thinner. It was basically just to make the customer happy and satisfied  with what they were buying and give them the best quality of meat for  the price. Our hamburgers didn   t shrink to half the size after you  finished cooking them. They stayed the same size as when you put them  on the grill, and the same with the steaks. We always sold choice beef,  but we had a certain machine from Ross Industries that would  basically   it was like a giant meat tenderizer. We would run all of our  meat, pork, and veal through that, and that allowed our meat to become  just as good a quality as the angus or the prime, but yet you were paying  the choice price.  That was also the reason that the meat market was at the back of the  store was so you had to walk through the rest of the place to get to the  meat market. Hopefully we   d get some sales in between, either you  going to the meat market or coming back from the meat market. Another  thing was our produce. We always were very picky on produce that we  selected, and we would buy from five or six different vendors here  locally. If the celery didn   t look good coming in from one, we would call  another one. Turn that one down, call another one until we found the  celery that met our specifications. If we couldn   t find any, then we  would sometimes just be out of that product just because we did not  want to sell an inferior product. A lot of times towards the end of the  crops, end of the seasons, the product would be not as good, less  developed, so a lot of times we wouldn   t have stuff just because it was  not up to our qualifications.  Well, you grew up in Oklahoma City with your father and grandfather  running the market.  Yes.  Where did you go to school?  I started off at Belle Isle School, which is just right up here on Villa, and  then I went to Heritage Hall Private School that was at Sixty-third and  Penn. Before they got the actual campus built, they rented out different  churches in the area, so they had a lower school in one church, a middle  school in one church, and an upper school in another church. My  sophomore year they got the campus up and running out on 115th and  Penn, and I ended up graduating from Northeast  High School .  I had a car hobby at that time and kind of thought maybe that   s what I  was going to do instead of working the grocery business. But after I  realized my hands would be dirty all the time and be laying in  transmission fluid and oil, I opted to stay with the seventy-degree,  15  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  climate-controlled business. Being able to sign your own paycheck also  had quite a bit to do with it. Heritage Hall didn   t offer mechanics  classes, and Northeast did, so my last two years I went to Northeast and  graduated from Northeast just so I could. Basically, now, it   s just a  hobby, but at that time I thought maybe it was going to be a career  change. I tried to learn as much as I could, and I did. I learned enough to  know that I didn   t want to do that the rest of my life. (Laughter)  That   s good. When you were ten and working in the grocery store, were  you glad to do that at the time? Was that exciting to get to do that, or  was it like a chore?  It was more of a chore, and then when I got into junior high and high  school, I was only allowed to play one sport a year because I was  working the rest of the time. I   d play football, tennis, baseball,  basketball. I did the gauntlet, but I just couldn   t play all of them in one  year. I had to switch off for different years. That was also one of the  things that kind of prompted my thinking of a different career change  was the fact that a lot of times my friends were headed to Vale and  Aspen, and I was headed to work for spring break and summer vacation,  no summers off.  It was full-time during the summer and usually four to six thirty after  school during the winter. There were some times it was a chore. Plus,  being the son/grandson of the business, SOB, son of boss, a lot of times I  was picked on more than some of the others because they knew they  couldn   t fire me and they knew I wasn   t going to walk off the job  because I   d have to go home to Dad, and that wouldn   t be pleasant.  Fortunately, Dad was really good about whatever I messed up at work,  he didn   t always bring home after work. (Laughs) He was real good  about that.  Well, what are some lessons you learned during that time, working when  you were younger?  Well, one of the things I learned was it   s always a point of view.  Grandfather had me set up a display on an endcap, and so I stacked them  all up nice and neat, all the product labels facing out. He comes over and  tells me,    Well, that   s a terrible job. It looks so nice, people are going to  be afraid to buy it. They   re not going to take one off because it   ll mess  up the nice design,    all that kind of stuff. So he proceeded to jumble  them all up and dump it in one area. Then the next time he handed me  some and told me to go build an end display, I just started dumping the  cases in there, and he told me how bad that looked and that nobody was  going to even look at it because it was just all a jumbled mess, and he  started straightening stuff up.  16  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  I realized right then it depended on what your point of view was,  depending on if you were going to buy that product or not. Different  accounting stuff, different lessons on life, how to treat people, how to  respect people, listen to them, help them. Then if it was a complaint, try  to make whatever was wrong right, or do something, gift certificate, just  something to always please the customer. I learned, like when times  were getting thin, like through the oil crunch in the    80s, how to cut back  on controlled expenses and then the uncontrolled expenses.  Gas and electric and that kind of stuff you really can   t control, but the  advertising and some of the other stuff, you can control, and how to cut  back here and cut back there. Or if things are not going as well, to  advertise in different spots as compared to where you were advertising.  Learned that usually TV and radio didn   t work too well because it   s such  a diversified customer base that not always watched one certain channel.  You   d spend your money on one channel, but you   d miss two thirds of  your other customers on three other channels.  Different marketing aspects kind of stuff, Grandfather was very good on  that. Bookkeeping as far as files for every individual item. Like I said,  back then, there weren   t as many items to keep track of. Now they have  the computers to keep track of them, which is what we did with sales  and purchasing. It was basically the same thing, but his was all on cards,  and ours is all electronic. He was a very good teacher, and he was a  member of Rotary and Kiwanis, Young Men   s Dinner Club. All the  different kinds of social groups or business groups he was usually a  member of.  And that   s your grandfather?  Yes, Grandfather and Dad, both. I didn   t follow into that as much. They  just don   t have as much intrigue as they did back then, to be a part of the  group. I was with Young Men   s Dinner Club for a while. Most of the  clubs I belong to are Car Co., Spin, the hobby things.  Did you have a good relationship with your grandfather always? Did  work influence that at all?  Yes, Grandfather was really hard on my dad, so Dad made sure he  wasn   t too hard on me. I mean, he was, but not too much, not obsessive  like Grandfather was with him sometimes. I know several times I got  him in trouble, Dad in trouble, because of something that I   d do at the  store. My other grandfather on my mom   s side worked the back door.  He was the one that checked in all the product that was being brought in,  so I had family all around me. Usually if he saw me doing something,  17  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  he   d be up there at the office telling him what I was doing or what I   d  just done. (Laughs) Dad would get in trouble from Grandfather, and  usually it was Dad   s position to yell at me. Grandfather would every  now and then, when he   d catch me goofing off or playing on the job. I  employed a lot of my friends. (Laughs) That was a lot of my friends     first jobs, package boys out there. We   d get to goofing around  sometimes, and I   d get caught.  Did you have any cousins that were     Not here, no, not here in the City, sure didn   t. It was basically just us.  My dad was an only child, also, so the cousins were all on my mom   s  side, and they were Texas.  What days was the store closed? Were there particular holidays?  We were closed every major holiday, Christmas, Thanksgiving, New  Year   s, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Memorial Day, the basic major  holidays. We opened at nine o   clock in the morning, and we closed at  six thirty at night, and we were open Monday through Saturday. We  were closed all day on Sundays.  Was your family involved in church?  Yes, in fact, that was on our sack that we would sack our customers     groceries in.    Closed on Sundays to allow our employees to visit or go  to church of their choice.    It was also the fact that we just didn   t have  that many customers in on Sundays. The business just was not there on  Sundays, and so he cut the Sundays out, which was fine for me. At least  I got one day off. (Laughter)  Well, on holidays, would your family get together, and did they like to  cook?  Oh, yes, yes. Christmas morning always started off at nine o   clock at the  grandparents    house. Grandmother would have fried quail, scrambled  eggs, gravy, fresh-made biscuits, bacon, sausage, usually coffee cake.  That was Grandmother on Dad   s side. Then we   d go to Grandmother on  Mom   s side and basically do the same thing again at four o   clock, three  o   clock, on Christmas afternoon. Did that for thirty-something years  until Grandmother got too old to be able to do that on Christmas  morning. Labor Days were basically just kind of hanging out. It was  mainly the Christmases when the families would get together, that and  the birthdays.  And Thanksgiving?  18  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  And Thanksgiving, yes, yes. It was the same thing on Thanksgiving. It  was usually early lunch over on Dad   s side of the family and then late  dinner over on Mom   s side. Fortunately, I was young and active at that  age, so it didn   t take its toll too much like it does now. Now we can get  everybody together. The family   s dwindled so much that we can usually  get all seven of us in one house. Makes it a little easier.  Did they have very diverse palates? It   s a fine foods grocery store, so  how did they choose some of these items to carry?  Yes, Grandfather always had a very good palate. I mean, he could  always distinguish a good quality food. Then on my mom   s side, her  mom was just a great cook. I don   t care how bad the cut of meat was,  she could take it and make it falling off the bone, covered in gravy,  covered in au jus, fantastic, and always made great pies. Then on my  dad   s side, different, more prime rib, beef tender kind of cooking, high-end  cooking. Grandmother, also, a very good cook. She made an  outstanding prime rib roast. She didn   t do as much baking as the  grandmother on my mom   s side because she helped a lot with the store.  She was also up there working quite a bit.  My mom would, also, but usually just the first of the month because we  carried our own charge accounts. You could come in and charge  groceries to your account, and then at the end of the month we would  add it all up and send you a bill. When you have four or five hundred  charge accounts, everything had to be added up. A lot of times, the  customers are in sometimes two or three times in one day. All that stuff  had to be added up, calculated, totaled, and then typed onto a statement  and mailed. It usually took us about two, two and a half days to do the  statements every month, the first of every month, and we would usually  hire   they called them Kelly Girls back then, but now it would be like  Express Personnel.  We would have somebody come in for those two days, and that   s all  they would do is add up invoices for the statements. Mom was up there,  Grandmother was up there, Dad and Grandfather, both, and a temporary  help person, all for the first two days of every month we did that. Then  the computers came in and did all the adding for us, and we didn   t have  to do the filing anymore of all the charge accounts or all the charge slips.  Technology does have its advantages, and now we can get done in two  hours what it used to take us two days to do.  Were people pretty good about paying their bills?  Yes, it was about 1 to 2 percent loss annually from bad charge accounts,  19  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  but 98 percent of them always paid their bill on time. We   d have some  stragglers. Grandfather always told me that you work with the attorneys  and the real estate people because they can have a banner month one  month and sell five or six houses, and then they can go three or four  months without selling a house, which hits on their income. The  attorneys, the same way. They may win the case, but it may be months  before they get paid. With our charge accounts, if people were having a  hard time, as long as they   d call and let us know that this is what was  going on and then try to make payments more than for what they were  charging for the month, if they were working a little bit away on what  they owed, then we   d allow them to continue to charge. Then when they  did sell a couple houses, they   d come in and pay their bill off, or they  did get the settlement or when they did get back on their feet, they   d  come in and pay their bill off. We helped quite a few people through  tough times just because of our charge accounts.  Would you let anyone sign up for a charge account?  Yes, oh yes. Anybody could come in and sign up for it, fill out the app.  Whether they got approved or not was a different story. We always went  through credit collections and a couple of the other credit bureaus here  in Oklahoma City. We always were members with them. That way we  could call or send in the information, and we could get a fairly good  response that we could base a logical decision on whether we were  going to open it for them or not.  Do you know the most number of people you had on charge accounts?  Active was about 950 at one time, and we dwindled from that figure.  Before we closed, we had about 600 on the books.  That was this year, about 600?  Yes, this year. A lot of them, it   s been passing away, and we lost a lot of  them. Also, people, they   re kind of downing the charging, the credit  card, and so that was another reason it dropped. The people were just  coming in paying in cash for it instead of actually using their house  charge. Grandfather always said it was tough for people to pay a grocery  bill at the end of the month when there wasn   t any food in the  refrigerator and they   d already eaten all of it. It was kind of hard for  them to pay, but our customers always did. It was a more convenience  for our customers. They could send their child up or their caregiver or  their housekeeper, and they wouldn   t have to give them a check, or they  wouldn   t have to give them cash. They could just charge it on the  account, and they wouldn   t have to worry about funds being misused or  not getting their change back or that kind of stuff. Just easier for the  20  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  customers, for them to be able to get through their business with us by  not having to do cash or checks.  What about the d  cor in the store? Are there some     Yes, Grandfather was always the red carpet   he wanted you to feel like  you were on the red carpet when you were in the store, and you were  because our store was carpeted with red carpet. He liked the old wood  paneling and the King Arthur kind of look, and it was more elegant back  then at that time when he was putting the store in. That   s basically what  we had, antiques. We had a fireplace. We had an antique couch by the  fireplace, and that allowed some of our older customers that had their  caregivers or their housekeepers with them that brought them to shop     they could sit at the couch in front of the fireplace and hang out and have  a cup of coffee and a cookie while their caregiver or their housekeeper  would do the shopping. Then if the housekeeper had any questions, she  didn   t have to make a phone call. She could just walk over there.  Was that a red couch?  Yes, it was. It was a hand-carved, English, red couch.  Did that sell in the auction recently?  Yes, it did. It sure did. That was one of the ones I wanted to keep, but at  that time, it   s not   the house is full. (Laughs) There was no place to put  it. It   s not going in the garage.  Do you know who it sold to, where it will be in the future?  I do know the person, and I gave them pictures. I have pictures of my  great-grandmother, my grandfather, my dad, and I sitting on the couch,  and then I had pictures of my grandfather, my dad, me, and my daughter  sitting on the couch. So I had the four generations, different generations,  but four generations sitting on that couch at one time at different times. I  gave those pictures to the person that bought the couch. I   m not sure  what they   re going to do with them, but they were interested in them. It  sold pretty good. I was surprised what we got for it because it had been  through a lot. We bought it in    72. I found the receipts of when it was  bought in 1972. It had a lot of people sitting on it. Caught Grandfather  sleeping on it every now and then. (Laughter)  Well, what year did you graduate high school?  Nineteen seventy-eight.  21  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  And what did you do then?  Went to OSU for a little while and realized I could make more money at  home and also learn more on-the-job training, but had a great time the  two years that I was at Stillwater. (Laughter)  So that was    78-   80 that you were in Stillwater?  Yes, and then back here and working with Dad and Grandfather and  didn   t have to fade the heat about the grades anymore. (Laughter)  Had anyone else in your family attended OSU?  My mom. She went through four years in three. She was a Phi Beta  Kappa, and, like I said, she did four years of college in three years.  Didn   t really have the funds, and so she worked and did summer school.  She basically went to school for three years, and that   s why she got all of  her credits. She was a very smart girl, and she was at OSU, and Dad was  at OU.  Do you know how they met?  Yes, they met at First Presbyterian Church. Mom was working there.  That   s on Twenty-fifth and Western. Mom was working there, and that   s  where Dad met her. In fact, I found one of her letters that he had typed  to her. It was on the old Plaza Court stationery. He was apparently going  away for the weekend, but he was already missing her and couldn   t wait  to get back to see her. It was dated 1955 on that one, and they were  married probably pretty shortly after that. Just a hometown girl and a  hometown guy, and they just met at the church, which that   s, I guess,  better than a bar. (Laughter)  Do you know what she majored in at OSU?  Psychology. She was very good at thinking and trying to outthink,  especially her son, trying to stay one step ahead. (Laughter) She was a  very smart person, and just recently had to put her in a nursing home,  dementia. One of those deals that just happens to some of us.  Quite a few of us, I think.  Yes, here anymore between the Alzheimer   s and the dementia, yes, it  seems to be getting quite a few.  Yes. So after they married, did she start helping out in the grocery store  pretty soon?  22  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Yes, well, that was kind of expected. That was if you were in the family,  you worked at the grocery store, so yes. She worked up there for a while  full-time, and then she basically came up and was a stay-at-home mom  and basically would just come up and do the statements the first of every  month. Then she would also come up and work during Christmastime.  Her and Grandmother both would come up. We had a big Christmas  basket/gift business, and so they would come up and help customers  probably about, well, the start of December through Christmas.  Pick out items for the basket, or were the baskets already created?  Baskets were already created, a lot of different, like, gift boxes. They  were there to inform them of price. If they needed it shipped, we would  take an address and ship it for them, just charging for the postage, and  mainly to answer questions and to help keep people moving.  You mentioned the delivery boxes used to be wooden. In the early days,  how would people make deliveries? Was it always in a car?  Basically a van, and I   ve still got one of the delivery boxes.  Oh, really?  Yes, in fact, I can dig   I   ve got it sitting out in the garage. But, yes, it  was always a van, and they had the city divided up into different  sections. Basically, you would leave your back door open, and you  would have your old box there by the door. Our driver would come into  your house, would put the refrigerated stuff away and the frozen stuff  away, and then leave the rest in the delivery box, grab the old delivery  box that was empty, and then head back out to the van to the next one.  And they folded, so after it was emptied, he could fold it and put it off to  the side, and it wouldn   t take up as much room.  Okay.  I   ll go get it real quick. Yes, one of my friends had saved one. Okay, this  is one of the old delivery boxes. It   s got the name of the store, and then  it also had the number. That number was correlated with the person   s  name that called in the order. So Mrs. Jones, Fred Jones, would have  number 122. This is what it looked like after it was empty. When it left  the store, it would have sacks of groceries in it like that. Then they  would either line up, or if it was below the top, then they would stack  them.  That is neat. How long did they use the boxes? The whole time they were  23  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  doing delivery service?  Yes. Then after 1970, they basically went away. Like I said, that was  back when there weren   t fifteen different kinds of green beans and  twenty different kinds of corn.  They   d just call in and say,    I need some green beans.     Yes,    I need a can of Del Monte green beans.    The difference would be  eight and sixteen ounce. That would be, basically, the choice they would  have. Emptying the store, we ran across a lot of stuff that we   d used, old  accident reports that had nineteen, five, and then the blank, so that was  just good for the    50s. And then had some stuff that had one, nine, eight,  and then the blank, so that was just good for the    80s. Different stuff that  after forty-eight years, it accumulates.  About how much does that weigh, do you think?  It   s probably about three or four pounds, and then if you   re swinging it,  it   s going to have a little bit more force. (Laughter) That   s not the one  that was used, but that   s what the box looked like that Dad subdued the  butcher, the intoxicated meat cutter with.  Oh, wow  (Laughs)  Back then they were called butchers, but now they don   t like to be called  butchers because you associate that with mass murderers.  Oh. What do they like to be called?  Meat cutters. They   re meat cutters, but they were butchers back in the  day when they were doing all the real cutting and breaking down. Now  you basically get it in a box, and you just have to cut the Cryovac off of  it and trim it, and you   re done. But when I was growing up, it was  hindquarters and forequarters, and they were unloaded off the truck onto  a hook. We had a rail system that once you got it into the   first you  weighed them to make sure your weights matched the meat house, the  weights that they said they were going to charge you for, and then we  would roll them into the cooler.  The new ones would go all the way to the back, and then the  hindquarters would swing to the right, and the forequarters would swing  to the left. Then when we started cutting, we would pull them off the  front. They would age, basically, two weeks in our cooler before we  would actually start breaking them down. That   s when you had to take it  off the hook and set it over on the block and get out the meat saw and  24  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  cut it down into four different pieces, and then you   d work from there on  what you got out of it.  A lot of times have changed, but that was mainly the health department   s  problems, the fact that it was brought in hanging. Of course, they wanted  to make sure that the temperature in that truck stayed the same the whole  time, which when it was in the middle of July and you opened the door,  it wasn   t going to stay thirty-five degrees in there. Then, of course, you  had to unhook it, and then they would lay it on the floor of the meat  truck. Then we would take it from the floor of the meat truck and put it  on our hooks on the rail system. Of course, it   s touching the dirty floor  that everybody had walked on, but at that same time, that was all  trimmed off because that was all being aged. That would never make it  to the consumer, but the health department had different issues on stuff.  Everything went to boxed. It was easier on us, especially my meat  cutters and my meat market manager because he wouldn   t have to come  up with as much ground beef or what was he going to do with the stuff  that didn   t sell because when you   re breaking it down from the  hindquarter and forequarter stage, you have to use everything. When you  buy it just in a box as a loin, then you   re going to have a little bit of  burger, but you   re not going to have the waste that you would have had  when it was hanging.  So you would use everything, before? There wasn   t anything that was  thrown out.  Right, exactly, and now you don   t have that challenge because you   re  just buying basically what you need and the certain cuts that you need.  You just break them down into the certain-sized steaks that you want to  do or into certain-sized roasts that you want to do. Usually, there was  about 35 to 40 percent loss on hanging beef, and they   ve cut that down  to about 10 to 15 on box beef. You don   t get to age it like you used to,  which has an effect on it, but the shrinkage is a lot less.  Were butchers trained before starting on the job, generally, back then?  We liked to have them with some experience, but we didn   t really want  too much experience because the way we handled our beef and the way  we cut it was different than other stores. The older the meat cutter, the  harder to re-train, so we liked to try to catch them just after they   d been  through the meat cutting school but yet had not got set in their ways, so  to speak. Usually, everybody was trainable. It may take a little bit  longer for the guys that were set in their ways, but usually they were  trainable, and we could get them converted over to the way we did  business.  25  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Were the delivery drivers young boys or     Yes, towards the end, Vietnam vets that had just gotten back, some of  them had problems with drugs and alcohol, but, yes, they were mainly  young people that would do the driving. At first, it didn   t matter what  their driving record looked like, but there towards the end with insurance  and stuff going up, it was kind of a mandatory thing that had to be  checked.  How many vans did the store own?  At one time, the top was fifteen, and, like I said, at least one or two  wrecks a week. It just got to be   it wasn   t feasible. With the gas prices  going up over a dollar and that kind of stuff, and the city was expanding,  and there was more and more product coming out that made it harder to  choose or harder to fill call-in orders.  Was there ever a point where there was more business that was being  delivered, or more products that were being delivered than actually  bought in the store?  No. It was mainly the older people that were doing the call-in orders, or  if they were sick or broken leg, broken arm, something that kept them  from actually coming to the store, because for a long time it was a great  place to meet your friends. We had a lot of people that actually got  dressed up to come to the store. That started changing probably in the     90s, friends seeing their friends at the store, just the people moving  away, that kind of stuff.  So besides butchers and delivery truck drivers, what were some of the  other positions of employees?  Usually had five girls up front working the checkout stands and also five  sackers. That was usually towards the end of the day. From about three  o   clock on, we would have the five sackers because during the day we  just didn   t have that much business going on. After people started  getting off work or they started planning what they were going to have  for dinner, then we would get the crowds. After school, we would get  the crowds coming in, and so we would have more package boys on  staff at that time than usually during the day. Same with the checkers.  We would have probably five on towards the end of the day instead of  during the day.  Were there many people besides your family members that worked in the  store their entire careers?  26  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  One of my office girls was there for forty years. She worked in the office  for forty. Basically watched me grow up. We had a couple of meat  cutters that were there over thirty years. Mainly that was about it  because the front-end help we would go through just because people  come and go. Same with the package boys. We   d start the young ones  off, and then as they got older, different jobs, or as they got out of  school, different jobs.  Did you try to maintain a family atmosphere with all of the workers that  weren   t your family?  Yes, we were. We were basically a big family. I was very good about if  their daughter was sick and the wife had to go to work, we   d let the guy  off to stay at home with a sick child. Or if they were down to one car in  the family and the wife had to be at work at nine, then we would allow  the husband to come in later after he   d dropped her off at work until they  got the second car up and running. I was usually really easy to get along  with as far as your work schedule as long as you let me know what was  happening and why it was happening. Then when I needed you to work  maybe a different time or on your day off, I kind of expected that  because I wasn   t going to ask very much and it was mainly if somebody  was sick, vacation, or busy times. I   d work with you, and I just expected  a little back in return, and that was kind of the give-and-take in the  family atmosphere of the deal.  Were the busiest days always right before big holidays?  Oh, yes, always. Always. Fridays and Saturdays were always busy, and  Mondays were always busy because we were closed on Sundays. They  had to either shop for that extra day, or they had to come in and shop to  make up for not being there on Sundays. Usually about the week, week  and a half before Christmas or two or three days before, like, Labor Day  or Memorial Day, really busy. Really busy.  Being distributors and connoisseurs of fine food, did your family have  any favorite restaurants in Oklahoma City?  Well, the Grandfather   s aspect was that we already had the best food and  the best steaks, so you   re not going to be able to get that any other place.  On Christmas Eve we would go to Glen   s Hickory Inn, which was over  on Tenth, just east of May Avenue. It   s no longer there. That was really  about the only time that we would eat out. I am more of an eating out  person than my parents and grandparents ever were just because I looked  at it as the fact that my customers were eating at different restaurants,  and if they liked a tri-tip, then I should maybe have some tri-tip or  27  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  sweetbreads or some of the different stuff that the higher-end restaurants  would serve. Then I would try to keep some of that product at the store.  The foie gras didn   t get called on very much, but I would always have  one or two loaves in the freezer. If that customer decided they wanted to  try to do a little foie gras, we would have some available for them. Same  with the caviar. I would frequent the different higher-end restaurants just  to see the products that they had on their menus, and then I tried to keep  some in, too.  Do you know if you were the only grocery store in Oklahoma that  carried foie gras? That   s not something very easy to find.  No, it   s not. Usually, if I wouldn   t have it, I would send the customer  that was looking for it to a restaurant to buy it. Sometimes they would  sell it to them. Sometimes they wouldn   t. It just depends on how much  they had on hand. I always tried to keep some of the higher, harder  things to find. I always tried to keep some in stock, especially through  the holidays just because the caviar, the foie gras, the p  t  s are going to  be more through the holidays than all the time. I always had caviar in  stock, and I always had foie gras in the freezer. It   s one of those deals  that you just try to have it, and if you   ve got it for them when they need  it, hopefully they remember, come back and see you. (Laughter) Repeat  business.  I know all grocery stores have some amount of waste. Their produce  goes bad or whatever. Did you have a special method of minimizing  that, or how did you deal with     It depended on the manager of the produce department at that time to  how creative they wanted to be. If we have a cantaloupe going bad, if  they wanted to cut it up and we could put it into a plastic tub and sell it  as cut cantaloupe, cut the bad parts out of it, then we could do that. It  was basically, like I said, the creativity of the manager at that time,  especially in the produce. The meat, a little easier to deal with, but the  produce was always a challenge.  What about seafood? Oklahoma being land locked, would you have to  ship it in specially or was that     We would usually buy from Gulfport  Seafood Market , which is at May  and, basically, Wilshire. We tried to branch out sometimes, but we  always ended up back there. It was one of those deals that we would try  a little bit here, try a little bit there, but we   d always end up back at Gulf  Port. The fresh fish was basically going to be salmon. Everything else  comes in frozen. Being land locked, you can   t really beat it. You can   t     you just can   t do it.  28  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Well, I   m sure you   ve had a lot of customers that grew up going to  Crescent Market and continued going there. Have you heard many  stories from people through the years or lately?  Yes, now they   re just mainly upset that we   re closed because they have  no place else to go. Other than that, some stories, but a lot of times it  was fourth and fifth generations. In fact, our last day, one of our  customers had her daughter and her granddaughter in there with her  shopping, so we had three generations just right there at one time. Just  different feelings as far as after we   ve closed. We tried to take care of as  many families as we could. We had a lot of loyal ones with us that  stayed, but, unfortunately, they were just   it   s kind of a passing away  thing, just couldn   t keep them. They, a lot of times, would leave the  state. We   d have the children that went to college someplace else, find a  husband there, and then end up living there or moving there to be with  the new husband, or found that they liked the town after they got  finished with college and just decided they wanted to live there. Just  changing times, different things, and then, of course, landlord going up  on the rent quite a bit.  When did you realize that there was a possibility that you might be  closing?  Well, it was about five years ago. I guess between pride and selfishness,  whatever you want to call it, I didn   t want to do it, but it kind of got to  the point that I had to. It just wasn   t feasible to stay open anymore,  especially with the increase I was going to get on the lease.  When did the increase begin?  It was about a year ago. I   ve been month-to-month since last July, not  July 2011, July 2010. Then they started increasing some of the other  things, kind of the backdoor way to come in on, still getting the same  increase on the lease even though I wouldn   t sign a new lease. It just got  to the point to where I couldn   t do it. It was just too much money.  Was it a pretty long-term lease before it became month-to-month?  Well, yes. I had ten-year leases with my landlord before, and  Grandfather had a twenty-year lease with them. Then the new landlord,  it was a five-year lease with a two-year out option for the landlord. Not  for the tenant, but for the landlord. As soon as I signed that new lease,  technically they could have given me twenty-four months to get out. It  was one of those deals that if I put new equipment in, I could not write it  off in the amount of time as far as depreciation goes to make it worth the  29  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  while to put the new equipment in. And the building was kind of getting  older to where I did need to start putting some new stuff in, but if I  couldn   t get the write-off for the tax purposes, then it wasn   t really  worth it. It basically came down to that. I also was promised a new  building, and then I was promised a remodel, and that stuff didn   t  happen, so just time to quit.  So you had to make the final decision this year.  Yes, sure did. Didn   t want to, but, like I said, after some   swallowed a  bit of pride, just the thing that you have to do.  What was your last day open?  It was October 29.  Did you run some specials on groceries?  We had 50 percent off that day. (Laughter) It was basically half price.  Tremendous day. Went through a whole bunch of product. It was either  that or the auction, so tried to sell as much   and, also, to my customers,  give as much as I could.  How did you inform your customers that you would be closing?  Well, the whole month of October, I cut my charge customers off.  Didn   t do any more charging after that, and that was basically the  indication that we were going to shut down.  Did you have many people calling you directly or coming up to you in  the store?  Yes, and a lot of people crying, a lot of people mad. It was the full  gauntlet of emotions with the customers. Unfortunately, I just couldn   t  do it.  Then there was an auction in November?  Yes, on 11-11. On 11-11-11 we had the auction for basically everything  that was in the store from compressors to the antiques, the furniture, the  fixtures. I mean, it was everything. There wasn   t anything we tried to  keep. Some stuff we did keep, but not everything.  Did it go pretty well?  Yes, it did, especially for the old stuff that we had. Some of that stuff  30  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  had been there forty-eight years. It was one of those deals that had to be  done, but still turned out okay.  All right. So the auction was held in November. You handed over the  keys to the building.  Last Wednesday.  What do you see in the future?  I   ve been looking downtown. Advertising-wise, it   d be great. Three-sixty,  or we   re back where we started. There   s all kinds of different  advertising stuff for the one downtown. I   ve also been looking out north,  kind of west Edmond, out by Gaillardia, Memorial, Meridian area.  Nothing   s built out there, though, but that   s changing. They   re getting  some spaces. It would be something that had to be started  from the   ground up out there. The one downtown, the building   s already there.  We had actually started to talk about construction at the end of August,  but the city said they want us to put two parking stories on top of the  building that   s already there, so had to call the structural engineers. We  won   t get their report back until December.  This month?  Yes, December 15 we should have our construction   then it   s going to  be if the building can handle two cement floors of parking and cars, how  much is that going to cost? And if it can   t handle it, what   s the city  going to want instead? Basically, back to square one. Like I said, we  should have been in construction at the end of August, and now it   s been  delayed, but we   ll see. It   s one of those deals, if it   s meant to be, it   ll  happen. It   s in the Century Center next to the Sheraton, and it was going  to be a grocery store, two restaurants, drug store, book store, coffee  shop. That   s if we can get it all together.  Oklahoma City is hoping to get more and more people living downtown.  I started about two years ago, looking. I   d actually thought about  opening up a second store, but the way things materialized with this one,  it   ll just be a main store. There are a lot more rooftops down there now  than there were two years ago when I was looking. It   s one of those  deals that it might happen. You just don   t know.  Well, where do you buy your groceries these days?  Well, so far it   s been Sunflower and Homeland, those two. (Laughs) The  meat I kind of liked at Homeland, but Sunflower   s close, and it   s got a  31  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  lot of the stuff. Well, it   s got my Valerie   s cookies. (Laughter) I don   t  have to go see Valerie or Jeff to get them.  And do you know the people that own those establishments?  Sunflower I think is Phoenix, and Whole Foods is Austin. The Meat  House, I   m not sure of. I don   t know where that one   s coming from. It  may be a local. Oh, and of course Homeland, buy it from us, not local.  (Laughs)  Are there any other local grocery store establishments in the area that  you   re familiar with?  Kamp   s, they have a meat market that   s just down the street from our  old store. Then Rhett   s  Meat Market  is kind of, I think, a Cusack   s   Meats , which is a local, but it   s over there across from Homeland.  Those are about the only two, and they   re basically just meat markets.  There   s no grocery in that at all.  And then Forward Foods     Forward Foods.  Is kind of local. (Laughs)  Yes, which they   re Norman, so I   d say that   s local. I count that as local.  I have not been in the one over here yet. I   ve been to the one in Norman  a few times, but I have not been in the one over here.  Are there any cheese stores in Oklahoma City that specialize just in  cheese?  Forward Foods is about it. That   s really about it, and they do a very  good job of that, too. In fact, that   s why I   d been to the one in Norman a  few times is the fact that   I mean, I went up there and found some  cheeses that I didn   t have, and so it was one of those deals that I brought  some of it back and put it in my store. I   d actually talked with her before  she opened this one up on Western about maybe doing something in the  store with me, and it never did happen. We talked about it, but it never  did happen.  Well, what do you see as the future for your customers? Where do you  think they   ll go?  That   s a good question. The ones that I   ve talked to are not too happy  with Whole Foods. It   s just that Whole Foods doesn   t have any national  32  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  brands. It   s all their own stuff. If you   re going to spend ten bucks and  you don   t know if you   re going to like it or not, it   s kind of tough to do  that. I have a feeling that Homeland   s (here at May and Britton Road)  business has increased quite a bit, but I don   t know. I see them out all  the time, and they ask me, and I   ve asked them. Like I said, Sunflower  and Homeland have been the two that I   ve gone to, and they   ve said that,  too. Some of them aren   t too happy with Sunflower, and some of them  don   t like Homeland   s prices, but not too many other choices.  One thing I meant to ask earlier, the shopping cart was invented in  Oklahoma. Do you know anything about that coming into the store?  Well, it was Silverman? Silverstein?  Sylvan Goldman  He   s the one  that invented it, and he lived right over here in Nichols Hills at May and  Grant. Our pushcarts never went outside because of the carpet. That way  we didn   t have to worry about them going through oil or grease or  something out there in the parking lot, plus, if people leave them out in  the parking lot after they   re finished. Our package boys had our own  carts that went outside and stayed at the front, and then our push carts  never went outside. They stayed inside. We got them from the guy that  invented them. It   s a local guy that invented them here, and we   ve had, I  think, four different styles of push carts at the store that we had in  Nichols Hills in the length of time that we were there.  Wow. What about the logo for Crescent Market? Where did that come  from? Do you know?  Yes. Grandfather, he   s the one that developed it. In fact, I found the  assignment of the name (it was dated 1963) that said that Art Pemberton  Inc. had the full trade name of Crescent Market and any of its brands. He  basically came up with the crescent moon for the Crescent Market  emblem.  Is there any more about the name and him choosing to keep the name  Crescent? Was it just what it already was, and it   s appealing?  Yes, and it was already established in the City, and so he really didn   t  want to change it too much, but he wanted to keep the name associated  with quality and good service.  Did you always have crescent rolls?(Laughs)  Yes. Still do. (Laughter) I take mine and wrap them around a hot dog  and stick them in the oven for a little bit.  That sounds good.  33  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Pemberton  Wilson  Little bit of cheese in there, yes.  Well, how do you hope that Crescent Market will be remembered?  As a name that stood for quality and good service. Hopefully, it will still  be around. It won   t be a remembered thing; it will still be around.  Is there anything else that you would like to share?  I think that   s about it.  All right, well I really appreciate you visiting with me.  Oh, sure. Thank you. I appreciate you making it a part of history.  Yes, it   s important.  -------  -------  
