 Wilson with the Oklahoma State University Library.  Today is September 3, 2009 and we   re at the Muskogee Public Library  in Muskogee, Oklahoma interviewing Herman Barrett. This interview is  being conducted as part of the Muskogee African American Heritage  Oral History Project, part of the Spotlighting Oklahoma series. Thank  you for joining us today. Let   s start out with having you tell me a little  bit about growing up, when and where you were born and a little about  your family.  I was born in Muskogee, Oklahoma at 4312 West Broadway, Muskogee.  I had a brother and a mother and a father. My father was the supervisor  of a building that needed to be cleaned and he was the supervisor of the  cleaning facility at that time when I was a child, a small child at that.  And basically growing up in Muskogee was very nice for me. My  parents were very nice, wonderful people and I had no trouble out of  them and they had no trouble out of me. Of course, I went to high school  here, went to grade school and high school, and subsequently graduated  in 1939.  Muskogee was just like any other southern city. As a youngster growing  up, naturally I got accustomed to the habits of the city and the habits of  the people around me, so it meant, of course, that I was well-adjusted as  far as everything went, even though odd things happened. For example,  a man who lived up the street from me wanted me to fight another  fellow for no reason at all. He just wanted to see us fight. He was a  white fellow and he wanted me to fight this other fellow, so he thought  of some things that he said that I had done and so forth and so forth. But  nothing ever came of it to amount to anything because you saw through  it, even as a youngster, a very young child. Beyond that, Muskogee has  gotten better since that time but it was quite an odd place when you sum  it up and think back on the things that have happened to you since that  time. It becomes a different picture all together.  5  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  What elementary school did you attend?  I attended Wheatley Elementary School. That wasn   t the first. The first  school we attended was a little house on Fortieth and Broadway.  Actually it was a house that was set up for colored children. And so  therefore they did their first grade and second grade I guess and third  grade because we did a lot of things with a teacher who had us cut  different animals out with soap and that kind of thing. So there was a lot  of crafts at that stage. Now, of course, you   ve got to remember, I don   t  know whether I had learned to read at that point or not, I don   t  remember because there wasn   t much of that going on. But that   s the  kind of thing that we did in first grade on Fortieth and Broadway, which  now stands the American Legion Hall, for whatever that means.  When did you go to the elementary school?  That was the elementary school. But later on, shortly thereafter, there  was a school that was constructed. My father was kind of a  neighborhood person who attempted to promote things and to help do  things that would help his children and the neighborhood children also.  So we decided on the school site, which was just one block from my  house, in which they constructed a very large school. But that school  was for whites. The school that was constructed for us, of course, was a  little neighborhood school down the street. A three bedroom house,  really, is what it was. Frame construction and so forth, had a flag pole  out there. It was disgusting. Every year we had to go through that thing  but I often think about it now with distaste. I despised it. Anyway, that  was what we had up until a few years later when they constructed a  school, a black school, on Twenty-fourth and Emporia. The school  building still stands incidentally. But it was a school for black children  and that   s where we went.  How many students attended?  I have no idea how many children were there, but I could estimate that  there must have been in the neighborhood, attending the entire school, I  would imagine there were around 250. That would be my guess. And as  I said, the building still stands.  How many do you guess attended in the house where you went to first  grade?  Now wait a minute, we had left the house. The house was constructed at  first as a temporary measure for black children. After a period, of course,  the city fathers decided that black children did need some kind of  education so a nice building was constructed on Twenty-fourth and  6  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Martin Luther King Drive now, it was funded like then. And that   s the  way it was.  And then you attended Manual Training High School?  Then after that I went to Dunbar Elementary School. And that was  across the street from Manual Training High School, which was at  Fourth and Fondulac, you could call it that, I guess would be good  enough. Fourth or Fifth and Fondulac. Now that   s where Dunbar was,  but it was across the street from the high school.  What do you remember about high school?  A lot. There are a lot of things I remember about high school.  What kinds of activities were you involved in?  I was involved in the Hi-Y; they called it Hi-Y, I believe, if I   m not  mistaken. And the Boy Scouts temporarily, and that kind of thing. I was  not involved in sports. But I did participate a great deal at the Hi-Y Club  and things like that. I don   t recall too much of anything else.  What did you do in the Hi-Y Club?  Socialize mostly, from what I can recall. Basically social activities. You  may have taken a trip or two hiking or something like that. Or the group  would meet in school to discuss some things that they wanted done like  some kind of program they wanted to put on or something like that. But  beyond that I don   t recall too much what was done. Certainly not  academic.  Do you recall some of your favorite teachers?  Sure, I recall a lot of them. How many do you want me to name?  Some of the teachers that had the strongest influence on you.  Well, C.A. Riley was probably one that had the greatest influence.  Probably because it was through him that I got a chance to learn a little  Shakespeare and to learn Hamlet   s soliloquy, which I still know some,  and to learn several other quotations from Shakespeare. That was one of  the things that I remember him so well for because he loved  Shakespeare, and it made you kind of like it. You can   t forget    To be or  not to be,    you don   t forget that kind of stuff. But anyway, that was part  of it. And you wanted to know some of the other teachers, I guess. One  of the other teachers I can recall was J.T. Humphrey who taught  7  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  mathematics. Very good mathematics teacher and probably one of the  best that I had ever seen at that time. He taught algebra and gave me my  first insight, really, into how algebra would really work and I managed  to see how it could be used to even replace numbers at certain times. So  it was interesting.  Now you may want to know about some of the others, I presume. Harry  Hodges was a science teacher. He taught chemistry and we had just  gotten chemistry in that school, by the way, not long after I got there.  And chemistry was quite interesting; I have always been fascinated with  it. We did a number of experiments and that kind of thing. We worked  together as a team and did pretty fair I   d say. I wouldn   t say we did the  technical parts of chemistry because they weren   t available. We didn   t  have facilities for so much of that. We were able to do a lot of  experiments and that kind of thing with a Bunsen burner. But beyond  that, there wasn   t much you could do. You mixed a few solutions and  they reacted. There were no explosions or anything like that because we  didn   t have that type of chemical. But just the same, it was interesting.  Then there was Mr. Russell, he taught social studies for the most part,  which was interesting. He had you do a lot of writing. When you do a lot  of writing, you do some learning. May not be a whole lot, but you  certainly have to do quite a bit. Regardless of how it   s put, you find  yourself having to pick things up just by associating with them. Am I  going too far?  No, not at all. Would you walk to school?  For the most part. I lived on Forty-third and Broadway, that was where I  was born, that was where I spent most of my time   in fact, all of it. I  lived on 4312 West Broadway and while here in elementary school I  spent all of my time at that particular address because that was our  house, that   s where we lived and so forth.  Tell me about your neighborhood.  The neighborhood was a mixed neighborhood. We had a number of  fellows there that I know to this day, white fellows, black fellows, Indian  fellows. We called Indians    chief    by the way, all Indians were    chief.     All of them. It was a nice neighborhood, the neighborhood was fine. We  got along very well. There were no fights, unless some white fellow  instigated one, which they did do that. Because somehow it always  amused them to see black fellows fight each other. I never understood  that and to this day, I don   t understand it. But, that   s what happened.  They would say a lot of things to cause friction, hopefully that you   d  respond to. But, of course, a lot of times wondering what was the point,  8  Wilson  Barrett  you find yourself doing nothing. And that   s exactly what happened to  me. I did nothing in many instances.  The neighborhood was fine, everybody knew each other. Some strange  things happened in that neighborhood. Every evening we would go  fishing, so to speak. That was about two blocks down the street. And the  neighbors seemingly would gather at that point and they would fish for  crayfish. I would catch a few crayfish but I never did eat them, but they  ate them, the people next door to me. That kind of thing. We played. In  my estimation there were no fights, no disagreements or anything.  Everybody seemed to have gotten along very well. In fact, next door to  us there was a family in which there were four girls, four young women,  but they were all older than I. And these women were fantastic in the  sense that they got religion, they joined a church and got religion, and  they would do fantastic things. And it always was strange to me why  they would do all this singing very loudly and dancing through the house  and all that. They had gotten some kind of spirit. I don   t know where  they got it from, but that   s what they seemed to have felt.  But that was my neighborhood and as I said we played together, the  white boys, although some of them I know to this day   Foreman Hare,  for example, still to this day lives on Fortieth Street across the street  from the school that we attended first. He   s across the street to this day.  Now the others that were in the neighborhood, especially the white ones,  most of them are dead now. He is probably the only white one that I  know who is living. There were many others, but I can   t think of their  names at this point.  Were there any businesses in your neighborhood?  Yes, there was a grocery store, my father had one. He finally closed it up  and sold it to a white fellow who moved the store and went somewhere  in the neighborhood of a block or two up the street from us. My father  owned the property at the time and he built his store there or they  enlarged on his store there and had it so that it was very successful. He  stayed there for a number of years and then he moved from there a block  across the street from him in front, on Okmulgee.  Incidentally, the streetcar used to come directly in front of my house.  The streetcar used to pass in front every day. And when the streetcar got  to Forty-third Street, the conductor had to get out and turn the thing  around. He   d catch the front of it, and twist it around until he could head  it back to the other direction. He   d do that every time he came out there.  But that was a common practice and if I wanted to board the streetcar,  all I needed to do was to get on at one of the stop signs, one of the signs  where you could get on it. If I recall, we   d rush to the back and that   s  9  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  where we stayed until we got to our destination.  How much did the streetcar cost?  I don   t remember. I have no idea. It wasn   t much, I tell you that, but I  haven   t the faintest idea.  What other places in Muskogee stand out in your mind from your youth?  The first church I ever attended was called Old Agency  Baptist  Church , which was on Fortieth Street. It stands out because it was the  first church I ever attended in my life. That   s the reason it   s important.  There were a number of other things because growing up in a town like  this, that size, on Saturday people from the outlying areas would come  into the city and would sell their products very often. It was an outing  for them because they would stay there all day long.  It happened that I had an uncle who had a wagon that had a mule that  would drive him to town   drive us to town when we wanted to, but he   d  beg us to go with him because he wanted some company. So we   d go  with him and we   d stay in town all day long. They would buy different  items and that kind of thing. I recall that so much because my uncle was  cross-eyed for one thing. Cross-eyed and had a bad leg which he had to  doctor on every night, every night. Obviously it was cancer but the guy  assumed it was, I don   t know. Those are some of the things that stand  out. Basically he was a nice fellow otherwise, always smelling like  iodine.  Did your family have a car?  My father had a car at that time and then, of course, he traded it at  intervals. But yes, he had a car and he parked it in the front yard. But the  funny part about it was that his brother-in-law, my uncle, could actually  go to the back of the car and turn his back to the rear end of the car and  actually raise the car, raise it up, pick it up.  Really?  Yes, he could pick it up. It was so funny and I never forgot it. He used to  think it was quite a novel thing to do. That   s what he did for a hobby  seemingly, pick the car up and set it back down. You got me talking  more than I had anticipated but go right ahead.  What about family meal times? What are some of your favorite foods  that you remember your mother preparing?  10  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  That gets to be a hard one because food has never been one of the things  I liked all the time. Food has always been one of these items that you are  forced, you have to have, but you   d like to do without it a lot of times.  I   ve often felt that way about food and to this day I   m not much better.  But anyway, my mother was a very good cook. She prepared a number  of vegetables especially, potatoes and things like that. And she was very  good at desserts, pies, and cobblers especially, that kind of thing. But  food is just one of these items that I have never found to be a luxurious  item. It   s an item that was a necessity, but something that I could just do  without many times, but I didn   t because I knew it was a requirement, so  therefore I had to eat. But it   s definitely not one of these things that I felt  that I just wanted to do above anything.  What were some of the biggest holidays or family celebrations?  The best holidays I   ve ever had in my life were not necessarily holidays,  but they were Sundays when the family got together. My father had  three brothers and they would come out after church and visit each other  and spend the whole afternoon. The most pitiful time in my life was  when they had to go home.  Did you have cousins?  They were cousins. That   s what they were. My father   s brothers. All the  children would be cousins.  And did you go to school together?  Yes, we all had to go to school together because there was only one  school to go to, so there was no question about that part of it. If you  were at the same level, naturally you went to the same school. They  would go to school at what they call Dunbar, which was an elementary  school, or Wheatley. And in spite of the fact that they were all brothers,  they still were very close. They didn   t live a long ways apart from each  other so the children managed to get together at intervals and spend time  together and got to know each other pretty well. And actually we were  fond of each other because we liked to get together on these Sunday  afternoons especially.  Did you always attend church growing up?  Always. Always. I may not have known what it was all about, but I did  attend. I shall never forget the first church I went to, as I told you before,  was a church in which all the windows during the summertime were all  up; it was very hot. I always remember that church because I always  wondered what in the devil they were doing. There was a man up there  11  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  talking, I didn   t know what he was talking about. And sometimes he was  yelling, I didn   t know what he was yelling about either. But that was the  first church I ever attended. And after that, the church that I attend to  this day is the second church I have been involved in.  Does the first church still exist?  It still exists.  And what church do you attend now?  Mount Calvary Baptist Church. That was the church that my father  attended and we soon followed as we grew up and so forth. Even though  we left the city and went other places, we ended up coming back to visit  the same church.  Do you know how your family initially came to Muskogee?  Yes, I know how they came to Muskogee. Now my father came first.  My mother wasn   t married at that time, naturally, to him, but they came  to Muskogee because they came from Mount Pleasant, Texas and Mount  Vernon, in that area. And there were a group of white boys usually with  guns and everything else that would come riding through the  neighborhood. Quite common. They   d ride through the neighborhood  and if they saw one of them out, the first thing they   d tell them, they   d  say,    Look, I want you to be out of here by tomorrow morning.    Or else  they   d put a note on the fence    Be out by tomorrow morning.    So my  father and his sisters subsequently found sleeping quarters in the cotton  patch, with their guns. And they did this a lot because this was a  common practice, the fellows would come through. Once they came  through and they shot one fellow and they killed him. And then they told  his father and some of the rest of them to come and get him. The fellow  said,    No, I will not go get him. You killed him, so you go get him.     Now, you asked me why did they come to Muskogee. That   s the reason.  They got tired of sleeping in cotton patches and corn patches, so they  decided to come to Muskogee because things, they thought, would be  much better. My father   s oldest brother came first. He came because he,  too, was suffering the same thing. And he finally got a job down here on  Seventh and Broadway. It was a Cadillac dealer at the time or an  Oldsmobile dealer, something like that. But anyway he worked there and  then other brothers subsequently followed him. And then finally they all  ended up, all four brothers, living here. I think I   m right, three or four  brothers living here in close contact with each other weekly, or daily,  because they talked to each other quite often. They all had telephones  and so they were able to communicate regularly. And they stayed close  12  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  until they died.  And your father met your mother here?  Now, my mother   s family was a different group all together. They  settled up here in Wagoner and it seemed that my grandfather on my  mother   s side was a carpenter, he built his own house. For some reason  he got tied to Muskogee and decided he could do better in Muskogee  than he was doing in Wagoner. And so he moved his family from  Wagoner and my parents met here in Muskogee and subsequently got  married and produced two boys.  Did your mother ever work outside of the home?  Only briefly. My mother was very talented. She was a person who was  very good at canning and teaching how to can. Now she didn   t go all the  way through school, but she certainly was able to teach homemaking to  a number of young people and older ones too. Taught what she learned,  all types of sewing and that kind of thing, so she did a lot in reference to  that kind of thing. A lot of times it was just as a hobby, she did it as a  hobby. She had quite a tendency toward her expertise in work like that,  crafts and that type of thing. She was very good at that.  Who have been some of your role models?  Who have been some of my role models? Role models in what way?  Throughout life, inspirations     Yes, because there have been a lot of role models. Some have been  worthwhile, some haven   t. If you are thinking in terms, and I presume  you are, of positive role models, there were a number of them. But you  know, growing up in a neighborhood where the people are different  somehow from other people in this respect: there were two murders in  my neighborhood when I was still in elementary school. Most shocking  thing I had ever heard of. But this was a thing that happened just one-half  block from my house. One man had shot and killed one of my  favorite friends, so to speak. I say my friend, he was a grown man at that  time and I was just a child. But the man was a carpenter and he got off  the bus at a certain time every night and somebody, an enemy of his  apparently, just shot him for no reason at all. Not racial at all, nothing  racial about it, he was one of them. Then a man just a half block down  the street suffered the same thing. They had a habit of getting off the  streetcar, which passed in front of my house, every night about a certain  time and whoever wanted to kill them just stood and waited for them to  come. I think I   m getting off the point. I think I missed one thing you  13  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  were saying that kind of threw me off.  We were talking about role models.  Yes, you were talking about role models. Some of those people were  role models in terms of their activities and in terms of the way they acted  and the way they treated me. You liked them, some were very nice. Very  nice fellows or very nice men. One was very tall, the one who was  killed, and another one that I knew down the street from my house was a  very nice fellow. You got to talk to them whenever you got a chance.  We had so many role models, however, that it makes it kind of difficult  to pick them out, depending on an area you want to focus on.  What did you do after you graduated high school?  After I graduated high school I went to Washington, D.C. It happened,  and I was fortunate in this respect, that I had an uncle, my mother   s  oldest brother who along with a good friend of his decided they were  going to Washington, D.C. because of the location of Howard  University. Howard University was a very good school. It was one of the  best schools for blacks. Some friends of his had gone and so they  decided they would go. So my uncle took out to Washington, D.C. with  a good friend of his. The fellow eventually graduated from medical  school and my uncle graduated from electrical engineering school. He  became a teacher after that, and the man who became a doctor was a  doctor all of his life. He never once took a vacation and never left the  area where he began to practice medicine. That   s how I happened to be  involved in going because I had an uncle there and I could stay with  him. One of the worst years I   ve ever spent in my life was spent with my  uncle and his wife.  Why was that one of the worst years?  One of the worst because they were different from my parents. They had  no children themselves. They were basically selfish   silly selfishness, I  thought. Well for example, my uncle, his wife would fix breakfast for us  and put the table down. If she happened to put the table down in front of  me first, he would complain,    Well why you feeding him first?    Silly  stuff. But that   s the reason why my tenure there was only one year. That  was enough.  Did you have to pay them money?  My parents took care of that in a number of different ways. They may  have paid some cash. I know I didn   t because I wasn   t working at all so I  didn   t pay anything. But it was only a year so it didn   t matter that much.  14  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Where did you go after that year?  After that year, my brother came to Washington, D.C. also. And we all  began to eventually work in the government. And then it turns out, of  course, we went to school at the same time, some of us did; at least I did  anyway. I finally got a job working in the post office, in which I worked  for quite awhile.  In Washington, D.C.?  In Washington, D.C. I was a postal clerk.  And you attended Howard?  Yes, I attended Howard and went to work. Now in the meantime there  was a break. The war broke out and, of course, I was plagued by the  service. They were trying to draft me and I was trying to keep from  getting drafted. Subsequently they drafted me and I went on in the  service finally, had to serve. I served close to three years and got out.  After that the G.I. Bill took over for me. And, of course, I went on to  school. I was determined I was going to go to school in spite of it all.  But in the meantime I had married and had a son. My wife for some  reason, of course, told me the brilliant idea that I should   ve gone to  school before I was married. Which I guess she was right but I couldn   t  do anything about it then. How was that going to help it then? I thought  it was a silly statement to make. I think it   s a silly statement for anybody  to make.    You should have done this before.    How in the devil are you  going to do it when it   s all over with, see? But just the same, that   s the  way it was. She told me two or three times that I should   ve gone to  school before I was married so I didn   t need to go now.  Well, having made up my mind I was going to go, I decided to go  anyways. So she remained there with me until she decided she would  move out. One day I came home, she was gone. And that took care of  that part about it. I had moved into a new house. I bought a new house  but she didn   t like the location. She had a son shortly after we moved  there and she decided that the best place for her was just to move out.  Her family was from Muskogee but she was born in Washington, D.C.  while her father was going to law school, and so they felt that they  should stay in the city. And I felt that the country area, the neighboring  areas would be better for me, so that   s how I ended up where I was,  which was kind of outside. Not in town but on the edge. And, of course,  it was cheaper and everything else.  So what years did you attend Howard University?  15  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  I attended Howard University from   well I began and had to stop. I  started in 1940 or 1939 and then the war broke out and I had to go and  serve three years there. And then after that I came back and I was  registered in the School of Pharmacy at that time. I came back and  decided that I did not want pharmacy anymore and that I thought  literature was more in keeping with my capabilities and that   s why I  chose to go into the College of Liberal Arts. I was still determined that I  was going to go even though I wasn   t sure if I   d ever graduate. I loved  going to school and still to this day love to go to school. So it was never  any problem with me, it just happened that I went where I wanted to go  and took what I wanted to take. And that happened in many courses that  I took which had no relationship to my major except a distant  relationship, so to speak. So I took anything I wanted to take because I  had the G.I. Bill supporting me. So it didn   t make any difference. I took  government, sociology, vocabulary building, classics; I had to take  French, of course, and that kind of thing. So I went until finally I had  gotten so far along, I had accumulated so many credits that if I didn   t go  on and get something going the time was going to run out on me. And so  I went on and decided it was time to get ready to graduate. So for that  reason I took a different shift at the post office. I worked all shifts, I  finally ended up working the midnight shift because that was the only  way I could get the higher courses in. So I did.  What year did you graduate?  1954.  With a degree in?  English.  And then did you continue to work at the post office in Washington, D.C.  after you graduated?  Well, after I graduated I remained in the post office awhile and was  trying to get a job because I had prepared myself to teach at that time. So  I decided that I would keep going, keep working in the post office until I  got something else going. I couldn   t just quit and do nothing. So I went  on until I got a job. What I did, I went to a job fair and at the job fair  there was a man there from Baltimore, which I guess you know is only  forty miles from D.C. I went to this job fair and the man talked about the  schools in Baltimore. And although I knew Baltimore reasonably well, I  didn   t know that much about it. But anyway, when he came, I decided  that   s where I wanted to go. And after having been in Washington, D.C.  the years that I had, many years, I chose to accept a job in Baltimore if it  was going to be offered. Subsequently it was offered and I got a job over  16  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  there. I took the teacher   s exam before I graduated. I decided that I   d just  go on and take the job in Baltimore if it was offered, if I got a chance, or  if I qualified for the exam is what it was. So I took the exam and had  planned to take it after graduation because I knew my score would be  higher (at least I felt it would be, anyway). I took that and got a job in  Baltimore and I stayed over there from that point on because I not only  liked the job but I liked the learning activities that were taking place that  part of them I was responsible for and some of them I was associated  with other people who were. So that   s what happened.  You were teaching English?  Yes, I taught English in junior high for the most part.  What eventually brought you back to Muskogee?  My mother   s death.  And now you live here?  Yes.  Are you glad to be back?  No. I mean yes. Well, in a way. After all you   ve got to remember, I  came back for a purpose. I had gotten accustomed to that area up there. I  met a lot of people up there and I was quite satisfied with it. However, I  knew I had to come home because when I lost my father, I had to look  after my mother because she had never been by herself at all. And with  my father having accumulated a little property here and there, I felt that I  needed to come back to give her a hand. That   s the reason why I came  back.  What year did you come back?  1985.  And you   ve been back since?  Yes. I   ve lived here since 1985.  Did you raise any children here?  No. I had no children to raise. My son is older than you are now. I just  talked to him a little while ago; he   s there in Washington, D.C.  17  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  What about Muskogee has changed since you were here as a child?  A lot has changed. Most of the people that I knew are dead. Many things  have changed. Is there any particular area you want me to focus on?  The feel of the community.  Well the community   s about the same. People have been about the same  since I was here. Some I still know   a few I know from having lived  here. But the main thing about Muskogee, I   ve visited Muskogee almost  every year   almost every year that I was away, if I could. So many  people that I knew before I left are still living. I came back and it was  the same thing. It   s just about taking up where you left off.  Has the town grown or did it used to be more of a thriving town?  It   s grown in a way. In many ways it has grown. For example, you   ve  got a mall, you didn   t have that before. It   s grown. There are many  respects that it   s a little different. Some people are different and then  there are some who are the same way they were when I left here. But a  lot of them are dead, of course. Especially some of those who were  friendly to me, my cohorts, many of them are dead or left the city to go  to California. Many of them went to California.  Are there often high school reunions for Manual Training?  Yes, they have reunions every so often. They have had some, but they  don   t do me any good. See, I very rarely know anybody that comes to  the reunion because I   m older than all of them.  Did you work in the Postal Service any when you came back to  Oklahoma?  In Muskogee? How in the world am I going to do that? The postmaster  said as long as he was there, there would never be a black in the post  office. That   s what he said. That was his comment to my father who was  a janitor in the post office. And I wouldn   t have worked in Muskogee  anyway in the post office because there would be no reason. After all, I  had graduated, I wouldn   t think about wasting my time in a post office.  That   s the reason I left the post office in Washington, D.C. I had reached  where I needed to go. And it had afforded me what I needed and wanted,  so I saw no reason to keep going. I didn   t want to work at the post  office. I was tired of the post office, ready to go.  However, one of my cousins who was there at the same time I was and  who came from here, he worked in the post office the full time. And to  18  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  this day he is still in Washington, D.C. He   s retired, of course. But no, I  couldn   t have worked in the post office here because they didn   t want  any blacks in the post office anyway, if they could get around it.  But it   s phenomenal that when I was a child or young person here they  had some blacks who were mail carriers. There were a few who were  mail carriers. They had at least four or five who were mail carriers. One  was a night collector, a man named Depps was a night collector and  that   s what I did in Washington for awhile. But beyond that, I don   t  know how they got on those jobs. But I know they haven   t been  followed by anybody else since that time. Those men have all died or  they   ve retired and died.  Are there many buildings that were here when you were a child that still  remain?  A lot of them. Stevens Hotel is still here, it was here when I was a child.  And many other buildings are still here. McEntee   s and the building next  to it and across the street from it. In fact, the downtown area is much the  same. They have made some innovations, but mostly it   s the same. But  the mall is entirely brand new. Friends that I knew who lived in the area  prior to the construction of the mall, those people went other places you  see. They ended up having to go to other places.  Who were some of the individuals when you were a child that were  recognized as community leaders in the African American community in  Muskogee?  Well, there were a lot of them. Quite a few of them. Jake Simmons was  one; oh there were many of them. All the ministers, Reverend Reed and  Reverend Noble. And many others have died, of course. You see many  of the leaders, there are few here now who were here when I was here.  Few or almost none. They   ve all passed on. There   s nobody who was  here when I was here, prior to my leaving.  What are some world and national events that have had an influence on  your life?  One of the greatest was President Johnson   s inauguration. I was there.  Went in and saw him and, in fact, I was fortunate enough to have even  done some campaigning for him. Fortunately, being in Washington at  that time, I saw Truman, I saw Eisenhower   those were the main ones I  saw. And those I went to the parades. They were an influence. Then, of  course, you have other people like Martin Luther King, a tremendous  influence. And I imagine if I think harder I could think of others. But  there were many people.  19  Wilson  Barrett  You had many people in Muskogee, black folks especially, and some  white folks, I don   t want to put it that bad. I worked for some people  whose name was Sadler. Very nice people, very wonderful people. I cut  the yards and then they   d have me at the house, run the vacuum, stuff  like that. They were very nice people. I think the daughter is still living.  Yes, she is; one of the daughters is, the other one died, and the son died,  and the husband died, and the mother died. But they were here when I  came back, some of them were anyway. But they were very nice people.  This man whose name was Sadler used to give me rabbits and I took  them home, raised them, built a container for them, a little place for  them. Then he gave me pigeons. Then he gave me a book on the  pigeons. I tell you, some of those experiences are phenomenal. When I  think back on them I think what a nice person he was. Now, of course,  when I asked him to give me   I made a dollar a day, when I asked him  for a fifty cent raise he couldn   t do that, that was too much. But I tried  anyway. He never could give me a raise but he did give me these other  things of which I still remember and still say the family was very nice.  The only thing about that lady, Mrs. Sadler, very nice person, wonderful  person, but she said one thing that I never did like. She had a black dog.  And the dog would jump up on her, you know, and play with her. She  said,    Stop it  Quit doing that and act like a white man     I never forgot  that. Although she never said anything to me ever. I   d go into her house  and do whatever   clean, do whatever cleaning I was going to do. But  that was the only thing. She gave me a clock I had until just a year or  two ago and I sold it then. But it was a mantel clock. Since that time my  hobby was working on clocks and that kind of thing and they  contributed to it. They contributed to my learning about pigeons,  learning about rabbits, rabbits with red eyes and all that kind of stuff. So  they were very nice, all of them were. They had two girls and a boy.  Sadler worked also in the father   s office downtown when the father  passed. Very nice people, very nice people all the way down the line.  But that was the only thing that was kind of negative that I just didn   t  like. She wasn   t talking about me, she never made any remark about me  whatsoever and gave me liberty to do all the things they had me do  around the house.  Living in Washington, D.C. for so long, were you involved in many  social or political activities? I know you said you campaigned some.  I campaigned for Lyndon Baines Johnson, I sure did. I drove down  many streets for Lyndon Baines Johnson with my large placard on the  front. Yes, I helped him get in office. Yes, I was involved in a lot. There  were amazing things. See, when you live in Washington, some things  about Muskogee will stand out. For example, when I first went to  Washington, D.C., black people could not join AAA. Now that may be  20  Wilson  Barrett  hard for some people to realize. They had a thing up there they called  AA. And the AAA people, you   d call them up and they   d tell you,     Look, you go over there and join AA,    and so then they give you the  address of it. But there were weird things that happened. And yet my  father was a member of AAA here already and remained an AAA  member for years and I am still a member. But it   s odd, some of these  places offered different things and that   s what happened. That was one  of the phenomenal things that happened when I was there. I thought that  that was unbelievable. And I was shocked that here in little Muskogee I  could get into AAA; come up to Washington, D.C. and can   t get in  AAA. It was amazing.  Did you feel that there was more segregation in Washington, D.C. than  in Muskogee?  Well, you see when you get in a city the size of Washington, the  segregation, some of that you just don   t bother with. It   s unnecessary  because you are with people you can talk to. You   re already with them.  You go to places where they are performing or where they live and you  become friends with them. So segregation   s not an issue. White folks  stay in their area and we stay in our area, so to speak. Oh, you may come  across a few here and there and a lot of those that you come across are  very nice.  I know a fellow I worked with, a very nice fellow   two fellows I   m  thinking about. One was Jewish and the other was from Albuquerque,  New Mexico. That   s where he transferred to. Nice fellows. You couldn   t  ask for any fellows who were better than that. Now, of course, there  were some who said,    Barrett   s just like any other nigger to me.    They  did that when I was working   see I was a clerk and I worked my case, I  worked West Virginia. I left my case one day and the fellows told the  other fellow that came up there, said,    Look, you better not work on  Barrett   s case,    put mail in it, you know, because he didn   t know the  scheme anyway so it was silly for him to do it. But he said,    Barrett   s  just like any other nigger to me.    Little fellow, nice fellow; I never said  a word to him because it really wasn   t important. You know he was a  nice fellow and I think he meant well, but whatever he meant, it didn   t  strike me anywhere. Because what he said and the way he said it, it just  did not matter. So many instances like that, you find yourself   it   s not  important, doesn   t count, doesn   t register. And that   s the way it was with  him. But there were some.  Now this one fellow I was talking about, he had me to take pictures at  his wedding or take pictures of his daughter and things like that. Jewish  fellow, very nice fellow. That   s the way it was in the post office in  Washington, D.C. You come across a lot of people who are very nice.  21  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Color is no issue. It doesn   t make any difference. It doesn   t matter what  everybody else is doing. Color is not an issue and the people don   t treat  you like you   re some phenomenon.  Did you participate in any civil rights events like March on Washington  or any of these things?  I would have. I have done some things   I can   t remember exactly what  they were now off hand. The March on Washington, I was on the  highway then. I was on the highway at one of them and I really don   t  like marches. That   s the other aspect. But I would do whatever I felt I  needed to do and wanted to do. If I wanted to be with the group, fine. If I  didn   t, I didn   t bother. But I did campaign for Lyndon Baines Johnson  who I thought was one of the best presidents we ever had. Hard working  president and a good president. To this day I thought Johnson was really  good, because Johnson changed. He was not the segregationist that he  had been over his youth. He   s a man who changed completely and began  to do a lot of things that were very positively beneficial to both races.  What in your life has brought or given you the greatest satisfaction or  fulfillment?  I think my experience in Washington for one. I guess specifically I   ve  gotten, perhaps, more enjoyment out of doing pictures than anything else  I can think of, taking and processing pictures. I used to do that in my  basement, sometimes the whole weekend. There   d be nobody there but  me because my wife had left. I   d be in my basement sometimes from  Friday evening until time to get out on Sunday night and go to bed so  you could get up Monday morning. I think that has been my greatest  satisfaction.  And I enjoyed teaching, by the way. I enjoyed teaching. I told somebody  after I retired, I said,    I have enjoyed twenty-eight years of fun.    I had a  good time. And I don   t regret it for one thing because there were a  number of things that I did that were different, that were not following  the main path. But there were things that I did that were quite different  from what anybody else, to my knowledge, had done and successes were  phenomenal. I had done a lot of things with students so that a student  and I, if we didn   t agree, that was alright, we   d get along eventually.  There were a lot of things that I did with students that I was very happy  about later on because it brought them around and made them change  some of their ideas.  So as far as the practical thing, working with pictures and that sort of  thing, when I got a chance to work with it with students, that was fine.  But as I said, my greatest satisfaction, I enjoyed teaching. Because I did  22  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  it as I said for twenty-eight years and I told somebody I had twenty-eight  years of fun. I had a good time. I didn   t get mad at anybody. Oh, one or  two isolated cases may have come up. But for the most part there was no  animosity. I didn   t want to kill them and they didn   t want to kill me.  (Laughter)  Have you stayed in touch with any of your students?  No, because I   m in Muskogee, see, and that was in Baltimore, Maryland.  There was a time when I could visit Baltimore and I would be in the city  just less than a half hour and I would run across some of my students,  ex-students. And it was a pleasure because we   d always have fun at that  point. But by living so far away now, that   s impossible. And now  they   ve changed. I don   t know what they look like now, you see.  Because some have had families and some look different. Many have  died. But you just don   t see them. I mean it   s just a different set-up. I  miss that part about that area more than anything. Where these people  here talk about the people they used to teach and they came in contact  with them over here or there, wherever. I can   t do that because I don   t  come in contact with any. There is one that I will talk to occasionally, an  African fellow that I talk to on occasion. But that was because he sold  Shaklee products, and I like Shaklee products so I miss that. These  teachers around here are fortunate because they can run across a few  people every now and then. But that   s about it. I miss that and wish that  were possible. But I go there now you see, nobody would recognize me  because I   m old. They don   t recognize me and I certainly don   t  recognize them   So what have you been doing in Muskogee since you moved back?  Well, I   ve been busy involved with church. I   ve been a member of the  fraternity, Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity. I   ve worked with the NAACP.  And anywhere somebody requests some help or something like that that  I can perform I would work with them.  Oh yes, I   ll tell you of another lady I worked with. You probably don   t  know this lady, but anyway, her husband used to own the Territorial  Bank. I can   t think of her name. I think they   ve gotten out of the banking  business now, but anyway, one of the first assignments I had after I got  here was to work with her adult groups. She had an adult group of  people and she was running the program. It was nice. I worked with her  for quite awhile. Then she left there and went to work with her husband  in the Territorial Bank. But that was about it as far as the other groups  that I have worked with. We worked for quite awhile together.  What kind of work did you do together?  23  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Worked with adult education.  Just all kinds?  (Laughs) You know it   s been quite awhile ago. That was when I first  came back here. I   ve kind of forgotten what we did. We did a lot of  things to help adults in adult education. Because I had worked with  adults for quite a number of years and she wanted to enter some of the  areas that I had been proficient in working. But I don   t remember  specifically what all we did. She was leading the program. But it was  nice. Finally she left it and when she left it that ended that, I left it too.  Of all the things you learned from your parents, which do you feel was  the most valuable?  That   s one of the worst questions I think you can ask. The reason is you  learn all things from your parents, you learn so many different things  that are completely disconnected; hardly connected at all, really. And  you find yourself picking up a point here, a point there, a point there,  and a point there about different things, about different aspects of their  life, the things that they   ve grown up with. For example, my mother  used to say,    In all thy ways acknowledge Him and He will direct thy  path.    She used to say it all the time. My father used to say, I bet I won   t  remember it,    The Lord is my light and my salvation. Whom shall I  fear?    My father would say that every day at the dinner table or  whatever.  So you asked me what did I learn, well I learned many things from my  parents. My parents were not able to go to school because my father had  to leave school early and, as usual, they had families early. They had to  get out and work to take care of them. And as a result, he didn   t go to  school very far and neither did my mother. But somehow my mother  managed to acquire enough skill and practice to teach other people  certain things that she knew that they didn   t know. How to can, for  example. My mother was an expert. They didn   t know so she was asked  to teach them at school. So I learned a number of things that you can  learn without having to have formal training to learn.  What is one thing you most want people to remember about you? From  all the lives you   ve touched through teaching     That I tried to help people reach their goals as much as I could. And if  they didn   t have a goal, I tried to get them to find one. This has been one  of my points of emphasis for many, many years. And that is to try to get  people, young people especially, to find some kind of hobby, something  that they can do in their spare time and enjoy doing without perhaps  24  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  Wilson  Barrett  getting any money for it. And if you   re lucky to get money for it, that   s  even better. But something that you get pleasure out of doing just by  doing it. And I   ve tried to encourage everybody that I have known over  a period to do that, to find something that you like to do that you   re not  going to get any money for it, the only thing you get out of it is  satisfaction.  Do you find that through photography?  Oh yes, I find it through a lot of things. You see, when I came here one  of my ambitions was to stay busy. And so I came and I decided I would  take a course by correspondence called Small Engine Repairs, working  on lawnmowers and weed cutters and weed eaters and all this stuff. So I  did that for awhile and I enjoyed doing it. I didn   t get paid for  everything, some of them I did for nothing. Many of them I did for  nothing. But for the most part, I did get a little something, I got  satisfaction out of it if for nothing else.  What kinds of hobbies do you enjoy?  Working on clocks and watches. And as I was saying, I enjoyed working  on small engines. I don   t like to do that now because I have trouble  lifting some of these things now. But I used to enjoy working on  lawnmowers. I enjoyed it very much. And to this day I enjoy fiddling  with clocks. I could take a clock, an electric clock for example, and put a  battery movement in it or take a clock that you wind and put a battery  movement in it. So the clock, you have it for one lifetime and when the  movement wears out you can put a battery movement in it and let it run  for another lifetime. But I enjoy doing it. Those are some of my hobbies.  So I have quite a few but I   ve enjoyed them all.  Are there any other questions that you wish I would   ve asked you about  your time in Muskogee or about you and your life?  Well, I have a feeling that I have covered my entire life perhaps a lot  better than you probably realize. I have covered the whole works; I have  covered many of my likes and dislikes, ambitions, plans, some of them.  So I   ve covered a great deal of material in so many different areas. And I  can   t think too much of anything else because I opened up to you and  told you as much as I could tell you in all areas regarding all kinds of  people   and I have met many kinds of people.  I never will forget while I was in the service I met a little fellow, a nice  looking young fellow from St. Louis, Missouri. Had dark hair, pretty  curly hair, and I was in the hospital at the time. He would wait on me  and I often thought about him. I didn   t know his nationality. He was  25  Wilson  Barrett  Jewish. Very nice fellow. And I often thought about him because he told  me he lived in St. Louis. And the reason for that is that I knew St. Louis  is just up the street there, so to speak. But that   s about it. I think that you  have drained the barrel. And if there is any more there, it   ll have to come  out some other time.  (Laughs) Okay. Well I really appreciate you talking with me today.  You   re welcome. You   re welcome. I hope I covered the areas that you  had in mind. And certainly I hope you got an interview that would reveal  as much as you need to know.  -------  -------  
