 Little Thunder  Vazquez  My name is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is Tuesday, May 20,  and I   m interviewing Victoria Mitchell Vazquez as part of the Oklahoma  Native Artist Project sponsored by the Oklahoma Oral History Research  Program at Oklahoma State University. We   re at the Cherokee Nation  Health Center at Vinita, and I   m catching Victoria on a rare day when  she   s not busy as a tribal councilor for District 11 for Cherokee Nation.  Victoria, you   re the daughter of celebrated potter Anna Mitchell, the  only one of her daughters to become an award-winning potter in your  own right. You   ve taken your mother   s legacy in new directions,  garnering awards at Santa Fe Indian Market, Eiteljorg  Museum of  American Indians and Western Art , Red Earth, Cherokee Homecoming,  among others, and teaching the art of pottery to many other people.  Thank you for taking the time to talk with me.  Thank you.  Where were you born, and where did you grow up?  I was born at Claremore, Oklahoma, and grew up in Vinita.  Remind us what your dad did for a living.  Early on, Dad was a rancher for a little while, worked on a ranch in  Welch  Oklahoma  for his uncle, so he was a cowboy. He always  wanted to be a farmer, but he never did get to be a farmer. Later on he  went to work at the Vinita post office, and he retired from there as a  rural route postal carrier.  Do you have any memories of your mother   s early pottery experiments?  Well, actually, Mom didn   t start until I was already gone.  5  Little Thunder  Vazquez  Little Thunder  Vazquez  Little Thunder  Vazquez  Little Thunder  Vazquez  Okay.  I went to NEO  Northeastern Oklahoma A M College , and then I got  married young and moved away. She started probably a couple of years  after I   d left home, so I wasn   t exposed early on.  Did you know your grandparents on either side of the family growing  up?  Yes, I have more memories of my dad   s parents, Clay and Mattie  (Martha) Mitchell, and they also were longtime Vinitans. They lived in  town, and a lot of times when I would be going to school, (I went part of  my school at Riverside, a little grade school in Vinita) we could go  home and have lunch with them in between, and then go back to school.  They lived, like, two blocks from the school. I knew them better, but  they both still worked when I was a kid. My mom   s parents were  divorced. I did not see her mother. Her Indian name was Oolootsa  Owens, but her married, final name was Iva Jumper. She died, probably,  when I was a teenager. She never lived in the area. She always lived  near Saint Louis and couldn   t afford to travel, so I didn   t have a  relationship with my mom   s parents. We would see her dad on occasion.  He married again and raised a family at Jay  Oklahoma , and so  summers we   d always go down and visit him and his second family.  That was my next question, your exposure to Cherokee culture and  language growing up.  Okay, when Mom and Dad got married and decided they were going to  raise a family in Vinita, my mom specifically told my dad (she told us  this over the years as we were older) that she did not want us to grow up  the way she did. Of course, she spent most of her life in boarding school,  and her language was stripped away from her. She didn   t have good  memories of childhood. She wanted the best for her kids, and her idea of  best was to raise us in town, in Vinita, going to public schools, going to  Presbyterian Church, and not being raised in a traditional manner  because she really wasn   t raised in a traditional manner. She didn   t  encourage speaking the language because, of course, my dad did not.  My dad was part Cherokee, but he didn   t speak the language. Really, as  children, up until I was in high school there was not much discussion  about our culture. We knew we were Cherokee, and we went and visited  places like Cherokee, North Carolina, and we had artist friends, but we  didn   t practice any traditional things in our home.  What are your earliest memories of seeing Native art?  It   s a great memory. In fact, this is on my website, a picture of my dad  6  Little Thunder  Vazquez  Little Thunder  Vazquez  Little Thunder  Vazquez  making these little Indian drums, little drums that were made out of     it seems like they used to have coffee cans that were about half the size.  Daddy would cover them in bark, and then he and Mom got leather and  covered the tops. Then they would paint Indian designs, what they called  Indian designs. Because we didn   t have a lot of research material in our  home, books, didn   t have TV or any of that, I believe that Mom and Dad  ordered magazines and books about Native Art, and so they used very  simplified, like arrows and (I hate to say this) tipis. Tipis are not in our  culture. Things the tourist trade would recognize as Indian because they  made them for a little trading post that used to be out on Highway 66,  east of Vinita. It was before the turnpike went in, so there was a lot of  tourist travel when I was a child. I was about five or six when they were  doing that. They   d make little moccasins, and Mom would bead on  those. These things were made for sale in this trading post. They weren   t  typically Cherokee. They were just    Indian.     What about your earliest memories of making art?  First grade. I went to a little country school, and I was blessed to get to  go to a country school, a one-room schoolhouse for first through third  grade. Then it closed. My older sister went there, and the classroom was  probably thirteen total kids, one teacher. Whenever I was in first grade,  there was only three of us. When she moved on to teach the higher  grades, she would let us go in the back of the room and play with  modeling clay. I had no idea that I was going to grow up and play with  clay as an adult. (Laughter) My first memory of making anything, me  and my girlfriend would sit back there at this little table with modeling  clay, and I loved the idea of creating homes, little houses. I would make  little four-sided structures. They had a floor and the walls, and then I   d  make furniture to place in there, sort of like a little clay dollhouse. Never  made a pot or anything, just little dollhouses and little people.  But you loved the three dimensional...  Yeah, I did. I didn   t do much painting or drawing, but   .  That   s my next question, what kind of art instruction you had in  elementary school or middle school.  Okay. Growing up, in grade school we didn   t really have anything extra  for art, but in high school, I got to go one year to art classes in high  school. I can remember enjoying painting. We didn   t do ceramics, but  we did painting and drawing. I can remember a painting. I can see it in  my mind   s eye because I didn   t get to keep it. My teacher asked me if  she could have it because she thought it was really good. It had a deer  and landscape. Over the years, I so wished I had kept that because I  7  Little Thunder  Vazquez  Little Thunder  Vazquez  Little Thunder  Vazquez  never did really do painting after that. It was my only foray into drawing  anything. I did not have any formal art instruction.  What happened after high school?  Well, I went to NEO for a little while at Miami, and I married young.  My husband was going to   he went to OU (University of Oklahoma),  and he was not doing well. He was flunking out. Those were the days of  the draft for Vietnam, so he joined the National Guard, and we made the  crazy decision to get married. I got pregnant on our honeymoon. As I  recall, in the 1960s, late   60s, I was the only pregnant girl on NEO  campus, but I was married. Back then that was a big deal. You didn   t see  what we see today. I didn   t finish college. I became     What had been your major?  At that time it was going to be business. I really did not have an affinity  for college. If I had known that I was really going to love art, I would  have gone to art school, but I didn   t have any of those opportunities. I  had this new baby, and I turned nineteen when she was born. We moved  to Bartlesville, and he got a job with Phillips Petroleum. I went to work  when she was six weeks old, my first real job with Southwestern Bell  Telephone, which ended up being a career. I didn   t get to do art or be a  housewife or any of that. I just went from a little bit of college, being  married, having a baby, and then all of a sudden, I have a career and a  child and a husband. It was fun, though. Glad I was young.  When did you first get interested in pottery?  Mostly I was interested as an observer because my mom was doing  pottery then by the early   70s. For a wedding gift for my second husband  and I, she gave me my first piece of pottery. It was beautiful, and I still  have it. It was a real simple piece, and I was thrilled. I started collecting  on a small scale things that I found attractive. I didn   t go to art shows  back then. I didn   t even think of it. I traveled a lot with Southwestern  Bell then. I ended up being in marketing, and so I traveled more. I didn   t  do things that I do nowadays like go to festivals and art shows and  museums. I maybe had gone to Woolaroc and maybe had gone to  Gilcrease  Museum  but didn   t have that big draw, mainly because my  husband was not interested. He was a golfer. I had a little girl, so I didn   t  have a lot of free time to explore.  I was interested in the pottery, and I would watch. On occasion, I   d go  and watch what Mom was doing, and I was the only grown daughter that  would go to her shows. I had another sister, older sister, that lived here  in Vinita, and she had three little girls and didn   t want to travel or go to  8  Little Thunder  Vazquez  Little Thunder  Vazquez  Little Thunder  Vazquez  any of those. I frequently would go see Mom and Dad. They used to do  Rendezvous at Gilcrease Museum. Mom would set up there, so I   d go to  her shows. Tahlequah, when they did the Heritage Center or the  Holiday, sometimes she would have a booth there, and so I   d always go.  Then when my daughter got to be about seven or eight, she got  interested. Sometimes she would sit and play with the clay at Mom   s  booths, and Mom would give her some clay. I was probably in my late  twenties, my first exposure to thinking,    Hey, this is pretty neat.     That was kind of a great foundation in a way to moving into making  your own pottery.  Right.  When did you actually give that a try?  I didn   t get the opportunity until, I believe it was 1990. I was living in  Houston, and I was single again. My daughter was off in college, and I  was very dissatisfied with my life. I was selling insurance and was not  really happy, living in the city and in a townhome. I kept getting this  pull to learn it. I called Mom and Dad (in fact, it was 1990) and asked if  I could come and apprentice with Mom and live with them for a while. I  felt like that   s the best way to experience digging the clay, processing  the clay, having the things at the ready that you wouldn   t have in a city. I  went and lived with them for a year here in Vinita on their ten acres that  they had. Daddy was grinding clay for Mom, and he would dig clay for  her and help her. He traveled with her a lot. I got to experience  everything from learning to dig, how to process, how to hand build, how  to decorate. Then I got to go, just as a driver, I went with them to Santa  Fe Indian Market. That   s when I got the bug. I thought,    Oh my gosh, I  have got to do this. If I could ever, ever be good enough at pottery to go  to Santa Fe,    that was my dream. I did this for a couple of years, and I  really wasn   t working. I wasn   t making money. I was cleaning houses  and doing pottery. I realized,    Well, I can   t make a living as a potter,     but I really enjoyed it.  Were you starting to sell then at that point?  No, I wasn   t even selling. I was just making it and learning it. I  remember I started designing some T-shirts, and I would sell T-shirts for  money. The biggest benefit of that was getting to spend a year or so with  my parents as an adult. I had never done that. No distractions, and all  their kids were gone. The joy of getting to sit in Mom   s shop with her,  and while we were working she would talk, and she would tell stories  about her childhood, about boarding school, about art, anything. I   d just  listen. I wish I had recorded, but I had no idea that I should have  9  Little Thunder  Vazquez  recorded. Then in the evenings when we were through working, Dad and  I would sit out on the patio. The back of their house faced a wooded  area. They had ten acres, and he loved birds. He had a cat; he always had  the cat in his lap. My favorite image of my father to this day (he   s been  gone since 1997) is that visual of him sitting in that lounge chair with  that cat on his lap, and us out there with the birds and the beautiful  leaves and the sun and the wind and listening to him talk.  He talked about very different things than what Mom talked about, so I  heard both sides of the art story, from the person that got to do it and the  person that got to help with all the driving and all the helping that Daddy  did. They loved it, and I got a real feel for a legacy that I realized later  that they were giving me because they studied. The other big thing was  they had an extensive Native American library, and they had been  collecting and buying books all their lives, I mean, all their married life.  That   s all we knew as children. We didn   t have TV, so we read. We all  grew up with an appreciation for books. Mom and Dad were avid  readers, and they loved everything about anything having to do with  Native.  They had all these different tribal books and art books and history books,  and I inherited those after Mom passed. I inherited most of those books.  That   s where I started really researching and learning what Mom had  done and looking at research. There was a couple of books that she was  already in, that she had been in. I can   t remember the very first one. I  met a gentleman from Davis, California, Jack Berry, who   s still living,  and he wrote a book about potters. He heard about Mom, and he came to  Oklahoma from California to interview her and take a picture of her  pottery, and there was a little story of her. I was so proud to see her in a  book. All those things led to me getting to where I am today. It was a  neat experience.  When did you sell your first pot?  It would have been about 1997. After I had spent those first couple of  years with Mom and Dad, I ended up going back to Houston and  working some more because I thought,    I can   t make a living doing  this.    It was while I was in Houston the second time that I decided,    I  am going to go back to Oklahoma.    In 1997   the catalyst for that was  my father   s passing in May of    97. I came home for the funeral, and  because   I had just gotten laid off of a job, so I had some money. I had  some free time. I told Mom,    I   d like to stay a couple of weeks and help  you.    It was during those two weeks that she was grieving, and the  family, everyone left, and it was just me and her. I said,    How would  you feel about me moving back here full-time and staying with you and  really focusing on the pottery and helping you?    She said,    Well, I think  10  Little Thunder  Vazquez  Little Thunder  Vazquez  Little Thunder  it   d be great.    So later that year, I came back, and I started seriously  making pottery.  I think I sold my first piece to a friend. It was a tiny pot, and I sold it for  maybe twenty-five dollars. The amazing thing was that that year, the  first year after I moved back here, I met my current husband, Bruce  Vazquez. I was working part-time at an insurance company here in  Vinita, and my whole intent   everything worked the way I had prayed  for it to work that I could stay with Mom, help her, work on pottery, and  not have to work full-time but make enough money to live. That   s what I  was doing. I was working part-time at this insurance company, and I met  Bruce. I really think that God placed him in my life because it just  worked out perfectly. The very next year, we married, and I got  accepted   my fiftieth birthday was the most awesome year, my fiftieth  year. We got married, and about a month later I get an acceptance letter  for Santa Fe Indian Market. I had six weeks to produce. When you first  apply, you don   t get selected right away, so I didn   t know if I was going  to get in. Then when they told me I was in, I had six weeks, so I became  a little factory.  And you hadn   t really done any shows.  And I hadn   t done any shows. That was my first show: Santa Fe   What was that experience like? (Laughter)  It was awesome. I remember I had about twenty pieces, and I was going  for quantity. First I started out trying to do the nicest things that I could.   Shows pot  This was one of the pieces that I didn   t want to sell because  it was so hard to make. It was one of my hardest, first, early pieces that  Mom said,    You would pick the hardest thing to try and make.    I   m glad  that I kept that, but I had things about like this: native clay, little pieces,  nothing great big. I sold everything that year, and it was my first time to  go to Indian Market. I just loved it.  I got to go probably three or four more years with Mom, and then she  stopped doing shows. Then my life got busy on the ranch, and I started  teaching. My husband wasn   t crazy about   he didn   t want to go to the  shows. He   s a rancher, and he   s not interested in Indian art shows. He  couldn   t travel because we have a full-time   we still have a working  ranch. I was going by myself and looking for people to go with, and it  became a hardship to go do art shows. From that foundation, I started  winning awards. I won my first ribbon at Santa Fe Indian Market in  miniature category, and that spurred me on.  Was it that same year?  11  Vazquez  Little Thunder  Vazquez  Little Thunder  Vazquez  Little Thunder  No, it was 2000, in 2000. Then I started becoming serious about  Cherokee Homecoming Art Show, Red Earth Festival, things around  here that wouldn   t be so far for me to go. I found in my art show  experience, that even though I   m a good   I was in marketing for years,  and I was in sales. I love to talk to people. I really don   t enjoy the art  show aspect of standing behind a booth, talking to people, trying to sell  my work. I would rather educate people about our culture and the  Southeastern Mound Builders and teach people how to make pottery  than I would to go to shows and compete. I don   t like the competition  aspect of art. I   ve got enough awards that I was grateful, but I don   t  enjoy that. I don   t enjoy competing with my fellow friends and my  fellow artists. Some people love it, and I   m just one of those people that  I don   t care about it. My joy came from, for instance   can we talk about  this piece now or these pieces now, or do you want to do that later?  You can feel free to talk about it now and then we   ll     Come back to it.     we   ll look at it. We   ll come back to it, as well.  Okay. My greatest joy came when I was approached by the Cherokee  Phoenix reporter, the Cherokee newspaper reporter, and I happened to  be in Tahlequah entering this piece in a art show. He said,    While I   m  here and I   ve got my camera, could I do a story on you?    I was just  thrilled. I was holding this piece in my lap, the tripod head jar, and it  was something that was very difficult. I learned how to do it myself,  figured it out myself, made it by myself, fired it, blackened it, all that.  This picture in the   the story came out in 2001 fall issue, and as a result  of that, I applied to the Smithsonian for a fellowship. Long story, (we  can get into this later) it led to me making a tripod head jar for the  Smithsonian a few years later.  You never know where these things are going to take you, but each one  of those little, what I call, blessings in your life, when someone asks  you,    Can I do a story,    you don   t know who   s going to read it. You  don   t know who   s going to be affected. That   s when I first started  becoming, getting a little notoriety, not just as a person that makes  pottery, or Anna Mitchell   s daughter, but a person that has something to  share and a legacy that she   s carrying forward. That was my proudest  moment to think,    Hey, I can do this. I can represent what Mom started.     That   s my greatest joy from those experiences.  Well, talk about your Smithsonian experience a little bit, that fellowship.  12  Vazquez  Okay, I   m trying to remember who encouraged me. I think it was  Martha Berry who had done a, the bead artist who   d just done a  fellowship, and also Margaret Roach Wheeler, who   s a friend of mine  that   s a Chickasaw clothing designer. They had both just done that, and  they said,    You really should apply for this fellowship.    At the time, it  was called Native American Artist Visiting Artist Program. It   s through  the NMAI  National Museum of the American Indian  and the  Smithsonian. I mean, the Smithsonian is NMAI. So I applied. I believe  they had a juried process at the time. This was in 2005; 2004 is actually  when I did the paperwork. It   s very extensive paperwork and quite a  presentation of why you want to do it, what you want to study, what  you   re going to do with it if you get the fellowship.  I think they selected at that time maybe two artists per year. They had a  spring program, and they had a fall program. They called me in 2005  and said,    We   ve selected you for this fall which starts in August.    I was  just elated. What it was, was you received a five-thousand-dollar stipend  to come to Washington, DC. They paid for all your travel. They paid for  you to have a staff person to travel with you, and you get to visit  museums from Washington, DC, to Boston to Philadelphia, ending in  New York City, for three weeks. I was in that area for three weeks. You  start at the NMAI Suitland, Maryland, location which houses all the  artifacts that you   re going to study. My research was going to be  specifically about Southeastern Mound Builder pottery and artifacts and  the era from, say, 1200 to 1700. Whatever museum had those kinds of  things, that   s what I got to look at. I spent a week at the cultural   I can   t  remember now what they call it. It   s a holding site that   s a big building  out there where they have all these artifacts.  It   s the most amazing thing. They have floor-to-ceiling cabinets. The  ceilings are very tall, and they   re computerized. No one can unlock them  unless they have the computerized key to open it. I had a staff person  that knew exactly where I wanted to look, and he took me first to the  Arkansas mound site pottery. You   ve got rows and rows and rows that  go way up high. You get to get on this little automatic ladder, rolling  thing, and it   s got a table on it. You pull these drawers out; you can take  the pottery out and set it on this table. You can photograph it, write  about it, touch it. It   s just amazing. These are things that were found in  the burial mounds. I did that for a week. As a payback for your  fellowship, at each museum that you visit, you   ve got to give a program,  present a program about your art and what you do. It   s called a brown  bag lunch, and it   s for all the employees of that facility, come and listen  to you.  I was giving a talk with some slides, and talking about Mom and digging  the clay and all that, and I had a portfolio with me that I   d made  13  specifically to take. On the front of the portfolio was a picture of three  pieces that I had just finished and I had not sold. As a result of that  brown bag experience, one of the people that was helping me said,    Do  we own any of your pottery for our collections?    I said,    No you don   t.     He said,    Well, we need to.    So, long story short, he got the curator to  purchase those three pieces. That was, I mean, the highlight. I can  remember calling my mom and calling my best friend and screaming,    I  have got an order  I   ve sold pottery to the Smithsonian     That was just  the first week.  Then we went to Harvard, Peabody Museum at Harvard, got a day there,  at Philadelphia, another museum, and then New York City in a week. At  each of these places, you meet different staff people, and it   s just  awesome. You go on a train, things I   d never done before, go by train  from Boston to New York City, and you stay in a hotel. Everything   s  paid for, so it was very comfortable, very easy, very fun. The other  rewarding part of that was that the young man that got the award at the  same time as me was an artist from Ecuador. He was from the Shuar  tribe, and he did not speak English. He only spoke Spanish and his  native language. His art form was musical instruments, and also he came  from a tribe that used to shrink heads. He wanted to see shrunken heads,  and they had them in the museums.  We traveled together for those three weeks, and after the first few days I  realized that he was not going out and doing any   you   re on your own  every night. Because he didn   t speak English, he wouldn   t go out to  restaurants. He was eating out of the candy machine at the hotel because  they didn   t have a restaurant. I went and bought a little book about  Spanish/English and wrote a note and left it with the guy at the hotel and  said,    Give this to this gentleman.    I connected with him and started  going to meals with him, and we would communicate by writing notes.  He   d look at the book and look up English. I   d look up Spanish, and  we   d write.  By the end of the three weeks   he was only twenty-two, and he was  adorable. He had this long black hair, and he had a headband with these  parrot feathers. He wore a tattoo. It was a mineral tattoo; it wasn   t a real  tattoo. Everywhere we went, he has on a black T-shirt, jeans, and hiking  boots, and then this garb. We   re walking down the streets of New York  City, and people are just, they probably weren   t really looking at us, but  some people did. It was a strange sight. He was like my son at the end of  those three weeks. It was the most   . I   ve never seen him again. We had  the most fun.  Not only did I sell the work at the Smithsonian, but I met a lot of people.  Once you go through this program, you were allowed from then on, you  14  Little Thunder  Vazquez  can study at any museum that will let you. You have the right and the  ability as an artist to go in and look at their archives. I could go to  Gilcrease. I could go anyplace, really, that if they allow it, you have an  open invitation to study archives. That whole experience led to so many  different things. The only other thing I had to do in payback was to come  back and give a program in my community about that experience, and I  did do that at our Vinnie Ream Cultural Center here in Vinita. It was, it  was great. I had a big crowd. I was amazed. Here are people that I grew  up with in the church that used to call me little Vicki, and now they   re  coming to watch me as Victoria the potter, talk about going to Harvard  and studying. It   s just amazing. It was just amazing, the life change that  came about from that.  How did it impact your pottery?  It made me want to study even more. It made me want to look at   not  only did I want to create what Mother always called traditional  Southeast pottery, but I really was drawn to the effigies that I saw. I saw  some amazing effigy pieces. They would be anything from a head jar to  a little animal figure or a fish. I was drawn to that. I   ve not ever had  sculpting classes or anything, but I would try to figure it out myself.  Like how would I make this little head of a bear, or how would I make  this little bird? I had a lot of joy in figuring out how to create creatures. I  had a period there after I did the research where I really got into the  fishbowls that look like fish, and birds. I love bird things. I started doing  a lot of birds and turtles. It gave me a greater appreciation for what the  potters back in the 1700s, 1600s did. They started with cooking and  utilitarian things, but yet there were people there that obviously loved  the art aspect because you would see some of the most amusing effigies.  My most memorable one that was just hysterical, I picked up   it looked  like just a jar. This was in the Philadelphia museum; can   t remember the  name of the museum. Picked it up, and on the bottom of the pot was this  little flat man as if he   d gotten rolled over or like the pot had been  stamped on him, you know. It   s this figure laying on the bottom of the  pot, and I was laughing. I thought people forever have had a sense of  humor. There have been artists forever. There have been people that   .  No idea is original. You   ll see things on pottery that was made who  knows when, like in the year 1300, 1400, that I could recreate today and  make it look similar. It was almost a religious experience to make my  first head jar. One of the places I studied was the anthropology museum  there at the NMAI. It   s right next to the place where all the artifacts are.  Very few people are allowed in there because there are still some  funerary pottery that maybe have the bones and things in them.  I saw lots of things in there that made me   I saw some head jars that  15  Little Thunder  Vazquez  were buried with people. You don   t really know the significance of the  head jar, but they assume that it was to honor the person that it was  buried with. That   s probably my biggest influence in making head jars.  That   s my favorite thing to make, was from those, looking at those.  When I made my first head jar, I was going to Santa Fe Indian Market.  This was probably 2003, and truly it was my first one to try to figure out  how to do a face. I looked at pictures from magazines, art museum  books, and things. I wanted it to look primitive, but I didn   t want it to be  ugly. I wanted it to be attractive. I did a pretty good job, and I was going  to enter it, actually, as a competition piece because it was wood-fired  and everything. In an unfortunate accident, someone else dropped my  box that that was in, and it broke. I didn   t get to enter it. I didn   t get to  sell it.  I was just sick because when I was making it, literally as I was making  the face, (it sounds weird) as the face took form, it was almost like there  was a spirit in that face. I have never been that kind of person who  talked about those sorts of things related to my art, but it really was a  neat experience. Out of negative things, I   ve always found there   s some  good. I ended up later, much later, I go and open the box, and there   s  this broken head jar. I thought,    I   m going to put it back together.    I  glued it back together. I probably should have taken it to a restoration  specialist and had them   and I probably still could. This broken man   s  glued back together, and the head jar is still in my studio at the ranch.  It   s too fragile to carry around, but I want to copy it and make it again  because it was tough to make and it doesn   t look like any head jar I   d  ever seen. I reaped a lot of positive influences, and my art did take a  different direction.  It   s interesting because I remember your mom saying she didn   t like the  head jars because your dad didn   t like them, I think. Maybe that   s why  she didn   t     Right, right. I don   t know why Dad didn   t. I don   t know if he thought  they were ugly. In the pictures you saw they were ugly. They   re not real  attractive. I think that he wanted Mom to make beautiful pottery, and she  did make beautiful pottery. Daddy was more concerned with the  commercial aspect of, like, how much she was going to get for it, and  each year he wanted her to win more ribbons and to make more   . Not  necessarily that he was money hungry, he wanted to elevate her and to  see how much higher she could go and how much more exposure she   d  get. Mom really would like to have played a little bit more and  experimented, and Dad would discourage her. She just always said,     Daddy didn   t like head jars, and so I never made them.    I said,    I like  to make them, so I   m going to keep making them.    She liked them. She  was impressed when she saw my finished product.  16  Little Thunder  Vazquez  I know that you   ve had friendships with other potters, and I   m not sure if  I   m remembering correctly if you also took some workshops from Jane  Osti. Can you talk a little bit about work with other potters that you  might   ve met?  Yes, actually, my most memorable and most extensive was actually with  a potter that   s not Cherokee, and his name   s Richard Zane Smith. He   s a  Wyandotte potter, and I met him at Taos when Blue Rain Gallery was  still in Taos, New Mexico. It was during Indian Market time. Probably  about 2006 or 2007, I met him. I was impressed with pictures of his  work I   d seen. He does this amazing corrugated pottery with these tiny  coils. He   s famous now, really well known, and his work is just  amazing. I met him and went up and told him I was a potter from  Oklahoma and how much I liked his work. Well, that led to, later, when  he could get away from his adoring public, he said,    I am Wyandotte,  and I would love to come and visit Wyandotte, Oklahoma. Could I stop  by your ranch and see how you do your       just stop by. I said,    Sure.    It  ended up he did come to Oklahoma, and he stayed with us for a week.  He brought his daughter, and they went to the powwow at Wyandotte. It  led to this longtime friendship and this relationship that we decided we  would do a workshop together.  He invited me to, the first thing he invited me to do was help him with  the Philbrook workshop he was giving on this corrugated hand building.  He spent a whole day trying to teach me how to do that, and I just didn   t  like it at all. It   s very hard, and it   s nothing like what I do. I helped him  teach that class, and that was fun. The next year, he said,    Why don   t we  put on a workshop in the Wyandotte area?    Then he and his wife  decided they were going to move to Wyandotte. They lived at Glorieta   New Mexico . They moved to, bought some acreage near Wyandotte,  and he and I put on a week-long or two-week-long workshop open to  any Native American. They didn   t have to be Cherokee or Wyandotte,  but they had to be Native American. We did it for free; we didn   t charge  them. He would work during the day, and I   d cook at home. Then I   d  come in the afternoon.  We did this every day for two weeks. We had elders that came. We had  young people that came, moms. We ended up with about, probably,  eight potters or eight people that really, really liked it and completed  works. Then he showed me how, and I helped him dig a pit on   and this  was at the Bearskin Fitness Center. It   s still there. Bearskin Fitness  replaced   it   s on the grounds of where Seneca Indian School was. It   s a  very sacred place, and my mom went to boarding school there for a time.  On the final day, we had taken everybody   s pottery home and dried it,  and made sure it was completely dry, and we had a firing.  17  Little Thunder  Vazquez  We built this pit, and it took about four hours for us to make this thing.  A bulldozer had come and dug out, maybe not a bulldozers but little  digger, probably like a four-foot-deep rectangular hole, and we lined it  with fire bricks and cement blocks. He   d done this before, and I had  never done anything like this. It was really fun, and I learned a lot. We  fired the pottery, and he left it in there overnight and then the next day.  That night we had a potluck. Everybody brought food, and we sat  around the fire and told stories and things. Then the next day, everyone   s  pot came, they came out well. Nobody broke anything. It was amazing.  That was the most fun, a real good learning experience for me to be  exposed to a different art form by a different artist from a different tribe.  We became friends and did some other things together, and then because  we both got so busy, and I got really busy with my art and teaching it,  we talk on Facebook now. We say,    We need to get together.    I see him  at Santa Fe. When he   s doing the Blue Rain Gallery demo, I   ll go in  there. We live forty-five miles apart, and we never see each other  anymore. I learned a lot from him. One of the things that I learned from  him (I asked him if I could use his idea, and he said it was fine) he used  to make (he probably still does) these big bowls. They   re made with all  these tiny coils. You   ll have this big bowl, and he would have black  sand. Then he   d have four or five smaller of his pieces in there.  I   m drawn to gourd effigies and plant life. I said,    Would it be all right  with you if I made a big bowl, not like yours but just a big bowl, and  make squash effigies?    He said,    I don   t care.    I started doing that, and I  have sold about five of those. They   re very fun to make. Instead of sand,  I would put beans. I   ll either put white beans or red beans. I sold one at  the  Washington, DC  Department of the Interior Indian Craft Shop last  year. It was just that one little idea, and I had never seen anybody do  that. Artists love to share. Artists love   you can learn from anyone. I  think every artist does that. They can learn from other artists. Doesn   t  matter what your level of skill is.  That was kind of your entree, it sounds like, into teaching, too.  Right, yeah, I really enjoyed that. Actually, my first class was in about  2001. Aaron LeMaster worked at the Cherokee Heritage Center and  asked me if I would teach a class. I didn   t really feel qualified to teach a  class, but I did. It was made up of tourists that came through for the day,  and they   d signed up ahead of time. I had maybe nine or ten non-Indian  tourist people, and we made a pot. It was just really difficult because I   d  never taught, so I didn   t know what I needed. I didn   t know how to do it  with that many people, but it was successful. Then we   d let the pots   I  think they fired them there later. I learned a lot from that. Every time I  18  Little Thunder  Vazquez  would do a class after that, I would figure out what was the easiest way  to teach, what kind of tools do I need. It led me to   I   ve done this for  almost fifteen years now. Probably twelve, thirteen years, I have taught.  It led me to going back to    simple is better.    Instead of taking all my  tools and all these things, I take two or three pieces of what we   re   like,  if I   m going to teach them how to do bowls, I take bowls. If we   re going  to teach effigies, I take my little effigy collection.  I have a pottery board that I   ve made for the classes. I use the same  natural tools that Mom and I used, like the river stones, and the gourd  neck that you smooth the inside, and handmade paddles that you smooth  the outside of the pot. People love that. One of the things that I stress in  my classes is that you don   t have to have money to make pottery. You  can go dig your own clay. God gave us everything in nature that you can  use. The river stones, you can make your own paddle. You can use  sticks and shells to decorate. You just need water and your hands. I   ve  simplified it to where people are really seeing the impact of what our  ancestors did. They worked with whatever they had, and that   s what we  do. I try to avoid working with commercially-made tools and  commercial things. I like handmade. Love wood. I love working with  wood, and my husband makes my paddles for me. I even found some  little pods, seed pods, that have a perfect cross indention. Made a clay  stamp out of that. People love that. It   s from nature. It   s just there, so  that   s the fun part. Yeah, the classes, I did learn a lot from that  experience, and I   m still learning.  You did some work with Cherokee National Living Treasures committee.  Can you describe that a little bit for us?  Yes. In fact, it   s an ongoing process. I was nominated and received the  award in 2012 as Cherokee National Treasure, and there are currently  about forty-five living. There have been about eighty-three or so  designated when the program started in the   80s. I didn   t get involved  until after Mom had   I think I went with her to one banquet before she  got sick. Then when I became a Treasure, then I   m, of course, allowed to  work with the group. There is an association. The Cherokee Nation has a  department, the Education Department, that oversees the National  Treasures. Their budget covers putting on an annual dinner around  Christmas, and we receive gifts. It   s really nice, really nice thing. What  I   m working on now with some other treasures is trying to get more  exposure for the elder National Treasures that don   t get out. Maybe they  don   t drive, and maybe they can   t even make their art form anymore, but  they could teach and talk about it.  As a councilor, I have taken that a step further. One of my goals in my  four-year term is to create a program within the Nation that   s partially  19  Little Thunder  Vazquez  funded by grants and funded from the Nation to pay the mentors and the  people that they teach. We want to teach young Cherokees that are  committed to learning the art because they   ll be the next Master Artists.  I would like to have a free co-op for the Masters and the Cherokee  National Treasures in which to sell their art and have it in one place in  the Nation, somewhere in Tahlequah where all these different art forms  are shown and have regularly scheduled workshops where they can  come and talk, or they can teach, or they can show how they make  kanuchi, or how they make the food, or how they carve a bow.  It   s getting a good reception. We are at the point where we have applied  for a grant through National Parks and waiting to see if it   s awarded.  From that first grant we will take   other National Treasures will go and  interview the elders and the ones that haven   t been out in the forefront,  interview them and say,    What kind of things would you like to see this  program do?    We   re going to model it after the Qualla Arts and Crafts   Mutual  at the  Cherokee  Eastern Band that North Carolina has had. I  think they   ve had their program over thirty years. It   s highly successful,  and its time that Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma has something like that.  It   s been great. To receive the award was wonderful, but what you can  do with it as a result of receiving the award, it does elevate you and your  work, and your stature as an artist and as a Cherokee. Then being on the  Council is another bonus because I can reach more people as a councilor  than I could as one artist.  That sounds wonderful. Is that, you think, maybe one of the most  important art initiatives that you   ve worked on so far?  Yes, definitely is. I   ve done small things. I   ve worked some with the  local Vinita Vinnie Ream Cultural Center. Vinnie Ream was not Native,  but Vinnie Ream was an artist back in the 1800s and sculpted Abraham  Lincoln. That statue is in the Capitol Building in Washington, DC. She  became more well-known because Elias Boudinot lived in the area and  had a thing for her. It was kind of a little romance that never did happen,  and people talk about that in our little museum here in Vinita, Eastern  Trails Museum. I   m getting ready to serve on that board. They have just  installed a really nice display of Mom   s pottery, and I   ve given them  some of her tools and some of her clay. They have things about Vinnie  Ream. I digress, but the Vinnie Ream Cultural Center is a building that  was purchased by a philanthropist here in Vinita and donated to the city  or to the community. It   s funded just through donations.  It   s an old house that was a lovely two-story home that people lived in a  long, long time ago, and it was just sitting empty. They   ve fixed it up,  and they now have weddings and teas and all kinds of things. We did,  Mom and I did a pottery class in that building when it was first  20  Little Thunder  Vazquez  Little Thunder  Vazquez  available. Well, now it   s too nice to have the messy arts. There   s a little  building behind it that was probably the servants    quarters for this house,  and we   ve made it into Annie   s workshop, named after another local  artist that passed on. I   ve taught pottery classes there, so I have been  involved here in my original hometown and stay involved in that. I get  lots of calls for all kinds of things, but I teach pottery classes and help  with cultural events and try to get more notice for the Cherokee artists.  And how about the Cherokee Women in Art Association? You were one  of the founders, I guess, of that, co-founders. Are you still involved with  them?  Well, actually it came about and went away so quickly. It was sort of an  experiment, and it wasn   t really my idea. It was Sharon Irla. Sharon Irla  is a painter, and then Verna Bates who   s a gourd artist, were talking at  Cherokee Art Market about us doing   . I think it was Sharon   s idea  originally. She said,    Wouldn   t it be great if we could get some women,  Cherokee women, to do exhibits at various places to get interest in the  Cherokee artists, women specifically?    We found five of us. One was  Debbe Edwards, a sculptor, and me and Verna and Sharon and then  Katherine Ratcliff, who   s a basket weaver, and it all led up to having   .  Our first exhibit was at Woolaroc, and it was last summer. I believe it  opened in May, and it stayed up until mid-July. We would take turns on  the weekends, going and hanging out in the gallery with the tourists, and  as a result of that, we all did sell some work from that, which was nice.  We got some national exposure, but it was too difficult to keep it going  because every artist is busy with their own things. Especially women, we  all have families and husbands that like to eat, and travels, and it just  kind of fell apart. We decided that it was not something that we could  continue with. It was too much work for the little that we gained from it.  It was fun, though.  Let   s talk about your techniques and process, maybe, a little bit more.  I   m wondering if you can describe how your early formats and  approaches might have changed, your early formats in clay, approaches  might have changed, as compared to what you   re doing today.  Okay. I learned from Mom. She would tell me,    This is how you   re  supposed to do it,    because that   s what she learned or she taught herself.  After I learned and after I became successful at making pots on my own,  I worked by myself out in my own shop. I took the ideas that she gave  me and the knowledge that she gave me, and I still, you know   .  Digging the clay, that process never changes. Processing the clay,  getting it workable, that   ll never change. The difference that I see in  when I first began, I was aiming for the same kind of pottery that Mom  21  made and things that she was well-known for.  Then, because I   m an artist, and because I was her daughter, and because  I wanted to do different things, I started branching out and trying to do  different things, using those techniques. I was amazed at how   I do  remember this, the one lesson I learned from Mom that always applies  and still applies. Jane and I tell our students, Jane Osti and I, whenever  you   re making whatever it is, you first look at it as a vessel or a pot. You  make the pot, and then you change it in some manner to look the way  you want it to look. When I discovered how much I could manipulate  the clay and make things different from this little simple bowl, I wanted  to do things different.  The first five years probably, I just stayed with what I knew. I   d  experiment a little bit on, maybe, shape, but then I asked Mom. She was  well-known for her melon forms. She would actually take a real leaf and  press it, and make a clay leaf, and put a vine, and do these beautiful  pumpkins and melons. I asked her if I could do that, if she cared if I  made that, because it was something that she kind of made up. She  showed me how. Then I took the melon form. That   s my other favorite  thing beside the head jar. My melon forms are what I love to make  because I love gourds and melons, and we grew gardens all of our lives.  I can still see   I buy a gourd just for decorative purposes, and then I try  to make it into clay, make something that looks like a gourd. I learned  the processes, the technique. You can apply them in any way, but what I  kept that I like   .  I could   ve ventured out into glazes and things that other artists do which  I think are beautiful and lovely, but I would prefer to stick with the  earthenware clay and the simplest way of making things. The one thing  that I did not carry forward that I wish I could is Mom   s firing methods  of the outdoor firing pit that Dad built her, the metal tub, and putting the  pots in there four or five hours, and the wood. For one thing, where I  live, my husband   s just not thrilled about me having fires. We live on  more flat, open   we have lots of grasses because we raise cattle. It   s  very windy in Oklahoma, and it   s dry, so he   s worried about fires. He  said,    I   d rather you didn   t dig a pit and make an open fire out here,    so  I have electric kiln firing at my home.  I know how to do the traditional firing, and sometimes in other places I  will do that. I know how, and I can teach it. One of the things that Jane  and I love to do now and both of us are teaching is we can take an  earthenware clay   and it   s a commercial clay, but it feels very similar to  my native clay. When you   re teaching people, you don   t want to waste  that clay because it   s so hard to process. We   ll make the same types of  pots that we make, fire them in an electric kiln, and then do a flash-  22  Little Thunder  Vazquez  Little Thunder  Vazquez  firing, second firing, and pine needles like this, the darkening. What  determines how black or how dark it   s going to get is how long you  leave it in the fuel. I was doing mine in a tub with a lid and making it  solid black, but you can put it in an open fire with the pine needles. It  gives it a browning effect and smoking, and it   s just beautiful. Even  though you   re not doing the traditional firing, you   re doing a form of it.  My firing methods went way out of the bounds of what Mom did, and  you   re limited by what your home and your studio and your time and all  that.  When did you get your studio?  That year that I got accepted at Santa Fe. My husband has a little   he   s  lived on this ranch forty years or more. He built the house, and he had a  little outbuilding that had been a chicken house. He   d bricked it and  raised it up. It   s a little building. His two boys when they were growing  up were motorcycle nuts. They would work on their motorcycles in this  little building. Well, they were gone, so it was just sitting there empty  with junk in it. He helped me clean it out, and I painted the walls. It   s a  little concrete floor. I   ve had that same little studio since 1999 and still  use it. It   s simple. It   s all I need.  How important is texture for your work?  For me, my art is more about texture than it is about glazing or shining,  mainly because I love the sculptural things and the faces. You   re not  going to have a highly burnished face, so the texture to me, I love the  way the clay feels in its natural state. I don   t want to change it too much  to appear shiny or to appear newer or whatever. The part about texture  that I   m leaning toward, (I don   t have pieces that reflect that today  except for the top of the head jar) the stamping technique. I   m starting to  get really interested in stamping because that   s what Jane has been  doing. There were a couple of artists from the Eastern Band that came  and gave a program here a few years ago. I didn   t get to attend, but  Mother did.  They have a whole   the Cherokees and the Eastern Band have a whole  different technique of stamping than we thought we had. We thought we  were doing stamping, but it   s not the way they do it or did it. They make  big paddles with really intricate designs. Instead of stamping in a  uniform manner like I   ve been doing, they continuously stamp the whole  thing following a pattern, using this design, and it just makes a beautiful  stamped of the entire piece. You don   t do a lot of burnishing on that.  You want more of that texture to show. That   s something that I   m  leaning more toward, that I   m making more stamps, making my own  pottery stamps, and teaching stamp pottery, and it   s really fun.  23  Little Thunder  Vazquez  Little Thunder  Vazquez  Little Thunder  Vazquez  Little Thunder  Vazquez  I bet. I did notice the fish pieces on your website, I think, that I really  liked. There were blue tones in one of them, I think, but can you talk  about     It was probably the smoking that looked blue.  You sort of mentioned your love of effigies and the importance of animal  imagery in your work. I   ve also seen you incorporate, like, shell  earrings on a head pot, things like that. How much do you incorporate  other kinds of materials?  Not really very often. I like copper. I   ll use the copper wiring to make  earrings. I have done shell earrings before, but I actually like to make the  clay earrings now. Any ornament that I put on it, I like to make it  from     Out of clay.     yeah, out of clay. It   s fun, and I   ve done some jewelry. I   ve been  doing some pottery pieces, like a big bead that   s maybe stamped. I have  a friend that owns a bead store and a jewelry store where she puts  together necklaces. We create necklaces together where she   ll have the  chain, and then she   ll do the little wiring, the hooking onto my pieces.  We   ll mix my clay beads with other beads. I   ve sold necklaces for, like,  three or four years. It   ll maybe have a little tiny bit of pottery in it.  People love it because part of it   s handmade but yet it   s nice enough that  you can wear it. It   s not fancy jewelry; it   s costume, fun.  But do you have a name for your sort of collaborative venture?  Not really, we just play. Now, I have done collaborations with other  potters. I did a collaborative couple of pieces with Richard Zane Smith,  and I   m now the proud owner of the piece that we made together. The  bottom is the piece that I made, just the plain pot, and then he did his  tiny coiling at the top. It ends up looking like a Hopi maiden with all  those necklaces. I thought it was gorgeous, and he let me have it. I   m  doing a collaboration with Jane. We   re going to do a large piece together  because I don   t know about large pieces, and she   s teaching me how to  make the great big pots. Well, just in the last few weeks in doing that  work, I   ve decided I can   t do it. I have too many issues with tension in  my shoulders. I   m getting arthritis, and my arms will ache. It   s too big;  it   s too much. She   s gotten away from the great big pieces that she used  to make.  Anyway, I collaborate. I   ve collaborated with an artist that does  24  Little Thunder  Vazquez  Little Thunder  Vazquez  weaving. You probably know her: Marty Gradolf. She   s at Eiteljorg a  lot. Maybe you don   t know her, but anyway, she   s Winnebago. We won  an award at Eiteljorg with a collaboration that we did. She did a weaving  and wanted my little mask faces to hang within the weaving, and it  turned out wonderfully. I think we got third place. Then I did  collaborations with Terry O   Brien who is a Mohawk bead artist. She  lives on the East Coast, and I met her through the Smithsonian  programs. We came up with this idea. We   re both very creative, and she  loves beadwork. That   s all she does is beadwork, and all I do is pottery,  so I said,    Let   s do something together.    I created a dress out of clay,  and she told me   we came up with a design first.    Okay, we   re going to  do this kind of dress.    I wanted to do the early Cherokee cape with the  skirt. I said,    You could do the beadwork on the fringe, make the fringe  look like beadwork,    so we did.  She told me how many holes to punch where, so I punched the holes,  fired it, and made it look like white buckskin. I shipped it to her, she did  the beadwork, and then we made a stand for it. I entered it at Cherokee  Art Market, but I don   t think anybody knew what it was. They didn   t  know what   it just got no notice, and it was gorgeous. Bill Wiggins, our  friend that collects art, bought it. He said,    If you ever make any more, I  want them.    We ended up making four different dresses, and then we  stopped because we just got too busy with other things. It   s so much fun  to have input from   I   d never thought of pottery and beads together  until I got to know her. We had seen maybe one other instance of where  a potter had put beads on clay. My little jewelry thing, I   d love to take  that further, but right now I   m too busy with council work to play.  How about your signature? How   d you come up with that?  I have my Indian name. All of my siblings and myself were named by  my mom   s aunt, and we were given Indian names. We don   t know that  there was a particular meaning, but my Cherokee name is Dayani, and  it   s D-A-Y-A-N-I. The syllabary for it looks like a JWH, but the  syllabary isn   t actually the letters. I started because my dad took a class  on how to write and speak Cherokee. Mom didn   t know how to write  Cherokee, so I asked Dad,    Let   s figure out how to write my name.    He  showed me. I always sign my clay with my English name and my  Cherokee name and then the year.  With both?  Yes, both of them. I put    Victoria.    I was doing    Victoria Mitchell  Vazquez,    but it   s too much. I usually put Victoria, and then the  signature of the Dayani, and then the date.  25  Little Thunder  Vazquez  Little Thunder  Vazquez  Little Thunder  Vazquez  Oh, and the date, too.  Just the year, yeah.  Do you title your pots ever?  Sometimes. For instance this head jar, I named it Treasured Memories  because I made it after Mom passed away, and it was specifically for the  jury program for the Cherokee National Treasure Award. You have to  create a piece of art just for that. I used her stamps to make the little  crown on his head. It   s got tattooing on it which our ancestors did. I was  looking at pictures of different Indian men, and so anyway   . I write a  little story. If I have a signature piece that a collector has ordered or  wants to buy, I write the story for them about the piece. I will tell about  how I made it, a little bit about my process, where I got the idea, and a  little bit about our Mound Builder ancestry. I   m sure I had a little story  about Treasure memories, but it was that, specifically that my mother  was already a National Treasure and I used some of her clay and my  clay. I still have some clay that Daddy dug for Mom, and I use some of  it on occasion because there   s just maybe half of a barrel left, or less. It   s  precious because the place where they dug it is not available anymore.  Daddy would   ve dug that before 1997, so I love using that.  How important a role do commissions play in your     More so now than before. When I wasn   t a councilor and when I wasn   t  as busy, I had more time to play and make pottery that I wanted to make.  I really didn   t like   there are some times when I don   t care for a  commission. If a person is too specific about how they want you to make  it or what they want it to be like, I just say,    You better find somebody  else.    But if a person says,    I love your work. I would like you to make  me something. I don   t care what it is, or if it   s an effigy. I like melons or  whatever,    and that   s all they say, then I   m thrilled. Currently I have  three ideas or three commissions from different people for specific  things. One is a wedding gift, and it doesn   t have to be a wedding jar,  thank you, because I don   t want to do the wedding vases, and they   re not  typical Cherokee. I look for   I   ll ask about why they want it, who it   s  for, and tell me something about that person that   s significant. In this  one instance, the lady   s buying it for a wedding gift for her best friend.  The friend and her husband live on her original family   s farm, and they  call it Blackberry Hill.  We came, me and the buyer, came up with the idea of the shape of a  bowl, and on the shoulder I   m going to do a stylized engraving of a  blackberry vine and maybe put some Indian designs on it, too. I love to  do those creative things where they say,    I want you to be creative with  26  Little Thunder  Vazquez  it. Here   s an idea of what I   d like to have, but you do your thing.    I love  that because you know that that piece is already sold. I don   t do that  many shows anymore, so actually commissions are more important now.  If I were not a councilor, I would probably be making a lot of pottery,  making it for specific people. Also, the collections, people that started  collecting years ago have dropped off because either from age, or  they   ve got too many things already, they don   t have room, so your  collector base changes drastically, as you know, over years. I don   t  count on it, and I   ve never had to count on my art income to live on,  thank goodness, because I would be really skinny. I would never eat. I  think because I don   t have to do it for a living, it allows me to be more  creative and enjoy it.  What is your creative process, starting with how you get your ideas?  Generally, I have a lot of ideas already. I have a little sketchbook, and if  I come up with something in my sleep and I wake up, you   re thinking  about something, I have to run and sketch it before I forget it. That   s  one, is, like, things that come to you because you   re always seeing  things. I see faces in grain of wood, and I see faces in clouds.  Everywhere I look, I see things like animals or faces.    Oh, that would be  a neat pot,    so I   ll maybe sketch it. The other creative inspiration comes  from the fact that I still want to talk about and show our Mound Builders  ancestral things, and talk about how important that era was, and we  don   t know what happened to those people. People are just thrilled to  hear about it, and I love talking about it. I like to make pottery that  reflects that so I can say,    One of my ancestors could have made this.     Show an artifact and say,    Now here   s my rendition of it,    or the head  jar thing. I can see faces in a painting, and I wish I could paint. I   ll think,     I could maybe make that into a nice head jar, a face.    I am sort of  wanting to sculpt, but I don   t have a lot of time for that, either. I have  done one sculpture that   s a true sculpture that I   m going to have  bronzed.  Ideas come to me from other artists, going to art shows, going to  museums. When I was at the Smithsonian during my research, there  happened to be an Allan Houser, a big Allan Houser exhibit going on at  the NMAI. I took a lot of pictures of his things. I came home and was  really inspired. Could never copy what he does, but the idea of the  flowing figure. It would be a simple figure with just the mom   s face and  a baby form. I came home and created something like that in my clay in  a very small scale. I love his technique, and his simplicity of his large  sculptures are, to me, breathtaking. Anytime there   s an Allan Houser  exhibit, I go see it. The Oklahoma History Museum, I   ve done some  classes for them, and I love that place. I get a lot of inspiration from that.  27  Little Thunder  Vazquez  Little Thunder  Vazquez  What has been one of the decisive forks in your career, when you sort of  could   ve gone one way but you chose to go another?  Hmm, in as far as     Art.     art? Clay? I   d say the biggest one lately has been the death of my  mom. Right before she got really sick and had to go to the hospital, she  was interviewed by a gentleman who was originally from Vinita. He   s  now in New York City, and he creates production sets for dramas and  things. He wants to come back to Vinita.     We were talking about the  biggest fork in the road in my career lately, and it has been my mom   s  passing. I met this young man that was doing a video story of her. What  he   s actually wanting to end up with is a film about Indian Territory and  Vinita when it was first formed, and give a history of how impactful the  Indians were in Vinita, as well as end up showing Mom and her story  about recreating or reviving the art.  I met him on the phone and via email and never met him in person until  a year after mom died. He sent me a wonderful, after she passed away,  he sent me a picture of her that he had taken the day he did the  interview. It ended up being the picture we used at her funeral. I now  have it in my home, and she   s just sitting there casually with a little pot  beside her. Whenever he told me what he wants to do, (he is part  Cherokee) I decided to help him how I can, any way I can because he  eventually wants to take that program back to the National Museum of  the American Indian and have it premiere there. It   ll be about Vinita and  about mom.  There are a group of people here in Vinita, some people that are   one   s  a city councilor, and one   s a museum person, and different people that  are interested in restoring the old courthouse that has been just sitting  abandoned. One of the things we want to do with this gentleman is make  it a place where they can put on programs like a play, also have art there.  We have this loosely-formed group of people that I   m going to be  involved with, and he   s been contacting me. He just recently contacted  me again, and he said,    I would like to have   .    He said,    I   d really like  to commission a head jar from you for this program as it comes about,  and I would like to come back to Vinita and spend some time, and us  have a teaching workshop sort of thing,    not necessarily me being the  teacher, but find potters that would come in and teach local children  about Native art and pottery and have it all woven into this story.  He sees it as being more than just one production or one film. Because  he grew up here, he has a big affinity for Vinita. His family   s from here  28  Little Thunder  Vazquez  Little Thunder  Vazquez  and his   . We met through   his sister worked at Clanton   s Caf   and  saw my mom one day and went up to her, and she said,    You look a lot  like my grandmother who passed away.    Ended up, my mom and her  grandmother went to boarding school together, and so they started this  friendship. J. J. Lind is the young man   s name that is currently working  on something in New York. Then he   s going to come here this summer  and work and start on this program.  I see myself veering more away from creating art to sell into becoming  an educator and a helper and a person that   s an asset to the community  based upon the things I   ve learned, and the things I know about our  tribe, and our history, and our art, and my mom. All those things  together are important. The older you get, the more you realize you only  get so many years left (hopefully, I have a few) that you can do things  physically and mentally, that you have the ability to speak for someone  else. I see myself doing more of those kinds of things than being an  artist. My career has taken a whole different turn obviously. Politics, I  don   t know where that came from.  What has been one of the low points of your career?  Oh goodness, probably   no, I don   t want to talk about that. There   s  really not been a low point as far as my career. There have been  situations and incidents where   and it had to do with jealousy of other  people, women, jealousy, art, competition. Competition has always  been, seems like, the catalyst for something negative in my case. I don   t  really like that whole competing thing. The low point would probably be  a breakup of a friendship over that sort of thing, trying to do the same  thing that somebody else is doing and you   re trying to do your thing, but  yet they   re trying to keep up with you or surpass you or make it into a  competition. It ruined a friendship, so that   s probably the only negative  low point.  How about one of the high points? You might have mentioned   .  Oh, goodness, I think the high point was the Smithsonian research, to get  selected for that, to get to go do it, and then for them to have my work.  One of my pots is on display on the fourth floor. How many people get  to do that? I get pictures from people all over the place over the years,  and it   s been up since 2006. I   ll get pictures of friends that are visiting.  Just the other day this young man I was talking about sent me a text. He  had a picture of my pot, and he said,    NMAI, DC. I   m here. Lovely.    I  get these, and it   s awesome. The other big high point just happened in  April. The national museum hosted the Cherokee tribe for about four  days. The Eastern Band came. We had Keetoowah Band people there  and us, the Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma. The chief was there.  29  Little Thunder  Vazquez  Little Thunder  Vazquez  Because I   m a councilor I have better access than I would have had  before to the chief and to the other councilors, (several councilors were  there and our speaker) to get to take them upstairs in the elevator and  show them,    Victoria has pottery here.    They posed with me. Here I   ve  got a picture of me and our chief, with my little pot, and Jane Osti. Had  her in the picture. They don   t have any idea. People that are not artists  have no idea what it means, what we do, how much it means to other  people, and what a museum is about, and how people get excited that go  see those things. Everyone has their own loves and interests, but I just  can   t imagine our world without art, how important it is to me. I   d like  to create that same love in somebody else   s eyes. That was the big high  point, and that just happened in April.  That   s wonderful. Well, we   re going to take a look at your pots here in a  minute. Is there anything else we   ve forgotten to talk about or that you   d  like to add?  Oh, goodness, I don   t think so. Probably the only thing I   d like to add is  the fact that I   m looking forward to helping the other Cherokee National  Treasures and the elders. Every year, we lose one or two of our  Cherokee National Treasures and once that person   s gone, if they  haven   t taught someone in their family or some young person how to do  what they do, it   s gone again. It   s all about the lost arts that have been  revived. I think that   s going to be my biggest focus, is keeping as many  people as possible aware of how important that is not to lose those arts  again. You can   t make another Anna Mitchell. You can   t recreate what  she recreated. You can only take what she taught those of us that were  fortunate to learn and to pass it on. We   re getting older. We   re all going  to pass away. We   ve got to keep it going. We   ve done a great job of  reviving interest in our history and our culture, and we need to keep it  going. That   s one of my most important goals for the next few years.  All right, we   re going to pause for a second.     Victoria, would you like  to talk about this pot a little bit?  Yes, this pot brings back wonderful memories of the first couple of  years, the first year I was with Mother. This is made from the same clay  that Mom and Dad had dug. I made a red slip. The clay color is a lot  lighter than what this pot appears, and the symbols on it come from our  research book called Sun Circles and Human Hands. The round circle  with the wind symbol and the four-directional cross are very symbolic  with our culture and with our ceremonies. At the very top, the rim has a  little, very simple design that Mom used a lot, and if you carry that  forward and repeat it many times, it looks like a basket. It   s called the  Cherokee friendship design.  30  Little Thunder  Vazquez  Little Thunder  The pot   s heavy. Early work is a lot heavier than what I make now  because you don   t know how to make thin pottery, so it   s a good  reminder of how I started, and I like to keep this with me as a reminder  of the progress that I   ve made, where I started with Mom. I can  remember her laughing and saying,    Why do you want to make that?     That   s one of the hardest designs, doing the circle and making it all fit  on there. She said,    You always want to seem to take the hardest thing  first.    It just seemed like the thing to do at the time. I recreated that pot a  few years later and sold it. It won an award, and it was about ten times  better (Laughter) than that one.  All right. Okay, how about this one?  Okay, I did talk about this earlier a little bit, but this was one of my  biggest challenges. I made this about four years after I had started  making pottery. I saw a drawing of a tripod head jar or head water bottle  in our research material that came from the Mounds. It was a drawing of  these three heads with simple faces. I challenged myself to make it and  figure out how to do it, and I did. Was thrilled with the outcome. This  poor little piece has such a story. I made it, and then I took it   I was  able to get the Phoenix story with that in my lap. Then I sold it to a  collector in California and shipped it out there. It arrived broken, and it  was broken where the heads attach to the three tripods. It was double  boxed. I   d never had a piece broken in shipping, but it was broken. He  shipped it back to me, which was the wrong thing to do because in order  to get insurance from UPS, you have to have them come and see the  piece.  Anyway, long story short, it was actually a blessing because he ordered  another one. I recreated one and sent it to him. I got the insurance money  for the broken one; I got the pay for the new one; and as a result of me  having this piece back in my hands, I had a restoration person help me  put it back together. You can   t tell that it was ever broken. That   s the  piece that the curator of the Smithsonian NMAI saw that picture in the  newspaper and ordered one. I made one of these for the Smithsonian.  Then when I did my research which was about three years after this pot  was made, when I got the fellowship, I saw the actual one that the  drawing had been drawn from. The actual tripod head jar was in  archives, and it was about a third that size. It was just amazing. I got to  take a picture of it. It   s quite a story, and I will keep that forever because  it   s been around the block a couple of times.  Right. That   s a wonderful piece.  -------  -------  31   
