 Little Thunder  Harjo  My name is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is Thursday, October  14,  2010  and I am here with Benjamin Harjo in his studio in  Oklahoma City. Good afternoon, Ben.  Good afternoon, Julie.  What are your tribal affiliations?  I am Absentee Shawnee and Seminole.  Can you tell me where you were born?  I was born in Clovis, New Mexico, in 1945, September 19.  And that   s where you attended school?  No, that is just where I was born. We came to Oklahoma because both  of my parents are from Oklahoma. I started grade school in Byng,  Oklahoma, which is a small community outside of Ada, Oklahoma. I  attended first grade there. My mom and I moved back to Clovis, and I  attended various schools until about the fifth grade, when we moved  back to Oklahoma. So we were kind of nomadic at that beginning of  my life. Then I went back to Byng, Oklahoma, to their school.  Did your parents meet in Clovis, or did they meet in Oklahoma?  Boy, I think they probably met at a bar or some other off location  in  California . I am not really sure where they met because they never  really talked  about it , and we never really asked. I know that my dad  was in the service because of the war then, and my mom was working,  doing probably aircraft maintenance.  5  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  There was an air force base in Clovis, wasn   t there?  Well, at that time, there were a lot of people that had moved out to  California to go to work because of the war efforts there. And it was  much later. My older brother was born in Sacramento, California, and  my younger brother and I were born in Clovis, New Mexico. We kind  of did a lot of moving around. I remember, after my dad entered the  service, we went up and down the coast of California, Oregon, and  Washington State, picking fruit and nuts, whatever. It was still, I think,  a depression-type economy going on, and work was finding  whatever   it was, whether it was cotton fields picking cotton or out in the  orchards.  I remember you talking about managing to find some spare change for  two of your favorite loves when you were young. What were those?  When my mom and I were living in Clovis, before my brothers came  and joined us, I would go to the western movies, which were just down  from where my mom and I lived. In order to finance going to these  movies to see Roy Rogers, or Gene Autry, or Johnny Mack Brown, or  Lash Larue, who was an Oklahoman, I would get pop bottles   I think  they were two cents apiece   to turn in. So I would get enough to go to  the movies, five cents at that time, which was the cost of admission.  Sometimes I   d be there watching the same movie three or four times  until it finally occurred to me that that was going to be the ending of it.  (Laughs) Do you remember any of your early art efforts in school?  I was always attracted to reading comics, and sketching some of the  Looney Toon and Walt Disney characters. Enjoyed that. Fascinated  with Walt Kelly, and of course, Steve Canyon and Milton Caniff, and  Dick Tracy, Chester Gould were some of the people that  made me  think  I would like to be a cartoonist when I grow up.  Yes, those are more sophisticated cartoons    a lot of reading.  (Laughter)  Yes and, of course, Pogo was very politically oriented.  When you went to live with your grandparents, how did that come  about?  Well, the reason my mom and I moved to Clovis is that my dad and she  had gotten divorced, and she took me and my dad took my two  brothers. Then, they finally came out and joined us in Clovis. And then  she remarried, and that   s when we moved back to Oklahoma. She gave  6  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  us a choice. Did we want to live with her or did we want to go live with  our grandparents? All three of us chose our grandparents. We did not  want to break up the unit.  And also, I know that Indian kids frequently are given that choice  because it   s sort of an opportunity to be raised a little more traditional.  Yes, not only that, it was a more stable environment. My mom  eventually gave birth to our sister. They, too, were a young family, and  were moving around, going to different areas. I think being with our  grandparents   of course, there were three cousins already living there,  so that made a household of eight people   one bathroom. But it was a  farm. We raised cows and pigs and chickens, and so we didn   t have to  go to the grocery store for those products, the eggs and the meat. But it  was a labor-intensive environment as well. Once we increased the  family, we had to do two gardens. It was our job to go out and hoe and  weed, and make sure that we picked everything when it grew ripe.  Wow. I think you were seventeen or eighteen when you headed out to  art school, the Institute of American Indian Art?  I was the ripe old age of eighteen, by then. I was held back a year from  my first grade, so I had to do it twice. After that I think I learned I  better stay on top of things  What drew you to the Institute?  I was sitting in the Shawnee Indian Clinic, just waiting to get some  annual shots, and I picked up a bulletin. In the bulletin I read that Santa  Fe had begun a school called the Institute of American Indian Arts, at  that time. And in reading the description of the classes they offered, I  saw a class in cartooning. I told my grandmother that that   s where I  wanted to go to school. My high school counselor wasn   t too excited  about that because they were grooming me to go to college. My older  brother was the brain, so they figured I must be right behind him and,  of course, I wasn   t a brain, he was. I was more creative. So we made  the application, and I worked for the summer in Tulsa at a bottling  company, and then packed my bags and off I went to Santa Fe.  When I got there, I discovered that they no longer had their class in  cartooning, and I figured as long as I was there, I may as well enroll in  the other courses. So I started out with painting and drawing and color  and design and pottery. Discovered a wonderful instructor there named  Seymour Tubis, and at that time, they had some great teachers. Allan  Houser was in the sculpture department as well as painting, and Fritz  Scholder was painting, Charles Loloma was doing jewelry, and Ottlie  7  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo   Loloma  was doing pottery. Seymour Tubis, who became my mentor,  taught not only drawing, painting, but he taught woodblock  printmaking or printmaking in general. It was a method of working that  was new to me. I had never known what it was all about until I did my  first woodblock and cut out the same areas in both blocks, and got  yelled at severely. They enrolled me in pottery, and I sat there for a  whole class period with this piece of clay, and I think I ended up  making an ash tray.  So many people did. (Laughter)  I left that classroom the next time it met, and they were looking for me,  and discovered that I was in the printmaking room. They decided that  they would leave me alone because if that   s what I wanted to study,  then they wouldn   t interfere. Going there, it was a two-year post -  graduate learning experience for me because at that time they did not  have a degree program. It was kind of an interim between high school  and college, or the university.  That sounds like one of the reasons it was such a successful program. It  produced an amazing number of really prominent artists. Are there  other aspects of the program you think that really made it successful?  I think there were a lot of aspects of the Institute that made it very  successful.  IAIA first formed to teach Indian students to do domestic  chores for a living, but the arts eventually took precedence. Unlike  Dorothy Dunn   s teaching, we were given the freedom to create with no  restrictions.  When I first started there, we had around three-hundred  students, and the students came from everywhere in the United States.  Alaska and all of the other tribal entities came there, and I had not  realized how many there were until I went to school there. We had our  own Aesthetics Day, and Lewis Ballard, who is also an Oklahoman,  was a great composer, was our Aesthetics instructor. And we were  grouped into divisions   the Five Tribes under Lewis Ballard   and we  were taught some music and dance. At the end of the school year, we  got together and each of us prepared a meal and built a structure from  the various tribal groups there. Ours was a chickee  a Seminole  dwelling that stands on poles, above the ground . Then we all got  together in the evening, and everybody got to go around and try other  foods. That was a good part of it, too, as well as being at the Institute,  and taking field trips, being exposed to a lot of other artists and their  works, going out and sketching the landscape, whether it was along the  Rio Grande, or up at a pueblo, attending some of their ceremonies. I  think it was very enjoyable because we lived on campus. We were like  a clique of creative energy. It kind of emanated from there. Like you  said, a lot of great artists emerged out of those years in   64 and    66. A  8  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  lot of them went on to make names for themselves.  Who were some of your fellow Oklahomans over there?  Fellow Oklahomans that I can name right off the bat were Sherman  Chaddlesone, T.C.  Thomas Wayne  Cannon, Kirby Feathers, and Burt  Russell, Patty Harjo   no relation but a very good friend     and a fellow named  MacArthur  Silverhorn. Some of these guys went  on to pursue a career in the arts, and others found that art was not the  easiest career to make a living at. You had to have kind of a hard shell,  and bullheadedness, and I think that was me from the beginning. There  were several times my dad tried to talk me out of going to be an artist.  He said,    You won   t make a living at it.    I think before he passed on,  he realized that, yes, I was so bullheaded that I was going to make a  living at it.  Thank you for that story. You went to Vietnam. Did you enlist or were  you drafted?  Oh no, I went kicking and screaming like all the rest of the guys of that  period. When I got drafted, I had run out of my student deferments, and  so I knew I was going, and I hung around Stillwater, waiting for the  official notice. And then, when it came, I went to Fort Polk for my  basic training, and then Fort Sill. And I figured, well, if I am going to  Vietnam, I am going to go and enlist in their program for non-commissioned  officers as a sergeant. So I went over as a gunnery  sergeant on 175 field artillery.  Good idea. So it was after you had enrolled at OSU that you were  drafted?  Yes. I wasn   t headed to college until Seymour told me,    This is your  option: you are going to college.    (Laughter)  Once I   d graduated in  1966 I began that fall at OSU.   Well, it   s interesting, because some of the Institute students were  coming out and going for that career, full force, but you chose to get a  university education, too.  Well, there were a lot of students who went on. Some of them went to  the Chicago Art Institute, or they went to the San Francisco Art  Institute to pursue more education, because like I say, it was basics that  we learned there. I remember going to OSU and meeting J.J. McVicker  for the first time, and I told him that I didn   t think his art department  was up to snuff. I had no idea who he was at that time, and he turned to  me and he said,    Well, we are not exactly an art school.    He knew I had  9  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  come fresh out of an art school.  Is there a way in which having to go to Vietnam impacted your  artwork?  I don   t think it impacted my artwork. It was a break because when I  was drafted, at that point in my life, it was kind of a low moment. It  provided me with clothes, three square meals a day. Of course, it was  also a learning, disciplinary environment again, and since I knew I was  headed that way    My older brother was at Fort Sill, stationed there  because he was in officer candidate school. At that time, they had too  many officers, so that   s where he stayed. And my younger brother went  in the Marines, and he was stationed in Okinawa. And he kept  volunteering to go to Vietnam, so I would not have to go, but I think I  probably would have went anyway, even if he had been able to go over  to Vietnam. Some good experiences, some good people I met there.  Beautiful country, but I felt like we were  people, and in my view   looking at Indian people because the Vietnamese  made  that  impression on me. Here we were with military might, fire power, and  here these guys were determined not to be overtaken, to be ruled.  Sort of a colonial  situation ?  Yes. I had written a paper when I was at OSU that we were not going to  win the war in Vietnam, and one of the fellows that was in ROTC had  questioned why we weren   t. And I had laid out why we weren   t, and  the determination of the people was a major factor.  I was wondering when you got back, and when you were in Tulsa, I  understand you were one of the first Indian artists to visit Linda  Greever, who had just opened the Art Market. She had inherited these  Impressionist paintings, but you were one of the people who first  convinced her that she should go in a different direction. Do you  remember some of those early conversations with Linda?  Oh sure. Along the way I graduated out of Oklahoma State University  in 1974 with a Bachelor of Arts degree.  So you came back after the war and finished.  Yes. I spent about a year and a half figuring out what I wanted to do,  and the GI Bill was available to me, so I finished my degree at  Oklahoma State. Then, once I was out of there, I moved to Tulsa and  worked for the Tulsa Indian Youth Council for two years as their  cultural and recreational coordinator. Of course, before I got that job, I  was a janitor until she  Donna Rhoads  found out I had a degree. I kept  10  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  reading in the magazines about some of my fellow classmates, what  they were doing with their art, and I decided it was time to jump off and  begin my career more seriously than I had in the past.  That was in  1976.   Of course, all throughout going from Santa Fe to college, I continued to  do woodblock printmaking. I would do that after classes, and in my  spare time, working with a frame shop and art supply store there in  Stillwater. I could get my art supplies at a discount, and I learned how  to do framing and matting and cutting glass, which was something that  every painter, every artist needs to take advantage of. When they find  someplace they want to work at, do it in the art field they are  concentrating on, whether it is dance or music.  I can see the utility of that. Do you still frame some of your pieces?  Yes, that way I know where it is, (laughter) and if I am working until  the deadline, I can still matt and frame and do all of that right before the  show. I would travel from door to door sometimes for businesses, and  show them my portfolio of work I had, and I told them,    You don   t  have to buy anything, but if you would like to look       That was my  way of getting in the door, and of course, most of the time they found  something that someone wanted, and they would end up buying it. But  walking into the Art Market, at that time  Linda Greever  was doing  shows with a Cherokee artist named E.G. Thompson, and I think he  was probably the first that she worked with   and he would have, I  think, the whole gallery  for his paintings  at that point. And she had a  lot of the starving artist paintings that she was selling, the mass-produced  things from Europe, the Orient, or from these houses that did  the paintings. I talked to her, and I said,    Why don   t you do an Indian  art gallery?    And she said she would talk it over with her husband, Matt  Greever at that time, and they would let me know.  Sure enough, they decided well, let   s try it. So my friend, Terry Adams  and I   Terry had worked with me and for me at the Tulsa Indian Youth  Council   he and I got in there and we started stacking these display  walls that she had. He was a bead worker and a feather worker, so we  put his bustles on the stacked columns, and then we started doing art  shows. We would take brown paper and cover the glass so no one could  see in until we had the opening of the show. And then we would rip the  paper down, and people would be standing outside waiting to get in,  and it was a wonderful time.  There was that much excitement?  There was that much excitement. There were some artists that gathered  11  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  for the shows. We had some great turnouts, some great shows. At that  time, I was also a rascal.  (Laughter) In what way?  Oh, my gosh  Some people get to tell ing  you stories, and I   m  wondering how I lived through some of that.  What Oklahoma shows did you do? There were some major shows at  the time. The Philbrook Annual?  The Philbrook Annual was going on at that time.  Did you ever do that show?  I did that show, usually with my woodcuts. Then we had small shows,  bank shows, any show we could find that we could get into, because  there were not that many that were available to us. Not a lot of the  museums or places were doing Indian art shows.  Was the Five Tribes Museum active back then?  Yes they were. They were doing their show, and I can   t remember if I  even went to do their shows or not.  Is that right? Because you are one of their Master Artists now.  Eventually. (Laughter)  Do you remember when you earned that title?  Oh, gosh  I do not. It has been so long ago.  When and how did you meet your wife, Barbara?  After a couple of marriages, I met Barbara at an art symposium just  down the street from where we live now, at Oklahoma City University.  My friend, Robby McMurtry, and I were attending the symposium and  exhibiting our work. We were the only table that had extra seats when  lunchtime rolled around, and so she and her mom came over and sat  with us. Of course, I had no idea we would get together later on. We  were just two rascal artists out there enjoying a good time.  That was your first meeting.  That was our first meeting. (Laughter)  12  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  That   s great. Well, all artists need a support system    emotional,  psychological. How has that impacted your career, to have been able to  meet Barbara?  Well, you know, looking at a support system, going back to  the subject  of  Tulsa, working with D.F. Henry who had the Mobile Art Gallery at  that time     What mobile art gallery?  That was the name of it: D.F. Henry   s Mobile Art Gallery. She was  doing shows at a place called the Ramekin Restaurant, and I had met  Jim Halsey, and Jim Halsey had talked to her about hosting a show for  me at the restaurant.  And Jim was?  Jim Halsey  was  a music promoter at that time and I think he still  handles the Oakridge Boys. He was with    I think Leon Russell and he  worked together, but there were a lot of people that he worked with.  Roy Clark is another one of his musicians. When he talked to Diane,  she paired me with Willard Stone for the Ramekin Restaurant show.  That was my first experience with seeing that my artwork was going for  more than what I had been able to sell it for, because she was also a  promoter of the arts.  Did she double your prices?  Sometimes she tripled them. She made it where the people were willing  to buy it, and that was something I could do, as well. Then, of course,  along the way, meeting Doris Littrell, working with her, and then Linda  Greever, then coming to Oklahoma City again, working with Doris.  There have been some very supportive people along the way, and I  have had some very lucky breaks. I have been able to travel and to  promote my art and, I think, always being able to be out there and talk  with people, always being friendly with them. I am not a hard-sell  artist. If they like my work and they want to buy it, that   s great. And I  really appreciate the people over the years that have bought my work  and have been able to support me. Like you say, it takes two, and Barb  is the money manager. She keeps the agenda of where I am supposed to  be and what I am supposed to be doing. I can create and she can  manage. I think that   s what every artist needs.  Sometimes there is that element of protecting your time, too.  13  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Yes, there is.  It   s nice to have that. You mentioned some of the learning experiences  that fed into your career as an artist. How did working in the gallery  for Linda for a couple of years affect your art?  Well, having the training of being able to cut mats and frame, things  like that. If a show came up such as going out to California, and doing  the Natural History Museum shows, they would help finance my  transportation, getting me out there to do these shows.  In terms of your painting, let   s talk about all the different media you  work in. What are those media?  Printmaking. Sometimes it is monotypes, mostly it   s woodcuts,  occasionally it   s etchings. Then painting, whether it   s using acrylics or  gouache. And then drawing, which is pencil, pen and ink, Cray Pas,  which is an oil crayon, very little in the way of pastel, but then use of  colored pencil, conte crayon, which is the forerunner of the pastel. It  comes in the sepia tones, and I have always enjoyed working with the  conte.  That   s a really amazing range. What is it that you like about woodblock  prints?  What I like about woodblock, or what I like about printmaking in  general, is texture, being able to print things that have texture. Whether  it   s a flattened frog that I found in the highway and I have glued to a  board and inked up (laughs), or you know, taken a fish, especially if I  am teaching a class to grown-ups or to kids, exposing them to going,     Wow, I didn   t know a fish could be printed.    Of course, you don   t  want to eat it after you print it, but you can see what it looks like. Then  taking the bottoms of their tennis shoes that have a design in it and  having them do a rubbing across that, and seeing that,    Wow, I didn   t  notice this.    There is a lot that   s textural around us that we don   t see,  and printmaking  was  when I discovered it. I wanted to print  everything that had some kind of texture, whether a crack in the  cement, or a snake that I found   it had gotten flat, so I could glue it  down. One year I took egg shells, and I took an old puzzle board, and I  flattened the egg shells and glued them down and then ran my inks over  it, and printed it to see what it would look like. I remember telling  Terry a long time ago about coming home from a class. I had cooked  some beans and the beans had spilled on the stove. And when I looked  at the image there on the stove, I drew it down, and I made it into a  woodcut, and I printed that. Influences for print making come from  everywhere. It   s just up to you to see what   s there.  14  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  So much of this ties into your love of picking out patterns in things. You  stated once that you look for    the whole in the part    to come up with  your designs. Can you talk about that?  Well, you look at things, I think, a little differently. I have looked at  bugs, and I see designs in them. One time I was drawing or painting a  dragonfly, and as I started painting it, right in the center of the  dragonfly there emerged a woman kneeling. I had not seen that until it  came into my painting, and it was also a part of the dragonfly. I have  seen spider images on the back of a turtle. Again, you have that  different way of looking at things and it will spark a drawing or a  painting, and then you can go in and draw it, and then put it down, and  then start to paint it.  Going back to your painting, how has your style changed over the  years?  Over the years, my paintings and my drawings and my woodcuts have  kind of all merged together into the style that I have now. When I first  started, I was doing a lot of photographs, drawing from those, or  painting from those. I wasn   t real happy with the way it was going  because I was getting bored.  Was it kind of hyper realism? Or was it just more representational?  Some of it was, and some of it was representational. I enjoyed my pen  and inks. I did one, one time, and it appeared very three-dimensional to  me, because it just popped the face out. It was a face on black  background. Doing the black background, of course, it was white paper,  but I brushed ink over it to make it black. But I think it was intentional  for me to take my woodcuts and try to merge them into my painting  style as it developed, and to do a lot more geometric patterns and use of  primary colors.  I would like to hear more about your color. Do you mix color at all?  Let   s start with your gouache.  With my gouache, I do mix color, just as I do with the acrylics, and  with the oil-based printing inks. I think, sometimes, when you find that  you run out of colors because there   s only so many there, then you have  to mix and come up with something that excites you.  Well, there is one particular color that many people admire. It   s not  quite a blue, it   s not quite a purple. You might know what shade or hue  I am thinking of.  15  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Yes, I am not sure what it is either. (Laughter) You know, I have no  concept of what my color scheme is going to be. I know what kind my  drawing is going to be and then, when I sit down and I start to paint, my  colors develop. They will come out of the tube first, and then I will hit  the areas that I think I want to see the colors move around on my  canvas or on my board. And then I will come back in and add another  color to that to see if it will react to that. Sometimes it   s complimentary  and sometimes it   s not. I just enjoy the paint, and then the reaction of  color on color.  And is the idea to keep the eye moving in a certain way that you would  like it to move? Or is  that  not a huge consideration?  Yes, I think it is a huge consideration because I like to have the eye  moving and to experiment with how it moves, to see where it is going  to move, and that   s within my own self. If the viewer likes it, and the  purchaser enjoys it, then that   s great.  How about your painting materials? Do you work on board, or what  kinds of materials do you prefer?  I like the 300-pound watercolor paper, but then I will use 140-pound  water color paper. I like the Bristol board. I like the smooth, as opposed  to the vellum, because it seems like the smooth will hold the line better  and not feather as much as on the vellum. And I use pen staffs and pen  points that are interchangeable. I don   t use the rapidograph  pen ,  because I think the rapidograph is too much of the same line, and I like  a varied line. Of course, using the pen points and the staffs, you have  got to be real careful that you don   t load it with too much ink or you get  this great big blob. And then you   ve got to figure out,    Okay, what can  I make out of this?     Those pen and inks seem like they would be very time-intensive.  It   s all time-intensive, but after awhile, you forget how much time is in  there. Sometimes it   s deadlines you are worried  about , and so you are  painting all through the night, or up into the late morning hours, and  you   re working three, or four, five, six days straight to just finish  something. For me,  it   s  doing one piece at a time. It   s real hard to do  several pieces, because if I don   t finish one piece, and I have several  started, sometimes I will lose interest in the other ones. So I try to  concentrate on one piece and then move to another piece.  Are there certain subjects that recur in your paintings over and over?  Or themes?  16  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Some subjects show up unintentionally. I didn   t mean to put them in  there, but it seems like the bird image shows up quite a bit in my works.  Yes, I kind of enjoy all images. I   ll be reading a book, and I   ll be  looking at maybe, say Mayan art or Egyptian art, looking at a  magazine, and all of a sudden, in the background of a photograph will  be an image that sparks my imagination, so I   ll draw it down. I think it  is important for an artist to keep a sketch pad because ideas come at the  strangest moments, and if you don   t write them down or sketch them  down, you forget about them. I   ve done that before, and I   m going,     What was the idea?     One thing I get very strongly from some of your paintings is a feeling of  continuity of Native cultures through the millennia. I remember  paintings that specifically refer to mound-building cultures. Is there  any special connection that you feel with those culture groups?  Looking at petroglyphs, visiting some of the drawings and the paintings  that they have put on the cave walls, looking at some of the paintings  the Aztecs and Mayans did, looking at designs and patterns in their  clothes and buildings, their repetition of objects. Yes, they have all had  an influence on my work, and I think you will see in my work that I do  a lot of repeating objects, a lot of times.  And animals have often been a subject matter?  Yes, they have been.  I happened to read your comment that hooves are more pleasing to  draw    you like the design of hooves more than feet. And I was really  struck by that because feet aren   t really pretty.  No, but you can make them really strange looking. (Laughter)  What role does humor play in your work?  Humor, because I wanted to be a cartoonist, sometimes plays a very  important role in what I am creating. Sometimes I will do a piece that  makes me laugh. Other times, it also has its serious side. On occasion,  sometimes, it   s a protest piece, but I don   t always tell people that  because I think within me, it   s my protest.  So humor can be a way of making people open up to a protest, or  challenge their thinking.  Yes. I did a piece and it was called, The Times They Are A-changing. I  used one of Bob Dylan   s titles. It was the face of an Indian person, and  17  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  it started out that it was very dark on one side, and as it progressed, it  got lighter, and it progressed some more, and it got browner. And this  was my statement, that not all Indian people are brown, and they don   t  all look alike. You have these many facets of color within the Indian  races.  How important is story to your paintings?  Sometimes story is pretty important because some of them don   t have  the story until I complete them. And then, people want to know,    Okay  what is the meaning of this?    Some of them don   t have a story, and so  I   ll have to make up something just to please them, the audience.  (Laughter)  Do you always come up with something?  Sometimes I say that there is really no story because it   s just a drawing  that pleases me.  But that is such an expectation, and especially for Indian artists.  It   s like, you have to title your work.  And how do you feel about titles?  Sometimes they are pretty difficult to come up with, and other times,  they roll right off my tongue. I always try to think up, sometimes, a  humorous title to some of my pieces.  Sounds like a good strategy. Speaking of sketch books, I always  wondered if you had a secret sketchbook of cartoons, or something that  you   re not going to reveal the existence of until way later. I know that  sketching is important to your creative process.  It is. Like I say, a lot of times I am sitting, talking on the phone, and I   ll  be sketching, or I   m watching TV, and they   ll pan across this room, and  there   s a photograph, or maybe even a painting in the background, and  to me, it will look entirely like something else, so I   ll have to quickly  go and sketch it down. I think if you don   t have a sketch pad around  you, and you have a napkin or a manila envelope   anything you can  draw on   it   s helpful.  This is sort of out of the blue, but did you ever do a drawing in  exchange for a meal?  I think so. I have gone to restaurants with friends, and if I   m bored or  18  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  sitting there, and I happen to have a pen or a pencil, then I will draw  something. Of course, if I leave it, they   re ripping it off the table, then  going,    I   ll pay for your meal.     So that worked nicely. (Laughter) Do you do a certain amount of  printing each year? How do you know when you   re ready to switch  media?  Lately, I have been working doing a lot of painting and pen-and-ink  drawings. A woman right now has commissioned me to do a monotype,  so that   s what I am working on now. But like, for Santa Fe Indian  Market, I   ll do a monotype, generally, to put into their competition.  That   s been an important show for you over the years.  Yes, I have been doing it twenty-seven years. First starting out, doing  Santa Fe Market, I made  425.  Which might not have been a bad amount twenty-seven years ago?  It wasn   t a great amount. (Laughter)  For Santa Fe.  For Santa Fe.  Expensive Santa Fe.  Yes, even then, it was pretty expensive: it didn   t even cover our  expenses, so you have to kind of look at that and go,    Oh well, maybe I  should try it again.    And it   s gotten better over the years, and the  people that come to see me, some of them are friends, some of them are  collectors, and they always want to know what I am doing. It   s been  great to visit, not only with a lot of the artists that I only get to see out  there at that time of year, but also people.  How has your creative process changed over the years?  Over the years, I think it has become a lot more influenced by shapes.  For instance, I   ll take, say, a cereal box container, or a Coke container,  and I will tear it up to put it in the trash, and as I am tearing it up, the  shape of it will remind me of something. And so I will save it, and then  I   ll come back and outline it on a piece of paper, and then start to fill in  that outline of what I think I saw.  Inspiration from the most routine but unexpected place.  19  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  I think that   s the great part of being creative is you get these unexpected  inspirations. You   ll be walking out on the highway, or the sidewalks,  and there will be, say, a bird splatter, some kind of little image that has  been ground into the pavement, and you   ll sketch it down. I   ve walked  across a bridge in Chattanooga and saw some rusted wood there, and  took a photograph, and it looks like people having a conversation with  each other.  Were you in Chattanooga for a show?  Yes. First time I had been there. It wasn   t a particularly great show, but  at least it was an experience. I met some good people, hung out with  some fellow artists.  That does seem to be one of the really nice things about being an artist,  is the travel.  Yeah, being able to go to different places. Like I   ve been to Japan with  my artwork.  Can you talk about that a little?  Several years ago, the state of Oklahoma wanted some miniatures, and  so I did four of them, and then I did a painting to present to the  prefecture of Kyoto. They took over some dancers and some art from  the Cowboy Hall of Fame, at that time, and then they showed my work  along with them. And we did a fundraiser here through my friend  Robert Vincent and got enough to pay my way over there and my way  back, put me up in a nice hotel. Since I wasn   t a part, really, of the  state, I was able to be on my own in the day, and at night go wherever I  wanted to. So I would jump on their subway and I   d ride it to the end,  and jump off, and maybe at two o   clock in the morning, I would make  my way back to the hotel room. But I was out there photographing and  sketching and just enjoying being in Japan because it was one of my  ambitions to go there.  That   s wonderful. I know you   ve both relied on galleries to represent  you, and you   ve also travelled to these kinds of shows. Do you think  there are advantages to either route? Do you think a combination is  best for an artist?  I think a combination is best for an artist because if you don   t work  with an outlet or a gallery that shows your work, what are you doing  with it when you are not travelling to a show? If you store it in your  house, no one is going to see it. If you have it on a gallery wall, you  20  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  don   t always have to sell it to them. You can put it there on commission  or consignment. Then, when you get ready to go do a show, you can  pull it and take it to a show. Again, that   s up to you and the gallery,  however you want to work it. It   s better to stay consistent on your  prices, if you are working with a gallery and going to a show, because  in the long run that will hurt you. People will go,    Well, I   m not going  to buy it in the gallery because I can get it from him or her for a lot less  than the gallery.    It   s an old concept, here in Oklahoma especially, that  artists will sell their work for a lot less if they hit on hard times.  That   s been unfortunate, because it is a struggle to convey to people  that   s not how most artists do business. Every artist has a following of  collectors, and as you said, they sometimes become very good friends.  Does it get complicated if they are still buying and they are also close  friends?  No, because I think there   s certain collectors that you can have as  friends and still sell them artwork, and they will still be a collector.  Again, that is something between you and the person. There are other  people that you only see maybe once and they   ll buy something from  you and then they   ll disappear. Some of the people that have supported  you over the years, and you have a closeness to   I think that   s a great  feeling.  It is a great feeling. What are some of the art awards that you are most  proud of?  Oh, gosh. Art awards that I   m most proud of. One that comes to mind  right away is the Woody Crumbo Memorial Award that I received one  year in Santa Fe. I had known Woody from the beginning of my art  career in Tulsa. He and I would discuss marketing. He had this concept  of how I should approach it. I appreciated his advice. Then being made  an Oklahoma Treasure by a group here,  those are  two of the honors I  can think of right off the bat.  Those are great honors. Did you meet Woody Crumbo at the Art  Market or did you just meet him?  I met Woody through Jim Halsey.  Through Jim Halsey, yes, because Woody   s daughter  Minisa Crumbo   is married to Jim.  And Jim was promoting Woody   s work and taking it to places.  You have mentioned his art also as kind of an influence along with  21  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Kandinsky and Klee, Mondrian, some of the  European  abstract  painters. I was wondering in what way Woody Crumbo   s work had  influenced you.  I think just looking at  it , because you look at his originals and you see  a lot of texture in them. You see a lot of buildup of paint and, of course,  like I said, I   m attracted to texture.  (Laughter) What have been some of the other highlights of your career?  Other highlights of my art career, besides meeting the people I have  over the years? Being able to travel to other countries? Being honored  by the various awards I have received over the years? I think that being  able to help younger up-and-coming artists. Because I am getting old,  getting to the age where the people I admired  were  when I first  started. It   s good to be out there in these various markets and to see  what is being created. And to see who is going to be shining as they  continue their art careers, and being able to offer them advice or  encourage them, or to maybe find a marketplace for their work. That   s  probably been something that I appreciated being able to do, along with  my wife, Barbara. And then teaching, not only adults, but kids, and  seeing how their minds work, and seeing what they can produce. One  time I was doing a printmaking workshop in Tulsa and one of my  students had put a blob of ink on a piece of paper, and I looked at it,  and I  said ,    Wow, I can see an image in that.    So I asked them if I  could have that blob of ink, and they said,    Sure.     Was that through the Philbrook Museum?  No, this was a teachers group that was there. There were a couple of  years where I did work for the Philbrook Museum, when they weren   t  as big as they are now, or where they had me working out in the tipi,  and I would talk to kids and tell them a legend. Well, when I would tell  them a legend, I did cartoons to emphasize my legend, and so I could  remember the legend as well. (Laughter) I remember, one time, I  cooked a meal for them toward the end of the session and I told them it  was something and they were very afraid to eat it. (Laughter)  How do you define Oklahoma Indian Art?  How do I define Oklahoma Indian Art? I think we have some very  outstanding creative artists here in our state that, a lot of times, are  overlooked by our fellow Oklahoma staters. And when they travel out,  and they do, to these other markets, they are    discovered    by some  Oklahoma collectors and brought back here.  22  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  So  part of what makes Oklahoma Indian art  is this notion that its  artists are just not recognized, not a prophet in their own country.  A lot of, I think, people see  the possibility of  bragging rights. Say, for  instance, when they go to Santa Fe, and they buy an Oklahoma artist   s  work out there, and then they bring it back, and they say,    Oh, I bought  this in Santa Fe.    And they could have bought here, just as well, but it   s  more romanticized. Looking at fellow artists out there, and doing these  various markets   that   s why it   s important to always look around and  see what   s done. Some of it will influence you, and some of your work  will influence them, and that   s always great to see.  So did you show with Imogene  Mugg , too?  I did, having been here in Oklahoma City. Imogene Mugg had her  gallery going on. She was at the fairgrounds for a number of years, and  then she opened up her own gallery, and then Doris Littrell was here.  In 1990, a newer version of the Indian Arts and Crafts Act was passed,  and as you know, it required the artists to have proof of enrollment to  call themselves Indian artists, or be certified by their tribe. Do you  remember the impact that had on the Oklahoma Indian art scene?  We were, I think, a close-knit community of artists before they passed  the Indian Arts and Crafts Law, as it was then. And when they did that,  it created a lot of tension, and a lot of finger-pointing at people that  could finally come out, and  say ,    Well, they are not truly an Indian  artist.    It hurt me to see the friendships over the years that had been  there all of sudden disintegrated. And shows closed off to a lot of fine  artists that weren   t creating Indian art because there was a profit in it,  they were creating Indian art because that   s who they truly were, that   s  who their people had told them  they were .    You are of Indian descent,  although we can   t prove it.    I think the Indian Arts and Crafts Law  originally was created to stop the imitation that was coming into this  country from overseas, and then it went awry. And it was used for a  different purpose, because we still have those imitations coming in.  Yes, we do. I would like to talk about something fun. We are getting  ready to wind up here, but I know that you have a passion for garage  sales. (Laughter)  Oh boy.  I just wondered if you would explain what it is you enjoy about that.  What I enjoy about garage sales is   and I   ll tell you what I am looking  23  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  for when I   m doing garage sales. I   m looking for an old World War II  film, showing a movie star at a USO program.  Why?  Because they went over in the various wars, whether it was WWI,  WWII, Vietnam, or  the  Korean War, and they would do these shows.  You know, Bob Hope when I was in Vietnam was always there with  these various people. And I think Ann Margaret was an outstanding  performer that really complemented and paid tribute to the veterans  there. Someone out there had to do a video, a film of one of the  performances.  So they were really important to the morale.  They were. Definitely important. But I look at old photographs, and I  have a collection of, not only women in their period dresses with the  flowing gowns and things, but I look to see if there are Indian people in  some of these photographs. I picked up, on one occasion, a slide  presentation of the celebration in Anadarko.  Oh, Indian Fair?  Indian Fair, yes. So I   ve got those. You know, things that I can use,  whether it   s a person or a landscape on a slide, or in a photograph for  my painting, so that way I don   t have to use a book. I can go to what  I   ve got in my collection. Some of the people  have  family photos that  they no longer want, and I find those things that are humorous to me.  And books   I am always collecting books. When I was growing up on  the farm, we didn   t have a whole lot of books in the farmhouse then.  The school library    you know, you read the Hardy Boys, you read the  Just So Stories of how the animals got the way they did. There weren   t  a lot of books on Indian people. I collect those  older historical books   to see how Indians were written about, and to see what we were  portrayed as. And in some instances, we   re the brutal savage out there,  we   re the heathen person that has no God, and the people that wrote  those, you go,    Alright, this is a terrible book, but it   s a part of history  and how we were portrayed.     That   s true, and it makes you appreciate the sixties, doesn   t it? We are  going to talk about a few pieces of artwork, starting with part of a  woodblock print.  This woodblock print, what you see here (and I don   t know how well  you can see it) is the key block for this print. It   s called a key block  because everything else will fit within this block here. It   s more than an  24  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  eight-color woodcut. When you draw it out, and you put it on your  wood, you have to flip it so that when you get ready to print it, it comes  out the way you had drawn it and imagined it to be. So all of these are  colors that will fit into this particular block, and produce this print.  Because of the distance, I can print three colors at a time in some of my  blocks, instead of having to cut three different blocks. That   s done on a  mahogany-grain plywood piece of wood. Sometimes I   ll use poplar,  which will hold a really nice line.  I take it they are pretty easy to work with     They  are . This one, because it is plywood, you don   t have to cut real  far once you cut down below the surface because it is all surface  printing. Then you can take a chisel point and knock out a lot of the  wood that is there.   Another favorite is not a woodcut.  This piece is called The Spirit  Gatherer, and it   s a woman collecting the spirits. The spirits are  represented by these little balls of light all across the landscape. And  the birds are the ones that are coming to try and get the spirits before  the woman collects them and puts them in her apron. This is a pen-and-ink  with watercolor. It   s one of my favorites.  And it   s one that you kept in your personal collection?  Yes. When I talked to some of the earlier artists here in Oklahoma, and  when the end of their life came, they had nothing of theirs in their  family that they kept because they were trying to make a living, and  they were selling everything that they produced. I made it a point that I  would allow some of my work to be out on the market so long, then if it  didn   t sell, it would end up on our wall, and in our collection, and  would never be sold.  That   s so important.  This one is called My Daddy   s House. I told people if I ever sold it, I  could buy my daddy a house with it. That   s why I titled it My Daddy   s  House. It   s a piece that was created for an organization out of  Washington, D.C. one year. It  shows  the Four Directions and four  cultures. The red circle represents continuing life, and remains  unbroken; the hands represent communication and friendship; the trees  represent the rainforest of the earth; the half mounds represent the  earth; the bird coming from the center, flying out, represents prayer to  the Creator. And this is just decoration to make it vibrate on the eye  before I closed in these circles. It had a lot of movement to it, but once I  closed those circles in, it made it very static, so then I went back and  25  Little Thunder  Harjo  Little Thunder  Harjo  added this design.  It   s a wonderful, wonderful piece, and that   s gouache on watercolor.  Yes, that   s gouache on watercolor paper.  Thank you so much for your time, Ben.  You are very, very welcome.  -------  -------  
