 L. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  Today is April 9, 2012. My name is Latasha Wilson and I   m with the  Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at Oklahoma State  University Library. I am in Altus, Oklahoma today visiting with Frances  Herron.  We are also joined by Randy Wilson.  Thank you for having  me in your home.  Thank you, and I   m so pleased you   re doing this. It   s important that we  get this history, and we let a lot of it go just because we don   t have  programs to record it. I   m pleased you asked me.  Well, thank you.  I   ll start out with heritage.  Yes, when and where you were born and     All right. My father came to Greer County and settled up in a little  community that was just being formed called Hester. It was 1898. He  and my mother lived in a half-dugout for two and a half years until they  could afford to build a house. I was the youngest of seven kids and had a  great life. We never had money, but we had lots and lots of love and  good religious training. My family helped build the church, the little  Presbyterian church where we all lived, and helped settle the  community. I was born on the 28th of December, 1918. I always swear  I   m a year younger than I am because I wasn   t a year old when I was  born, but my kids give me a hard time over that one.  I started to school when I was five in a buggy, and we traveled to  Martha, five miles. Had bricks warmed to put at our feet so we could  endure the cold weather. When we graduated, it was Depression years.  They didn   t have money to keep the school going. They ran out of funds,  state-wise. So we went to school on Saturdays to make up days and  5  L. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  graduated in April. Graduated when I was sixteen and went to OCW   Oklahoma College for Women , first, to women   s school. Then two  years at OU  University of Oklahoma , graduated at twenty with a  Bachelor of Arts degree in Speech.   OCW was  in Chickasha?  Chickasha, and it was wonderful. It was strictly an arts school and for  five dollars a semester, I had private speech lessons once a week and I  had private piano lessons once a week. Five dollars a semester. It just  blows my mind when I see what college education costs now-a-days. I  started teaching school at twenty. At the end of a semester, a man from  Blair was head of the OU facilities, and he said,    Jobs are going to be  hard to find, and every teacher will be graduating in May. They   ll grab  the jobs. You   d better go. There   s a job at Washita.     So I started teaching at Washita, just west of Anadarko. Lived in a bank  vault in an old building. Bathed in a tub, had an outdoor Johnny and had  a great, great school. Didn   t know a thing about teaching school, but the  Indians taught me. It was a good job.  Then I came from there to Blair, and I taught at Blair for a year and a  half. Went to Mangum and Mangum Junior College. Taught at Sayre for  half a year. Married my husband, Earl Herron, and he and his partner  Ruby Garrett put in a furniture store in Altus. We moved for that just at  the time when Altus was trying to get the new air base reactivated. It  was full-time work. Entertaining in trying to get it in. But it was a great  time to be here. Altus had tremendous leaders and people that really  worked to get it done.  When was this, what years?  1951.  Who were some of those leaders?  Walter Hinton, Dick Moore, Earl, Cal Buckley at the newspaper, Frank  Webber at the radio station. All of them, so many people were    There  was a lady named Nina Grimmett that was just famous. She   d been a  bosom buddy of Senator Robert Kerr, and she worked like everything to  get that air base in. She called him one day and said,    Bob, we want that  Air Force Base and we want it right now.    He said,    Nina, you   ll get  your Air Force Base.    Within the year, it was started. It was fun to watch  it built. Now, where do you want me to go?  Well, let   s back up a little ways. Who was driving the buggy when you  6  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  were going to elementary school?  A high school boy would drive the buses. At the time I started to school,  some of the buses were pulled by mules. That was an interesting thing.  They had roll-up curtains and they were old gas Model-A Fords. Model-  A or Model-T Fords. It was rough going when it would rain because the  roads were all just terrible. You could hardly get down them. We had  good lives because we rode horses. We had taffy pulls. We had some  square dance, but we were religious and we couldn   t square dance or  play cards. They did a lot of community meetings in the schools and the  churches. They would have box suppers, and we thought it was so much  fun to decorate a box and sell it. See who would buy your box. We  didn   t know that we were different from anyone else. There was no class  distinction because everybody was poor. The boys wore overalls to  school and the girls wore little homemade dresses. We wore long-handle  underwear, and the greatest thing that happened to us was the first spring  day when you could pull off those old scratchy underwear.  We, in 1928, moved to a new farm. My dad had homesteaded on this  farm in 1898. Some people named Duffer had come early from  Tennessee and they were friends of my dad   s, so my dad and uncle lived  with them. They had two homesteads   160 acres you could get free. He  had two, and you weren   t allowed to have two, so he gave them one of  the homesteads for working for them for a year. All of us kids were born  on that homestead six miles west of Blair. So it was special to us. The  lady next door to me owns it now.  Oh, really?  She had a brother named Dick McCloud that bought up farms all over  the country. Dick bought the farm and they still have it.  What crops was your father farming?  Cotton. Then it was all cotton. Later they diversified. I think this is an  interesting story. Dad was a go-getter. He got a Stark  Brothers  Nursery  catalog and found out that he could order trees. There was no tree in the  area. So, he planted an orchard and he sold orchards. Got the other  neighbors to buy, too, and that paid for ours. When he needed a new car,  he   d take a neighbor boy and ride the bus to Detroit and bring back four  cars, and he   d sell the cars. That   s how we kept nice cars. One  Christmas, dad had planted this orchard. He was so proud of it. Mom  had grown up in Texas where they had more than dad   s folks did and  she wanted a Christmas tree. So when dad had gone to work, she cut  down an apple tree and decorated it and let the neighbors know, and we  had the first Christmas tree in the Hester community.  7  L. Wilson  Herron  R. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  After that year, they saw they   d outgrown the house and they went to the  little Presbyterian Church. When dad got with his brother to Vernon,   Texas  on the train coming from Tennessee, they gave a man three  dollars a day to take him to Hester, to the community. They had rented a  box car and they put their house goods in one end and two horses and a  cow in another end and slept in the box car. So the guy made them   it  took them three days to go from Vernon to Hester. That was how they  happened to be at Hester. But it was fun to watch that community  evolve. Everybody was kin to everybody because they all intermarried.  How many people lived there at its height?  The little town community had a train come through, and when the trains  came through, there were, at one time, ten different trains that came  through Altus. Everything was done by train because you were so  remote. Either Montgomery Ward Catalog or   by trains. The MKT, the  old Katy, came through Hester. The man who was the superintendent  said the first pretty woman that steps off of the train when we land at all  these little communities, we   ll name the town for them. So Hester  Young from Mangum stepped off and it became Hester. A woman  named Martha Medlin had come to Martha and her daddy, they lived in  a dugout, and she started first school at Martha. So they named the  Martha community for Martha Medlin. I   m not real sure how Southside,  when Elmer and all those other communities out there consolidated,  there   s a really good story about all those pioneers there. They always  told me this story at Humphries that there was a fishing hole on Red  River that was so deep that there was catfish in there that probably  weighed two hundred pounds. You heard that story, too, didn   t you?  Yeah, we always heard those stories.  And you know, someone caught a big old catfish down there, so I guess  maybe they were telling the truth. (Laughs)  So Hester was a woman   s name.  Hester Young.  What about Blair?  Blair was named   the Zen family, it was called Zen first. Zen family  came and settled there. Joe Zen and Hal Zen were the sons of the  original man. Then it was named Dot for a while, D-O-T. I guess it was  a combination of those little places. When Oklahoma became a state in  1907, they passed a law that every section of land would have   one  8  L. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  sixty acres in every section would be set aside for schools. School land  existed and you could lease it. Just about three years ago, somebody got  the bright idea to sell that school land to finance, what, I don   t know.  I   ve never found a legislator that can tell me. They sold off probably  every bit of that school land. I never thought it was fair because it was  bringing in ninety-eight dollars a student to every school. I would ask  our legislators and they would say,    Oh, it was before my time, I didn   t  have a thing to do with it.    So pass the buck.  What was the name of the school you attended?  The school that I went to was Martha, and then I went to Hester for four  years and then graduated. They lost the high school, so I went to Martha.  Martha was a combination of fifty-two school districts in this county.  Right now, there are six schools left in the county. They   ve all joined  together. It was really interesting. We had a man here who was county  superintendent. I   ve lost his name. He did a lot of research on that and  found all those little communities. They have it at the museum if you  want to get it.  Okay. How many people did you graduate with?  Twenty-nine, and I   m the only one living.  Really? And what year was that?  1935. Right in the middle of the Depression years.  Was there any dust in this area from the dust storms?  Oh, lord, honey. We lived with dust storms. When National Geographic  was down and talking with some of us about it, they kept trying to get us  to say that it was horrible, that we had terrible lives. We didn   t know  that. We grew up with it. The dust was terrible, you just shut your doors  and stayed in and you didn   t go out. The years that were dusty were bad  and we had a hard time, but we grew everything we raised. Raised  everything that we ate. So we didn   t have lack of food. We had love, and  church was the center of our lives. So actually, we didn   t know we were  having a hard time. I thought everybody wore overalls. Everybody wore  homemade dresses.  What would you do for entertainment?  We had hayrides. They   d take horses and they   d put bales of hay and  throw quilts over it, and every kid in the community would go on the  hayride. Or they   d have taffy pulls. Do you know what that is? It   s a  9  L. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  candy you make. Two people can pull it and it comes out about that big.  Then you break it. It   s really good, vinegar based. Or we   d have ice  cream socials. Everybody would come to your house and bring  homemade ice cream. We had delivery from an ice company in Mangum  or Blair or Altus, and they   d bring you twice a week great big hundred  pound blocks of ice and put them in your icebox. That   s how we had ice  to make ice cream. You   d go out to the tank and break the ice and get  the ice to make your cream.  Where did you go to town on Saturdays? Did you go somewhere?  Yes, if we could get to town. If the roads weren   t too muddy, everybody  would go to town and park around the square and visit until night. That  was fun, and I thought it was so much fun because I   d get a nickel to go  to the drug store and get a little tin cup with a little tin spoon, and that   s  where we got our ice cream.  Was that Hester that you were going to?  We went to Mangum. If we wanted shoes or clothes, we usually came to  Altus. Altus had such an interesting history during World War II. What  was the guy   s name, the movie star? He was here. He was stationed at  Altus Air Force Base. Every Saturday night, he would go down and go  around the square entertaining people. George Gobel. That   s how he got  his start. He was in the Kiwanis Minstrel Show, and he told on television  that he got his start with Nina Grimmett in the Kiwanis Minstrel Show.  The Kiwanis would have a show every year. You might remember that  this happened up until 1967 when the NAACP said they   d march on us  if we had another one. Of course, it was in blackface. The Kiwanis  raised money and they used the money for kid   s programs for boys.  Every summer, they   d take them to camp for a week. Somebody would  take them, and whoever had a skill would    I wrote the Minstrel  programs for seventeen years and just loved them. Nina Grimmett  directed them, so we had quite a thing going. We had some great  entertainers, like George Gobel and people that actually became famous.  Singers.  Can you describe those a little bit?  The programs?  Yes.  Well, they were on current events. I know one time we wrote on LBJ,  and we had a beautiful backdrop of his home in Texas. We even brought  a Cadillac car out when he took them riding with his beer cans and we  10  L. Wilson  ripped everybody to pieces that was a political figure, and wrote a lot of  jokes about it. One time, some man walked out in the program and took  his kids with him. He said to my husband the next Friday,    How can you  stand to have your wife sit there and listen to those stories?    He said,     Listen to them? Heck, she writes them.    (Laughter) But the Kiwanians  were a good bunch of people. I don   t know anyone in the club, now.  Times have really changed.  You know, the hardest thing in the world for anyone is to change and to  accept change. It   s easier to stay the way you are. So I have seen  Oklahoma go from democrat one hundred percent   I mean, Jackson  County certainly   to all republican. That   s all right, that   s a choice. You  have a right to be what you want to be. But it startles me that all the  farmers that got rich off those FDR programs are now so solidly  republican. It   s just the change that you have to accept. I think morally, I  have been shocked to pieces because I   m three generations too old for  this world. When I see things that we used to send kids to the office for,  now, everybody accepts them. I don   t know that that   s good. I have been  alarmed about the change in religion because I don   t see churches  growing. I see them decreasing. At least they are here. I think we   re  really missing a bit when we take prayer out of schools. I used to have  someone train to give the prayer at every football game. Now you can   t  do it, and that shocks me, and I   m concerned about it. I think maybe  we   re getting so easy in raising our kids that they   re losing the value of  respect. Maybe responsibility, because workers don   t come to work, and  don   t call you and tell you, and they stay off sick. We just never could  do that.  So I think we are losing some values that were important, but we have  some mighty bright kids out there now. Television has made a  tremendous impact on America, and we knew it would. I think a  criticism would be when we started taking federal money for schools.  Because with federal money comes federal control. I   m not real sure that  No Child Left Behind program and some of the testing programs they   re  doing now is giving a teacher an opportunity to teach. She teaches to the  test, rather than to values. They don   t have time for it. We have some  great teachers and we have some great schools, but maybe we   re putting  too much emphasis on cell phones and internet. We go overboard on  something before a situation will right itself, and I think that   s what  we   re seeing now. You drive down the street and everybody is on a cell  phone. Somebody walks into your house and the phone rings and they  talk the whole time they   re there instead of visiting and fellowship.  They   re on the phone. But that   s good, too. It   s good we have them.  Well, going back to your career. After you got married, where else did  you teach?  11  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  Honey, I started teaching at Washita and taught English and speech. I  learned how to train kids to win speech contests. We started winning and  I started liking it. 4-H club was one of the joys of my life. I gave free 4-  H club lessons to any kid in the county that wanted it. I trained all those  kids from Southside, and they went up there and won everything they  entered. So it was fun to do that because you gave them an opportunity  to do what they wanted to do. Then I taught eighth grade at Blair. I had  to teach an agriculture  class . You had to teach whatever the  superintendent told you to teach. I had an agriculture class of eight boys  and we planted a garden and grew the prettiest weeds in the county. I  taught English until I came to Altus and I started classes in drama. The  second year I was here, I got the superintendent to let me write a book, a  syllabus, on personality development. I taught that for fifteen years. It  was a great course. I loved it. I did the first school musical, junior high  school musical.  At Altus?  Yes. We did Peter Pan, and we did Charlie Brown. We did everything. I  have spent many, many hours writing speeches and resumes for people  that needed them. I   ve taught forty-two years, and half the people in  Altus have been in my class. So that is the most wonderful thing. When  you start turning fifty, you have all these friends and lots to do. Slowly,  slowly you change. Your friends leave or your friends die or your  friends move to be around their kids, and when you get my age, there   s  nobody left. So I   m out of friends. They   re all former students and  they   re wonderful to me. But that   s a change I don   t like. After I quit  teaching, I started volunteer work. I volunteered at the museum for ten  years and loved every minute of it.  And that   s the Museum of the Western Prairie here in Altus?  Yes. Then I worked like a son of a gun. I gave thirty-seven speeches to  get the Vo-Tech in and they wanted to name it for me, and I said no. So  they named the symposium room for me. I have an award at the high  school that they give and my name. It   s the Outstanding Student Award.  That   s nice. It   s fun. I was Oklahoma Teacher of the Year in 1978.  What year did you retire from teaching?  1982.  Did you know that you were going to attend college when you were  growing up and going to school?  12  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  I had a sister who was a teacher that lived    She was the first woman  principal in Altus. Her name was Amenta Smith. She was the first  principal here, woman principal. That was during World War II. So I  had a role model.  Had she attended college?  She had her master   s degree from Southwestern. So it was an inspiration  thing there for me. I loved teaching school. There were very few times  that I ever went to school that I wasn   t overjoyed to be there. I couldn   t  wait for the first day of school to start to see who I could get for  students. I   d sit at the first of the line at the table to enroll them and grab  them and make them take speech. So they didn   t have much choice.  (Laughter) I had a lot of great, wonderful students that have been  through. Jennie Buchanan over at the museum is certainly one of them.  It has just been a pleasure to teach school.  I know attending college was a lot cheaper, then, but it still cost money.  How were you able to finance your education?  Well, it was Depression and we didn   t have money. So my dad sent me  one semester to OCW and then he called and said,    We can   t send you  anymore.    So I went over and got a job working in the dining hall. I was  so spoiled that I   d never even washed dishes. I had to do dishes and  serve tables for a year and a half to get through school. I learned an  awful lot through the experience. Then I had met a man at Weatherford,  an older man that was a book salesman, that became a mentor to me and  a really good friend. He became the book store manager at OSU. He got  me a job in the Student Union. I worked in the Student Lounge for two  years. That was great because you knew everybody on the campus. You  were into everything. I had NYA  National Youth Administration . It  was one of Roosevelt   s Youth Programs. I got eighteen dollars a month  to use, and I got my meals free at the Student Union for working there.  So I really put myself through college and loved it because I had an  opportunity to do a lot of things I would have never done. We planned  parties for kids and I got that kind of challenge. I had such good teachers  all the way through that just    I started taking private speech lessons at  Blair. They called them expression lessons, then. When I was ten years  old, my dad would unhook the plow and took me over to Blair for  private speech lessons and we   d pay with cream or a dozen eggs or  something. That   s the way we paid for it. So I had speech all my life.  That   s the way Larry Derryberry   s mother paid me. She had so much  pride, she couldn   t think about Larry coming to me for free, so she   d  dress me a chicken or bring me a mess of green beans or make my son a  cake. So that   s the way you did things in those days.  13  L. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  I think it was rather interesting. I loved to read and learn early. I was not  smart. I devised a way to do what I needed. A man in our community  was educated and he had a lot of books. He lived about a half mile from  me. He   d let me come in that house at any time because no one ever  locked doors. I could get a book at a time. I read books that were far  above my comprehension. You know, Shakespeare, whatever, so I could  have books to read. Go into the Mangum Library and check out a book  and you could have it for two weeks. If the roads were so bad we  couldn   t get in, I   d walk to the mailbox and the postman would take that.  I   d take him a can of cream and he   d take my book back to the library.  (Laughs) So I got to read always. Saturday Evening Post, I just couldn   t  wait for Saturday Evening Post to come out because it had a good story  in it every time.  What years did you teach at Southside?  I taught English.  What years?     53-   55. It was really not a very good school whenever I was teaching  down there. We didn   t have any library at all. He put me in charge of the  library. I bet there weren   t twenty-five books in that library. Later, they  got a library. They got funds through the State Department. The Library  Department started sending in books. One of the things I worked the  hardest on in Altus was getting that library here. It   s a four county  system and it is wonderful. Had a little tiny library in a brick building  over on Broadway. We adopted three kids, and the day I adopted the  kids, the first thing I did was take them to the library to check out books.  They laugh now that I checked out, Manners Can Be Fun, Grammar  Can Be Fun. (Laughter) They remember those books.  How old were your children when you adopted them?  I   d been teaching probably eleven years, then. We got little girls, nine  and eleven. That   s pretty old. They had a lot of baggage, and it was just  so much fun. Five years later, we got a little boy. I took him to get his  book and he checked out Bimbo the Elephant. He thought that was the  funniest book he   d ever read. He said,    Call me Bimbo.    (Laughs) So  now he frowns on being called Bimbo, but the little toot ended up being  All-American three times in the decathlon. Do you remember that? He  was quite a little runner. He graduated in    72, so he came out a lot later  than you.  What are their names?  14  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  R. Wilson  Herron  June, Cecilia and James. They   ve all been teachers. James is a coach in  Texas and Cecilia taught for years and June taught childcare here for  years. So they had good careers. The girls are retired. Bimbo is hoping  to retire.  Well, a little bit more about Altus and this area. So the Air Force Base  came in in the fifties. How did that affect the community?  Well, our communities jumped from about seven thousand to as high as  twenty-five thousand. It   s down right now because with the last base  closure, we lost a whole group of men. What   s out there right now is  pilots, and most of them are officers. We   ve lost nearly all the enlisted  men. There are pilots that are training for the C-17s. We went from three  or four different kinds of bases and with every one, there would be a big  drop in sales and it would really affect the economy of Altus. But it has  been a boom to Altus and it was such a thrill to get those Air Force kids  in because they   d traveled all over the world. They brought a lot of  information with them. Altus gave them permanence and family and  dedication that    So many of them have liked it that they   ve stayed.  They   ve retired here. Our church is all Air Force widows.  Did the base start with World War II?  Yeah, it started with World War II. It was an Army air base, then. The  bombing was    41. It started in    42. It was in tents. There were no  sidewalks. It was muddy as can be, and then they started building. They  had a subsidiary base at Frederick. They had a landing practice field at  Blair. They were flying B-29s and they brought in a great    I wasn   t  living here, then. I was at Mangum. It really caused an influx of people  and they didn   t have places for them to live. There were a lot of people  that had servant quarters that they lived in. They changed that into  apartments. Then they began to throw up those houses that were  concrete, you know, that they could put up in a hurry. Started whole new  additions. Like Walter Hinton, he built this edition, Indian Hills  Addition, but he built about five additions in Altus. One of them was  Title IX down by the railroad tracks. The town just boomed and the  economy boomed. When the war was over, then, all the guys came home  from World War II with dedication to drink up every bit of whiskey they  could find, and to marry, and to start businesses. You go back and you  check it and nearly every one of those World War II veterans did just  exactly what Tom Brokaw said they did. They made it successful in  whatever they did, whether they were farmers    Altus became the  largest irrigated farming county in the United States. We   ve got big  farmers.  Speaking to Randy  Your dad was one of them. They have  really done well and they became doctors and became lawyers. They got  15  R. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  the free schooling, veteran   s schooling. Went into whatever profession  they wanted. It was interesting to watch it, but it was a group of really  dedicated people. The amazing thing, the people that had been in the war  didn   t want to talk about it. It was really a bad experience for them.  They just don   t mention it.  Just wanted to move on.  You could hardly get a story out of anybody that had flown a B-29 or  anyone that had been in a prison camp. I   ve tried it and they just didn   t  want to go there.  When you were volunteering at the museum, you said you   d done some  oral histories. Who were your oral history interviews with?  Well, I interviewed Ray Holsey, who was killed in a plane crash about  three weeks after I interviewed him. He and somebody named Holdrege,  Curtis Holdrege, were our first heroes here  in Altus . Ray was shot  down on an island. He stayed on that island, which one side was  Japanese and the other side was natives. They helped him build a  runway out of cane and get that B-29 up. So he was a hero for that. I  don   t know what Curtis Holdrege did. I   ve forgotten. I had his story, but.  I interviewed Ursa Geiger who was in the high school band when they  brought a guy here to be the band director,  Dick Jewell . He named the  Altus band,    That Altus Band.     Was that Don Levitt?  No, Don was after him, but Don Levitt was great. It was before him. But  the boys were riding toward Lawton out by Ozark School and a man had  a flat tire. They stopped to help him fix it. He said he was a band  director and he was going to New Mexico to apply for a job. They said,     Come to Altus, we need a band director.    So they took him to the  superintendent of schools, Mr. Steel, and he hired him on the spot. He  started that Altus Band that was so famous and won everything at the  contests. That   s all over their record at the museum. Jennie will be great  to help you with anything you need.  What else should we talk about?  Do you want to hear early days? The Dust Bowl experience? It started, I  guess, in probably about 1929. The stock market crashed overseas and  when it crashes overseas, it seeps into the United States. This economic  downsize started over in Italy and places over in Europe. It eventually  worked its way into the United States. Banks started closing. Altus had  three or four banks. One of them closed its doors one afternoon and  16  L. Wilson  Herron  R. Wilson  Herron  never did open. Everybody that had money in it lost a great deal of  money. Like ten thousand dollars was a life savings. That was a lot of  money if somebody lost that. Some of the banks were able to reopen.  The first time we had a dust storm, we didn   t know what it was. We  looked to the north and we saw all these clouds rolling in and we  thought it was the carbon plant at Shamrock. You couldn   t tell at first  what it was. Then it would hit and it hit with power. It would roll in and  you   d see it coming. We took the curtains down off the windows. We  rolled up the rugs and put them up so that you could    It was powdery  dirt. I have the cutest poem that I wrote one time for a program. I still  remember it, do you want it?  Yes.  Today, Kansas soil blew in.  It was New Mexico the day before.  Texas may call tonight,  leaving sand upon the floor.  But I   ll not leave Oklahoma,  I   ll tell you the reason why.  I want to stay and keep watching  the rest of the world go by.  And that   s just about the way it happened, too. You would milk the cows  and do everything you had to do outside because you couldn   t even see  to get to the barn. They   d dismiss school early and let those old trucks  get home. It would be about three days that that storm would really  blow. The point was how to get all that dirt out of the house. You could  hardly sweep it out, you almost had to mop it out. But you had food, so  you were okay. You were in trouble if you had to go to town to a doctor  because you, honestly folks, could not see from here to the park. We had  one after those dust bowl years when I was teaching at Southside and  they let us out early. It must have been in 1955. Coming home, I could  not see from one telephone post to another. You remember your folks  talking about that?  Yes, I remember one dust storm, even in my lifetime.  It really blew about three days and it   s kind of frightening because it  roars. We would hang our wash on the line, because we didn   t have  washing machines. You had to pick a day that looked bright and sunny  and you watched that cloud to see if the dust was rolling in so you could  get your clothes off the line. We made lye soap in a great big old black  pot out in the yard. Let it sit and it was made out of scraps from meat  17  R. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  and a can of lye. It was so gentle that you could wash your best fabrics  in it. But it was made out of lye, I don   t know how it happened. We had  orchards and we   d can our fruit and had the best food.  We usually kept women school teachers at Hester when we lived there.  We had a bathtub, and not many people did. So they stayed with us and  my mother would set the table with china every night. She had a three  course meal, but everything came from what she had made. The most  interesting thing we probably did on the farm was kill our own hogs.  Everybody would get together and bring their hogs and they   d hit them  in the head with an axe cruel, then they   d put them in a great big old vat  of boiling hot water and had them tied on a pole. They would scrape the  hair off of them, and then hang them back up and de-gut them. Then  they would have a big old door over saw horses and they would scrub  that and put the meat on it, and then they   d cut it up into the pieces. I  don   t know how the winters were colder than they were now, but they   d  have a big meat box. They   d salt down the hog. When you wanted some  fresh meat, you   d go get out a pork shoulder or a ham, and it was good  eating. They made red eye gravy that went with it, that had a taste all of  its own. You can   t make it now because they don   t have that kind of  meat.  Did they store that in the smoke house?  Yes, they had smokehouses. Ours was in the garage. Yeah a  smokehouse, a lot of people had that. They   d hang the sausage and  they   d make little bags about that long and about that wide and they   d  put the sausage in that. You had to use the tenderloin and the liver and  stuff like that right away because there was no way to preserve it.  So what was red eye gravy?  Red eye gravy was water    You   d cut the ham and off the grease from  the ham, you   d add water and salt and pepper. It was greasy, but it was  good with homemade biscuits. Everybody made their own bread.  Getting a loaf of bread from the grocery store was a real treat. And a can  of tomatoes that wasn   t a home can just tasted so good.  What were some other things your mother would make?  She made all kinds of cakes and candies. During the war, there was no  sugar, so she made them out of Karo. One of the most interesting things  we did during World War II was the teachers had to issue books for  everything, from gasoline, shoes, lard    You had to go in and sign up  for it to get books. You   d have one pair of shoes and that was it. The  gasoline, they took all the tires, the rubber industry for the war, and we  18  L. Wilson  R. Wilson  had synthetic tires. You could only drive thirty-five miles an hour going  to Oklahoma City. It took forever to go there. We made do with what we  had. Sugar was a real treat. And nylon hose. Man, you couldn   t get  nylon hose. The gals went bare legged. We had air base guys that flew to  Mexico. I happened to know one and he   d buy me nylons in Mexico and  bring back. Then I   d take them and put them in a fruit jar and seal it to  keep them for special occasions, like my wedding. But all those things  you remember.  The thrill here in Altus, they tell me when I interviewed Lloyd English  (he was a school superintendent), he said growing up, they   d go down to  the square and there was a wall around the courthouse square about that  high. They   d sit out there at night and visit until ten o   clock and then it  was time to go home. (Laughter) The Ku Klux Klan was a big deal after  World War I. Just about everybody joined it because they thought it was  the thing to do. It wasn   t so much to get blacks, it was to control  problems. I know there was a man at Hester that drank up everything  that he took in. The kids were needy, and so they went to him and said     We   ll tar and feather you,    the Ku Klux Klan did,    If you don   t stop  drinking.    That cured him. He became an Al-Anon right away.  I remember one occasion that I saw the Ku Klux Klan. I was six years  old and we were at church on Sunday night. The back door opened and  in walked twenty-five men in their sheets. I was terrified. They walked  to the front of the building and gave the preacher fifty dollars. I saw that.  Forever I saw that. We had a case here in Altus, the man that built the  Presbyterian Church was a big worker, but he was head of the Ku Klux  Klan. He had his office up over Hickerson Furniture Store. He heard  about this,    I was dating this girl who was married.    They   d gone to  Olustee to a church meeting. He got the group and they went down to  Salt Fork Bridge and waited for him and when he came back, they got  him out and just beat that guy to pieces. He sued and all of this is in the  records at the courthouse. This guy at the museum and I went down and  got all that out. But Louetta Chesser, the director, wouldn   t let us use it  as long as anyone was living. There were members of that Presbyterian  Church that remembered how active he was and how he came to the  church and so we never could publish it, but it   s a good story. The  Hickerson kids grew up seeing those Ku Klux Klan costumes and a  casket up there. Finally, Harold Hickerson got tired of having it up there  and cleaned the room out and took it all home. So those kids used those  costumes to play with.  Wow.  What ever happened to the costumes?  19  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  R. Wilson  Herron  R. Wilson  Herron  R. Wilson  Herron  They probably threw them away when they sold that big old house to  somebody. Honey, I   m kind of running out of stories to tell you.  (Laughs) You   re doing great. When they came into your church, why did  they pay the preacher fifty dollars?  Because nobody had any money. They were helping him out. Like you  give tithe or whatever to your church and it was great, but it was scary.  We always thought my dad was one of them, but he said he was sick and  he didn   t go to church that night, and he never did that. He never  admitted it. But when I was teaching at Mangum, I had a superintendent  named Fraker that said he was young and he joined it. He said that he  got out of it when he realized that merchants were using it to handicap  their competitors. So he said he realized it was bad. He went on to  become head of the Oklahoma Historical Society, Elmer Fraker. He had  quite a story about being in the Ku Klux Klan. So when I   d come to that  part in history  classes , he   d always come over and lecture.  We enjoyed college. Those were the best years of my life. We danced to  big name bands. OU was always bringing big name bands in and there  was a place in Oklahoma City that Bob Wills came to. Country as he  could be, but boy, what a show he put on. It was fun to do that. And then  at the end of the year, it was the thing to do to go to the Depot area in  Oklahoma City and slum. Go to those places that were really dives. It  was fun to do that. We went to the first    What   s the name of that fried  chicken?  Oh, Eischen   s?  Or Kentucky Fried Chicken?  Not Kentucky Fried. It   s a man   s name.  Colonel Sanders?  No, it was before that. He had a little restaurant in Oklahoma City.  Oh, Beverley   s.  Beverley   s. When they had trouble with a flood, he stayed open and fed  the people in Oklahoma City that were workers. He put in his little  Beverley   s downtown, and it grew into a chain just because that one man  was so kind and generous. He pulled a Bob Tucker and helped  somebody in need. You know, in those days, everybody helped  everybody else. My mother delivered every baby that was ever probably  born for all those years that she could in the Hester community. They  20  L. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  called her Mammie because she was there to help. If you had food and  no one else did during the Depression days, I   d have to take an old  gallon shirt bucket and go down to some people that lived a mile from us  to take milk every day, or whatever bread was leftover, because they  didn   t have food.  Dad hired a man to work on the farm for a dollar a day. That   s how he  survived. All the programs came out like they killed off hogs to cut  down the production. They plowed up cotton and the first payments  came out to farmers for layout land. It   s still in. I don   t know whether  it   s a good thing now or not. It may have outlived its purpose, but  everything had a name like NYA  National Youth Administration , CCC   Civil Conservation Corps , and when I started teaching school, my male  students, several of them joined CCC and they   d send them to these  camps like they built  Lake  Lugert. They built the stadium out here and  so many buildings that are still there. All those buildings there around  the park were built by CCC and they   d pay so much, maybe like twenty  dollars a month, and they   d send them home to help support their  parents. It was wonderful. And then, of course, they got in the service,  and most of these were kids who   d never been out of Jackson or Greer  County. Here they were stuck in Corregidor or Guadalcanal or  someplace, and what an experience it must have been for those young  guys.  I wrote about twenty people all through the war. Former students,  because they loved to get mail. It was just something to do. The air mail  was done on real thin tissue paper. They   d cut    If it shouldn   t be said,  they   d cut it out. They censored every letter that came in and out. I took  a bunch of them and put them in the museum that had a lot of things that  had been taken out of my letters. Didn   t even think they were dangerous,  but who knew?  Did you listen to Roosevelt   s Fireside Chats on the radio?  No.  Did your parents talk much about politics?  Well, I don   t even mention it because I   m a Yellow Dog Democrat, and  everybody around me is Republican and everybody I know is  Republican. I will not argue religion or politics. But you   ve got a right to  be what you   re going to be. My dad was really into it, and it was a  democratic state. Every time there was an election, the politicians would  all come into the courthouse. You would go hear the speeches. We came  down here one time to hear Alfalfa Bill Murray. He was parked in front  of the old Schaffer Hotel. He was in the back seat. He would go cut out  21  L. Wilson  Herron  the toes of a new pair of socks and stick his foot out the window so  people would think he was a common man. He was back there taking a  nap. But we got to see a lot of people, and I have been privileged to  know    My husband was a champion athlete and he knew every coach  in the state. I   m not kidding. He and his brother Jack, he   d played for  OSU when Mr. Iba was there. Earl would get these athletes that would  come through high school. He   d see a good prospect and he   d call Mr.  Iba and he   d interview them. We really enjoyed doing that. At one time,  Southside had a superintendent (I   ve lost his name). He went to  Northern Oklahoma and starting managing a big nursing home up there.  But he was famous, and he sent every good baseball player from  Southside. Got major leagues. Tony Reisinger and Johnny Reisinger,  you know who all of them were. He really did a good job of sending  them to the coaches.  Where was your husband from?  He was from the Mangum area. He had his degree from Central State  and had gone to four or five colleges, so we got invited to more  alumni    I get so many alumni invitations from the many schools that  I   ve taught. (Laughs) I had the cutest experience about two years ago.  The Class of    55 was having a reunion over here at the motel. They  called and asked if I   d come. There were seventeen in that class that  year. They remembered the skit that they did in 4-H club that won state.  They did that skit for me. I had written it, and they got the biggest kick  out of doing that. (Laughs) It was Betty Fern McGee and nearly all of  the boys were superintendents of schools somewhere. They had really  made it big.  You couldn   t remember this, but there was a little girl named Yvonne  Spence that went out there to Southside. She and Larry Derryberry were  state winners of the 4-H club and went on to national. When Larry  Derryberry gave his first speech, he was twelve years old out at  Humphries. The first day of school, here this little boy with his foot in a  sling met me at the car to welcome me to Humphries. He said could he  help me carry my books in. We became instant best friends. It   s still that  way, and he calls me just about twice a month. We chat and chat. Of  course, he   s done so well. I   m really proud of him, but no more than I  am a lot of them. Anyway, he was twelve and Leonard Solomon, the  county agent, said,    They   re having a county meeting here, let   s let  Larry Derryberry emcee it.    So the head of KWHW said,    You can   t  introduce a United States Senator with a twelve year old boy.    Leonard  said,    Leave it to Ms. Herron and me. We can do it.     We got ol    Larry, we got him trained. That morning, the auditorium was  absolutely packed with parents and kids from two or three counties. It  22  L. Wilson  Herron  was fogged over and Senator Kerr   s plane couldn   t land until an hour  later. Solomon was on one side of the stage that I was on. We were  feeding Larry jokes. He   d run out and tell them. He just had them in the  palm of his hand. He was so cute. And in walks Senator Kerr. He is this  huge man with this booming voice, and Larry came about to his beltline.  Larry said,    They tell me Senator Kerr is a big man in Washington, but  golly, you look big from here, too.    So Senator Kerr pulled a dollar bill  out of his pocket and said,    Son, let me be the first to contribute to your  campaign.    He backed Larry constantly and wanted him to go as a page.  The Derryberrys wouldn   t let him go. Larry had health problems,  always. He couldn   t do it. They didn   t want him to. He wasn   t old  enough. But he had him come and make an ad for him when he ran for  the Senate again.  Probably, in my opinion, the best politician and the one who did the  most for Oklahoma was Senator Bob Kerr. There   s just no doubt in my  mind that he did because he had Oklahoma in his heart. He was in there  with LBJ and Sam Rayburn and people that had power. Senator Kerr  was probably the top man, politically. Could get things done and he  knew how to do it, with the Kennedys and everybody. Died young, but  good stories from him and I put some of them in the museum. I taped  Nina Grimmett. She was telling how when Bob Kerr died, he had rooms  in the Skirvin Hotel   as well as homes everywhere   and the family  asked Nina Grimmett to come up and do a session of sitting. She and  George Nigh   s mother had helped him get elected governor. They were  with American Legion. So they went up to stay with him and they said  that they were sitting in there with him and no one was in. It was raining,  it was a bad old day. They said a woman came in, very poorly dressed.  Got out of a taxi and asked if she could view Senator Kerr   s body. They  said,    Of course.    So she went over and she just cried and cried. She  said,    Senator, nobody ever but you and me will know what you   ve done  for me, old buddy,    and left. They were curious about the woman, so  they asked the family who she could have been. They did research on  that for a long time and finally tracked through the taxi driver. Kerr had  put her son through college. She was so impressed. It   s stories like that  that I love. But they   re not my stories.  Well, what has kept you in this area?  I love it. I can   t move. My kids live in Wagoner and they want me to  move. Earl liked it. We made a great living here. People in this town  were wonderful to us and my roots are very, very deep in Southwest  Oklahoma soil. That   s why I like that museum so much. The museum  almost closed three years ago. It did close when they were tearing the  asbestos out. The money was going to Elk City to the  Route  66  Museum and to the historical building. Mr. Blackburn wanted to close it.  23  L. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  They said they were going to. I think Senator, whoever our senator is  now, heard it and he was just furious. He told him,    If you do, you   re in  trouble.    Well, they had a meeting, about three hundred people came to  it and they told Mr. Blackburn,    You just can   t close anything as  important to us as the museum.    It was the second most visited museum  in the state for many years, next to the Historical Society. The reason for  it was several counties, they had puppet shows and they brought all these  grade school kids in from every school around the area. We had a girl  that got a grant to work two years and write a program geared to fourth  graders. It   s over there now, and it   s a beautiful book that she has done  for the museum. Her name was Layla Click. Click Chevrolet, you may  know them. It   s one of their wives. Layla Click. She did, What You Do  and How You Do It. Had tours coming in and we were showing them  how to shoe a horse, how to churn butter, how to do everything. The  museum has been really utilized by air base people. You don   t have a lot  to see or do in Western Oklahoma. This is one of the areas that is for  show. It has been used. They opened about, oh, five or six months ago  with Jennie as the new director. It was so packed with people, you could  not even get in the door. It was really visited and utilized. She   s doing a  tremendous job over there.  I was really impressed. We stopped in on Saturday, and it   s really nice.  She knows what she   s doing and she knows how to get it    She doesn   t  do it, she   s finding people who know how to do it. But it was great to  be   I was on the board, but I enjoyed working at programs with  Louetta. For seniors, I wrote up a thirty-second resume of people over  sixty-five and we broadcast it over radio. Then had an ice cream social  for them out in the backyard. I still see it, when they have obituaries that  they have been chosen to be honored. So they appreciate it.  Yeah, that   s neat.  They like the museum.  Well, what does Oklahoma mean to you?  Oklahoma means people with good work ethics and wherever they go,  wherever they live, they can get jobs because they   re dependable. We  teach that, and we taught it through pioneer values. I sit on my patio at  night and I watch those C-17s going up and down to train, and it just  gives me shivers that we have the base here and that it   s made so much  difference economically, educationally and in every way to our  community. I am so grateful that I grew up in Oklahoma. The heritage  that we have from Indians, the heritage we have from hardworking  people that came in and made the oil industries work and took chances  24  L. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  on oil wells to make big money. Like your guy at OSU that built the  stadium. He has a new book out, by the way, they tell me, that is  wonderful. Have you seen it?  I haven   t read it yet.  It   s his life story and someone read it and told me it was one of the best  autobiographies they   d ever read. What   s his name?  Boone Pickens.  Boone Pickens.  Yes. (Laughs)  What a guy. All of those people have made us what we are, but the old  farmer and the old taxi driver and the old guy that repairs your  plumbing, they made it great, too. And housewives. All those years that  I was teaching, mothers didn   t work very much. They stayed home and  raised their kids and it made a difference. You can do both, but it   s a  tribute to the women. I think we haven   t paid enough attention to our  women that have made Oklahoma history. From Alice Robertson, the  first legislator, all the way up to our new governor that   s the first woman  governor. We   ve done a lot to get where we are. And we changed  attitudes. I grew up with the only negroes I knew worked for us and  lived in a house by  us . So we watched their dishes separate when they  ate with us. We rode on buses  that were  was segregated. We went into  stores in Oklahoma City where they had to wait outside if they were  wanting pharmacy stuff, right here in Altus.  I   ve seen all that. Then, I went through the days of integration and I  think it had more effect on me than anything we   ve ever done because I  had to reprogram my thinking. Some of the most challenging and  wonderful students I ever had were black. But when they integrated the  schools, we had to lower our teaching standards to pick those kids up.  That was not good. Instead of changing their culture, they changed ours.  Listen to the music, listen to the attitudes they have. One of my cutest  stories, I had five black football players in my ninth grade that weren   t  doing anything and I said,    You will write a skit that will make me laugh  or you can   t be in any more programs.    They stayed up all night and  they came back with a skit, Snowblack and the Seven Honkies.  Did it make you laugh?  Oh, yeah. (Laughter) It was funny. They were cute.  25  L. Wilson  Herron  L. Wilson  Herron  What was the black school in Altus before integration?  It was down in that part of town, Lincoln. It was a very low grade  school. They brought a black teacher in from the school and she was one  of the nicest ladies I   ve ever known. Mrs. Jones, and she was great with  those kids. She was great as a teacher. W.C. Davis was the principal  down there. They moved him as a counselor in high school. W.C. was  one of a kind. He was married to a little gal that had been a night club  entertainer in New York City at the    I can   t remember the name of it.  She had a beautiful singing voice. Just a beautiful lady. But W.C. was a  great teacher. We had a black cop here that walked the beats. He  controlled the blacks. We had a teacher that was the public relations for  Altus, Ruth Ferris. Her husband was a judge here. Ruth was one of the  best teachers I ever saw. If she saw a problem about to arise over  integration, she handled it. She got Josh Telford, the black cop, and they  worked together and they solved so many of our problems. Integration  went very smoothly.  I always felt so sorry for the kids because they walked in and people  were ready to accept them, and they moved in like white. Then they got  hurt. I just couldn   t stand it when they would be segregated against or  kicked out of parties or got hurt because they were trying to date a white  girl, and it really created problems. But I learned to respect them and  love them dearly. I don   t even think about it, now. But it takes a lot of  changing in your mind when you   ve grown up with that. Here I was with  a momma who had a slave that lived with them and took care of them all  the years they were growing up. Then I   m teaching them and associating  with them. It   s just a problem of adjustment. That   s part of our change.  When history is written about you, what would you like for it to say?  That I gave it my best shot. That I cared, and I grew up in a family that  religion was very important to and God was certainly a part of our lives.  With a mother who was the best lady. I went to sleep at night hearing  her prayers as she knelt right by her bed, and that kept me from doing a  lot of mean things I   d like to have done. I had enough of everything, but  I certainly had love. I didn   t even know I was ugly until I went to  college because being the baby of the family, you know, everybody  thought I was cute. It just was a good life.  I   m so glad that I learned to make a living and I had a husband who was  a worker, and he was a doer. He was hard, but when we adopted the  children, he fell in love with them that day. It took me several weeks, but  he fell in love with those kids that day. He just loved those kids to  pieces. The first day, he cut down cane poles and put a high jump in the  back yard and brought an old mattress down there and Bimbo could     26  L. Wilson  Herron  his legs were almost twisted from malnutrition and he had him high  jumping. And the kid was All American three times in the decathlon, so.  See what a good life it   s been? Everybody has always been good to me.  Now I can   t go to the grocery store and I can   t do a lot of things. Larry  Duffy   s wife, he   s the dean out at the college, lives three doors down.  She comes and buys my groceries every Tuesday. Pam Roudybush  comes down and takes me everywhere. I have former kids call and say,     What do you need? What can I do?    Everyone has just been so good to  me. I   ve had the best of life. Bad and good, I   ve had it all.  Well thank you so much for talking to me.  Well, thank you, and I want to see what you do with your program.  -------  -------  
