 Finchum  Today is July 6, 2010. My name is Tanya Finchum. I   m here in Shawnee,  Oklahoma, to talk with Edwina Kelly, who is an Extension educator. She  began  in the Oklahoma Cooperative Extension Service  in 1987 and  retired in 2007. Her first counties were Lincoln and Okfuskee. Her very  first title was Extension Home Economist. Thank you for having me  today. Let   s start with having you tell us a little bit about your  childhood, where you were born and then we   ll work our way forward.  I was actually born in Galveston, Texas, on Galveston Island. My father  was down in that area because he was working. He was a carpenter. We  were down there for six months, and that   s it. We came back to  Oklahoma to the farm that he used to live on. They homesteaded in the  run of 1896. They homesteaded a farm near Tonkawa, Oklahoma. He  was the manager of Alcorn Elevator, which was in between the farm and  that area. It was near Riverview, the little cemetery. The church that I  attended when I was growing up was called Riverview, and it was just  all in the same kind of square mile. Dad and Mom ran the elevator until  we moved up to the north eighty, which was Dad   s eighty. That   s where  I went to school and all of that fun stuff. I went to Billings to school for  twelve years. I went to the high school and everything in Billings,  Oklahoma.  When did you graduate from high school?  In 1963.  We should back up. Your maiden name was   ?  Simmons.  Simmons. So, it would have been the Simmons Farm?  5  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Yes.  And in high school, were you interested in home economics at that  point?  I was enrolled in home economics, but I was in 4-H. I was the national  4-H club winner in home economics in the fall of 1963, when we went  to Chicago and attended the National 4-H Club Congress. I was a  freshman at OSU during that time.  What was your project that you won with to get to Chicago?  Sewing. Anything with the sewing machine. (Laughs) I don   t cook. I  never did cook. That wasn   t my thing. I sewed. I sewed for the Bellmon  children, and went to high school with Gail and Pat. I sewed for the  public when I was in high school. I made different garments for people  and things like that.  What was your garment that won the championship for that year?  I had a red and kind of burgundy plaid suit. I made my own hat and the  whole nine yards. There   s a picture of it in the scrapbook that I was  donating. I was able to make it with wool for the contest that year.  Do you still have it?  No, I don   t think I have it.  Well, how did you travel from Billings to Chicago?  Train.  By train? Did someone go with you, or did you go as a group?  We went as a group, as an Oklahoma delegation. I did know one girl,  Mique Tautfest. I don   t know where she is now, but I knew her and we  traveled together. She was a year younger than I was.  During your high school years, did you go to  4-H  Roundup at OSU?  Oh, yes. Oh, yes.  Can you share some memories about that? Did you stay in the dorm?  Yes.  6  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Visit the library while you were there?  I   m sure. (Laughter)  Roundup lasted about a week?  I think so. I   m not sure either from that time period.  So at that point, when you were doing Roundup, had you decided that  you were going to go to OSU?  Oh, there was never any doubt about that  The only thing that changed  was I got married, and I ended up in Blanchard. My husband at that time  was Jay Roy Lovelace. We were milking on his father   s farm, and we  lived in a trailer house there on the farm. It was easy to drive to  Blanchard, so I ended up getting my bachelor   s from the University of  Oklahoma.  And what was your major?  Education.  Did you teach before you decided to go back for your master   s?  I didn   t teach until later.  Let   s back up. How did you get interested in becoming a home  economist in Extension?  I have kind of a checkered past. My first husband, Jay Roy, was  murdered when my kids were eight and nine. That was after we moved  to the dairy in Alex, Oklahoma, and that   s where we were living at that  time. He was killed in    79, and at some point we moved to Shawnee.   Daughter: You began your master   s after Daddy died, in Stillwater.  You received that in    83. So we were in Stillwater from   80 or    81 to  about    82. Then you remarried another dairy farmer. We relocated to  Canada, but you finished up your master   s while you were up there, and  received that in    83.  Sorry, the strokes kind of left some of this blank.  So actually my daughter is married now to my step-son who is from  Canada. So when I moved to Shawnee, I married Charles Douglas. We  were married for fourteen years. He passed away. That   s when I met and  married Mr. Kelly. We   ve been married for seven years. I have a varied  marital past.  Sometimes it happens that way. So from Canada, you came back to  Oklahoma?  7  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Yes. Located in Stillwater, and then I got the job with OSU and moved  to Shawnee.  Do you remember much about applying for the job and how the  interview process went?  I just remember being interviewed, and not a whole lot.  Did they let you choose the Shawnee job, or were there other options?  No, I chose Shawnee because I was working in both Lincoln and  Okfuskee counties. So I never did live in either county, really.  Well you weren   t required to, were you?  No, wasn   t at that time.  Do you remember the first day or two on the job?  Not really.  How did you get trained? Was the person before you still there when you  started?  No. Linda Murray had a lot to do with my training and stuff like that. I  think I spent several weeks in Muskogee before I took the job, actually,  in the county.  Since sewing was your specialty, did you do sewing classes when you  first started?  I started quilting and things like that more so than actual sewing. I don   t  remember doing a lot of sewing classes as far as clothing. Like I say,  more of my specialty was quilts and that sort of thing.  What are some of the other subjects you would do in that twenty year  time period?  Lots and lots of quilting stuff. I, at some point, when Charles and I were  married, I started doing these quilts and things professionally. If you  look through the scrapbooks, there are several hundred quilts and things  like that that I made.  Where was your office located?  8  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  I had two offices. I had one office in Okfuskee County, and I had one in  Lincoln County.  Were they in the courthouse?  The one in Okfuskee County was in what they call the Extension office,  which has changed considerably. They   ve actually redone it. When we  were there last week for the retirement of Shirley Wilson, they   ve  changed the front of it. The office is now over on the north side, when it  used to be on the southeast side. It looks really great. Jan Maples is the  Extension educator there now.  And in the other county, was it in the courthouse?  Yes.  In the basement?  No, I had an uptown office. It was on the first floor. It   s in the same  place that it used to be.  Did your customers come to you or did you go to them?  A little bit of both. I had nine extension groups when I retired. They  would come into the office and ask questions and things like that.  Nine is a pretty large number.  Yes. I think there   s only two or three in Okfuskee County to this day.  I   m not sure because I don   t keep up with that county.  Do you remember some of the names of the clubs? One or two?  I   ve got all of them on the quilt  (Laughs)  We   ll look later then. I   m curious because they come up with some pretty  good titles, some of them.  Yes. They are all on the quilt.  Did you help with county fairs?  Oh, yes. Our county fair was held in September each year. We were  required to do the physical set up also. Then we were required to get the  judges, and that was usually somebody that we worked with in another  county or something like that. Jan Maples, again, was one of the agents  9  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  that would help judge. My daughter-in-law is the extension educator in  Creek County right now. My son married her two or three years ago?  Does she come to you for some advice?  Oh, no. She   s pretty independent. She was an educator in other counties  before she came to Creek County. They live in Bixby, Oklahoma.  Well, going back to the fair, did you have a favorite part of the fair or a  least favorite?  Well, I would say once the judging was finished, it was easier. It was  always kind of interesting getting everything judged and that sort of  thing.  A lot of work getting it organized?  Oh, yes. Oh, yes.  And did you have to go to other counties to help them?  Yes. I had to go return the favors.  When you first started back in    87, I   m assuming you had to have your  own car?  Yes.  And did you have to learn the back roads of the county?  Not a whole lot. We worked mostly out of the office.  Times have changed a little bit then from the sixties where they had to   do a lot of traveling .  Yes. I knew where all the major towns were. Wellston, we had a group  in Wellston. I had a group in Agra. The highways were more what I  learned than the actual back roads.  Did you have a favorite part of the job?  I just enjoyed the job. It was just something I enjoyed doing.  Did you do monthly reports or weekly reports?  We didn   t do a lot of narratives. We did mostly statistical things,  10  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  numbers and pushing pencils, as far as the numbers were concerned.  They wanted to know how many questions you   d been asked?  No, it was more statistical. How many contacts we made. We did a small  narrative, but it was just about yeah much  gestures  on the back of the  form. They were more interested in crunching numbers at the time.  When I worked they were having us writing pages and pages and pages.  I guess there   s good and bad points for that. Who was your immediate  supervisor?  Linda Murray was my extension educator  district home economist . My  immediate boss was Wayne Shearhart. Have you heard that name  before?  I have not, no.  Well he was quite a character. Very outspoken, he was a great big guy  and he was quite colorful. He was my boss in Lincoln County. Ron Vick  was my boss in Okfuskee County. After Lincoln County passed a sales  tax or something like that, they wanted me full time. So I went to  Lincoln County full time.  Was there much difference between the two counties work-wise?  No.  Clientele were similar. Are both of those counties pretty heavy farming?  Yes.  Mostly cattle?  Some dairy. Mostly beef cattle and things like that.  And you worked with the adult groups more than the youth.  Yes. I worked partly with the youth because at that time, we didn   t have  a full-time 4-H educator. So I worked with the 4-H club kids and did that  also.  Would you get many phone calls at home after hours?  Not really, because I lived out of the county.  11  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  On a typical day, about how early would you get to work and how late  would you have to stay?  Worked mostly eight to five.  And then occasional weekends with the fair.  Oh, more than occasional weekends.  When the fair wasn   t going on, you   d still be busy on the weekends?  Oh, yes. Judging, just doing whatever.  Did you go back to OSU very often for training or anything like that?  We did quite a bit of that. We went to various other places. We would  have training in other counties, in other locations, but mostly in the  northeast district.  Were you active in the association for the state?  Yes. We had state meetings, and I went to several national meetings. My  husband, Paul, was quite pleased when several of the national meetings  ended up in the same place as the NASCAR races at that time. He said  somebody from OSU liked NASCAR. We went to the race track at  Talladega one time, and that was because the national meeting was in  some place close to Talladega.  And Daytona maybe?  Yes.  Twenty years. That   s a long time to work at one job and a lot of people  contact. Did any of your contacts go into Extension themselves? Like did  any of your 4-H students go into home economics?  I   m trying to think.  Well early on, did you do radio or newspaper?  Never did radio, and very little newspaper.  What did you do to promote your classes and your work?  Well, those things were promoted by newspaper, the classes and things  like that.  12  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  You didn   t have to write articles on    This is how you do this   ?  No. I think Bernadette Stangl   s daughter, Donna, she   s married and I  think she   s an Extension educator. I   m not sure.  Do you remember a Cleo Stiles Bryan?  I remember the name.  You received an award in 2004, the Cleo Bryan Award. So that   s a  pretty good honor.  Yes.  I understand that she was quite a colorful person herself.  Oh, very much so.  You attended OSU in    81,   82,   83, somewhere in there. Did you have a  favorite professor in home economics?  Not really.  Did you do sewing there as well, or did you do something else?  I was mostly interested in money management. I did classes in money  management, and things like that. I taught those after I got my master   s.  In the eighties, that was an important topic, wasn   t it? Still is, but in the  eighties it really was.  Some of the awards I got were in money management.  So, management, quilting a little bit. I know you didn   t like cooking, but  did you do any cooking classes?  I didn   t do very many. I don   t remember. I remember doing food  demonstrations when I was in 4-H, but not cooking classes after I went  to work.  By the eighties, we already had the microwave and the slow cookers. If  you couldn   t answer the question that they were asking you, where did  you go to get your answers?  Well, we had the computers by that time, and you could search online  13  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  and things like that. I had a computer in my office from day one.  And you had a secretary?  I actually had two secretaries  Sue Helm and Pam Neff. And again, we  talk about the segregation thing. Well, my first secretary was a black  girl, and she was at the retirement that we had the other day. Her name  was Pam Neff  Anderson now . So the  question on  segregation, that  question kind of threw me, because it was so much just a normal part of  my day, the contact with the black population, that I didn   t think  anything about it.  That   s unique to that county, I guess. There are not many counties.  Okfuskee  had a larger African American population .  Yes. Like I said, the county agent was (and we called them county  agents at that time) black, and then one of my secretaries in Lincoln  County was black.  In your club work, did you deal with both  populations ?  Actually, I didn   t have a black group. There were some in Okfuskee  County, but not in Lincoln County. So it was a mix. Kind of an odd mix,  in a way.  Was it pretty much accepted? No issues then?  No, no issues regarding that.  Did you work with any American Indians?  Not a lot. No. See, I   m part Cherokee, and my husband Paul is part  Cherokee. We   re such a mixed up race, as far as the Native Americans,  that a lot of people were part something.  I was thinking Lincoln County had Sac and Fox?  Sac and Fox.  Did you do cookbooks?  We did cookbooks. I   ve got one of them in the other room.  For Lincoln County?  Yes, Lincoln. I didn   t work very long in a dual county role, because  14  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Lincoln County wanted me full time, and then they moved to the three  position county and got a full time 4-H professional.  That made a big difference.  Yes, that made a big difference.  When you would go out to the clubs to do talks or whatever, would you  have much equipment to take with you?  Not really.  Not by that time?  No. I don   t even remember carrying a laptop.  And never a sewing machine.  No.  When you were quilting, was it hand quilted or machine?  Hand, yes. Pretty much all hand quilted.  Piecing it by hand as well?  No. Sewing on the sewing machine, but the quilting was done by hand. I  remember, and I still use this lady some, Pam Cronk was one of my  homemakers, and she has a big quilting machine. She does professional  quilting by machine.  There was a time period when crafts weren   t considered part of the  Extension workers    work. So by the time you came along, it was okay?  Yes. In fact, we did arts and crafts shows. They weren   t part of my job,  but now some of the shows were. We would do those, and then we did  them in Colorado and things like that. Logger Days and stuff like that,  all kind of on the side.  Part of work, but not part of work.  Yes. Just kind of a nice sideline.  Was there a dress code or anything like that when you started?  No.  15  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Before they had to wear  skirts  and stuff in the sixties. And you could  wear pants by the time you came around.  Yes. Jeans even.  Really?  Yes. I could dress in what I have on. Especially if I was going to do  physical work.  Which would be what?  Setting up tables, and putting things out at the fair, and that sort of thing.  During the fair, did you have to work all hours?  Yes.  I mean, from closing and opening and closing     Yes. We opened the building and closed the building.  Was it air conditioned?  Oh, yes.  That helps.  Yes.  Did you have to make pies or man a booth?  No.  Just make sure everything else was in working order?  Yes.  Any surprises along the way? Anything that you just weren   t quite  prepared for?  I just kind of took it all in stride. Just, whatever there was to do, do it.  That seems to be a skill that   s important for this job.  16  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  (Laughs) Definitely.  I   m learning that. And you do all sorts of things. It   s not just one in a  day   s time. You cover all sorts of topics and questions.  We actually had a sewing machine in the office, but I carted mine  around more than I did use the office machine. The office machine was  kind of antique-y, so it was easier to carry my own.  Did you service your own?  Oh, yes.  You knew how to take it apart and clean?  Oh, yes.  How did you learn to do that? Just trial and error?  Yes. I don   t remember learning, because I did it all of my career, and in  4-H also. I may have actually done demonstrations on how to clean the  sewing machine and that sort of thing.  Had your mother been active in the homemakers club?  No. Mother wasn   t in a group, but she knew how to do the stuff. She just  kind of encouraged me to follow that pathway.  On the farm when you were growing up, did the county agent come out  and show your dad things?  No. The county seat was Newkirk, which was a considerable distance. It  was the other end of the county from Billings.  I   m just trying to figure out when you would have become aware that  that was even a job, to be a county agent or a home demonstration or  extension educator?  I think it was probably in college because, like I said, I didn   t have that  much. Maybe more in the 4-H area. They may have come out to our club  meetings and that sort of stuff, but again, we were at the other end of the  county, so there wasn   t a lot of contact.  So from the time that you got your bachelor   s in education and you  decided to go to OSU, what led you to pursue the master   s in home  economics?  17  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  The sewing, and then I had to have a degree from OSU. I couldn   t stand  having that red diploma. (Laughter) So I had to have the master   s from  the right university. I bleed orange.  Did you get a scholarship to do that? Did you have to work your way  through?  Well I was married, so that helped. Throughout my career, I won several  scholarships. The Sears-Roebuck Scholarship from National 4-H was the  first one, and then I   ve had several small scholarships.  Home ec.  Home ec.  Do you remember your home ec teacher from high school?  Mrs. Maine. She was a real tall, kind of austere lady. We had to do it  right, or we were in deep trouble. We did some cooking classes and stuff  like that in there.  Did you learn how to hem a dress?  Yes.  How did they do patterns when you were in high school?  Commercial.  How did they fit, to do the fittings? Did you make it and then alter it?  Not a whole lot. Just bought the correct size of pattern because, like I  said, they were commercial by that time.  We don   t see too many of them anymore though, do we? Where did you  have to go to get your fabric?  There were several good stores in Stillwater.  Fabric stores?  Yes.  Besides Hancock   s, I guess.  18  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Oh, yes.  Billings didn   t have  any ?  No. I don   t know that they knew what a fabric store was. We did go to  Hancock   s some, but you could order fabric. I used to order a lot. They  would send you out a sample book and things like that. Then you picked  out fabrics from that sample book, and ordered what you wanted.  When you were teaching quilting, did you do a particular pattern or  more of whatever people wanted to make?  Pretty much whatever people wanted to make. I don   t think we have the  right book out, but it was Thelma   s quilt. She wasn   t a homemaker, but  she did this quilt, and I have pictures of that quilt.  Did you have to teach them how to choose their colors?  More by example, I think.  I know it takes time to figure out which one looks good with which. Make  sample squares before you do the whole quilt.  Yes.  At OSU, by the time you were there, was there a practice house?  It was called a home management house. I participated in that.  When it first started I think it was practice house, and then I think it  switched to home management, but I don   t know what came next.  Something came next.  Have you had to do any programs with the elderly?  I did a lot of programs, actually, talking to the senior citizen   s centers.  Went to those and did the money management classes and things like  that.  Health and nutrition?  Yes.  In those twenty years, did anything particularly change in the job from  the first year versus the last year?  19  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Mostly what changed was my assignment. The first few months, I was in  dual county role. Then Lincoln County got enough funding to do full-time.  After that I still had, when Wayne and I were doing the job, it was  dual assignment. Then Ross Sestack came. Our first 4-H agent was  Randy Burris. We did 4-H that way. We had three offices, and all of us  were full-time.  It has grown.  Yes. That was probably the biggest change is different assignments.  You learned to work together to do some things. Would it have been  hard for you to get promoted on up the line if you   d wanted to be county  director or whatever the next level would be?  In Lincoln County that wouldn   t have happened.  Why?  Because I was a woman  Mick Jones followed Wayne, and it just wasn   t  done, to have a female.  Has there been one since you left?  No.  There   s probably been a few across the state, just not Lincoln County.  Oh, yes. Just not Lincoln County.  What about Okfuskee?  Nope. They   ve always had    Ron   s been there for    Well he hasn   t  retired yet.  So you would have had to move out of the county if you wanted to get  promoted.  Yes. Susan has served as county director for a while, my daughter-in-law.  In what county?  She   s been in Creek for years. I think she was county director when she  was in Seminole County. She has served as county director. That was  20  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  never an option for me.  From all of my interviews, it seems like the group is pretty tight knit. You  network with the counties that touch your county, at least, and know who  to get in touch with if you need help with something. Then the  conference was once or twice a year?  The state conference was once a year with everybody, and it was in  January.  Bad weather month.  Got you out of the county, and it was not a good travel day, but once you  got to Stillwater you were in pretty good shape.  Probably had it in January because work wasn   t as busy.  There wasn   t as much going on in the office.  That makes sense. And then national would have been   ?  National was held at different times.  And you got to go to a few of those?  Yes. I even served as a state officer and a national officer.  You learned a few things, and would bring it back to the state?  Oh, yes.  Your homemakers would come to you to do planning sessions?  Yes. We had monthly meetings.  And then they could pick what they wanted to do? Or the topics they  wanted?  Yes.  And you planned several months ahead of time, or the whole year?  Planned the whole entire year. We did some canning things, but not a  whole lot.  Landscaping? Did you do any landscaping?  21  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Not very much. That was mostly the guys    job.  What about weight loss and weight management?  Some. I didn   t have any homemakers that had any major problems with  that, so we didn   t cover it most of the time.  Leadership skills?  Leadership, yes.  How to do a speech?  Covered that in 4-H.  So if it hadn   t been for 4-H, you probably wouldn   t have come into this  line of work?  Probably not. My 4-H experience, when I went to find a job after my  husband was killed, that was where I started looking was OSU and that  area.  You said that your father had eighty acres?  The family owned the whole three hundred and twenty  acres . It was  the guys that got  land . The sister, they had one sister, and she got  money. But the boys all got an eighty  acre section  of land.  Do any of them still have it? Or is any of it still in the familyl?  No.  So you were raised on a farm. Did you have to kill chickens?  Yes.  You had to yourself?  Yes.  Did you have a certain method?  Put a board or something across their neck and pull the head off.  (Laughs) Kind of bloody, but     22  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  There   s different methods though. I   ve had six or seven different  answers, so I typically ask just because it   s interesting. It had to be  done.  One time, after we moved to the north eighty, we sold eggs, and they  were called a Cornish Cross. We had to go to Perry, which was the  county seat of Noble County. We had to go there every week to sell the  eggs.  How many chickens would you have had then?  Four hundred.  Oh, gosh. That   s a lot of eggs to collect   Yes.  And as an only child, I   m sure you had your share of chores.  Oh, yes.  When did  your parents  move off of the farm?  After I graduated.  So you stayed in Oklahoma for the most part, except for the few years  you were in Canada.  Yes.  So then from Billings to Shawnee, that   s probably a couple of hours.  Three hours, maybe. Spent a while in Alex, Oklahoma. We went from  Blanchard to Alex, and had a dairy farm down there. We milked about  sixty head. We were milking when Jay Roy was killed.  That experience and all those experiences helped, I would think, with the  job, too. You could communicate and relate to  people ?  I was actually a freelance writer for Hoards Dairyman for several years.  You knew the language then.  That   s actually how I met Ginger   s father-in-law, through writing for the  dairy magazine. So I have quite a collection of articles that I wrote for  Hoards Dairyman and various publications.  23  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  Kelly  Finchum  You have a center, but then you   ve done various things around. It   s all  interrelated. Any regrets with having chosen Extension work?  None. Absolutely none.  You   d do it again?  I   d do it again in a heartbeat.  Maybe even to the point of going to OSU first?  (Laughs) Yes, or staying at OSU. Because my first three years were at  OSU. It was only my last year that was at OU.  We   ll take that then. Anything else you want to add before we close out?  If you want to look at some of the stuff, you   re welcome to look at it.  Well thank you for sharing your story. It   s been a fascinating life, I   d  say, so thank you.  -------  -------  
