 Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  My name is Juliana Nykolaiszyn and today is Saturday, August 8, 2009.  I   m with the Oklahoma State University Library and we   re conducting  an oral history project today focusing on the 1930s. Today we   re here  with John St. Clair at the Stillwater Public Library. John, let   s begin by  learning a little bit more about you, where you grew up and tell me  about your family.  I grew up in Perry, Oklahoma. I moved there I guess when I was just  real young, probably three or four at the most.  And where did you move to? Did you move to the city or the farm?  I moved into the town of Perry. Before that we lived in Enid.  Describe the house for me.  The house we first lived in, I can   t describe it real well. I think it was a  small two-bedroom house. It was five boys, my mother and father.  What did your parents do?  My mother, of course, was just a housewife. She did a lot of painting  and such. But my dad worked in the oil field until, I don   t know, I guess  it was before the war, he went to work for the gas company, Apache Gas  up in Northern Oklahoma and then Oklahoma Natural.  So as a little boy, what did you do for fun?  Played.  What did you play?  5  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  We played Shinny. You ever hear of Shinny? It was with a little can,  like an evaporated milk can, and we played just like playing hockey only  we had our sticks. We   d go out in the woods and cut them. And we   d  play football. Of course, what we did an awful lot of back in those early  days, we had a big garden, we raised nearly everything we ate.  Would your mother can a lot of stuff?  She canned nearly everything we ate. We had the big garden. When she  got everything she thought she needed for the winter, well we got to, us  kids, we   d peddle it. We didn   t have no money, there wasn   t anything.  Well how   d you peddle it? Where   d you go?  Just door-to-door.  And would you have much success?  Oh yes. Our biggest customer, as I remember, was a lady that every year  had an order in for a bushel of spinach. And when my mother got all the  spinach she needed, well then she   d sell it. And that first customer we  had was that bushel. But we   d go all over the town, it   s not very big.  And then what would you do with the money?  We   d spend it.  On what?  I guess going to these little   they used to have movies. They had a  couple of theatres downtown but they also used to have these traveling  movies. They   d set up a tent and show movies, it   d be a nickel or  something like that to go see a movie. But we, just like any other boys,  had our games of football. We played some of that, but basketball we  had no place, hardly, to play basketball in the old days so we didn   t play  much basketball. Of course, when I was growing up when I got to  school, my oldest brother was eight years older than I was and he started  wrestling. And as soon as he started, I started. I was the first pee-wee in  Perry. So I   ve been wrestling nearly all my life.  Wow. That   s pretty good.  Yeah, I even went over here to OSU. Art Griffith was the coach, I knew  him from back in high school days. I used to go with the team and  wrestle exhibitions if they had little ones where we went.  6  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  What was elementary school like? How far was it from your house?  It was about seven or eight blocks. I   d run home to dinner every day and  come back. They didn   t have much school program as far as eating at  that time. They did have a small meal where the people that really didn   t  have the time to eat or anything, they fed them. I had to go home to eat.  And then after elementary school?  Well then it was junior high and high school.  What was that like for you?  It was nice. I took part in all sports, mainly wrestling and football. They  didn   t have so many sports in those days, they didn   t. They had track,  just very little. Because they didn   t have coaches and things, they didn   t  have equipment or anything, there wasn   t any money.  Would you travel to other schools to wrestle?  Yes, and they didn   t have school buses most of the time I was going. A  couple of the coaches or the teachers or something would take their cars.  We could take two cars, pack them in there. I sat in somebody   s lap  probably til I got in high school. In high school then we started having  buses. We didn   t have them when I started. Those were pretty lean days.  How so?  Well there wasn   t any money, wasn   t any jobs. We were very fortunate.  My mother did canning and everything, we raised all of our food, and  we even had a pony. That pony is quite a story in itself. My dad   s  youngest sister married Henry G. Bennett, the President of OSU   s son,  Dr. Henry Bennett. He was my uncle. And they had this pony for their  kids. When their kids grew up and didn   t need it anymore, they gave that  pony to us and two of my brothers come over here and rode that pony  back to Perry. So we had a pony. I used to deliver papers on that pony.  Wow.  We had cows, chickens, everything, in town. Everybody did.  So you had a pretty big yard.  Well, yeah it was fair. Two lots is really all we had. But we had lots of  fun. You were talking about games, we used to play with rubber guns.  You probably don   t even know what a rubber gun is.  7  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  I have no idea.  We   d take a piece of wood and make it in the shape of a gun or  something and notch the back of it. Then you   d take the old inner tubes  out of the old cars because the cars always had the plastic, tires were no  good. We   d cut them up in strips about a half inch wide, load them on  the gun, had a string and you could pull the string and shoot. We had a  barn in our yard too where we had our cows and things and we   d play in  that and everything with the rubber guns and shoot each other. We had  lots of fun.  Now did you have milk cows or beef cows?  Oh, it was milk cows.  So you had to do some milking in your time.  No, my brother did that. I wasn   t the farmer in the bunch.  How   d you get out of milking?  I had other chores. We all had chores.  What were some of your chores?  Doing the washing was one of the things.  Like the clothes washing?  Oh yes, an old ringer type washing machine.  How did that work?  It didn   t work very good for me, I didn   t like it. We moved from the  house we first lived in to up across the street from the elementary school  and they played games. We did the washing on Saturday, my little  brother and I. And they were all playing baseball and things across the  street, making fun of us.  It had a wringer on it?  Oh, yes.  And then you would have to hang up the clothes?  Oh, yes. We all had chores. My brother just older than I was, he was the  8  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  cook. My mother for several years had tuberculosis, TB, and she had to  stay in bed. So we had to do the work.  So your one brother was the cook, you were the washer with your other  brother. What were some of the other chores for the brothers?  Oh, it was anything that went on in the house, cleaning the house, doing  everything. We did it all.  Tell me about your clothes.  Well my clothes, we all had, you know, your colored embroidery. Each  one of us had a color and they   d mark them with a little dab of this  embroidery so we   d know which clothes when we washed and put them  away, we   d know whose were what. Of course, I was mostly hand-me-downs.  We had a lot of that. I used to get clothes, which I didn   t like,  from my cousin in Indianapolis. His father was the superintendent of  schools in Indianapolis and they sent me all of his old clothes and part of  them were knickers. I was the only one in town, I think, that had  knickers, which I didn   t like. You know what knickers are?  Yes. You didn   t like wearing the knickers?  No, nobody else had them. It was an experience.  What about shoes?  We had shoes just like anybody else. Of course in the summertime, we  never wore shoes. It was always barefoot.  No problems getting stickers stuck in your feet?  Oh, yes. I got a lot of stickers. All through elementary school I don   t  think when it was warm, I ever wore shoes.  Well would you listen much to the radio?  Some. Of course, I don   t think we had a radio at first, didn   t even have  fans or anything. When we got fans that was a luxury.  How old were you when you remember getting a fan?  I don   t know. I think I was in school. See we never had refrigerators. We  had ice delivered every day to fill the ice box. It   s a lot different from  these kids today.  9  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  Sure it is.  My first bicycle, I bought it delivering papers. Soon as I got to  delivering papers, I think I bought all my clothes and all my spending  money from then on. We all worked.  Would you ever have to collect money for the subscriptions?  We had to collect every week.  Would people try to barter with you?  Not too much because it was just a flat rate. I delivered two papers: the  Tulsa Tribune and the Blackwell Journal. Tulsa Tribune was eighteen  cents a week for the customer. That was the Sunday paper, Tribune  Sunday. And I got I think nine and a half, I think the company got eight  and a half. The Blackwell Journal was eight cents a week with the  Sunday paper. I got a nickel and they got three cents. That   s the way I  made my first money.  That   s a pretty good job.  Well, it kept me going. And then I got to be a janitor at two business  places downtown, for an insurance company and a gas company. I think  I got five dollars a month from the insurance company and eight dollars  a month from the gas company.  What time would you go in?  After school or in the evenings. I used to have to do that with playing  football or wrestling and when we got home from being gone  somewhere, well I   d have to go and clean those up before I could go  home. I   d do that after I got home from wherever we went to play. I used  to have a friend who was a farm boy and they didn   t have any way to get  home. He   d stay with me and he   d have to go help me clean up before  he could go to bed. (Laughs) But it was different.  Did your family have a car?  My mother had one for a short time. Of course, I had one older brother  that used to get it. My dad would be working out away from home and  he wouldn   t give her the keys then she got rid of the car. Yeah, one  brother he was kind of ornery. (Laughter) He kept me from having the  car when I got to be sixteen.  Well that wasn   t very nice.  10  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  No. I run away from home.  Really?  I was two weeks late to get back to start school. I went all over. I went  down to Texas and one little storm blew in, hurricanes. It flooded  everything and I couldn   t get out. Corpus Christi.  Wow. So did you know where you were going when you decided to     No.  You were just taking off to take off?  Yeah. I ended up, I think, first at Carlsbad, New Mexico and went  through the caverns. They was building that air base down there. And, of  course, I had money. I   d worked at farms and things, harvesting. But  when I couldn   t even get a place to sleep, I   d sleep in a box probably  because they was building that air base and everything was full. But I  went from there to Abilene, Texas. My oldest brother was stationed  there in the Army. He had tickets to a USO show that night, he and his  wife. He had a job and he couldn   t go so I got to go and see Rita  Hayworth. Then I took off and went to the coast and that   s when I got  caught.  Now were you hitchhiking along the way?  Oh yes, that   s the only way I   d go.  Was that difficult?  No, not then. That was the only way to go. Real interesting.  How did your family feel about Roosevelt?  That he was quite a fellow. He made it possible for people to work  instead of begging. Perry   s got an awful lot of stuff from that WPA and  CCC. Our stadium and one of our schools, our National Guard armory  and parks, I guess what they call CCC Park. That   s where they built  those boys a place to live and they stayed there and built that park. But  we   ve got bridges all over Noble County, I think here in Payne too, that  the WPA built. And the rural were small bridges. Roosevelt was   I  don   t think there was very many people who was against him.  Did your family, any of your brothers or you work on any of the relief  projects?  11  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  No, we were too young for that.  Do you remember any dirt blowing through the area?  Well there was always dirt blowing. (Laughter)  I know we didn   t, at that time, have full-out dust storms     We didn   t have them like they had in the Panhandle, no.  But did you notice any dirt rolling through?  Oh, it was dirty and everything. But I didn   t notice anything too bad. We  never had it that bad, I don   t think. Most of that was, well it   s just like  later they had that even up in Kay County when the wind would blow  that sand. My goodness it would   that   s even after I come back home  after World War II, it   d blow maybe overnight two or three foot high  along the fence lines, that fine sand and dirt. But we didn   t have that  kind of thing.  Tell me about holidays growing up. What do you remember?  Just like any kid, at Christmas we got gifts. Fourth of July we   d shoot  fireworks. We probably had one thing we played with that most kids  didn   t have. We raised all those gardens and we had the potatoes put up  and the one-inch firecrackers, that was a big one. We used to have lots  of those and we   d go sneak in and get potatoes. We had a bolt the size of  that firecracker. We   d punch a hole in them, put the firecracker in, light  them, and throw them at each other. We used to have some real potato  fights. (Laughter) Of course, if my dad had caught us, we wouldn   t have  had them very long. We never got caught.  Well I know it   s tough as a little kid, but could you tell that people were  having a tough time?  Well I guess, just like a little fellow at school, you go up there and the  banker   s kid had everything and you didn   t have nothing. (Laughs) And  that was pretty obvious.  Do you remember the prices, outside of newspapers, of some common  items?  Not especially.  What a candy bar would cost?  12  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Oh, you could buy candy for a penny. You could get different things but  most of your bigger regular candy bars was when I grew up, getting  bigger it was a nickel. They   re not a nickel anymore. Or you could take  a quarter and go to the movie and have popcorn and something to drink  for a quarter. Other than that we didn   t   of course we didn   t buy  anything because we lived at home and everything.  Well do you have any stories looking back on those days from growing  up that you   d like to share about the 1930s?  Well back in the    30s, that   s when I was in school most of the time. Of  course, I had a lot of fun because I did a lot of wrestling and football.  What schools were the big powerhouses in wrestling and football back  then?  I suppose the big wrestling was Tulsa Central, where Art Griffith was  coach. Like I said, I got well acquainted with him and his boys. You  probably heard of Jack  Griffith , he had all these filling stations here. I  knew all them because I grew up with them, really. And football, well,  we held our own with about all of them. See back in those days there  was only one class. There   s four or five classes now and we all  competed with one another. We used to beat Stillwater, Ponca City, and  all of them. Stillwater wouldn   t hardly play us because we beat them.  Well back then you had to play both sides of the ball, right?  That   s right.  That   s pretty tough.  You ought to wrestle. When you get in shape to wrestle, you can play  football from now on and never get tired.  Really?  That   s why I get disgusted with hearing these commentators when they  used to put some of them at play both ways, you know. Oh and even  now just playing one way how tired they   re supposed to get. Well,  they   re not in shape if they get tired. They don   t work out hard enough.  No, I never had any problem with that.  I guess wrestling gave you good conditioning.  Well, I worked at it. So many of them didn   t. I did pretty well.  13  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Give me some of your favorite wrestling memories.  Well, I guess when I won some tournaments and things. I was All-State  two years, football one year. Those were good memories. I guess the  worst memory was   we was undefeated a couple of years. The last year,  we played Pawnee. Pawnee   s smaller than Perry and they was  undefeated that year and they beat us. And that was one of the big let-downs.  We shouldn   t have been beat but we were.  Well sometimes that happens.  Oh, yes. There was a big fellow from Pawnee I got acquainted with that  was on that team. We got to be pretty good friends.  After high school, what did you end up doing?  I graduated in May, turned eighteen in June. I was sworn in I think in  August in the Army. It wasn   t voluntary, it was draft. They were drafting  men with kids then. There was one, well I knew a lot of the people, the  county engineer of Noble county was one that I went in with, he had two  or three kids. I was still in training here in the states when he was a  prisoner of war. They went and took them, vroom, they was overseas. I  got lucky and I went and took a test down in Oklahoma City, Aviation  Cadet Test, and I passed it so I went to the Air Force. I was in training  about a year before I went over.  Where did you serve overseas?  Europe. And had to stay out over there a couple of years. Of course, I  didn   t have enough points to come home. It was quite an experience  over there.  How so?  Well, of course I flew thirteen missions in twelve days. And then I  transferred to training, which was bombing through the clouds at  Pathfinder training. But then because they couldn   t send us home, I got  sent back to Germany and got a job in 9th Air Force Service Command. I  was right out of Nuremburg about nine blocks, where they had that trial.  I got to go to the trials a couple of times. I was there for a year or  something. That was quite a place.  So after your service in the Air Force, what did you do?  What did I do? I started college.  14  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  Where at?  Right here. Stayed a couple years, I was wrestling, I got to wrestle some  over here, not a lot. But anyway, I got a job as a game ranger. So I was a  game ranger for a good many years.  Well going back to your time in college, where did you live?  Vet Village. The first year I had to drive back and forth from home in  Perry. But I lived in that old Vet Village.  And describe that for me. What was your accommodation like?  Well it was built out of one quarter-inch plywood. No inside walls. It  was probably about, oh it would   ve been, maybe it might   ve been twenty  or twenty-four foot square and they had a bunch of old lumber over here  and I built a room on it. I built me a utility room and everything. I had  the fanciest place out there. (Laughter) It wasn   t anything to brag about  because there   s none of those left. They had Quonset huts all over. That  first year I had to drive back and forth to Perry every morning and night  because they didn   t have classrooms. I   d go in the mornings and I   d  have to come back and go to classes at night. Half of my teachers were  students. They didn   t know any more than I knew. It was a pretty sorry  mess. You didn   t learn anything because some of those teachers, like I  say, they didn   t know any more than I knew. Then the next semester  you   d have a course a little more advanced, you   d get somebody who   d  been teaching for years and they expected you to know something. It  was bad. I finally quit, and part of it was because too, you have to get  your classes and you have to stand in line and the lines would be one,  two blocks long. I said,    I stood in enough lines in the Army, I won   t do  it again.    I didn   t so I didn   t get the courses I needed. It was a mess.  So you became a game ranger.  Then I went in business for myself.  What did you do?  Plumbing, electric heat and air.  Back in Perry?  Yes. I had to hold three licenses, state and city.  How did you meet your wife?  15  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  We went to high school together. She moved to Perry about the time we  were, I guess, juniors, might have been sophomores. That   s how I met  her. We got married when we was eighteen. I was going to school at  OBU, Oklahoma Baptist University down at Shawnee. Army had taken  that over as a pre-flight school and I was going to school down there  when I got married.  That   s wonderful. So you   ve been in Perry a long time. You   ve probably  seen lots of changes.  Oh, yes.  How has the city changed since you   ve been back?  Well it   s not the same place, really. It hasn   t grown tremendously  though, they called it 5,000 years and years ago, but that   s when they  counted all the dogs and cats and people in the cemetery. (Laughter) But  it   s about 5,000 really now. It   s pretty good, it   s got a lot of things a lot  of small towns don   t have. Of course, we have the industry, Ditch  Witch, and we have a nice Y, a YMCA, good schools and lots of good  churches, which is what makes a town, I guess, when you have all that.  Well do you have anything else you   d like to share with us about your  time growing up? Any good stories I need to know about? I   m sure there  are stories.  There used to be hobos up all the time back in the Depression days.  They jumped the trains and they   d get off at these little towns and go  begging for something to eat. We lived probably five or six blocks from  the railroad tracks. And they   d come up, walk up and knock on doors  trying to find something to eat. My mother always fed them. She  wouldn   t let them in the house, but she would always feed them. But  there was lots of bums or hobos or whatever you wanted to call them.  Just people out of work probably is all it was. My wife   s father said he  used to dig potatoes for potatoes. In other words, they   d get hungry and  they   d go and people let them dig in their patches and share with them.  That   s the way they got something to eat.  Would your mother ever put them to work?  Not really. She   d just feed them.  Sometimes they   d say they would mark a house so they   d know where to  go for food. Do you think that was the case?  I don   t know, but we had quite a few of them. They   d just come off the  16  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  trains and head up the streets and start knocking on doors. When you get  hungry you   ll do a lot of things. They weren   t bad people. They were  pretty run-down and dirty because they had no place to clean up or  anything. They didn   t have the programs we have now.  Did you have a favorite food from back then that you just love to have or  a favorite meal?  I liked about everything, still do. I think there was some of them I didn   t  like. I think it was peas and corn, there was one of them I didn   t like and  I wouldn   t eat it. Finally one day my mother put it together and I forgot  which one I didn   t like. So I ate them both. (Laughter) She cooked, she  had everything. She canned meat and everything. See, they didn   t have  any way of keeping meat. They had the old ice box because they  delivered ice every day in big chunks. Of course, we had one of the first  refrigerators, it was an old Servel, gas. It was a great big one. And it  didn   t have a compartment like you have now for freezing. It had an area  up here, it had four little trays about just the size of ice trays we have  now. It was built in with the trays sliding in. And it had one big tray that  held over a gallon. That was always full of ice cream because we had the  cows and lots of cream.  So would you make ice cream yourselves?  My mother, she   d make it and put it in there because we churned our  own butter and everything. Like I say, we raised about everything.  So really, you had plenty of food outside of not having probably a lot of  money. So you never went hungry.  Oh, no. My mother saw to that. Of course, my dad was working most of  the time, he was out, he worked in the oil field and he was gone most of  the time.  So you boys had to pretty much behave?  Well, pretty much so, yeah.  Or try to, at least.  Yes. Well just that one brother, he made it tough on us. Like I say, the  first car I owned was a Jeep that I bought when I was overseas. After the  war, they had all that surplus stuff over there and I was lucky enough to  get in on it and I bought one for  200. It had leather upholstery, painted  blue with a silver stripe around it. And that   s where I got this.  Indicates   I was coming home, my buddy was driving the jeep and we hit a  17  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  German truck head on. I woke up hanging over the front end of that Jeep  so I couldn   t bring it home, it was wrecked.  What was the first car you bought in the states when you came back?  Well there was a couple of years or so later I come back and I wanted a  car of course, like everybody did. You had to put your name on a list,  had to put  25 down to Ford there. My name come up to get the car and  I went down to get it. In the meantime, I bought an old pickup that my  dad had used all through the war for the gas company. The gas company  sold me that old pickup. Well, I went down to get my new car, he says,     No, you   ve got to let me have that pickup or I won   t sell you a car.    So  I didn   t get a car then. Another year later I think I bought a Dodge pick-up.  But see there wasn   t any new cars. They didn   t have anything so just  to buy meat and tires or anything, you had to have coupons to buy that  stuff. But I got a Dodge was my first one, then my first car was a    52, a  station wagon, Ford.  Speaking of cars, going back to ponies, did you ever meet President  Bennett?  Yes. I didn   t know him well but I met him several times. Of course his  son, he was my uncle. Yeah, and like I say, they gave us that pony just  through the association of his kids didn   t need it anymore and I don   t  guess I know how it came around, but anyway we got the pony.  Do you remember seeing or reading The Grapes of Wrath?  Oh, yes.  And how people felt about Steinbeck? Were they happy or were they  angry with his work?  I didn   t pay any attention to that. It was quite a story. I didn   t read that  much, I guess.  What year did you retire?  I didn   t.  You   re still working?  Yep.  You   re still doing all the plumbing and electrical?  18  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  No, my daughters have a liquor store and I work in that liquor store  every day. I   ve got to go to work tonight at five. (Laughter)  Wow, you still stay busy?  Oh, yes.  That   s great.  I don   t like to sit at home and just do nothing, but I do a lot of it. I   ve got  a lot of friends down there. You know what I do down there?  You   ve got to tell me.  I bake cupcakes, I do make some cookies and candy at times, and I give  them away to customers. When I first started giving that stuff away the  people would look at me. (Laughter) They wouldn   t hardly take it. I   d  say,    Well, it don   t cost you anything.    People just couldn   t believe  anybody would give something away. But they expect it now.  (Laughter)  So you have a lot of friends that come in.  Oh, quite a few. They come in and ask about me.  That   s good customer service.  It   s kind of fun.   Can you tell me about when you got married?   Down at Shawnee, it was the middle of the week and a new class was  coming in. Middle of the week right then and they had no place to put  them. So they turned us loose and give us about three days down there  staying downtown, running around before we could ship out. So I called  Rosemary up and I said,    If you can get some money, come down, we  can get married.    She said,    Well, I   ll try.    Well a friend that I graduated  from high school with, this girl, she loaned Rosemary  20 and a  suitcase. She came down and we didn   t have a license or anything yet,  we had the  20, I might   ve had a dollar or two in my pocket and that  was about it. We didn   t have any money. She was eighteen, I was  eighteen. We called down to the courthouse, the lady answered, it was  late. I guess we found her name. Anyway, she said she   d meet us at the  courthouse.  Well we went down where we thought was where to meet her, we  19  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  waited and waited an hour or two, nobody showed up. So we finally  called back and she says,    Well, I was waiting for you,    we met in the  wrong place. So she came back downtown and we got the license. Then  I went to the beer joints and found a couple of my buddies. One of them  was named Elmer Bender, so we called him the best man and the other  guy   s name was Francis Battle, so he was the maid of honor because his  name was Francis. So we went to the Justice of the Peace. I didn   t want  to give him that  20 because he might want to keep us, so those guys  stayed around and they gave him the money. We got married. And we  had to go downtown to the old Laugrey   s Hotel there in Shawnee. Guess  it was pretty new then, pretty nice anyway. And all these friends of mine  were all next door, we was all in that hotel for about two or three days.  But that  20 we ate and stayed in a hotel for two or three days. Then I  transferred out, went to San Anton. I think it was six weeks before I  could get off the base. She was down there the day that I got off, she  stayed there. She followed me until I went overseas.  Was there any thought about not coming back to Oklahoma? Moving  somewhere else? Or did you always plan on coming back to Oklahoma?  I guess I never knew anything else. We haven   t really lived anywhere  else. Of course, I was in a lot of places in Europe, did a lot of things in  Europe. I could tell you a whole lot of stories. (Laughter)  See those are the stories I want to hear. What did you do in Europe that  was so exciting? I   m sure it was exciting.  I didn   t get to go over with the crew. I went over in the big airplane and  another crew came across with another, but we couldn   t all go together.  There was a general in there with us. Old General Bentaleer, he   s the  one that got in trouble with some GI   s whistling at some girls and the  press gave him... Anyway, we got over there, we flew our missions, then  we went to Venlo, Holland, which was go out one gate you   re in  Germany, and the other gate you were in Holland. Anyway, while we  was there, the war was still going but we couldn   t fly because we were  too close. We might be bombing our own people. So we got to running  around all over the country. Matter of fact, when we moved into Venlo  that night, we was in tents, nothing but tents and a cot and a couple of  blankets. Well, we took the truck into the little German town and we  loaded up. I had a carpet on my floor in my tent and I went to town. I  bought a lavatory made out of canvas. I had it and found some junk piled  there, because there wasn   t a house or a building on this air base in  Venlo. They destroyed everything. It was runways, is all it was. I had the  best tent in the bunch. I mean I had a hospital bed I got in town. I found  some netting. I had mosquito nets over it. It was quite a place.  20  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  You were quite ingenious.   We were  about fifteen or twenty miles from Solingen, Germany, where  they make all the high-power steel and stuff, and we would hitchhike.  The Air Force didn   t have the transportation and they didn   t like the Air  Force very much, most of them. But we   d hitchhike up right behind our  lines and scrounge. We got up right across the river from Dusseldorf and  met a German couple. He spoke English just as well as we did, he used  to live in Georgia. It was Willy and Lily. And they   d put us up and we   d  go there and then we   d go over to Solingen. He had his car hid in a little  shop he had. We   d take gas up there and then we   d go up there to  Solingen to these factories where they made swords and daggers. He  would be our interpreter. We   d go up there and buy them with coffee  and sugar and stuff. We   d come back and sell them to the guys going  home.  How it worked, well even after we left there we went to Belgium, which  is Li  ge, we could take our Belgium money and take it to Germany and  get ten to one dollar and we would buy a lot of these daggers and things  with German money, and coffee and stuff. Then we   d sell it back to the  guys going home for Belgian money, so we was making money selling  besides the money exchange. But they got to where they wouldn   t let us  send home   only what we made. So I sent Rosemary, I think it was  three sets of crystal that was made there in Li  ge. I was buying all kinds  of stuff because I couldn   t send  money  home. But we   d go up there at  Willy and Lily   s, we   d spend a day or two up there.  In Venlo, the old boy that was commander, he would put up a bulletin  board of all the duties to be done for the week. Of course, we couldn   t  fly because we couldn   t. So he put that up and if my name wasn   t on the  list, we   d all head up and go up there in Solingen and trade, do all kinds  of things. But then they sent us back to Germany. Then some of the guys  was writing their senators and things and they couldn   t send them home  because they didn   t have enough boats. So we went back to Germany,  got into Solingen, Germany and they kept asking for two volunteers.  You don   t volunteer in the Army, but this was a headquarters and we  was always where we ate before was out   we was living in tents; you  was eating in a tent and everything. At Solingen, you go in and you ate  just like at a caf  , had a little German girl waiting on you. We were  officers and when we   d eaten at the other, they didn   t give us our food  money because they was feeding us. But in this place, they   d give you  the money, you could eat there just like in a caf   or you could go to the  mess sergeant and buy it and take it to your house.  We were living in a Nazi newspaper man   s house, right up on a hill, two  or three stories, I forget. It was two at least. We had a big veranda out  21  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  overlooking, it was up on a hill. It was a beautiful place. The Army kept  it and cleaned it and everything. We had everything. Everything was  done for us. We lived in that and like I say, we could go to the mess  sergeant and take food home and cook it or eat there. But they had the  Officer   s Clubs and everything. Of course, that   s where I got to drinking  so much because shoot, you   d go to work at eight, noon before you   d go  eat you   d go by the Club and have a few drinks. When you got off at  five you   d go have a whole bunch of drinks. And like I say, I heard  about this Jeep deal and I bought a Jeep. Had my own transportation. We  could get weekend passes to a rest home with this 9th Air Force Service  Plan at Lake Tegernsee down by Munich. It was a big enough lake they  had a town on each side of it. One of those towns had rest areas for the  enlisted men and the other one for officers. You could get a pass to go  up there on the weekends, breakfast in bed, we had everything. Nothing  we didn   t have access to.  And like I say, I went to that in Nuremburg, I went to those trials a  couple of times. I travelled all over. It was something. I used to say in  our office I was only about twenty, but they gave me a desk job. They  gave me a German secretary and an eighteen-month draftee to work for  me. And this girl that was my secretary, she had been caught in a  bombing deal down in the basement of a building where she was, she  couldn   t get out, she was there a week. And her hair turned white. She  had white hair; she was about forty. Of course, when I come home  everybody said,    Oh       She was an old woman to me  (Laughter) But  anyway, we had quite a bunch there so we got scrunched. There was five  of us lived at this house. And any time one of them got something, they  had to get enough for all of us. I found a place and I got a lot of leather. I  had boots made for us and I had these fold up bags, what do you call  them? Anyway, we had a bunch of them made and suitcases. One old  boy got silk and he had silk shirts and things made for us. Like I say, my  Jeep had leather seats in there. I had quite a time.  It sounds like it. And I   m sure that   s just the PG-version.  Well this headquarters had about two or three generals. One of them was  my boss. Back after the war you   re not supposed to be in on any more  promotions, well he wanted me to stay. Of course, they wanted to try to  have my wife come over, but I decided I wanted to go home. Anyway,  he got me a promotion while I was there. I went overseas as a flight  officer, which is just like a warrant officer. That was an advantage in  that a regular officer, I think, got ten percent of their base pay when they  went overseas. A warrant officer got twenty percent. And their base pay  was the same. So I got more than the officers. I was Second Lieutenant  and in order to get me to stay, he got me First Lieutenant. So like I say, I  should   ve stayed. But I didn   t.  22  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Came back to Oklahoma.  Yeah. But after the war, I travelled all over.  Well that   s fascinating.  Yeah, I did. I had some good times. (Laughter)  I bet you did.  Well, I did. In fact when I come home I told my wife I   d take them over  some time. I think that was    99? I took my wife and my two daughters to  Europe. We was over there what, twenty-one days I think. We had no  idea where we were going for sure. We went over there and rented a car.  We flew into London and we didn   t stay there. The next morning we  was going to take the tunnel under the water. Well, come to find out we  couldn   t because we had a car rented just across the water. What was  that? Calais or something? It was France, right there. But if you took the  train, you had to go to Paris because it didn   t stop there. We couldn   t  take the tunnel, so we had to take the boat over there. We got our car  there and we took off and went to, oh, I don   t know, fifteen or twenty  countries. But we didn   t have any place to stay. When it got dark, well  we   d go find a hotel or something.  That   s quite a trip to do without just     Not knowing any of the languages. Those girls had a time, I   ll tell you.  We just turned them loose and they did all the interpreting and getting  stuff. I   ll tell you, it was a lot of fun. Those people were real nice. But  we went all over. You just name the country, we   ve been there.  (Laughter) There   s one little country about the same  size as  Noble  County, the whole country. They had an old boy, I guess he was the  king, he had a castle up on the hill.  Liechtenstein.  Liechtenstein.  I just got back from there.  You did?  Yeah.  It   s nice, isn   t it?  23  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  St. Clair  Nykolaiszyn  It   s beautiful. That castle up on the hill.  Yeah, that   s where the king   I guess is he called a king?  It   s prince.  Prince? Well anyway, when you   re right down below on the main road  is where you have your corner market or something where you buy junk  in Liechtenstein. So you   ve been there, you know where it is.  Yeah, I just got back from going around Switzerland and we had to go to  Liechtenstein, my husband wanted to go.  Yeah, we went through Switzerland, we went down to Italy, down where  the houses are on the water. We even went up to Witches Garden but we  couldn   t get up there because you had to get your name in the pot for  two or three days ahead of time so we didn   t get to go up on top.  Good times.  But we was all over the place.  And then you come back to Oklahoma, bake some brownies. (Laughter)  Well I had a good time over there after the war. And like I said, I  should   ve stayed. I   d have been retired then. I   d be an alcoholic, too,  because that was one thing that worried me. Because the army will make  an alcoholic out of you. We   d fly a mission and in debriefing they   d give  you drinks. That   s one of the first things they give you when you get in  there was drinks.  Well hopefully that practice has changed.  I hope so because that   s not right.  Well John, we really appreciate you coming out today. It   s been a lot of  fun.  Well, I didn   t tell you anything.  That   s what people think sometimes but you shed light on a lot of stuff  for us and we do appreciate it.  -------  -------  
