 Little Thunder This is Julie Pearson Little-Thunder. Today is Friday, April 3, 2015, and  I   m interviewing Mary Horsechief Henderson for the Oklahoma Native  Artists Project, sponsored by the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program  at OSU. We   re at your home in Welling, Mary. You   re Cherokee and  Pawnee, and you come from a family of artists. Your mother is one of the  early Cherokee women painters, and you have picked up painting as well as  cultural items. You   ve won multiple awards at shows like The Trail of Tears  and Cherokee National Holiday Show. You   ve collaborated on paintings  with your family while working full time for Cherokee Nation Behavioral  Health. Thank you for taking the time to talk with me.  Henderson All right.  Little Thunder Where were you born and where did you grow up?  Henderson I was born in Dallas, Texas, and I actually grew up in Muskogee, Oklahoma.  It   s where we ended up. My parents, they met at Bacone  College  back in  the    50s. They were a part of that exodus to the big cities for jobs. My dad  and his brother took their families down to Dallas, and that   s where they  found jobs and were working. We came back, but my uncle remained down  there. In fact, his family is still down there. Yeah, I grew up in Muskogee.  We ended up there. I don   t know, maybe it   s the connection to Bacone, but  that   s where we ended up.  Little Thunder Where were you in the family in terms of brothers and sisters?  Henderson I   m the second born, so I   m the second oldest. My older brother, Sam, we   re  two years apart. My younger brothers are six years younger than me. Six  and seven I think, so they were like the second batch. (Laughter)  Little Thunder Your dad was a metalsmith, and I know you lost him fairly young, but do  you have memories of him doing metalwork at the house?  5  Henderson No, my dad   who told you he was a metalsmith?  Little Thunder I thought your mom did. He worked with silver and jewelry.  Henderson Oh, he did some jewelry. He wasn   t like a metalsmith jewelry type person     Little Thunder Right.  Henderson    more like findings-type what they would call now. He would make  chokers and other types of necklaces like that. Basically, he was just trying  to put some things together that would help him make a little money and  give him something to do. My dad was a pretty great person. I don   t know  how many people have told me that over the years. He was a spectacular  athlete. Him and my Uncle Nat were All-Staters at Pawnee.  Little Thunder Wow.  Henderson He went to Bacone to play football and basketball, which he did. He  would   ve been a coach. He was going to school to be a coach. He had issues  with alcohol. Bad enough that it killed him. He died of cirrhosis of the liver  at a very young age. He was thirty-nine. He tried and tried over a period of  years to stop.  There   s a lot of different ways of doing that over the years that people have  used, including arts and crafts, and types of things like that. That was one of  the things, I think, that he picked up that he liked doing. He would make,  like I said, chokers and necklaces and things and sell them. I think I might  even have one or two of those left. I know my mom does, but mainly he was  just, like I said, a spectacular person that actually drew people to him. It   s  what it seemed like to me when people have come up and told me about  him. I knew him because I was a little older than Dan and them. Yeah, he  was a unique human being, I think.  Little Thunder What are your memories of your mother working on art?  Henderson Well, I remember as a little kid, her drawing and painting. She would draw  us and paint us, and use us as her figures in her paintings. I remember     some of my earliest memories are going to school with her at TU   University of Tulsa . I have a memory of walking under, I must have been  about three or four, because I remember walking under the big wooden  tables. They had them big long wooden working tables in the pottery room. I  remember walking under those tables and every now and then I would reach  up and get something and look at it, and I would put it back. (Laughter) Can  you imagine have a three-year old in the pottery room? Which is crazy.  6  I don   t know how old I was, but I imagine I was about that age because  mom was in school pretty much all the time when I was growing up. I really  liked it. I really liked going to school with her and they say I was a really  good kid, so it was no burden, I think. We would have lunch together. To  this day, Bean and Bacon Campbell Soup is my favorite because that   s what  we would take with us. (Laughter) It   s the craziest thing. Everybody thinks  I   m crazy because it   s so unhealthy. Vienna sausage sandwiches with  mustard, not bologna, although I do like bologna. Not bologna. It   s because  of that, going to school with my mom. When I started doing it and picking  things up, and going to school, and taking classes, and picking up techniques  and stuff, it was no big deal because this is what we do.  Little Thunder You   d been observing it.  Henderson Yes, and I went to   of course, there   s all kinds of stories about art shows  and things, too. I always remember my mom painting and drawing, and she  did all of that while raising four children, too.  Little Thunder What was your relationship with your grandparents on either side?  Henderson I was very fortunate that I had several grandfathers on my Pawnee side. I try  to look at it that way because on my mom   s side, my grandpa died when,  from World War II, the mustard gas poisoning, when she was really young. I  never knew him. I had my grandmother who is of English descent and she  was something else. She was from her own period of time, believe me. Had  no interest in anything Native American, had no interest in anything artistic,  but she did teach me about trees and flowers.  We were very close because she bonded with me when I was a baby. I was  the only one she bonded with. The rest of the boys never could understand  why we were so close because my grandmother was just so different, my  white grandmother. My other grandmother, Ekah, her name was Sophie  Butler. Her and my blood grandfather, Hugh Horsechief, had separated by  the time I knew them. He was blind and had gotten blinded from an  accident, but he was a member of the Native American Church. I remember  him always singing all the time. He   d just sing all the time. He   d sit in his  room and shake his rattle and he would just sing all the time, or he   d be  listening to music all the time. I   ve heard that he did compose some songs. I  don   t know what those songs are, but because of him, I   ve always heard,  too, that if we ever wanted to participate more in the Native American  Church, that that way   s been made for us.  My grandmother, on the other hand, was a nurse at the IHS  Indian Health  Service  Hospital in Pawnee. Just visits with her. I didn   t get to spend a lot  of time with her, but she would patiently answer our questions. Every now  and then, we would ask her things. We asked her about which band were we  7  and she always told us. We   re all four because grandpa was two and she was  two. She never really talked about Pawnee stuff or anything like that, so I  don   t know if it was because we didn   t spend that much time with her or if  she didn   t think it was important or from that generation that didn   t think  that those type of things were important.  Just being around her and being with her taught me more about being  Pawnee than, I think, anything like that. She did like to go to pow wows a  lot and, oh, she loved wrestling. She was an avid wrestler fan and she would  be watching it all the time. (Laughter) She loved wrestling. She also was  probably the one that taught me, first thing you do when somebody walks in  the door, you ask them,    Did you eat?    She always had brown beans on the  stove, and she would cook. No matter what time of the day or night that we  showed up at her house, unannounced, it would be like,    Did you eat yet?     Then she would commence to start cooking for us. That   s how my dad grew  up.  My grandpas, though, Hugh Horsechief was my blood grandpa. He used to  call me    Braids    because he would hold my braids. He would teach us a  couple of words and he would always fan us off. He also taught me that. He  would always fan us off every time we would come visit with the cedar and  fans. He told me, one time me and my cousin, Ginger, got scared because  we thought there was a ghost in the house or something. It was bothering us.  He told us   he told me, and I don   t know why, but I always remember it  and it   s something I   ve passed onto people, that you don   t never have to be  afraid. The Creator is always with you and the Creator gave us these things  to protect us with. If something   s bothering you, or you hear something, you  tell them that they   re not supposed to be here. You call on the power of the  Creator to make them go away and they will.  I   ve used that in my life, and I   ve talked to other people when they   ve gone  through something similar like that. I say,    This is what my grandpa always  told me and it   s always worked for me.    Of course, there   s a lot more to it  than that, but he   s the one that taught me how to fan somebody off, and I do  that with my nieces and nephews. I fan them off. I haven   t done it in a little  while, but yeah, I used to do it every time before they would go back to  school and talk to them a little bit about that.  Little Thunder Growing up in this kind of creative environment, what are some memories,  early encounters with Native art that stand out for you?  Henderson Well, like I was telling you, I went to school with my mom when I was in  pre-school, to college. I remember the smell, the smell of linseed oil and oils  and what an art room smells like, what a pottery studio smells like. I  remember those smells and how wonderful I thought it was to have all of  8  those supplies and things to just make stuff with. The encouragement, I got a  lot of really good encouragement. People     Little Thunder Did you draw while you were there sometimes, or make something? A pot or  something?  Henderson Yeah, I made a pinch pot at TU and they fired it for me. They were very  encouraging. I   ve always had nothing but encouragement. I have friends that  are in families that are way more, I shouldn   t say more dysfunctional,  because we   re pretty dysfunctional. (Laughs) I should say they never got  any encouragement at all from their families. In fact, they were pretty much  told,    That   s stupid, ugly. What are you doing?    Or    You can   t do that.     I   ve been very fortunate all my life. I was always encouraged. By teachers,  by other people, by other artists. As far as art, my very first memories are  even going to Philbrook and running through that museum outside in the  gardens.  Little Thunder To the Indian Annual? During the show?  Henderson Yeah, in the gardens. I, to this day, I still have a favorite room in there and a  favorite painting.  Little Thunder What is it?  Henderson It   s The  Little  Shepherdess.  Little Thunder How cool.  Henderson I love that painting.  Little Thunder Yeah, I think I know which one it is. (Laughter)  Henderson Yeah, it   s absolutely beautiful. My favorite room is the   I don   t know what  they call it. It   s the one with the glass floor.  Little Thunder Right. It used to be a dancing room.  Henderson Yeah, I love that room, and it had fountains. When I was a kid, the fountains  actually worked, and it was just so wonderful. It was on the other end of the  museum, too, so they always had the Annual at the other end and all of the  people and everything, so I could go over there and get some peace because  I always had to take care of the little ones. Oh my god, the Williamses, too.  David Williams   s kids, James and John. Yeah, and the others. Talk about  terrorizing Philbrook. Yes, we did.  Little Thunder You were kind of in charge of the younger kids?  9  Henderson Well, no, there   s no way I was in charge. You couldn   t be in charge. I mean,  yeah, I was older and maybe me and my brother, Sam, were kind of  intended to be in charge, but there   s no being in charge of all of those kids.  They   re just   can you imagine? Then we would go back in there and steal  cookies, and punch, and stuff, because they would have the hors d   oeuvres  and things.  Little Thunder How about your art experiences in elementary school or middle school?  Henderson Once again, I was very fortunate. I actually did go to Head Start because my  mother taught Head Start. I did go to Head Start     Little Thunder And this was in Muskogee at that point?  Henderson Yes, yes. Even like at Franklin Elementary, I had an art teacher, Mrs. Boggs.  I found out when I was an adult that she was a relative, actually. My first  day of school   actually, I went to Tony Goetz  Elementary School . We  lived on the east side when I was in first grade. My very first day of school,  I wasn   t terrified. A lot of people say they have horrible experiences with  their children the first day, but I remember going in a classroom and they  gave us these big, beautiful pieces of big manila paper. They were huge.  They ran off the table it was so big   and these beautiful, big crayons. The  big ones for little kids. They were beautiful.  She had us draw the letter A. Then she took us through, and we had to put  little eyes and we made a little Dutch girl with a little Dutch hat. I was, of  course, going to town, I just thought this is the most wonderful thing.  (Laughter) This is so wonderful, this paper and this   I just like materials, I  guess. Anyway, I started shading and coloring because it was so much fun.  She comes over and she   s walking along, like teachers do, walking along the  desks. She comes over and looks at mine and she didn   t say anything. She  grabbed the paper and she jerked me up and she said,    Come with me.     I thought I was in trouble. I was like,    Ah.    Like I said, I wasn   t one of  those kids that was terrified and would cry and all that stuff. I just went with  her and I thought,    What could I have done? I didn   t do nothing wrong.    I  went with her and she took me to this other classroom and told this teacher,  she said,    Look at this. Look at this.    I was like,    What did I do wrong?     I   m sitting there looking at both of those teachers and neither one of them  are saying anything to me. They   re just talking to each other and I   m  standing there going,    What   s going on?     They basically were, I guess, amazed by the picture, whatever, and from that  day forward, I got all the art supplies I wanted. I got all the paper. In fact, I  remember   well, we changed schools. We moved to the west side, we  10  actually bought a house, big house. I went to Franklin and we had an art  teacher there. I always had   they would move me to another table. I always  had another table in some other room that was bigger because they always  had me doing all kinds of projects.  Little Thunder They recognized your talent right away. How about by the time you   re in  high school, have you sold any artwork yet? Are you entering any shows?  Henderson Yeah, by the time I got to high school, I already had one at Philbrook.  Little Thunder Okay, so you entered the children   s     Henderson Yeah, I entered the Annual Show. I don   t know if it was   I don   t remember  them having a student show.  Little Thunder    student division.  Henderson They might have had a division, I don   t know. I remember they had a  Purchase Award and they bought my piece.  Little Thunder Wow.  Henderson It   s still there. They hang it every now and then.  Little Thunder How cool, and you were what age?  Henderson It was about    75   because the piece was about 1976. It was about the  bicentennial. I would   ve been about fourteen, thirteen or fourteen.  Something like that.  Little Thunder Wow.  Henderson When they said I won the Purchase Award I was like,    Oh, what does that  mean? Money?    They said that what it means is they   re going to buy your  piece. I go,    So that   s all I get is they   re just going to buy my piece?     They   re like,    Yeah.    That   s pretty much it. I never really thought that much  of it until I went to college and that   s when they were doing that  retrospective about their collection. They were interviewing people and they  were creating a book. I   d gotten interviewed and told them the story about  Philbrook and everything. Told them about that and they were going to  show some of the art. I was included in the Bacone bunch, even though  when I did the piece I wasn   t in school out there.  My professor, we had to do these visits when I was in college. It was  important to go to a museum and to write a piece. They gave us a day off to  go do that. Sometimes we would all go together. Professor R. C. Koontz was  11  with us. Somehow a bunch of us all went down there at the same time. We  were at Philbrook, and we were there to see the Thomas Moran exhibit. I  mean, that was what I was going to write my piece on and     Little Thunder Was it Philbrook or Gilcrease?  Henderson It was Philbrook.  Little Thunder Oh, okay. They had the Morans there.  Henderson Yeah, this was in the    90s, during this time. One of my friends comes  running up and just screaming at me in the museum going,    You didn   t tell  me you had a piece down here.    I was like,    They have that up?    I kind of  knew they were going to do it, but I didn   t know when. Mr. Koontz just  happens to be right there. Of course, he hears it and he goes,    You have a  piece in Philbrook?    I go,    Yes, yes I do.    (Laughs) You should   ve seen the  shock on his face. Then he started smiling and he was just so excited. I  thought,    Okay, when I was in school, the thing I wanted to do when I went  back was I wanted to make straight As.  Little Thunder You were at Northeastern at this point?  Henderson Yes, I wanted to make straight As because I wanted to get scholarships to  finish. The only way that I could bring my grade point up was to get the best  grade possible, so I had this system that I would use. I mean, I wouldn   t  suck up too much, but there   s things that you can do to make yourself  appear more positive. When an instructor is trying to decide whether you   re  going to be that point or so off or whatever, they   re going to give it to you if  you make the effort. That had been my mindset. (Laughs) When he gets all  excited I   m going, I   m looking at him, I go,    Yes. Yes, and we should go  see it.    (Laughter)  Little Thunder You did get a small check because they made a Purchase Award right? They  bought it from you.  Henderson Yes.  Little Thunder Okay. What happened the first time you went to college? Did you just get  discouraged?  Henderson The first time I went to college I was   let me just say, I went early for one  thing. I was only seventeen. I thought I knew pretty much everything. I  thought I had it all figured out. I went to OU for a year, and I enjoyed the art  program there. I was totally lost. I remember being totally lost, but there  were several older students that helped me out in that way. Their style at the  time, even though I was taking basic classes, was totally foreign to anything  12  that I had ever experienced. I was just trying to make my way, you know,  and explore it. It was pretty challenging, actually.  I did a lot of partying up there. I missed, by one credit, so they put me on  academic probation. I was playing softball. I went up there to play softball  and I didn   t make the team. I got the last cut. I got cut. I could   ve came back  and probably made it, but I didn   t have the confidence to do that. If I knew  then what I know now, or if I   d had any more support that way, I probably  would have   if my dad had been there, probably. He might have supported  me. I don   t know. I decided to leave there and go to Bacone and play ball  there and go to school, which was the last place I wanted to go.  Little Thunder Why?  Henderson Well, it was back home and at the time I just wanted to leave there. You  know, that   s what a lot of kids do. They just want to get out of town, get as  far away as possible. (Laughs) I had felt like I had failed when I went back  there, but I made some good friendships there     Little Thunder Who was teaching at the time?  Henderson Dick West.  Little Thunder Okay, wow.  Henderson Dick West was there. He was back, teaching a couple of classes. Of course,  Ruthe  Blalock Jones , and I think Janet Smith was doing an internship  there, too. I got to take some classes under Dick West. I remembered him  from my childhood because we used to sit in the back of the church at  Bacone and we   d draw pictures on the programs and basically not do a  whole lot of listening. He had this deep voice and he couldn   t whisper  (Laughter), but he was always so nice to us. Like I said, I   ve never felt  afraid around him, I never felt uncomfortable. He was always so nice to us.  His hands, I swear to god, they were this big. One hand was about that big,  that big, but he would draw, and I would draw something and he would  draw something. God, I wish I had some of those. (Laughs)  Little Thunder Was he drawing on your drawing kind of? You were drawing together?  Henderson Yeah, we would draw stuff together.  Little Thunder Oh, that is great, that is great. (Laughter) You eventually finished your  degree at Northeastern, is that right? Is that where you got your   .  Henderson Yeah.  13  Little Thunder A bachelor   s in     Henderson Fine art. Bachelor   s in Fine Art with a minor in education and a minor in  Native American studies, because I was going to do education. I was going  to be a teacher and I didn   t want to be a teacher. They got so mad at me  when I said,    I   m not going to finish. I just know this isn   t what I want to  do.    I just told them,    I   m not going to finish my       I was this close, too. I  mean, all I had to do was get the last internship.  I said,    I know this is not what I want to do. I know I should finish it, but is  there something else?    And they said I had to have a minor to graduate. I  said,    I   ve got all kinds of hours in there, isn   t there something else?    They  started looking and they said,    Oh yeah, Native American studies. You can  take one class and you   re pretty much done it.    I   d taken a lot of Native  American classes over the years, so I have a minor in Native American  studies.  Little Thunder Your mom had mentioned that she really hoped none of her children would  turn out to be artists because she knew how hard the path was.  Henderson Yes. (Laughs) Yes, and we all got degrees in it. (Laughter) Except for  David, who didn   t finish his degree. He   s so close. Yeah, and I   m the same  way now. I have become my mother. (Laughs)  Little Thunder You tell young people, don   t look at art as a full-time living?  Henderson No. Yeah, I do tell them that. Even when I was in school   when I went back  to school I was an older student     Little Thunder How old were you? Thirties?  Henderson I was in my early forties. I was in my early forties, like forty-one, forty-two.  I was an older student and everybody thought I was so great. I   m like,    You  listen to the instructor give the instructions. You try your best to do what  they say. You   re here to learn their technique. You   re not here to do your  own thing. If you   re going to do your own thing, then just go out and do it.  That   s what so many art students have such a hard time with when they get  to college because it   s tough. You got to do what they say. That   s what I  would do, and I worked hard at it because I was really wanting those As too,  remember?  Little Thunder Right.  Henderson They were just like,    Oh, Mary you   re so great. You do everything so  wonder   you   re just so awesome. You   re such an awesome artist. Are you  14  doing this now? Are you going to do this when you get out?    I would just  look at them.  Unfortunately, it   s so sad, but I would just say,    You know what, I   m a drop  in the bucket. I can tell you right now, I   m a drop in the bucket. Yes,  probably if I devoted myself full time to this and actually worked, and  worked, and worked, I might actually produce something that might have an  impact somewhere. That doesn   t mean I   m going to be able to make a living  at it.     I mean, I was very real with them.    If you   re looking at trying to support  your family that you   re going to have, because you will have one, you better  be looking at something, and you   re going to be doing this on the side. If  you are fortunate enough to pick up something or if you don   t think you   re  this fabulous and you still really live and breathe art and you want to do it,  you better find something that you can do better than everybody else like  photography, the computer graphics, whatever, and then you could probably  make a living at it. Yeah, you better be thinking about something else.     It   s not a failure to be a teacher. It   s not a failure to teach others and  encourage people to learn and do as much as they can. It   s not because you  can   t do art that you become a teacher. It   s very, very tough.  Little Thunder How did you end up getting into behavioral health?  Henderson Like I told you, when I was younger, I partied a lot. I developed an addiction  to alcohol and drugs to the point where I didn   t think I could do anything. I  dropped out of school, and I couldn   t hold a job. I was horrible at like  Burger King and Arby   s type of things. No matter how hard I tried, I just  really couldn   t do that very well. It was difficult for me to go to work  because of my addictions and everything that goes with it.  What I did was I got sober in Muskogee. Went to Monarch, started trying to  figure out what I want to do with my life. I started working there. Actually,  they hired me, and I got recruited from there to go to this new treatment  center called Jack Brown at the Cherokee Nation by Richard Allen and my  husband, Jim Henderson, who was going to be a counselor there. That   s  when I came to Tahlequah, and that was in 1989. I went to work with Jack  Brown at the treatment center there as a technician and worked with the  kids.  I was there for about six months when I got recruited to go to a new drug  abuse prevention program working with kids, which I did. It was a grant. I  did that and I bounced from grant, to grant, to grant. Every time one would  end, another one would appear. I   ve been very fortunate. I really haven   t had  to search for work, but I   ve been recruited. Every time they would recruit  15  they would say,    We   re going to give you all this money. This is what your  salary is going to be.    I would tell them,    I   ve got to go back to school. I  don   t have time to do all this.    It was always these grants that had these  massive amounts of things that they wanted you to do. (Laughs) It was just  crazy how much they wanted you to do. They   re like,    You   re the only one  that can do it.    I   m like,    Well, okay.     Then once I got in there I wouldn   t get the pay because I didn   t have the  degree. This happened to me about three or four times, and finally I just told  them at the end of another grant, I said,    I   m going back to school.    So I did.  I retired early. Drew up my retirement and used that to go to school. It  wasn   t much, but I drew out some. That was the mid-   90s. When I got out of  school, I was going to go get my master   s. I went and visited TU, OU, and  Arkansas, and applied to all of them (god, I loved OU). Mary Jo Watson,  she gave me a tour. We had met before, I had asked her to. We were judges  for some JOM art show. That   s how we   d met.  We would just get so excited about Indian art, you know. She gave me the  most wonderful tour there, and they had just got a collection in, too, that  hadn   t all been identified. I got to go through there and help identify some  pieces that weren   t signed, and talk about them, and that was kind of cool.  She really wanted me to go to school there. She even took me downstairs  and I got to see the Pollocks.  Little Thunder Oh, wow.  Henderson God, it was awesome. These big, giant storage area   it was beautiful. I  really wanted to go, but I was married and I was going to have a baby and  that wasn   t going to happen. I stayed here and I did get a raise, got a job. I  became a customer service rep resentative  for the Housing Authority. I did  that for a little while until the Housing Authority fell apart and started laying  people off. When they started laying people off, I ended up being one of  them. You don   t really need a customer service rep resentative  if you   re  going to lay people off.  I asked a friends of mine, who had been in community work, if he still   he  always wanted me to come work for him. I said,    You can   t afford me.     (Laughter) I said,    You know how you was always wanting me to come  work for you? Why don   t we make that happen?    He did. His name was  Marvin Jones and he brought me back over from Housing Authority to the  Nation.  He put me in charge, assigned me to the methamphetamine program. We  were in the middle of a meth crisis, and we were trying to figure out what  we could do to eradicate meth in five years in the Cherokee Nation. That set  me on the path with the folks that I work with now. That   s when we started  16  our community work, working with communities to help them build plans  and training, to take a look at their local conditions and data, and build  strategies that attack those. It   s much more than brochures and posters.  Brochures and posters are still a part of it. I   ve been doing that for   god,  seems like forever. I   m going to continue to do it for a few more years and  then I   m going to do this.  Little Thunder Paint full time.  Henderson I can   t wait.  Little Thunder We   ll get to that in a minute. Were you able to use your art skills, either  painting or making cultural items? Were you using any of that when you  were working in the counseling fields, or was that just something that you  were doing on the side as you could?  Henderson Oh yeah, I   ve been fortunate that I   ve been able to do stuff creatively with  work for forever. I mean when I got recruited   when I was at Jack Brown     I would work with the kids and do beadwork and stuff with them, too. A  little bit of art therapy. I know enough about art therapy, you have to be  qualified to do it, but we would do a little bit of stuff. Then when these drug  abuse prevention programs, when I worked with these kids in the  communities, we did a lot of art. I   ve taught a lot of beadwork. At one point,  I was even helping at Sequoyah High School in the dorms with some kids  after school. They had this thing called a    (god, what was it called?) where  they would have an elder come in and work with them and that was Betty  Smith, who is a national treasure. I would do beadwork with them.  Now in the prevention that I   m doing now, it   s more of a science. There   s a  lot of creativity that goes in with developing strategies that   s going to affect  a local condition. Like for instance, we   re developing a public information  campaign for Cherokee County and for Wagner County. Our Cherokee  County public information campaign, it   s to address binge drinking. We   re  going to use Bigfoot as our spokesperson like Smokey the Bear.  Little Thunder Yeah, good idea.  Henderson There   s a lot of materials that we   ve had to go through to try and develop  the messages. We know that a poster is not going to make somebody stop  binge drinking. We know that, but it   s just a little part of an overall plan.  With a bunch of strategies altogether, maybe we can start effecting some  change. It takes a while, it takes   sometimes it takes a long time.  Sometimes these changes can happened pretty quickly, like with policies  and stuff, but we   re coupling this with policy and enforcement, and some  other things. We   re kind of excited about Bigfoot. We   re going to throw in  17  the ENDUI program, too, so there   s always opportunities to make posters  and just to come up with ideas.  Little Thunder Right, right. Now you   ve taught a couple of moccasin workshops, I thought,  for the Heritage Center or was it   .  Henderson I did. I did that with the Heritage Center, and then here lately, I   ve been  doing a lot of them with Cultural Tourism, Cherokee Nation Cultural  Tourism.  Little Thunder What was the biggest challenge the first time you taught a workshop?  Henderson Wow, the first time. I don   t remember the first time. (Laughter)  Little Thunder You   ve been doing it so long. Are you able to use it to kind of advance your  own work, too?  Henderson Probably the biggest challenge is trying to meet people where they   re at, and  then develop a way or a language or somehow to get them to the endpoint,  you know. I mean that   s what teaching is all about is translating the  material, so that they get an understanding and actually get the end result  that they want, hopefully. Have you ever made a basket? Okay, well, you  should make a basket. You should make a Cherokee basket. Next time you  get a chance, you need to do that because that   s one of the examples I use.  Most people that have taken my class have done that. Baskets is big around  here.  Your first basket that you make doesn   t usually turn out the way you  envision it because it   s hard to make them symmetrical. (Laughter) There   s  things wrong with it, the first basket. The next one you make, you correct  some of that stuff, and the next one you correct, and eventually, if you work  at it and you have enough interest or you like it, you could probably make  some pretty nice stuff. But it takes a little practice and effort. I tell people  when they take my class, I say,    We   re going to be working on this for  about four hours, and normally everybody will maybe finish one moccasin.     Not because everybody is slow, but because we   re going to learn the process  and then you   re going to have this little bit of time to do it. The hardest part  is a lot of people take the class and they   ve never tied a knot before, or  threaded a needle. We have to go from that. Some people that actually make  things, they will finish both of them. I usually have one in every class,  usually.  Little Thunder That   ll finish two   a pair.  18  Henderson Yeah, they   ll finish both of them. They may not fit them perfectly, they  might have to make adjustments to them. I think one time, my friend made  them, actually, one of the last classes, she finished both of them and they fit  her perfectly. They looked good.  Little Thunder That   s great.  Henderson Yeah.  Little Thunder The ones that   do you think they finish the other one? A lot of the people  who take the class or do they   .  Henderson That   s what they say they do.  Little Thunder They say they do?  Henderson Yeah, I run into people all the time. I run into people all the time. I was at  the casino the other night and this girl just comes walking up to me. I didn   t  have any idea who she was. She   s like,    When are you going to have  another class?    I look at her and I said,    I don   t know, it depends.    She was  saying that she really wanted to take it. I was like,    Have you had one  before? Have you made moccasins?    She goes,    No, so we   re really  interested.       Okay.    People recognize me or they know who I am because  I   m slipping that card in the machine or something. I mean, I can understand  that there, but I   ll be Wal-Mart and people will come up. They go,    When  are you going to have another class?     Now that I have a little more time (I don   t have a lot of time), but I   m not  taking care of my husband so I think I   m going to start scheduling some  classes. It   s difficult, probably, because it   s expensive. You have to buy  hides. Usually, you want to have about twenty people.  The more people you have, the more likely you   re going to get a little bit of  a profit, but you   re not going to get a lot for the amount of effort that you   re  putting in there. (Laughter) You want to have about twenty people, that   s  pretty much max. Ideally, eight or ten would be good, but I   ve gotten to  where they just pack them there now. One time I did thirty-five, and I was  just,    We can   t do this anymore. You guys are killing me.     Little Thunder That   s too many.  Henderson I   m not whining because it   s hard on me, I   m whining because they   re not  getting the individual attention that they need. I started developing   I   ve got  handouts that has instructions, step-by-step. I did that the first time. One  time I did photographs that I   d taken at Smithsonian. I get to go up there,  visit my friend     19  Little Thunder You didn   t go on a fellowship did you? Or did you just go for a trip?  Henderson No. (Laughs)  Little Thunder Okay, great.  Henderson We went on a work trip. Every year, I go to the Community Anti-Drug  Coalitions of America forum in DC. A few years ago my best friend, Lisa  Trice Turtle, and I were going. That was right after, maybe a year or so after  Dennis Zotigh had moved up there. He had just finished Oklahoma   s  Historical Museum. She said,    We should call Dennis and he can give us a  private tour.    I said,    Okay.    She set it up. She contacted him, she emailed  him or whatever. He says,    Yeah, you guys come on out.    We jumped on  the metro, their subway train, whatever, and went all the way to the end in  Suitland, Maryland. It was snow. There was snow on the ground, about a  foot. We got off at the end, and of course, we didn   t know anything. What I  know now after going there several times, is that they have main stations  that you can get off and actually get a cab. (Laughter) We didn   t know. We  were going all the way to the end and we   ll just walk. It   s only a couple of  blocks. A couple of city blocks in foot-deep snow is difficult. We did  manage to get a cab after we started walking. It was cars going everywhere,  too. A cab actually felt sorry for us and pulled up and said,    Do you all want  a ride?    Said,    Yes.    He took us literally two blocks and we were there. He  says,    Are you sure this is where?    I said,    Yeah, this is it.     It   s a bunker where they store everything. It   s their cultural   it was brand  new then. They had brought the collections in because they had them stored  everywhere, they said. It   s all temperature controlled. They had these big  giant shelves that move when you push a button, and they have drawers in  them, a whole bunch of them. They showed us the totem poles that were in  Brooklyn. They   d been stored in an old warehouse in Brooklyn, and that  they had brought them in   and the seal jackets. It was just wonderful.  Oh, and the repatriation room, where tribes can come in and they can do  what they need to do with the bundles (it was just so neat), and where they  restore things and clean things, and all the equipment. At the time they were  cleaning Geronimo   s robe. It was a robe that he had, which was kind of  cool. He took me   he knew directly what we wanted to see. We wanted to  see all the Cherokee stuff, and then he said,    I   m going to take you over to  see the Pawnee stuff,    because he   s Pawnee, too.    I said,    Okay,    but I  wanted to see the moccasins. I wanted to see anything anyway.  He explained to us that they have everything set up where known enemies  aren   t right next to each other. The artifacts, the things, they   ve got  everything set up that way to create more of a peaceful environ-ment, too,  20  there. It   s not just temperature controlled and all that, but they really thought  that stuff out. They let us touch everything. I said,    Well, you need to give  me some gloves or something.    He said,    This is our stuff.    The attitude has  changed even.    This is ours, this is the people   s. What you   re doing here is  what we want   people to come, and look, and examine.     Little Thunder Were there any surprises with the Cherokee moccasins or the Pawnee  cultural items?  Henderson I didn   t get to look a whole lot at the Pawnee stuff. I was surprised that they  didn   t have more. There were several jackets for the Cherokees, which were  really cool, several deer jackets. It was really cool to see the handmade  buttons. The moccasins, what I really liked about it was that they weren   t all  made the same way. They were obviously made by different people. Of  course, everybody had their own way of kind of doing stuff. Some of them  were so stiff. Of course, I couldn   t turn them inside out or anything, and  some of them had soles that were put on, after. Which makes sense because  they   re not   everybody that wears Cherokee moccasins, if they wear them  for any reason for very long, they   re going to have blowouts. If you wear  Plains moccasins and you dance, or whatever, you   re going to have some  blowouts.  You could see the mending and you could see where they   d put another sole  on one pair. So that   s what I really liked about it. I felt more confident with  the way I was taught how to do it. It   s different from like Martha Berry and  some other people. I had tried to do just the plain center seam moccasin. I  can do it, but for the Miss Cherokee that I did that for, I had to mend those  about five times because she kept blowing them out.  What I discovered was the pucker-toe, where you gather up the toe, is much  more durable and I   ve never had to mend them. I   ve never had to mend one  of them. Of course, I make sure the knots and everything are pretty durable.  If you don   t do it right, of course they   re going to blow out, but the center-seam  ones   I don   t think they   re for everyday use. That was kind of cool.  Then you can understand. Once I saw those, I could understand. I   d like to  go back and reexamine them   but maybe someday.  Little Thunder You and your mom collaborated on, I think, one of your first casino  commissions maybe?  Henderson That was for the clinic.  Little Thunder Oh, for the clinic. I   m sorry. Can you talk about that collaboration a bit?  Had you ever done a big painting with your mom like that?  21  Henderson No, we had never done that before. It just kind of happened because    I  don   t really know, let me think about it. They had this call for art, and I  wanted my mom to be a part of it. For one thing, one of the ideas that I   d  had, it was going to include one of our relatives at the  Cherokee Female   Seminary.  Little Thunder Oh, a depiction of a Cherokee   .  Henderson Yeah, and some of it had a lot   oh yeah, it was our great-great-grandfather,  John Thompson. The letters and all that. They were big, they were really big  pieces. When we were talking about it, I just told her,    We need to all work  together on this. That way we can get it done. Otherwise, we   ll never get it  done.     Little Thunder Were they eight  feet  by 12  feet , or   .  Henderson God, I don   t remember. They were huge. They were big, really big, so we  did all work together. In fact, I think Daniel is the one that stretched them.  Of course, we all adjusted them and stuff, and we worked on the designs.  We all worked on the designs and the research and everything. We had a  little bit longer to do that with, but they turned out really nice.  That was the first time I   d ever worked in oil. We did one in oil and a couple  of them in acrylic. I look at that painting now and I think, yeah, that person  that did that in oil   I did it like I was painting in acrylic. It   s very brushy  and there   s a lot of   but that   s where I was at, at the time. I like it. It   s  alright. I personally never get to the point where I can do what I see up here.  It just kind of develops and then it ends up being something.  Little Thunder Now recently you answered a call, I think, for the clinic at Stillwell? Is that  what you told me? You ended up doing a piece?  Henderson Yeah.  Little Thunder What did you do for them?  Henderson The story of the strawberries. They called us last month, Elizabeth Tunes  called us and said they had already done the family collaboration with  another family at another clinic, I think that was the Kingfisher family, and  would we be interested? In fact, I think she called Mom first, and Mom told  her that she needed to talk to me.  I talked to her because   well, Daniel and I both have worked with  Elizabeth. We both know her and everything. When she proposed it, she  said,    We only got like a month.    But the sizes, they were only sixteen by  twenty  inches . They   re not very big. I said,    Oh yeah, that   s no problem.  22  We   ll get it done. Yeah, we   d like to do it.    It just seemed like all hell broke  loose after that. We had to go to Dallas one weekend. I wanted all of my  brothers to be a part of this. David doesn   t paint, but my other brother  Sam   and both of us work, and it   s right in the middle of the track season.  He   s a track coach and it   s just     Little Thunder You took a canvas down there to Dallas?  Henderson No, at that point we hadn   t even met and talked about it.  Little Thunder Oh, okay. Got you.  Henderson We had talked on the phone a couple of times, but we were all going to get  together that weekend and work out some sketches, and actually  communicate with each other on who was going to do what. (Laughter) We  hadn   t even done that. Then all of a sudden my uncle died, and we had to go  down to Dallas.  All of us went, except for Sam. Sam had to work. Daniel drew out those  sketches. I told him, I said,    Just do it. It   s going to take us forever if we  wait. Just do it.    He was right in the backseat and he drew out those sketches  when we were in that Dallas traffic. Oh my god, that horrible traffic. Then  we stopped and he showed them to me and I said,    Oh, those   ll work.  Those   ll work. Yeah, let   s do it.     Mom said,    I can fix the canvases.    I said,    Okay, we   ll do that.    I said,     When I get back to work, I   ll pick mine up sometime.    That   s when we  also decided that we would all be working on separate canvases. The last  collaboration that we did, the big ones, we actually did all of us work on  different pieces of each can vas . I did have one that I did most of it on. I  designed all of them, but the one that has the chunkey player on it, I did  almost all of that. Of course, we would just look at them and kind of critique  a little bit and try to make them better. That is at the casino. We did do  another collaboration at the casino, at the Hard Rock.  Little Thunder Okay, at the Hard Rock?  Henderson Yes, Daniel did the one with the turkey that   s in a boardroom somewhere.  Mom helped with the story of the first fire. She beaded the spider. There   s a  spider about this big in the middle of it. I did the design. There   s an owl  flying because you know, owl said,    I   ll go get it,    and was unsuccessful.  Then there   s a big medicine wheel in it, one of those Southeastern ones. I  think it   s got some copper leaf. I was doing a lot of copper leaf at the time,  on it. Of course, the water. Daniel did the fish. I did the tree. Yeah, we all  worked on that.  23  Little Thunder And would you each   you didn   t work on site or anything? You were just  like     Henderson Yeah, we did all of it on site.  Little Thunder Oh, you did? Okay, that   s what I was wondering.  Henderson In my old studio because had room in there. Yeah, we all did. I think Mom  actually did take that one canvas and bead on it first.  Little Thunder Your main focus, though, when you   re painting now it   s pretty much acrylics  when you get your choice of media. Is that right?  Henderson No, now it   s oils. I love oils.  Little Thunder Oh, okay. That   s interesting.  Henderson (Laughs) I know. I do like acrylics and I like watercolor, too, pastels. I like a  lot of different mediums. I guess it just kind of depends on what you   re  going to say and do. I like acrylics because you can paint really fast because  they dry fast and stuff. For the style   like for instance, for that style that I  did with the triptych, you can paint really fast. It dries fast. It   s going to give  you the impact.  The thing I don   t like about them is that I   m not getting a true color because  it   s always going to dry darker or different for some reason. That   s what I  love about oils is the color. The trueness of the color, and the shininess, and  all the different things you can do with it. Daniel and Mom is the one that  talked me into doing them. I use water-based oils and water-mixable oil  painting mediums. I don   t do the old-school stuff, but I really like them.  Little Thunder Do you do preliminary sketching directly on your canvas? Or do you do  studies first and then   .  Henderson It depends. Ideally, yeah, I   d like to do it directly on the canvas. If I   m going  to do something really quickly, I can do that. If it   s something that I   m  pretty familiar with, I can do that. Hardly ever happens. Usually, I   m going  to have to do some research, and some sketches. Maybe even some little  studies that end up   I think they   re a painting, but they end up being a study  for something else that   s going to be bigger.  I was taught by Dick West. He would take my sketches and just go,    This is  too long, that   s too short, blah, blah, blah,    and just start going all over it.  Just tearing the paper, whong, with his big old hands. I remember the first  time he did that, I was just like,    Wow, the kid gloves are off now. We   re  not in Sunday school no more.    (Laughter) He handed it back to me and I  24  just looked at him and I said,    I   m going to have to do this over, aren   t I?     He goes,    Yeah.    I said,    Okay.     (Laughter) So I was taught, you get that sketch and you get it right, and your  anatomy better be correct. I was taught to know your history and don   t be  putting stuff in there if you don   t know what it   s about. For instance, design,  decoration, other things. The leaves on the strawberries   we looked at so  many pictures. Not that we spent a lot of time with it, but I mean, I was  taught you make it correct because somebody   s going to see that and they   re  going to say,    That   s not right.    This is     Little Thunder    wild strawberries  Henderson This is stuff may collect dust, and be in a storage room, and get rained on, or  whatever, or it might last for centuries. You don   t know. More than likely  it   s going to outlive you, so what are you going to leave behind? It   s  important with the Native American art, I think.  Little Thunder How about titles? How important are they to you as a painter?  Henderson I don   t really care. (Laughs)  Little Thunder Do you title your paintings?  Henderson Yes, I title them. Like I said, I don   t put a big emphasis on them. Now the  strawberries paintings, I didn   t even put a title on mine when I took it down  there. Daniel had a title on his called Strawberry Fields, and so on my  invoices I put Strawberry Fields 2, Strawberry Fields 3. (Laughter) That   s  how committed I am to them.  Little Thunder What   s your creative process from the time that you get an idea? It can  either be for a painting or a design, beadwork design, or whatever.  Henderson The best ones they come in a dream, I think, because you   re always thinking  about them. Or when I   m driving. But yeah, the best ones come in a dream  usually. That one did. That one   s about the ravages of addiction. I think  that   s what it   s called, is Addiction. I had that show   I did my   what do  you call it? All art students have to do a show. I did that     Little Thunder Yeah.  Henderson    all seniors have to do that.  Little Thunder Your senior capstone project.  25  Henderson Yes, my capstone. I did my capstone during the American Indian  Symposium in the U niversity C center , in the Morgan Room, or one of  them  at Northeastern State University . Before that, everybody had always  just done them down at the library. They set up some easels and threw some  pictures up, had some punch.  I said,    Man, if we   re going to do a show, you need to have an audience and  make some sales.    They didn   t have a gallery back then. They got a gallery  now, downtown, which is wonderful actually. I knew Phyllis Fife and at the  time she was over the symposium and she was all for it. She was like,     Yeah, let   s do a show.    I pretty much sold just about everything, but I had  that one up.  The reason I brought that up was because so many people and so many  kids   because a lot of schools bring kids through that symposium     they   d all get up there and I got so many comments. Some of them would  just come in and they were,    Yes, that   s what it   s like. Yes, yes.    Because so  many   you just think about it, everybody knows somebody that   s been  affected by alcohol. I think I got pretty close with this one as far as what it   s  like and people could relate to it.  Little Thunder Right. We   re going to look at that here in a moment. It   s very powerful.  What has been a fork in the road in your art career where in your art  production, where you sort of went one way and you could   ve gone another?  A kind of fork in the road moment. You might have mentioned it.  Henderson Well, like I said, I was all set to go to get my master   s. I didn   t end up     well, my baby was stillborn, so I don   t have any children. I have seven  nieces and nephew, but I don   t have any children of my own. I had to go  through that as far as the process of grief and all of those things, and come  out on the end and decide whether or not I wanted to go to school, or if I  wanted to start my life.  My husband was several years older than me and he really wanted to buy a  house. Myself, I   m one of those people who didn   t really care. I mean, I   m  very grateful now that I have a house, but at the time I was just, I don   t  really care, but it was important to him. I knew that I was getting these  offers and so I was going to be able to make the money that I   d always  wanted. (It   s my little cat. (Laughs) She   s decided to play. I   m sorry.) It was  start my life, house, or go to school? If I went to school, how was it going to  benefit me?  Little Thunder What   s been a really high point of your art production so far? A high point?  Henderson Oh, but we were talking about the forks.  26  Little Thunder The forks, yeah, maybe we didn   t finish that thought. Yeah.  Henderson I don   t know if I even got to it.  Little Thunder You mentioned the three choices.  Henderson Right. The reason I didn   t go to TU is because I couldn   t get anybody to  meet with me. I   d set up an appointment, I went over there, and nobody was  there. I walked around the school and what I really wanted to see was the  graduate student areas. What were you going to get for the amount of  money? Normally, they   re just little curtained off areas. I didn   t even see  anything and the building was so small. I was like,    They probably don   t  even have an area.    I left. Like I said, I had a wonderful tour at OU. She  was   Mary Jo Watson was really pushing me more towards Indian art  history, and I really wanted to explore more painting, which could have     Arkansas was awesome. (Laughs)  Little Thunder I   ve heard.  Henderson They had somebody meet me there. They gave me a tour, full-out tour, and  they have a wonderful facility. They have a gallery right in their own art  building. They have their own art library, and of course, they have a lot of  funding. They actually showed me an area of a little space about the size of  this area right here, which was way bigger than any space that I   d seen  before because usually it   s like, I   m talking small. They took me over to the  financial aid building and offered me a scholarship that isn   t advertised, so I  was going to get a full ride.  Then I didn   t go, of all things. I don   t know, that   s been a long time ago and  I   m sure that some of that is probably still   I can go to school now with my  husband   s VA. I could do it if I wanted, so that   s there, too, as an option if I  ever wanted to. I   m just more interested in trying to learn more technique,  actually. I don   t know, all of that is still out there as far as forks in the road.  I   m very proud of my service to the Cherokee Nation as far as an employee,  working in the prevention field. I know it   s important work, but I didn   t get  to do a lot of painting along the way. I did do some artwork and have met a  lot of people. I got appointed to the National Treasure   s committee. I get     people ask me questions like they think I know something. (Laughs)  Hastings Shade told me that one time. He said,    You know, one day,    he  was talking about himself,    one day you   re going to wake up and realize  people are asking you questions and they   re referring to you as an elder and  you don   t even know you are.    He said,    That   s how I am now.    We were  like,    Yeah, you   re an elder. You know so many things, too.    (Laughter)  27  I   m not saying I   m there yet, but it   s kind of working that way. It   s nice as  far as, you know, being able to have some input on things. That   s about as  far as my fork   that   s about as far as I   ve gotten in the present time, but it  could   ve been very different.  Little Thunder Is there anything else you   d like to talk about before we take a look at your  paintings?  Henderson No. What was that other question you asked, before I took us off?  Little Thunder I guess a high point in your art slash personal life. A high point and a low  point, if you wanted to think about that.  Henderson I think my high point   s yet to come     Little Thunder Yeah, it sounds like you   re really getting ready to     Henderson    I think I told you about Philbrook. That was a high point that I didn   t even  realize was there. The Creator probably has things in store for me and I  don   t know what those are. He   s always taken care of me. I   ll just do  whatever I have to do. That   s one thing I   ve always thought of and  considered. Daniel will say the same thing. I   m just riding on the train.  There was an elder (and I can   t remember who it was) from another tribe,  they were talking about to be the hollow bone. That   s what you want to be is  the hollow bone.  You have to keep it cleared out so that the Creator can move through you  and out to the world. I just try to do the best I can at that and wait for the  opportunities and just try to be aware when they come. To paint and do what  I need to do. What he feels like he wants me to do as far as what I need to  say. Like I said, I think the best is yet to come. As far as my low point, I had  a lot of them when I was younger. This thing, taking care of my husband  because he got ALS from Agent Orange, being a Vietnam veteran. Some  people may think that   s a low point, but he was such a blessing in my life  and to many other people. It was really just an honor, I wouldn   t call it a low  point experience. It was really an extraordinary experience. I don   t know.  I   m hoping I don   t have very many low points coming. (Laughs)  Little Thunder I know you   re not going to miss any calls, any calls for art. Okay, we   re  going to pause it real quickly and reposition the camera to see your artwork.  You want to tell us a little bit about your triptych?  28  Henderson Yes, this is a triptych about addiction. This first one is really about  everything that goes with it as far as living in an alcoholic family, the  consequences of it, and some of the things that   because children end up  raising other children. You could even say, maybe teen pregnancy, but a lot  of it has to do with how we treat each other even when you   re in that. The  consequences of it, like I said. The acting out, and the high risk, and the  rage. Then, of course, broken promises, good intentions, but broken  promises.  This COA stands for Children of Alcoholics, and on the can it says DUI. It   s  a multigenerational thing. That   s why    planting seeds    is on there because if  people grow up in this environment they   re more likely to, unfortunately,  become the same way. They hear all this stuff growing up,    I hate you. You  can   t do anything right. You   re stupid. You   re not good enough.    Those are  just,    don   t cry,    standard things, so it   s a lot of feelings in there. (Laughs)  Little Thunder Okay. This is the second part of the triptych.  29  Henderson This is the second part of the triptych. You can see that they go together as  far as flowing into, one to another. Like I was saying a while ago, as a result  of all of this, a lot of times this is what you get from it. This represents the  internalizing all of these things and the consequences of that. All of these  things that are written into the figure is what   s internalized and what people  think about themselves if they grew up in this environment.  A lot of times children of alcoholics, they have shame, they feel like they   re  no good. Even if they   ve been told,    You   re a great person,    or whatever  and,    You   re doing wonderful things,    nothing   s ever good enough. They   re  very angry. Some of this other stuff is what people say,    I   m worried about  you.    They   re just kind of standard things that come with it. Resentment.  Why did this happen to me?  Sometimes there will be sexual assault. They   ll grow up with all sorts of  emotional issues from that kind of trauma. The black part is very important  because people that are in that depression, that   s what they say, all of them  say it,    All I could see was black. That   s all I can see.    This part right here  represents, the little white and yellow, is kind of like a light at the end of the  tunnel. They   ll describe that, too. They   ll say,    I can see a little bit of a  light,    but they don   t really want to believe it, and they can   t believe it  because it has to do with the fear, and the anger, and not thinking they can  30  do anything about it. So a lot of them do suicide. They disintegrate, they  develop depression, and they isolate, so that   s why we   ve got this person  sitting up here, isolated.  Little Thunder I can see why students would relate so strongly to this, too. All right, and  this is the last one of the triptych.  Henderson Yes, so you can see how it also flows into the other one, the last one. What  the last one represents is recovery basically   surviving. If a person makes it  through all of this, and they live and they don   t commit suicide and they  actually get some help, and work through those things this is what can  happen. These are some of the promises and some of the support and things  that happen. That you   re not alone because you really feel like you are.  What you realize when you get that support is that you   re not alone. They  teach you how to be grateful, that   s part of the changing in the thinking.  Because you know you can think of the glass half empty, or half full. So  they teach you about   and part of that is about gratitude. The easiest way to  get to a positive thought is through gratitude and you got to think about it  because sometimes we like to dwell in our   feeling sorry for ourselves.  That   s also where the healing starts, and being able to celebrate, and feeling  blessed   where the miracles start to happen. The hand goes through from  the person and it   s holding like a little lamp, so that   s like the symbol of  hope, and the butterfly for renewal.  31  Well this one   I like it and people like it because it does look like a cool  blanket right?  Little Thunder It does. It would be a great design.  Henderson It   s actually a study, a color study that I did for school. (Laughter) It was a  culmination of all of this study about   we had to do all these color wheels.  Oh my god, I bet I created three or four different kinds of color wheels and  then value charts. Then we of course did still lifes and some other things to  learn about color, and it really opened my eyes to color   like I can   t look at  that white wall without seeing all the colors in it as a result of all that.  R. C. Koontz taught me all of that because he   s awesome that way. He   s a  they honored him   he   s one of the millennium teachers for NSU. He taught  me all of that, so what this is, is a study on complementary colors. If you  look at a medicine wheel, and I have one, got a medicine wheel right here.  Little Thunder Yes, go ahead and show that, too.  Henderson If you look at a medicine wheel   a color wheel. If you look at a color  wheel     Little Thunder Which is its own, I guess, medicine wheel.  32  Henderson Yeah. (Laughter) It was working on me, believe me. You   ve got your  primary colors: your yellow, blue, and red. Those are primary. Illustrated  down here, you also have your secondaries which are in-between those: so  we   ve got green, and purple, and orange. They   re secondary, what they call  secondary. Then there   s tertiary: that   s the rest of them, okay?  If you look at the wheel, and this is why I still have this wheel out here  because I haven   t memorized all of them. I do kind of know them. What  they call the primary color always has a complementary color. So the  primary color yellow, the complementary color, the complementary color of  that is purple. Same thing with red, the complementary color is green. You  wouldn   t think that, but that   s what   if you really want to bring out a color,  you add its complementary right next to it. I still do that when I paint. If I  want to pull something out, I add the complementary. That   s how it is. It   s  directly opposite the wheel, that   s why I got it out. What you got here, and  I   m in the light, like here   s a blue and the complementary of blue is orange.  Orange is right next to it. It   s kind of difficult to do because you   re putting  lines down right and so we   ve got yellow and blue, I   ve got red and green.  There   s different values here, but we   ve got the purple and the yellow, and  the red and the green again, and the red and the green. Then there   s orange,  which is also kind of a really warm color. These are all right next to each  other.  33  Little Thunder Just the softness of the lines and it looks like a piece of fabric     Henderson And I did it, yeah, I did it really brushy.  Little Thunder    it looks like a blanket.  Henderson I did it really brushy and ideally we were supposed to make those lines  really straight and perfect, and I didn   t do that because I wanted to do it  really fast. I didn   t make them straight and perfect because I can   t do a  straight line. This is one of my fallacies. I cannot paint a straight   it   s very  hard. My mom   s real good at it. I can   t do it.  Little Thunder It works so much better like this, actually.  Henderson That   s why I didn   t do it, but Mr. King said it   s fine because you did the  whole thing that way. If you tried to make some of it straight then it  wouldn   t work. He came and looked at it and he goes   I said,    I   m  finished.    He kind of looked at it and goes,    Okay.    I said,    I   m done.  You   re not going to make me redo anything?    because I thought he was  going to, and everybody just looked at him like   (Laughs)  Little Thunder Mr. King, she didn   t follow directions. (Laughter)  Henderson Yes, yes.  Little Thunder That   s great.  Henderson Teacher   s pet, but he was right. I love this painting because of that. I   ve got  the memories, but also because it   s such a cool painting and I want to do it  bigger.  Little Thunder That would be neat.  Henderson And it does look like a blanket.  Little Thunder Well, thank you so much for your time today, Mary.  Henderson You   re welcome.  ------  -------   
