 Little Thunder My name is Julie Pearson Little-Thunder, today is Monday, November  16, 2015, and I   m interview Austin Real Rider for the Oklahoma Native  Artists Project, sponsored by the Oklahoma Oral History Research  Program at Oklahoma State University. Austin, you   re Pawnee and  Sioux, you specialize in ceramic sculpture, much of which is designed  as wall hangings. You   ve won numerous awards and honors at the  Heard Museum,  Colorado Indian Market in  Denver, among others,  and you were the 2008 Honored One for the Red Earth Indian Arts  Festival. I look forward to learning more about you and your work.  Where were you born and where did you grow up?  Real Rider I was born in Pawnee. I grew up in Oklahoma City and Pawnee.  Little Thunder What did your folks do for a living?  Real Rider My dad worked for Phillips. He ran a pump station is what he did. My  mom was a nurse in Pawnee.  Little Thunder How about brothers or sisters?  Real Rider I have three sisters. I had to think about that. (Laughter)  Little Thunder Where do you fall in the sequence?  Real Rider Number two.  Little Thunder Okay. What was your relationship with your grandparents on either  side of your family?  Real Rider I got to know them for a while. At the time, we lived in Oklahoma City,  so I didn   t get to see them that much.  5  Little Thunder Were you around the Pawnee language very much growing up?  Real Rider My dad could speak Pawnee fluently and I often asked him to teach me  how, but he always told me   he said,    Who are you going to talk to  later on?    It   s the truth. There   s none of us left anymore. There   s a little  bit, but I don   t think there   s anybody that can really talk it fluently.  Little Thunder What   s your first memory of seeing Native art?  Real Rider I was pretty young, probably fourth grade, I guess. School books.  Little Thunder How about your first memory of making art?  Real Rider Probably the second grade, I guess. Did a lot of airplanes.  Little Thunder Were you drawing them?  Real Rider Yes.  Little Thunder Were you doing anything three-dimensional?  Real Rider No, not until we moved to Pawnee. That was probably the fourth grade.  Just go to the creek and start messing with the mud down there.  Little Thunder (Laughs) Good beginning for a ceramics sculptor. Did you have family  or extended family who might have been an influence in your interest in  art?  Real Rider On my mom   s side, they were all musicians: piano and singing. My  oldest sister sang. She was real good. But other than that, I just drew  and taught myself how to paint.  Little Thunder When you were making things down by the creek, what kinds of things  did you like to make out of mud?  Real Rider Just any kind of animal. Got through, just throw them in the water.  Little Thunder (Laughter) Oh, you didn   t let them dry?  Real Rider No.  Little Thunder Did your folks notice your talent and encourage you?  Real Rider Yes, my mom did. I guess they were pretty good about encouraging us.  6  Little Thunder How about at school? Were you exposed to any art at school, in  elementary school?  Real Rider Yeah, we had regular little art classes all the way through to high  school.  Little Thunder Even at Pawnee?  Real Rider Yeah, that was at Pawnee.  Little Thunder At Pawnee, do you have any memories of any teachers or moments that  were important to you in terms of art?  Real Rider No, I really can   t even remember my art teachers. That   s bad.  Little Thunder (Laughs) But you were doing art?  Real Rider Oh, yeah.  Little Thunder All the time?  Real Rider Yes.  Little Thunder How early did you know that you wanted to be an artist?  Real Rider Probably in junior high. But when I went to the BIA  Bureau of Indian  Affairs  to go to school, they told me that you couldn   t make it as an  artist. So I went on to be a printer, which helped. It helped.  Little Thunder Is that when you got directed down to OSU Technical School at  Okmulgee?  Real Rider Yes.  Little Thunder But you did study painting and clay there as well?  Real Rider At Okmulgee? No.  Little Thunder Oh, you didn   t? Okay. That was misinformation online. When did you  sell your first piece of art?  Real Rider I really don   t remember, I was real young. They probably just bought it  to make me feel good. (Laughter)  Little Thunder Somebody in town or     7  Real Rider Probably one of my relatives, yeah. Probably got tired of me begging  them to buy it.  Little Thunder At OSU, at that tech school, there are a number of well-known artists,  actually, who went to school there. Was there anybody in your classes  whose name we would recognize?  Real Rider I think there was a Kiowa and a Comanche boy there, but I can   t  remember their names right now. I know they went on to be artists.  Little Thunder In terms of studying commercial printing, what kind of a base did you  get for your art later on?  Real Rider I knew   at the time I was drawing and painting. I knew what the  process,  what  it was going to have to go through to get put on a t-shirt  or be printed or whatever.  Little Thunder Who were some of the artists you admired when you were down there at  Okmulgee?  Real Rider The only one I really knew was Brummett Echohawk because Pawnee,  that   s a little town. I did have a relative or two that drew and painted,  but Brummett was the only one they really pushed, so he was the one I  remember.  Little Thunder He was a wonderful artist. It was kind of a change of environment down  there too, wasn   t it?  Real Rider Oh yeah.  Little Thunder How did you like it down there?  Real Rider It was okay. I knew I had to do it to get an education. I had to stay there.  But I got to go home on the weekends, so it was okay.  Little Thunder What prompted you to go on to the Institute of American Indian Art?  Real Rider I got a divorce and my sister was living in Santa Fe, so I went out there  and partied for about three years. During my partying, I met one of the  professors there at the school and got acquainted with him and his wife  and they talked me into going. That   s how I got in there.  Little Thunder You were about how old when you ended up going to school there?  Real Rider The reason I didn   t want to go to school there, it   s like me walking over  here, there   s nothing but young kids. I felt out of place, walking over  8  here. And I felt out of place out there. The kids all called me Grandpa  out there, so it was okay.  Little Thunder Were you in your thirties or     Real Rider I was in my forties.  Little Thunder Okay, and you   d been kind of working in commercial printing pretty  much up to that point.  Real Rider Up to that point, yes.  Little Thunder You weren   t the only one who was older when you went there. (Laughs)  That was kind of an adjustment, too, right, being in Santa Fe? What  was that like?  Real Rider I liked it. I wish I had went there first because I would   ve been in there  during its heyday. Things were really happening back in them early  days.  Little Thunder What did you focus on while you were there?  Real Rider Painting, and then I got in to one of the ceramic classes. I liked that. My  painting style just kind of went in to my ceramic work. No one was  doing that type of work, so it worked out all right.  Little Thunder Were you actually making like pottery that you were painting? Or what  were you working on?  Real Rider Yeah, I was doing pottery. The pottery I was doing, I was getting the  clay at Pawnee. I   d dig it up myself. It was some kind of special clay, I  guess, because the traditional pottery isn   t supposed to ring when you  thump it, but mine would ring like china.  Little Thunder Wow.  Real Rider They didn   t like me to do pottery out there because that our tribe didn   t  do pottery, but when it boils right down to it, every tribe did pottery.  These are the teachers telling me that. We went round and round over  that. Finally, I got tired of it, and I just took off in other things, making  other things.  Little Thunder That   s when you got more into the sculptural aspect of ceramic  sculptures?  Real Rider Yeah.  9  Little Thunder What kinds of things were you experimenting with in school there?  Real Rider What do you mean by   what kinds of things?  Little Thunder In terms of formats, were you making shields already and masks? Or  not yet?  Real Rider In my one pottery class they asked us to   it was our final grade     and they asked us to make a mask. I didn   t know anything about masks.  The only mask I ever seen was a Halloween mask. All the other kids  from the Northwest, and Northeast, and Southeast, and Southwest, they  had all grew up with masks. They whipped theirs out real quick and  turned them in. I couldn   t think of nothing, and the lady told me, she  said,    I   ll give you an F if you don   t turn one in.    I had a friend that  when he danced, he danced with a wolf hide on his head, and that   s the  one I made. It sold. Before it was even finished it sold. So I had to make  another one to turn in to my teacher.  Little Thunder You knew you were on to something then.  Real Rider Yeah. Then later on I was going to do a   one of the Indians, they  would send them off to Washington to sign treaties and stuff. They   d go  up there in their buckskin outfits, or dressed like Indians dressed back  then. When they got there, well, they seen everybody with their suits on  and everything, so that   s what they would get into   pinstripe suits.  Then when they wanted to take a picture of them, they didn   t really  look like Indians, so they   d run into the museum and grab war bonnets  and put them on them, and they   d take a picture. That   s what I was  going to do. I was going to do a life-sized Indian in a pinstriped suit, in  braids, and a war bonnet all out of clay. But I didn   t like the way artists  were doing eyes, so I come up with a way making an eye that would  look back at you. That   s what I do with my masks now     Little Thunder And that   s tricky.  Real Rider    They   ll look at you, yeah, and it caught on and sold pretty good.  Little Thunder Were you kiln   electric kiln firing your masks there, or were you wood  firing?  Real Rider I was firing outside, but I was losing   the way I had to fire them things  depended on the wind. I needed a little bit of wind. Sometimes there  was too much and it would crack them. That   s when I started  experimenting. I was able to put them in an electric kiln then. It worked  out all right.  10  Little Thunder So did you do Santa Fe Indian Market while you were at the school as  well?  Real Rider My last year I did the Market.  Little Thunder What was that like?  Real Rider It was good. I didn   t make a lot of money, but I sold, I sold out. It was  good. Then after that   I got, what do they call it? Tenured artist?  Where you   re in every year, you don   t have to apply again. My mom  got sick, so I moved back home, and then she got real bad, so I didn   t  go that year. They took me off the list because I missed that year, so  now I have to apply every year. It   s still okay.  Little Thunder How long did you stay in Santa Fe after you graduated? After you left  the program?  Real Rider I stayed there until    70. Probably about    71, I think, we moved back to  Pawnee.  Little Thunder Moved back to Pawnee. When you were working in Santa Fe, how did  you get your first kiln? Was it an electric kiln, I guess?  Real Rider Yes, I bought a used one and I bought it from what I sold. Used that  money to buy a kiln. Plus, I had access to the school   s kiln, so that  helped.  Little Thunder That   s great. Were you continuing to get your clay at Pawnee or were  you buying commercial clay?  Real Rider By then I had quit making pots, so I just quit. It   s a lot of work to dig  that stuff up and carry it back to your truck or car. By then, I was  starting to feel it in my shoulders because that   s what it does to you  when you work in clay too long.  Little Thunder Did you get into some galleries in Santa Fe?  Real Rider Never did. I was only in one and they didn   t ask me to get in it. They  paid full price for whatever it was and then they just stuck it in the  gallery and raised the price up. That   s the only time that I know that I  was in a gallery in Santa Fe.  Little Thunder In Santa Fe. What was one of your important early awards?  11  Real Rider My first one was I won Second Place in sculpting at Red Earth. I think  it was the first year of Red Earth, yeah. First year.  Little Thunder What was your entry for that?  Real Rider It was called The Wood Gatherer. Actually, all it was   it was a blanket  made out of clay and the wind was blowing it, but you could tell that  somebody was in there, but there was nobody in there. But it did have  the hair coming out, blowing in the wind and carrying wood. The wood  sticking out of it.  Little Thunder So it was a full figure.  Real Rider Yeah, it was about that tall, too. Probably about thirteen inches tall.  Little Thunder Neat. What were some important shows for you early on?  Real Rider The Heard Museum, Santa Fe, Scottsdale, Red Earth, and Tulsa, and  Denver. Seemed like I   d be going somewhere every weekend back then.  Little Thunder Wow. (Laughter) How did you approach the business side of your art?  Real Rider My wife handled that part of it.  Little Thunder This was Priscilla?  Real Rider Yeah.  Little Thunder How did you two meet?  Real Rider We was at a   It was before I got in school. We both wound up at this  dance hall there in Santa Fe. I asked her to dance and that was it.  (Laughter)  Little Thunder What kind of role did she play in the business?  Real Rider I was a worker. Yeah, I did all the work.  Little Thunder Did she sort of     Real Rider She handled applications and everything.  Little Thunder And then, I know she was good at the booth, talking to people.  Real Rider Oh yeah, that was fun.  12  Little Thunder Organizing. Typically, with that many shows, you   re doing just almost  one a month or something. How much inventory did you try to finish?  Real Rider That   s all I had to do was work. She handled everything else. She fed  the pups, and cats, and squirrels. Took care of the house. All I had to do  was work. She made sure I was out there, working. (Laughter) Now I  got to do it all myself and that   s why I haven   t been to a show in a long  time.  Little Thunder But you did go to Colorado last year? You went to Morrison.  Real Rider Yeah, but we got rained out.  Little Thunder One important thread in your work has been your masks. You explained  the assignment that led you to explore them. I know, besides, Pawnees  have this agricultural tradition in addition to the Plains heritage. Is  there a tradition of masks, too, or not?  Real Rider No, I don   t know of any. I   m sure maybe there might have been one or  two masks that they might have, one of them may have, but I   ve never  heard of any Plains Indians having a mask. Their mask was their war  paint.  Little Thunder And that   s often what inspires your designs. I think you were one of the  early Plains people to do masks, starting out, I don   t think there were a  lot of people doing them. How did general public receive them?  Real Rider They liked them. Some of them were scared of the eyes because they  would look back at you, you know. They all seemed to like them. Kids  really liked them.  Little Thunder And you wanted them to look back because     Real Rider I didn   t plan it that way, but it just happened to look back at you. I  looked at other masks that were dead, that didn   t have no life in them. I  tried to make mine look real.  Little Thunder How about other Indian people? How did they react to the masks?  Real Rider They liked them. In fact, I had other artists copy them and then go on to  do their own thing. That   s the way I learned. I copied other artists in  drawings and stuff like that. I   d draw them out of books that were  already paintings of other artists and see if I could do it. Then I just took  off on my own, did my own thing. I think that   s how everybody learns,  biggest part of them.  13  Little Thunder Yeah, and there are many more mask makers now. A lot of times, you   ll  incorporate other materials like feathers, or shell, or cloth in your  masks. Did you   were you doing that IAIA, too, or did you just start  adding them later?  Real Rider No, I started doing that mixed-media type mask. I more or less just  started right off the bat.  Little Thunder You do shields as well. Is that a challenge in terms of, if you   re going to  hang them as wall art?  Real Rider Yeah, you got to know how you   re going to hang them before you start.  That part   s not really hard, but it   s putting them in the kiln and then  firing them without cracking.  Little Thunder Are they raku, also? What   s the     Real Rider Yeah, the shields were raku.  Little Thunder You mentioned Pawnee stories and legends as being as an inspiration  for your artwork, how does your Sioux ancestry come into play or does  it?  Real Rider I can make fun of them. I can make fun of the Pawnees, I can make fun  of the white people because my grandfather was part white, my mom  was part white. My dad was Pawnee. Mom was also part Sioux, so I can  make fun of all of them. Like right now I   m doing a painting of a little  Indian boy. He   s on a merry-go-round, merry-go-round horse. It   s on     can   t remember the size of the canvas   but pretty good size. But I  painted it to look like a ledger paper. Then I   ve got little ledger Indians  chasing him, and he   s on the merry-go-round horse with his fingers like  a gun, and he   s looking back, shooting at them. Right now I don   t know  whether to make him and then call him a little Sioux boy or a little  Pawnee boy, but it   s back in the   between 1900 and 1920s style dress  on that little boy. I   ve got a title for it, but I don   t know whether to call  it The Sioux or Pawnee yet.  Little Thunder That sounds great, I hope we   ll get to see it before it sells. I   ve always  liked your ceramic horses. I was interviewing knife maker, Daniel  Worcester, and he has a whole room full of them.  Real Rider Oh yeah, yeah.  Little Thunder (Laughs) And each one   s unique of course. How do you keep them all  fresh?  14  Real Rider I don   t take pictures of them. I mean I do have to have some pictures, to  send out for an application, to put on an application. But I don   t take  pictures of my horses.  Little Thunder That way you   re just starting from scratch. Are commissions a big part  of your work?  Real Rider No, not really. I have had some commissions, but usually I just make  them and go out and try to sell them.  Little Thunder When you had commissions did you enjoy those or     Real Rider No. (Laughs)  Little Thunder I have yet to find an artist who likes  them . (Laughs)  Real Rider Because you can   t really get wild and crazy with them like you want to.  Little Thunder Right. How is your approach to the ceramic part of your work changed  over the years?  Real Rider I think about it more now. When I first started, I   d think about doing  something and then once they started selling   I would also have to get  into the mood. But once they sold and they were gone and I knew that I  had to make more, I got to where I could go out there any time and just  start working and didn   t even think about it. Now I   m back to thinking  about it again. (Laughs) But I haven   t done anything in a while. I   m just  taking a vacation right now, I guess.  Little Thunder It sounds like you   re exploring painting more these days?  Real Rider I   m trying to get back into painting. They   re a lot easier to carry than  ceramics.  Little Thunder Do you remember how the Indian Art scene changed? I guess we   re  talking about the late    70s,   80s, when you got real involved with it. Or  are we talking    80s?  Real Rider Yeah, it was starting to change then. It was starting to   there for a  while back in   let   s see, it was    62,    63, whatever you   d make, they   d  buy it. People would buy it. It   s started dropping off, but I still got in on  the tail end of it. Now they don   t buy as much as they used to, but  they   re still buying. If they like it, they   ll buy it. It   s a little slower than  what it was there for a while.  15  Little Thunder How about the    80s to the    90s? Do you remember any   . It seems like  three-dimensional objects got pretty strong during that period.  Real Rider It was like in Santa Fe. When your three-dimensional stuff was selling  like crazy, they wasn   t buying any paintings or jewelry. Jewelry wasn   t  selling real good, either. Then the next year they   d maybe start on  jewelry and buy a lot of jewelry and here   s all the sculptors and  painters, sitting over there, mad, with mad looks. Then the next year,  it   d be paintings. I   ve noticed that, I notice how they buy. So I thought,     I   ll get them. I   ll have paintings and sculptures.    (Laughter)  Little Thunder That   s great, you   ll have both. In 1990, the Indian Arts and Crafts Act  was passed, requiring artists to provide proof of tribal citizenship. I  think it had more of an impact here in Oklahoma, but I   m wondering if  you   ve observed any changes on the art scene at that time.  Real Rider When we had our store, my wife bought all of the jewelry. She was real  good at that. She could tell where it came from and everything. When  she passed away, I went out through Gallup,  New Mexico  and I  bought some jewelry and it was all plated. I wound up giving it all  away. I   m sure they still do it (you got to be careful), but they just  caught stores in Santa Fe that were selling phony jewelry.  Little Thunder You mean just this year?  Real Rider Yeah, just recently. And there are people out there that claim to be  Indian that are doing stuff that   s not real.  Little Thunder I didn   t realize you two had a store. Can you tell me a little about that?  Real Rider Yeah, we had an art gallery/western store for about seven years, I guess.  Did good. When she passed away, it just went down. I didn   t close it up  when I should have. I should   ve closed it earlier, but I wanted to keep it  open.  Little Thunder That   s a full-time job just running a store. That was there in Santa Fe?  Real Rider In Pawnee.  Little Thunder Okay. What was the name of the store?  Real Rider Prairie Rose.  Little Thunder Okay, yeah I remember hearing that. Do you have any funny or  otherwise memorable travel show stories?  16  Real Rider I got a bunch of them. (Laughter) When I started off, I was still in  school. This girl from Taos and her boyfriend was a guy from Kansas,  she had a little bitty, real small car. Real small. I don   t know, we were  all potters. She was a potter, and he did sculptures, and I did clay  sculptures. I don   t know how we got everything in that little car, but we  went all over the place. Now I got a pickup and it   s too small, and it   s  just me. We weren   t particular how we showed them back in them days.  Little Thunder Yeah, you need a few stands.  Real Rider What we   d do is just grab a table and throw a blanket on it and sit back  and wait for them to come by.  Little Thunder You were the Red Earth Honored One in 2008. What was that like?  Real Rider It was good, it was fun.  Little Thunder When you have a longstanding relationship with a show, does that make  it easier or more difficult to do the show?  Real Rider No, it makes it easier, but I don   t know. It just makes it easier if you   ve  been there quite a while.  Little Thunder You have your collectors that come back and know you.  Real Rider And you make a lot of friends and they come back every year.  Little Thunder It   s been through its ups and downs, too, like all the state art shows.  Real Rider I haven   t been there for a while. I   m thinking about going this year.  Little Thunder That would be great, see some of your paintings. Was it an adjustment  when you and Priscilla moved back to Pawnee? Was it an adjustment  for you, coming from Santa Fe, back home?  Real Rider Not for me, for her. She didn   t have a hard time adjusting. In fact, she  liked it because there was trees and grass. Our house had a porch on it  and she liked that. Where out there, they don   t have no trees. There isn   t  too much grass out there. She liked the pecans   pecan trees, so it  wasn   t hard for her to get used to it. Then we   d go back at least once a  month.  Little Thunder I understand you were part of the Pawnee Artists Association. I talked  to Marlene Riding in  Mameah  a couple weeks ago. Did you teach a  ceramics workshop for them?  17  Real Rider Yeah, I taught one. Everybody liked it.  Little Thunder Was that your first time teaching a workshop?  Real Rider Yeah.  Little Thunder So what was the most challenging thing about it?  Real Rider Not wanting to grab some of that clay out of their hands and do it  myself. They opened it up to little kids and, you know, little kids are  having fun. They   ll work for a while and they start goofing off. You just  had to go with the flow, laugh with them and get them back into it  again. I still have some of those kids come around and ask me,     Remember when you was teaching us how to do that?    Different stuff.  But none of the people really   Pawnee   s not an art town. You can   t go  out and you can   t buy clay, you can   t buy paints, you can   t buy brushes,  you can   t buy canvasses and stuff. But they like art. It   s just that there   s  no place to really go look at art back there, anymore. When we had our  gallery, we always had people in there, just looking. I know it helped  some of the other artists, that they started painting then. They got into it.  Little Thunder They could sell it to stores, a Pawnee store. What   s your favorite thing  to make in ceramics?  Real Rider I   d say a mask. I was doing sculpture of these Little People, but it takes  so long, and they   re so heavy that I don   t make them anymore. I was  getting ready to do a series of Indian dogs. Anywhere you go, there   s an  Indian dog. May have three legs and one eye, or part of its ear is  missing. In fact, we was sitting at the bar the other night and they were  talking about seeing these Indian dogs in different places. Somebody  said,    Yeah, there was one, running, had a fry bread in his mouth and  them other dogs was chasing them trying to get it.    (Laughs) There   s all  kind of stuff you can do with them. It don   t have to be a special breed,  just make a dog.  Little Thunder That would be great if you do a couple of those, too. What   s the most  difficult thing you ever made in ceramics?  Real Rider I did one of the Little People, had one playing the flute. His arms was  holding the flute up, but his arms weren   t resting on anything. It   s real  fragile before you get it in the kiln. To get it into the kiln to fire that  thing, it usually takes two or three people because they   re real heavy.  Once they got it in there, once it starts firing, it gets pretty hot and that  clay will want to melt sometimes. His arms would start to drop, so I had  to make little poles to stick under his arms to keep them from drooping  down. Then after they   re done, you   ve got to get them out of the kiln  18  without breaking them. Then you have to start adding this, or painting  this, and get it ready to go. Then you got to figure out how you going to  box him up, and how he   s going to ride in the truck or car. I did one that  won Best of Show out at the Heard Museum. We cut across through the  mountains. We had to go through the mountains to get to Phoenix. We  hit a snow storm, so we had to take that little guy and put a seatbelt on  him. (Laughs) He rode up front with me all the way through the  mountains, but we made it. I think that   s probably why he sold.  Little Thunder That   s a great story. Do you typically   you   re not building your own  boxes for things. You   re just using sort of cardboard boxes and bubble  wrap?  Real Rider Yeah, I used a lot of this foam, have to use that. Cardboard boxes work  great because they give if it leans too far over. That cardboard box is  going to give a little bit. Can   t say I   ve never broke one. I have broke  one.  Little Thunder But not very often.  Real Rider Not very often, no.  Little Thunder Let   s talk a little bit more about your process and techniques. Can you  explain the difference between like stoneware and raku?  Real Rider Stoneware is what they call high fire. It   s a special clay that will take  that high fire, kind of like   well, china is high fire. Stoneware is high  fire. Usually, it   s got a lot of   it   s called grog in there. It keeps it from  breaking. It won   t melt when it gets real hot. Raku is a different kind of  clay that it won   t go to a high temperature like that. Typical raku-fired  piece is anywhere from twelve to eighteen-hundred degrees, which is  awful hot, but it   s not hot enough to where it   ll catch on fire when you  open the lid up, because you got to open the lid up while it   s hot and  reach in there and pull it out. It   s red-hot. Where high fire, you stand  there and open that door up when it   s ready, you   ll catch on fire just as  soon as you open that door up. Your clothes will just burst into flames,  so you never open that up. With raku, you pull it out at a certain  temperature. I use trashcans full of leaves. Some people use paper, other  stuff, grass, but I use leaves.  I put my piece in there and it   ll burst into flames, catch on fire. It  depends on the glaze that I got on there, how soon I put that lid on. I  don   t really count or anything. I don   t look at a watch or anything. I just  know when to put the lid on. What it does, is it traps all the smoke in  there, and wherever you   ve not glazed that thing, the smoke will stick to  it. You   ve got to think about it when you make it, how it   s going to  19  look. I used to pull them out and let them dry, or let them cool off just  on their own, but now I pull them out and I   ll immediately dunk them  into water, a tank of water. Cools them off pretty fast. Then you take  them and scrub them up real good, get all the stains off of them. It   s  more work, it   s more fun than high fire. High fire you just put in the  kiln and at a certain time you turn your kiln off and wait for it to cool,  wait a couple days for it to cool and pull them out. That   s it.  Little Thunder There   s no more interaction with it once you put it     Real Rider No.  Little Thunder You use a lot of bright, bold colors. Are these ceramic glazes that you     Real Rider Yeah, some of them. When I first started, I asked a couple guys,    Why  don   t you use color?    All they used was real shiny glazes, or white  glazes, or black glazes. They told me you couldn   t use color, and at that  time, I didn   t see anything in color. I   ve even used acrylic paints and  fired them and get a little bit of color like that. I use ceramic glazes and  some of that color will burn off if you   re not careful, but if you let it go  too long in the kiln, you have trouble with different colors. So we watch  it, it comes out all right. I   ve noticed other artists are starting to use  colors now.  Little Thunder Did you get your raku clay here in Stillwater, or do you     Real Rider No, I buy it over in Tulsa.  Little Thunder You mentioned that you have some clay that needs to be used or thrown  out?  Real Rider Oh yeah, I   ve got tons of clay.  Little Thunder I think overaccumulation is something a lot of artists share, too.  (Laughter)  Real Rider It   s clay that I didn   t use. I cut off what I needed, or as I was sculpting,  it   s clay that came off and I just put it in a bag. A long time ago I was  able to take and kind of like making bread, I guess, where you wedge  the dough. What you do is you wedge it to get all of the air bubbles out.  Eventually, it   d start to take its toll on your shoulders and your arms, so  I don   t do that anymore. I just put it in the bag and hope somebody will  come around one of these days and say,    Oh man, what are you going  to do with that?    And haul it all off for me. No one has yet, so I   ll  probably wind up throwing it all away.  20  Little Thunder Was it more difficult to store clay in Santa Fe or more difficult here?  Real Rider It   s about the same. Out there, it would seem to dry quicker than here,  but it still freezes out there and it freezes here and you don   t want your  clay to freeze, so you got to store it somewhere where it   s warm.  Little Thunder I saw a picture of a raku buffalo skull that you did for the Colorado  show. It seemed like it was getting a bit little abstract, this really nice-looking  piece. It that a direction you   re exploring more?  Real Rider Yeah, it   s hard to do. When you grow up with realistic art, it   s hard to  get in to contemporary stuff, but a lot of the old Indian art was  contemporary. I can do that, but to do real wild and crazy stuff, to me,  it   s not art. I mean I know it is art, but I can   t do it. It   s either got to be  realistic or a little bit contemporary for me.  Little Thunder What about the scale of your ceramic pieces? Has that changed over  the years?  Real Rider No, my masks were more or less actual size. I   ve been wanting to do  some big pieces, but it   s hard to do it in this type of clay that I   m doing.  I almost have to use regular sculptor   s clay. Have it bronzed or     Little Thunder Also, your kiln probably has some size limitations.  Real Rider Oh yeah.  Little Thunder What is your creative process from the time you get an idea?  Real Rider Actually, it isn   t very long. I mean, if it   s something that   s going to  hang on the wall, you got to think about how are you going to hang it,  how are you going to cover that up. If it   s on a mask and you want  feathers on its head, you   re going to have to figure out where the  feathers are going to be, how you   re going to tie them on there, where  to put the little holes in them. Usually, now, it   s something I just do as  I   m making it. I don   t really think about it ahead of time.  Little Thunder So you don   t do preparatory sketches too much?  Real Rider Yeah, I do every once in a while, but it never turns out like those  sketches. (Laughter) As you go in you   re,    Well, it might look better  like this.     Little Thunder Do you keep a notebook of your designs at all?  21  Real Rider I used to when I was painting. I was painting and it was like pictures  flipping around in my head as I was painting. There was another one  came and then after that evening, I   d sit down and I   d think    What was  that, anyway?    And I can   t remember. I got to where, as them pictures  were flipping in my head, I had a tablet there and I would draw them  out real quick and I   d throw them in a box. That way I wouldn   t forget  them. I wound up with a whole box of thumbnail sketches. After I did  them, I just let them throw them away or whatever. I never thought  about keeping them.  Little Thunder So are you painting with acrylics now?  Real Rider I like to do watercolors. I   m not sure whether I want to do this little  fellow in acrylics or oil. I   m kind of thinking, oil.  Little Thunder How about titles for your ceramic pieces?  Real Rider Sometimes it   s kind of fun, thinking something up. Most of the time  you   ve already got a title in your head before you get started.  Little Thunder So you always do have titles for each piece?  Real Rider Yes.  Little Thunder And how did you handle your signature?  Real Rider I don   t know. They told us in school you had to sign them and to always  sign them the same way. I know mine   s changed a little bit, but not  much.  Little Thunder Do you sign on the back or on the     Real Rider Yeah, on the ceramics they   re all signed the same way, but there   s  nothing fancy about it because you   re scribbling in clay. Or, if it   s a  painting, then you can do a little bit smoother.  Little Thunder Looking back on your career so far, what was one of the decisive, forks  in the road for you?  Real Rider What do you mean?  Little Thunder Maybe a time when you could   ve gone this way with your artwork and  you went that.  Real Rider I was painting and I was doing oil. I liked it, but apparently, it didn   t  like me because it   d get me real depressed. I got to the point, I couldn   t  22  put that brush down. I couldn   t walk off and quit. I couldn   t quit. I   d  just keep painting. If I went to sleep, I   d wake up and I   d have to go  back in there and do it again. I couldn   t go nowhere because I had to  come back and finish painting. And you could only paint so long on a  piece. You got to let it rest. So I   d move it over and I   d grab another  empty canvas and start on it. I just made myself quit and then I got into  clay. Clay is a little different. It was relaxing, I guess, I don   t know, but  I liked it. I could walk away from it and come back and finish it. It  didn   t bother me then. That   s where I got started in clay. Like I said,  I   m just now getting back into painting. Watercolors, I can walk away  from them. I   m sure I could do it with acrylics. I don   t know if it   s the  smell of oil or what it is, it does smell good, but I might have put it up  again, but I   m going to try it.  Little Thunder What   s been one of the high points?  Real Rider I think it was meeting a bunch of people. I can   t remember them now,  but I sure met a lot of people, and going out and partying with them,  just having fun. Sitting around talking to them at the shows. Course, it  was always fun to sell pieces. It   s slowed down now, I haven   t gone to  any shows in a while.  Little Thunder What   s been one of the low points?  Real Rider Probably when my wife passed away and I just didn   t want to do  anything for a long time. But a friend of mine in Pawnee, he came by  and he said,    Come on, we   re going to shoot some pool.    I used to like  to shoot pool all the time. I started doing that again and kind of getting  out and I gradually started doing more work. That was it.  Little Thunder Is there anything we   ve forgotten to talk about, anything you   d like to  add?  Real Rider Can you get me a ticket for Bedlam? (Laughter)  Little Thunder I wish I had that kind of influence. I   m going to look forward to seeing  your paintings down the road.  Real Rider Hopefully, I   ll have them ready by this summer.  Little Thunder By Red Earth. Thank you very much for your time today, Austin.  Real Rider Thank you.  -------  -------   
