 Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Today is January 31, 2012. My name is Latasha Wilson, and I   m with  the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at Oklahoma State  University Library. I   m in Stillwater, Oklahoma, at the home of Adolph  Friedemann, who I will be interviewing today as part of the Germans  from Russia series of the Spotlighting Oklahoma Oral History Project.   We are joined by Adolph   s wife Florence as well as his son, Tom.   Thank you for having me here today. To start out, would you mind  telling me when and where you were born?  I was born in that room up there furthest to the east. I was born in that  room.  What is now the middle bedroom?  That was a little bedroom at the time when I was born. The house was  all torn down except I didn   t let them tear down that part, because I was  born in that room. So they made a kitchen out of that room, and the  framework is the same. It   s the kitchen, now. It was a bedroom at the  time.  And what is your birth date? What day were you born?  May the 10th.     21. 1921  Yes, 1921, that   s right. 1921 is when I was born.  Did you have many brothers and sisters?  There were twelve of you.  Yes, there was twelve of us. I was the youngest, so I was the last one.  5  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  Really?  Yes, I was the last one. I had a brother and a sister that was born when  my dad was married to his first wife just for two years  before she  passed away . They was still my brothers and sisters. But I had ten of  them that was born  to my parents . I was the last one that was born  from the ten brothers and sisters, but I had twelve all together.  Wow. So were there fourteen people living in this house?  No.  Twelve.  Okay.  Twelve people.  Well, considering your mother and dad, that would be fourteen.  What were your parents    names?  Dad   s name was Adolf. I was named after my dad. I was the last born,  and they kept the name Adolf going. That   s right, I was given the same  name as my dad.  Was it spelled the same way, or did they change the spelling?  It was spelled just A-D-O-L-F, and I always spell it A-D-O-L-P-H.  And what was your mother   s name?  Koepke.  Koepke?  Frieda Koepke, K-O-E-P-K-E is the way it   s spelled.  Is her last name a German name?  Yes. I don   t really know how to say it in German, but it was a German  name.  Did her family come from Russia?  6  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  No, they came from some part of Germany. They met in the United  States, and that   s where they got together.  What about your father   s family? Where did they come from?  They all came from Russia.  I have a note that your father was born in Vlinia, Russia?  Yes, that   s right.  Do you know how old he was when he came to the United States?  He was awful young, I know that.  He was still a child?  Oh, yes. He was a child.  Did both of his parents come to the US?  Yes.  Do you know if they moved to Oklahoma pretty early on?  Well, as far as I know, that   s where they  bought land  in Oklahoma at  that time.  Did they homestead in Stillwater?  They  purchased land  in Stillwater.  Is this the land that they homesteaded originally, your parents?  Yes, this is where I   m living now. Like I say, I was born in that first  room. I lived here all my life.  Did your grandparents live near here when you were growing up? Were  they living near Orlando?  Orlando, yes.  By the church cemetery   or where the original  Frieden   s  Lutheran  church  now called Salem Lutheran  used to be. How far did they live  from Frieden church? You know, the church that they developed? How  far away were they from that church?  7  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  Wilson  T. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  It wasn   t far. It was real close.  But I think Dad was the only brother that was actually born here. I think  the whole family was over there by Orlando, and then they moved here.  Yes.  These are stories that Dad told us years ago. So that   s the only reason  that I   m intervening.  No, that   s fine.  I hope that   s okay. (Laughs)  No problem. So when you were growing up, did your parents speak  German?  Oh, yes. My dad could hardly speak English but towards the end he  learned to speak a little English, but he was German and Russian. He  was all Russian. He could talk that. That   s where he was born, in Russia.  And then they moved to the United States, and anyway, he gave up the  Russian talking when he married a lady that was completely German.  Dad, tell her about what going to Sunday school was like in the old  Lutheran church. You said you learned how to speak German out of a  Bible.  Oh, yes.  Talk about that a little bit. What was Sunday school like when you were  growing up?  Well, I thought I was awful sharp to learn anything there. (Laughter) But  my parents were awful strict on Sunday school. We had to go to Sunday  school every Sunday. Of course, there was no other way to get there but  with a team of horses, because there were no cars available at that time.  What did you learn at Sunday school? Was it in German or English?  It was German. Oh, yes.  And what church was it?  Lutheran Church.  8  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  The Salem Lutheran Church in Stillwater?  Yes.  So you would go, all twelve kids, with a team of horses, into church each  Sunday?  Oh, yes. But I can remember just a very little bit of that because we got a  car, just a Model-T Ford. We thought we was in heaven. We didn   t have  to go in a wagon to go to any place. We could go in a car.  How old were you?  I was about maybe four or five, that   s about all. About five.  Were other people still driving horses and wagons while you were  driving the car?  Oh, yes.  And with so many children, did you have to take turns riding in the car?  Oh, yes. That   s right. There was a bunch of us. There was twelve of us.  What did your father do for a living?  He was just a farmer, that   s all. He had a lot of cattle and horses and  hogs. That   s what they had.  And what were some of his main crops?  It was wheat and cotton.  And corn.  And corn?  And corn, yes. You   re right.  So would he sell these things in town?  Well, the only town that I knew of that they ever took things to was  Orlando. And everything was with horses, yet. There was no tractors or  nothing. Everything was done with horses, some way.  Well, I bet your mother stayed pretty busy.  9  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  Oh, yes. She was real busy.  They sold wheat, and they made their own flour. She baked bread from  that, loaves and loaves and loaves, yes.  What were some of your chores growing up? How did you help out  around the house?  When I was big enough to walk, they taught me how to milk a cow, I  know that. I hated every bit of it, but I milked all my life. I don   t know  when I quit. It was pretty late. And there was twelve of us kids. We had,  I think, fourteen milking cows, and we had a lot of work.  You had horses, Adolph.  Horses, yes. We always had eight head of horses that did all the farming.  That was his job, to take care of the horses.  Would the horses help pull the plow?  Oh, yes, sure, walking plow. Then, though, they didn   t even have riding  plows. They felt great when they came out with one. When they made  riding plows, farming was just nothing then because they could just sit  on that plow and have four head of horses, and then that made three     well, twelve  times three  made thirty-six inches. Oh, man, you got a lot  of work done then. With a walking plow, you just got twelve inches  turning the ground. Being the last born I didn   t have to do the walking  plow. I cultivated with horses, yet, I didn   t plow with them but  cultivated, it made the nice soil. Then we finally got us a Fordson  tractor.  Do you remember when that was? What year or how old you were?  The tractor was a 1912 model, so we got it probably after it was about  seven or eight years old, something like that. It wasn   t a new tractor. It  was just an old tractor, but we thought we was in pig heaven with having  a tractor in our yard.  And you helped take care of the horses?  Oh, yes. That was my job, then. I got big enough where I had to take  care of the horses.  Well, that was a pretty important job.  10  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Oh, yes. But horses, you could trust them. They was real honorable  horses. There wasn   t no mean horses in the bunch. Had Prince and  Chug, Gal and Gladys. There was a couple other names, four other  names I can   t think of.  Did your family raise any chickens?  Oh, yes. We raised a lot of chickens. We mostly lived off eggs, because  we had about 150 laying hens at all times. It was a big family.  And you mentioned pigs, also?  Oh, yes. We had pigs, yes. That was the cutest little thing, a newborn  pig. You take and just pet them like you could pet a cat.  Would your family slaughter the pigs to eat?  Yes.  Did you have a pump house on your property?  Well, we got a pump house, yes. I was about ten, twelve years old. We  still got that well on this farm. It is a dug well. It was about eighteen feet  deep. It was a big, round well, water well. You couldn   t draw enough  water out of it to even make it show. It was a wonderful water well. We  still got it down there, but we don   t use it anymore. But it   s still usable if  a person would want to use it. It   s still in good shape.  I bet your father knew about that well when he came to this property.  Was that one of the reasons?  Yes, I had pretty good property when I started farming.  How many acres are out here?  Well, we had 160 and across the road 160 acres. We had 320 acres, 160  acres here and 160 acres across the road. That was all farmed with  walking horses and no tractors. I did quite a bit of that plowing, yet, but  not too much. Then we got a tractor when I was about twelve years old.  Did you have other families that lived nearby?  Yes, there was a family of Schroeders, they lived nearby across the road  that way. Of course, they farmed with horses too, then, and they finally  got tractors, and it just got better by the year.  11  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  So was it a lot quicker once you got the tractor?  Oh, yes, yes.  What did you do with your horses?  Well, we used them until they just wore out, and then we just finally  went to tractors completely, just didn   t get anymore horses. A horse  couldn   t last too long. They had to work too hard. About ten, twelve  years old, that was the life of a horse. Some of the horses was beyond  that if you worked them too hard, but our dad was always awful good to  animals like that. He didn   t overwork them. He kept the boys the same  way. Just if you plow a while with them or cultivate with them for an  hour or two, well, then just let them rest a while. Then you can go on  again for a couple of hours, then let them rest again. But so many people  wouldn   t do that, and they   d lose horses. They could just take so much.  Of course, when the mules came along, they was a lot tougher animal  than horses were. We finally wound up with four head of mules, and you  could do a lot of work with them. They was a mean animal, but you get  them tamed down pretty well, they worked all right.  Was your grandfather, your dad   s father, was he a farmer in Russia?  Oh, yes. Yes.  Was your dad old enough to learn some farming skills from him while  they were still in Russia?  Well, not too much. He learned most of it here in the United States.  Did his father have a farm in Oklahoma once he settled?  Oh, yes.  Was that near Orlando?  Yes.  So he grew up helping him on the farm out there?  Yes. Orlando, yes.  Well, do you know why your father moved to Stillwater?  I know his family was big, and I really couldn   t answer you on that, why  12  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  we moved away from there to come to Stillwater. I know we had a half a  section of land that he bought. How he got the money, I don   t know. I  can   t answer that, either. I was just a child then.  Do you know how he met your mother?  No, I don   t. Koepke   s was strictly German, too. Dad was Russian, but he  learned the German, too, then.  Well, they chose them for them, the brides.  Dad, do you remember what you used to tell us about Grandpa when he  was afraid he was going to lose the land, and this guy came and knocked  on the door and had oil? They discovered oil rights?  Oh, yes. I was just a kid. Anyway, they drilled some oil wells on this  place.  And it was this land that was in danger?  Yes.  And, of course, that   s when we made headways, finally, because that  was very available. I mean, people in vehicles started then and where  they had motors and the fuel was high at that time.  So did the oil keep flowing for a little while?  They flowed quite a while, then they put them on pumps, and they  pumped them for, oh, golly, years. I got one of them that   s still   pumping . That well has got to be around, it   s got to be over sixty years  old, and it   s still pumping. The only well, it   s just making about four  barrels a day, and they can   t seem to pump it dry. They drilled it at a  slant, at an angle. It   s not straight down, it was drilling that way   gestures . I don   t know much about it, but anyway, it was a big talk at  the time. And that well is still producing to this day, and it   s about older  than I am.  Wow. And that helped save the farm when it was in danger?  Oh, yes.  Do you remember telling us the story about Grandpa being on his knees,  praying, and you saw him when you were a little kid? You got in trouble  because you disturbed him. Can you tell that story?  13  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  Well, times were so rough and so hard, and we didn   t hardly have  enough to eat, I guess, and I     You peeked under the door, remember, and saw him praying at his bed.  Yes.  Because he was about to lose the place.  Can you tell us that story?  You remember seeing him on his knees by the bed?  Oh, yes. I   ve seen that many a times.  Very religious man.  And he was worried he was going to lose the property?  Oh, yes. But he was a very religious man. His belief was very high, and  everything worked out for him, I guess.  Do you remember telling me the story that he used to sit on that round  bench at Katz Department Store with Jake Katz, and they would argue  religion, about being a Jew and being a Christian? Do you remember?  You said they used to sit out and wait for them to talk to each other all  the time.  Yes.  Can you tell us a little about that? That   s pretty fascinating.  Yes, Jake Katz was there, and he owned the store, and he was the head  honcho of that, and they had a religious bunch out there.  What would they talk about? Different kinds of religion?  Yes.  Mostly, I think. Mostly religion.  Oh, I was around eight, nine years old. But I can remember some of it. It  got a little better towards last.  So would you go shopping at Katz Department Store?  14  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  No. They didn   t take me along. I had to stay home. (Laughter)  But is that where your shoes or some of your clothes came from, ever?  Oh, yes. It   s just I was the youngest of the family, and in fact, I   m the  last one that   s living, yet, of all of the children.  Would your mom do much sewing?  Oh, yes, gosh, yes. She was a good seamstress. She sewed all of our  clothes, practically, including overalls. She made several of those,  because money was always short. Katz Department Store was fully   stocked . Jewish people were running Katz Department Store.  And you said that Grandpa used to argue with Jake Katz, Jewish faith  versus the Christian faith. That   s what you used to tell us.  Yes, that   s right. He was a very good friend of Dad   s. It was pretty  rough times at the time.  You said that you used to have to sit out and wait for them to finish their  discussions.  Oh, yes.  Well, was there any English spoken in your house? Did your parents  speak English to you children?  No, he spoke a good German language, too. But what bothered him so  much is to learn the English language. But he could talk Russian, man,  you could just   he just rattled it off. That   s all he knew at first.  Well, did you learn German?  Very little, I did. Mostly us kids made fun of it.  Did you learn English when you started to school?  No.  Remember, Aunt Ada was your teacher, and you said until Aunt Ada  was your teacher at this one-room schoolhouse, you didn   t learn much in  school until she was your teacher. That   s his sister, Ada.  Yes, I have a sister, went on to school, she became a teacher, and that   s  where I started to school. She was teaching at Spring Valley School at  15  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  the time, and she was there for, I think, eight or ten years before she  finally resigned and quit teaching.  Where was Spring Valley School?  Where was Spring Valley School? From this caddy corner, one mile  north.  So how would you get there?  We walked it. We walked every day. My sister, she turned out to be a  teacher, and she walked it, too. It was nothing.  So she lived at home still, and then you would walk to school together?  Oh, yes.  How many kids were at the school?  There was about thirty students at Spring Valley School, always. It was  first grade from beginning to the eighth grade and was all under one  teacher, and they had a hard time of doing it. But they taught us a lot,  those teachers in those days. They was good.  Were the lessons taught in English?  It was English, yes. Spring Valley was English, yes.  So did you go there through the eighth grade?  Yes.  And then where did you go?  That   s all I went. I never got any more. We had twelve kids in the  family, we got our eighth grade. The girls couldn   t do field work. They  all went to high school. Of course, they had to walk to Stillwater. There  was no other way.  Wow. Do you know how far it was that they had to walk?  It was about five miles, they were walking. Only had one boy that  wouldn   t stay with us on the farm, and that was my brother, Gus. He  wanted his education so bad, and he walked it. Dad didn   t even let him  have a horse. He said,    If you want your education, you   re going to have  to walk it,    and he did. He got through eighth grade, and then he went to  16  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  high school. We had high school at Stillwater by then, and he became a  teacher, and he was the only one that had enough nerve against his dad  to go on to school. The rest of us, we just all got our eighth grade and  that was it.  Was it South High School in Stillwater that he went to?  Yes.  Did any of your brothers or sisters go to university?  Gus did, yes.  Ada and Ethel, all teachers.  He   s the one that went to university. And Ada did, too. Ada went, the  eldest daughter.  And Ethel.  And the other girls just got as high as high school and that was it.  Ethel, Adolph.  And Ethel?  Yes, Ethel was     She was a teacher.  She was about three years older than I was. She got her high school  education. And I   m the only one left of the twelve kids that   s living. I  was the youngest.  What are some food items that your mother would prepare? Did she  make German food?  Oh, she was a good cook. She always had good meals, I know that.  Would she make a lot of bread?  Oh, yes, she made lot of bread. There wasn   t a loaf of bread ever bought.  That was all homemade.  And that was made by the flour that you all made, ground?  17  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  Yes. She was a good cook.  Dad, what would you have with your sandwiches?  Well, we had milk. We had a lot of cows. We always milked around  twelve, fourteen cows. And we had a lot of butter, I   ll say that. We  finally got what they call a cream separator. I don   t know how they got  the cream first, but I remember that. When we got a hand turning  separator, it would separate your cream from the milk and oh, that was  pig   s heaven then. We had that and     You sold the cream.  Would you sell the cream?  Oh, yes. We got then where you could start selling cream, and there was  good money in that, because there was very few people that could do it.  Where would you sell it?  They had a place in Stillwater at that time. I forget what the name was,  but you could sell the cream there.  And it was a grocery store?  Yes, it was with a grocery store, you could sell the cream there and buy  groceries back with the money you got for your cream. And we always  had a lot of cream, because we milked as high as   oh, I don   t know how  many cows. The girls all had to learn how to milk cows. It was a rough  life, but we enjoyed it.  Might ask him about the pecan crop, they always picked pecans.  Did you have pecans, also?  Pecans? Oh, yes. We made a lot of money on it. In those days, pecans  were high. That field there and that field over there was all solid, just  nothing but pecan trees. Dad planted all of those, and we made good  money out of pecans.  Would you have to shell them?  Oh, yes.  That   s a lot of work.  18  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  Oh, yes.  And would you sell those in town at a grocery store?  I can remember a little bit. We went to town. Back when I was twelve  years old, we got our first car, we thought we was in pig heaven. We  could go to town in the car where we didn   t have to go with the wagon  anymore.  When did you start driving?  Oh, they let me drive a little bit when I was twelve years old.  You took the pecans to Chandler, didn   t you, Adolph? You had a  contract with your pecans?  Oh, yes. Chandler   s the one that bought the pecans. I really can   t tell you  how that worked, but they came and picked up our pecans and paid us  for them. Of course, later on, Florence and I sold some in Stillwater right  at first, when I was first married.  Well, when you were growing up, what would you do for fun?  Work. (Laughs)  Well, mostly just cotton and corn. We raised a lot of cotton. A bunch of  us kids had to pick all that cotton by hand.  So, when you were done working, did you get to play any with your  brothers and sisters? When you had a break from working would you  play games?  Tell about the time you and Charlie Scott shot sparrows and Grandma  fried them for you. Charlie Scott, your best buddy?  Yes, Charlie Scott, they lived half a mile east of here. We played a lot.  Did you shoot some sparrows one time, some birds?  Oh, yes.  You told me one time that you shot some sparrows with your BB guns  and Grandma actually fixed them. And there was just a little bitty piece  of meat there that you were to eat. Charlie Scott was your best buddy  that wasn   t family, right?  19  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Yes, Charlie Scott.  Would you ever go fishing?  No, we didn   t do much fishing. We had a pond, but towards the last, we  started in a little fishing, but not too much.  You didn   t have time to play, but you had the music where you said the  cars would go by, and they would stop. You each played a different  instrument, Gus and Ada and all of them. And you said they would  listen. The windows, of course, were open.  Tell her about the time you got a suitcase for Christmas. Remember that  story? Tell her about that story.  Well, I thought they wanted me to move. (Laughter)  The family gave him a suitcase.  I   ll never forget that.  Was it wrapped under the tree?  Oh, yes. That   s all I got for Christmas, just a suitcase.  And was it really for you?  I don   t know. (Laughter)  I don   t think so.  Would you get a present every year at Christmas?  Oh, yes. That   s one thing we did get. There was twelve of us kids, and  Dad was a hard worker. Of course, he got all his kids to work, too, as  soon as they got old enough. We had field work. It was all with horses,  no tractors, nothing. We had eight head of work horses.  Tell them about the gift you got, a bicycle, Adolph. The first bicycle you  got at Christmas.  Yes, I was about   oh, I don   t know how old I was.  Was the bicycle wrapped under the Christmas tree?  Oh, yes. Oh, yes. I thought I was in pig heaven, getting a bicycle, I   ll tell  20  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  you. There was twelve of us kids and times was rough. Like I always  said, there was twelve of us, but the way Dad managed, we never went  hungry for anything. We always managed to have plenty to eat. We had  a big bunch of horses and a big bunch of hogs and a big bunch of cattle.  You had fried chicken for breakfast.  And we milked. The barn was fixed to have eight head of cattle to milk,  and I got in on plenty of that.  Did you help build any of the buildings on the property?  No. I didn   t get to help any with that. They wouldn   t let me. There was  enough boys available where I didn   t have to help on that.  Would your family have a Christmas tree every year?  Oh, yes. That was a must. We had a big Christmas tree every year.  Did you decorate it?  Oh, yes. We decorated it. Dad was very good about stuff like that. He  tried to keep his family as happy as he could.  Did you put real candles on the tree?  Oh, yes.  Scary. (Laughter) You might tell them, you said Grandpa used to read a  lot. Your dad would read all the time.  Oh, yes. He would read all the time. That   s the only way I can ever  remember him. He had to have his German paper and also a German  magazine. He was such a highly read man. He just was reading all the  time.  Where did he get a German paper and a German magazine?  You could order them at that time.  From Germany?  I don   t know where he got them from, but they came in the mailbox  every day. He had a   what was the name of that mail   German     Frieden something.  21  A. Friedemann  Wilson  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  Anyway, Brother Gus made fun of it, and he got   oh, I can   t remember.  I wish I could.  If you think of it, we can say it later.  Uncle Gus would make fun of the German paper, is that what you said?  Yes.  Was it Friedens-Bote, Adolph?  Was it Friedens-Bote?  Friedens-Bote was one of them. That was a German paper, Friedens-  Bote. That was a weekly, the Friedens-Bote, but then we got a German  paper that came every day. Oh, Florence, can   t you help me on that?  Can   t help you, I did Friedens-Bote. That   s all I know how to answer.  (Laughter)  The paper actually came from Russia, and it was a German paper. But I  can   t think of the name of it.  Were your parents very interested in politics in the United States?  Pretty good. Dad was, yes, he was real good.  Do you remember their discussion when the war started?  Yes, I remember that. Dad was so terribly against that. He said that  could have been worked out where they didn   t have to kill so many  American people. He said that was the wrong. I know there was a lot of  talk about that at that time.  Did anyone have any bad feelings toward your family because of the  German origin?  No.  Adolf, the name, Adolf, remember, you said your dad wouldn   t sit in  front of a window, the name Adolf, because Adolf Hitler.  Yes.  He wouldn   t sit in front of a window, you said, because he was afraid  22  Wilson  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  that somebody might     Was he nervous because he had the same name?  Yes, it kind of bothered him, but everything turned out all right.  Tell her about Uncle Doc, as a doctor. Remember, he came over here  and knocked that tree over delivering somebody? You have some good  Uncle Doc stories, that was a brother to Grandpa.  Yes.  He learned his trade in the Russian Army.  Yes, he learned his trade in the Russian Army.  He used to have a bunch of Uncle Doc stories, that was a brother, the  physician, he learned his trade in the Russian Army. Then he practiced,  all the Germans here, he was the physician to them. But he was a terrible  driver. What kind of driver was Uncle Doc?  Oh, he was a terrible driver. (Laughter) Every time you got in the car  with him, your life was in danger. That guy, he was lucky. He had one or  two terrible wrecks, but he was lucky. But he was a doctor, and he had a  Model-T Ford, and he thought he was in pig   s heaven. He was a danger  on the road, but he managed to get by.  And then he saved people   s lives by being a doctor     Oh, yes.  But scared them on the road? (Laughs)  He saved a lot of people   s lives. He was a good doctor. Him and Dad  would get together, and they   d talk German so fast and so high, but of  course, I could understand it. I could   ich sprech Deutsch. I can still  talk it, but it   s pretty rough for me, because I don   t use it enough.  He still can say the Lord   s Prayer.  I got married to her. She wouldn   t talk German to me, so we just talked  English.  Well, how did you meet your wife?  Well, how did I meet you?  23  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  F. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  Wilson  T. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  Wilson  F. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  Oh, gosh, your two brothers married two of them.  Yes, that   s right. Two brothers married two sisters, and then she stayed  with her sisters, and I got well acquainted with her. So she finally started  dating me. She turned me down a time or two, but we got married.  (Laughter) She   s a wonderful little lady, I   ll tell you that.  When did you get married?  Do you remember?    46.  1946, she said.  I think that   s about right.  In Stillwater?  Yes.  Yes, in Stillwater, at Salem Lutheran Church.  Well, we didn   t get married in Salem. We got married at Perry. They  were brother and sister congregations.  That   s right. We got married in Perry at the Lutheran Church.  Zion Lutheran Church.  In Perry?  Yes.  So then she moved in with you out here, in this house?  Oh, yes.  Spent the first month with his mother because she couldn   t get out, so  we lived here a month. Three brothers married three sisters.  Oh, how neat. (Laughs) Wow.  Said she didn   t want another one, but she got a third one. (Laughs)  So obviously, I have a bunch of double cousins. (Laughs)  24  F. Friedemann  Wilson  F. Friedemann  Wilson  F. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  Wilson  T. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  T. Friedemann  That   s in front of the church that he went to. (Gestures to photo)  This is the Salem Lutheran or the Zion?  The old Salem Lutheran.  Okay. Was the old Salem Lutheran in the location where it is now?  No, no. No, it was on Ninth.  It was right there by South High School, right across the street, just east.  On Twelfth?  On Twelfth, yes.  But you kids were all born to go to that church.  Born and baptized, yes. Tell about how you lost your hearing, you think,  on that old first tractor you had, had direct exhaust, and how loud it was.  It was an old Farmall tractor, and you said you think that   s where you  lost most of your hearing was that loud tractor.  Yes, that was an International tractor.  Yes.  It was terrible loud. I still can   t hear. (Laughter)  No ear plugs, then.  Well, you   ve had quite a few tractors, haven   t you?  Well     Or just some good trusty ones?  Yes, he did.  I got three different kinds, and I got one now that   s just like a car. It   s  just as quiet as any car.  What kind is that?  Ford.  25  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Ford, yes.  What   s your favorite kind of tractor?  Well, we had a little Fordson tractor is what they called it then, but then  they went to Ford and     That was you second big Ford. You had more tractors than you thought.  Yes.  He   s had quite a few.  So when you took over farming this farm, did you farm the same crops?  Oh, yes, we farmed some real big crops. We had good crops and bad  crops, just depended on the weather. Of course, then they started to help  the farmer with allocation     Allocation, they only let them farm so much to keep the price up.  When they came along with that fertilizer that was really great for  farmers, because you could put that on the land, and you could make  double the money you did before you had that. And that   s what really  helped the farmers out is the farm crop.  Tell her about when you got your first combine. You used to have the  old thrashers, and when you got that first combine how that improved  everything. The first ones you pulled with a tractor, those little Allis-  Chalmers combines.  Yes, that was relief for the farmer, I   ll tell you. They had just about half  the work that they used to have when they came out with these good  machineries for farmers. Everybody around here got them one.  That gave you more ear problems.  They were loud.  Were those loud machines?  At first they were. Then they started putting real quiet mufflers on them.  They were just as quiet as a car, then, towards the last. Like the one I got  now, you can   t tell the difference if you   re on a tractor or in a car. But  that all helped the farmers to get a little bit better all the time.  26  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  How many children did you have?  Two. Tom and Susan.  And I saw that Susan is building a house nearby, now.  Oh, yes. Yes, that   s right. She   s building a beautiful home.  Do you remember the badger that came and got your chickens, and you  followed him all the way to the den, and you couldn   t figure out what it  was? We took a tractor full of water and put water into the cave until he  came out, the badger, and then A.B. shot him.  Yes, that   s right. I forgot all about that. (Laughter) You remember that  better than I do.  How did you first find out it was a badger? Because they   re pretty rare  around here.  I read something somewhere to find out about that.  Were there any German traditions that you maintained?  Well, Dad had a couple brothers but they didn   t stay with it that long  like he did. Dad had such a big family, and then he made farmers out of  all of us. Of course, there was Gus, my brother Gus, he didn   t like  farming, and Dad wouldn   t have sent him to school when he graduated  from the eighth grade. He walked to Stillwater every day, up and back to  go to high school. I mean, that was a hard job, and he did so well at  school that he became a teacher. The first teaching that he taught was  at   where was that at, Florence?  Ingalls.  Ingalls, yes. And he walked that, to Ingalls.  Wow.  That was about, oh, about two or three months, and then Dad gave up.  He felt that he owed a lot of that money to him because he sent him to  school. But anyway, Dad gave him back the money, and he said,    You  buy yourself a car so you don   t have to walk so far every day.    I tell  you, that was rough on him. So he bought a Model-T Ford of some kind.  He was in pig   s heaven, then. He could drive to school.  Your tradition was the morning devotions that your dad had every  27  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  Wilson  F. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  morning that you dreaded.  Would you have morning devotions?  Oh, yes. We had morning devotions every morning. There was no way  you could leave if you didn   t have morning devotions.  How long did it last?  I   ll say it was about thirty minutes every morning.  So would you get up, do your chores, have breakfast, have devotions?  And then have devotions, yes.  And then go to school.  Go to school, go to work.  So you had a long morning before you even got out of the house.  Yes, that was every morning. That was a must.  Still do the devotions every morning.  So you   ve kept that tradition going?  Oh, yes. We kept that. We   ve still got it every morning. We have our  little morning devotion every morning.  It was like church with your dad, though, you said. You thought he   d  never get through. (Laughter)  They were in German. The devotions were in German.  Yes.  Are they still?  Every Saturday and Sunday.  Really? I didn   t know that.  Yes, we do that every Saturday and Sunday. It   s German, Lord   s Prayer,  and he says it fluently, German prayer.  28  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  The church services were all in German, too, weren   t they?  Oh, yes. They was all German. In fact, when they started in English, I  didn   t get as much out of an English service as I did out of a German  service. I don   t know, it seemed like it was more for real  in German .  That   s pretty rough, pretty hard to read.  Yes.  I could more than he could.  But we had to listen to German service and that was every morning,  seven days a week, regardless. If we went to church, we had a service at  home, first.  As you grew up, would you speak German with your brothers and  sisters?  Well, at first we did, but then we got to where we spoke English to each  other. We just kind of gave it up. It   s like my brother, Bob, got married  to a girl that couldn   t talk German, so he had to talk just English to her,  and that kind of got us away from that. The girl I married was German,  but she wouldn   t talk German. She would talk English. (Laughter)  Well, he  Tom  learned German. We was afraid to send him to school  the first year because he couldn   t speak English. We said,    You   ve got  to start talking English.    You can   t even go to school without learning  German, but now you forgot it all. (Laughs)  Yes, not anymore. Ich spreche  ein bisschen  Deutsch.  A little.  Were there many other people in Stillwater that were Germans that  weren   t your family members?  No, very few, just Dad   s brothers. And Mother had a couple sisters that  lived at Stillwater. But really and truly, Stillwater was all just strictly  English, that   s all. We had German service in our church, but that didn   t  last too long. They went to English service then.  And now, they just do a Christmas sermon, right, in German, and that   s  it?  Yes.  29  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  Did your mother make noodles?  Oh, yes. Yes, that was a must.  All different kinds?  Well, no, mostly just the straight noodles, always, is just what I  remember.  But then would she serve it different ways?  Yes.  What about desserts? Do you remember any sweets that she would  make?  No.  Yes, coffee cake.  Coffee cake, what they called coffee cake.  Kaffee Kuchen?  There you go.  It was a very good cake. It wasn   t very sweet, but it was very tasty.  Do you remember at the church, men sitting on one side and women  sitting on the other side?  Oh, yes.  How long did that last?  That lasted a long time. It broke up quite a long time ago. But, golly, you  got laughed at if you sat on the wrong side.  Do you know how it finally changed?  I really can   t tell you that. I don   t know when it changed.  There was another Adolph Friedemann at Tulsa, and they would come to  the church. And they always sat  together , and everybody would just     (Laughter)  30  Wilson  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  They   d sit on the wrong side.  And after that, it kind of slowly happened to where you sat with your  husbands.  I had a brother that got married, and he sat on one side and she sat on the  other side, but that didn   t last too long. They wasn   t satisfied with that.  That   s when it finally started, Brother Fred and Emma. They finally just  said,    We   re going to sit together, we   re a couple,    and they did, and it  got started that way, then.  Would you have a special meal on Sundays after church or a gathering?  No, not that I     You   d just come home and get back to work?  We always came home for our meal. We always did.  Did you work on Sundays in the fields?  No, no, we never worked on Sundays. We still don   t. That   s one thing  she won   t let me do.  Well, I got pretty lax about it, lately.  Did you celebrate Easter?  Oh, yes, we celebrated Easter always.  Well, can you think of any more stories?  No, not really.  Or any good history?  You used to talk about, you had a car called a Whippet. Do you  remember that?  Whippet car? Oh, yes.  Yes. That seemed to be your favorite car. You always talked about that a  lot.  Oh, that was a good car, that Whippet. It was a grey-looking color. It  31  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  was a four-door sedan, and I   ll tell you, we thought we was in heaven  driving that car. It had all roll-up windows on it, and we kept that car for  a long time. It was a brand new one when Dad bought it. Dad was pretty  lucky. Money was awful short, and then Dad was a wonderful man for  praying. He believed in prayer so much. And I   ll never forget, we had a  man by the name of     Yakish.  Yakish, yes. He knocked at the door, and Dad invited him in the house  and he said,    There is a talk on this quarter section that there   s oil on this  place. And we would like to buy some royalty from you.    The royalty all  belonged to Dad at the time, yet. And the royalty, all it meant was down  in the earth. That   s where the oil is at, so these were the type of people  that I don   t know why Dad let himself get talked into that. He sold them,  what was it, almost half of it.  Of the mineral rights?  Half of the royalty, yes. Of course, at that time, money was awful cheap,  and Dad thought he was a rich man. He sold eighty acres of royalty and  we had 160 acres on this place. Of course, they drilled the well, they  made the well, Dad said,    Wherever they drill the well, my eighty acres  is on it on either side.    They wouldn   t do it at first, but then they finally  gave in and said,    Okay, we   ll take you up on that. We   ll want to buy  the eighty acres, but your eighty acres will be on either side. If they drill  an oil well, that   ll mean that we get less but you get more,    and so they  did. They never drilled on this side, they drilled one well here, just   we  was married already, wasn   t we?  They drilled several on this place, Adolph, it   s there they just did one.  That one they just did one.  Yes, but that well is still producing what   s being pumped now. So they  drilled that one well there     Those are closed up.  It wasn   t a big well, but anyway, we got our oil money out of that, what  they did for their half, and we got for our half. Of course, it   s just  making about a barrel a day, now, but it   s still going, still drawing.  Did you ever get the mineral rights back from Yakish?  No.  32  Wilson  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Is Whippet the brand of car?  Oh, yes. That Whippet was a wonderful car. It was all roll-up windows  in the doors. That was a four-door sedan, and we was very proud of that  car.  Did you trade in the Model-T for that?  Yes, we traded the Model-T in for that Whippet. It was a grey color. We  thought we was in pig heaven driving that.  Model-T had that old flappy cloth, got more wind in you. (Laughter)  What were some lessons you   d say you learned from your parents?  A lot of it, I   ll tell you. Dad had a rough time, big family, and times  were rough and he always managed it. And I can say this for our dad,  you   d catch him many a time at nights, he got up and went in the living  room here, on his knees, and was praying. It makes me feel real soft, yet,  because a person can be that believable in God as Dad was, and it  worked out for him every time. He was a wonderful person.  Learned to work hard. He always said work hard and honest. Honest  hard work.  That   s right.  Well, when history is written about you, what would you like for it to  say?  I don   t know. I wish I could be more like my dad was, I   ll tell you that  for sure.  He   s one of the most resourceful men I know. He can do anything.  I married the nicest little woman on this earth, too. That was where I was  lucky.  That   s important.  She   s wonderful.  Thank you.  Isn   t that the truth?  33  F. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Not really. (Laughter) I always tell him after sixty-five and a half years,  we   re just so used to each other.  Who was your favorite brother?  Well, I   ll tell you, in fact, to tell you the truth, I liked Hugo. I stayed so  much at Hugo   s place. Burt, he was a slow-goer. He did everything   it  took him ages to do something, but he always got it done. I mean, he  was slow. But he was a good one.  You was closer to Gus, wasn   t you, than any of them?  Yes, Gus and I was real close.  Yes, I figured you was.  Paul was a kind of an ornery one.  What would Paul do that was ornery?  When he thought he knew something, it was right or wrong, but he  wouldn   t give up. He thought always he was just the right person. He got  into it with Dad a lot of times, Paul did. But they always got along, I  guess.  Did you ever get into it with your dad?  No, I never did. I never did.  What were some of your sisters    names?  Sisters? Frieda, Ada, Ethel, Ruth, Emma, there was five of them.  And then the boys?  Burt, Gus, Hugo, Paul, Fred, and I guess, Adolph.  Bob.  Yes.  Robert, Bob Friedemann. Bob and Fred were your half-brothers, right?  Yes, Bob and Fred were my half-brothers. But if they   d have never told  us they was our half-brothers, we   d accept them as brothers. We just  never made big of that, that they was half-brothers.  34  Wilson  F. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  And is there still family in Orlando, in that area?  No.  Just the church cemetery.  Not even in Perry. Used to be at the Perry sister church, but we   re it.  We   re just about it in my family and his.  Well, extended family you   ve got nephews and nieces.  Yes. We   re both babies of the family, too. I was the youngest and he was  the youngest. Your dad always said,    Muss glauben,    you   ve got to  believe. He always told Gus, he was always inquisitive.  Yes.  And said,    You   ve got to believe.     Did you ever get any spankings from Grandpa?  No, I never did.  Really?  Gus did. (Laughter) Gus got some pretty hard ones from Dad. No, I  never got a spanking in my life from my dad. And I can   t remember  any   I think Bob was a little bit   him and Dad got into it a time or two.  But Gus was the worst. Gus, if he   d know something, he wouldn   t give  up, even if he was wrong.  How has this house changed over the years?  Yes, this room is new. This room is the only one that   s new.  The only room that   s     This is new, this is new.  Yes, this is new.  You added this room on?  Yes.  35  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  Tore down the upstairs and made it     Yes, we tore down the upstairs.  Are there any other structures on the property? Is there a barn?  No.  There   s a milk shed there, where the garage is.  The garage, that was built, yes. The barn is the same. That was the  original. Dad had it built, and we had a big granary. We tore it down  because it just wore out. But the garage, the barn is the same.  How many bedrooms were in this house when you were growing up?  Let   s see     Tell them about building this. They took houses across the road. There  was one little hall before I married you, it was just a long     Yes.  They brought the houses over from   they were tenant houses. You  added one on the other where you each     We had a bedroom, and the bedroom was connected with this. It   s not  there anymore now. But anyway, there was three beds in that bedroom.  There was six boys sleeping in that bedroom. I slept with the youngest,  with Paul, and Gus slept with Hugo. They got into it all the time. And  Burt slept with Bob, and then in the next room, there was     Like barracks.  It was. It was just long. I know when we first got married I thought that  was a weird house.  Where did the girls sleep?  They slept in the room next to where the dining room is. That was built  on. That used to be a bedroom. There was Ada, Frieda, Ruth, Ethel. Yes,  with two beds in there, four girls, and Emma, yes.  Five.  Five.  36  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Five. That   s right.  You didn   t have one sleeping in the bedroom with your mom and dad? I  thought you did.  Yes, I slept in the same room where Mom and Dad did, a bed in there.  I thought you did.  So in the winter you would just stay warm with your brothers and  sisters?  There was no warmth in the house at night. We just had enough covers  to cover up. That was pretty rough time, the nights were. But Mom, she  managed. Only way I can remember our mother, being tired. And there   s  a lady that had to work day and night. She had help from the girls,  finally, then Ada grew up and Emma and Frieda, and Ruth and Ethel.  And they were help.  Of course, Ethel was   the only thing Ethel enjoyed at home was to get  her a book, so she could read.  Got that from her dad.  She was a big reader, I   ll tell you.  Just like her dad?  Yes, she took after her dad there. Dad was always reading something.  Then he   d get mad at us boys that didn   t read.    You don   t read, you  don   t know nothing.    I said,    Well, it   s not there. You just can   t do it.    I  especially, I didn   t care to read. I never did. I liked to read magazines  and papers. I liked to do that, but just getting me a book to read a  book    I never read a book in my life. I just didn   t care for it. You like  to read, Tom?  No, not at all. (Laughter) Don   t like to read books. I read magazines,  too. Magazines and newspapers, but not books.  What was bath time like with twelve kids? How would you bathe?  That was quite a chore. (Laughter) Bath at that time was once a week.  You got a bath on Saturdays. There was a bathroom in the boy   s room,  and I think we all took a bath in the same water.  37  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  You took the cleanest one first. (Laughs)  I can   t remember ever changing water. It was awful soapy when I got  into it. (Laughter)  And since you were the youngest, were you last?  No.  Sure. You was the last one.  Hope they kept putting warm water in it. That water would get pretty  cold before the end.  I don   t know if they even bothered. (Laughter)  Did most of your brothers and sisters stay around Stillwater when they  grew up?  Well, they all lived around Stillwater.  When they were adults, they still lived around Stillwater?  Yes.  He had a brother and sister that lived at Perry.  Yes, towards the last they moved to Perry.  Ada, Hugo.  Fred moved to Pennsylvania, the one half-brother.  Fred was the type   he was     He went to Pennsylvania, that   s all.  He just took out. He was kind of mean at home, Fred was. He would do  what Dad told him, but Fred, he was a big reader in the papers. He   d get  a hold of the paper, and he got a hold of a paper that Pennsylvania was  looking for young men. They opened up a bunch of places where they  hired a lot of people.  Factories.  38  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  Wilson  Yes, and so Fred was the type, he read something like that, he wasn   t  much of a farmer. He didn   t like farming at all. And he got after Dad, he  said,    I   d like to go to east and see whether I can   t get to Pennsylvania.  And Dad said,    You   d never make it down there. The only way you can  get there, you have to walk.    He said,    Well, I know of people that tried  it, and they made it to Pennsylvania.    So Fred packed his books. I was  just a kid. I didn   t even know when he left. Mom packed him up. I don   t  know in what she did, but anyway   .  Paper bag. (Laughs)  His clothes, and said,    You be careful. You go on the road now, and see  if anybody picks you up. You be careful.    He said,    I   ll keep in contact  with you.    And it took about almost a month before they heard from  Fred. Heard from him, he was in Pennsylvania, and he said,    Now, I   ve  already got a job.    Oh, he was feeling good. And it was   oh, he must  have had a pretty good job. Anyway, a few months later, got another  letter to Dad, and there was some money in that letter. He made good  enough money where he saved up a little money. It wasn   t much, and he  sent it home to Dad. And Fred was that way ever since he was married.  He   d come home, and he   d want to work here at home some way,  somehow. They never did raise any children. They finally adopted a girl,  Dorothy. They came down here several times and visited us. And of  course, we have never heard from them lately.  She   s not living anymore.  But Fred was the type that he just wasn   t made a farmer. Of course, most  of the boys didn   t turn out to be farmers. I   m about the only one that   s  left to be a farmer. I didn   t know anything else to do, so I married her  and she   s managed to be a farm woman, so we made it.  It   s all I knew. (Laughs)  Would your brothers and sisters come back to your house since you  lived in your parents    house?  No. Sisters did, but not the brothers. Fred is the only one that came back.  They came for Sunday dinners, Adolph.  Yes, that could be.  Yes, they came for Sunday dinners.  Did you used to have a big event on Mother   s Day? Out in the pecan  39  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  A. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  Wilson  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  grove?  Oh, yes, that   s right. That   s right.  And you   d take an outhouse, and all the grandkids loved to go in the  outhouse.  Yes, yes.  Built one. (Laughter)  Yes, we did that. Of course, that pecan grove   in those days, we had  this pecan grove, and we had one pecan grove over there. Well, Florence  and I even made one year of our married life, we just had that pecan  grove and we made  500   what was it,  580?  Somewhere in there, yes.  Out of pecans. That was a big...  A big payment on the place.  Demand for pecans in those days. Anybody that had a pecan grove made  money in those days. And Florence and I one year, we made over  500  out of one year. But after that, pecans   I don   t know, it   s just there was  no demand for a pecan grove. Stillwater quit buying them. We had to  take our last load to Morrison because Stillwater quit buying pecans. I  don   t know what the deal was.  But you kept that looking like a lawn, that grove.  State park.  Yes, everybody said it was like a state park out there.  You kept it up real nice?  Oh, yes. We kept that pecan grove looking nice. It was just like a lawn  all the way through. I think we had fifty-four trees in that pecan grove at  that time. And we made big money out of the pecans. I know I  remember Dad making as high as  800,  900 dollars a year out of  pecans, because there was a demand for them, but not now.  You grafted some of those trees, too, didn   t you, paper shell?  Bob did. Bob grafted them.  40  A. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  F. Friedemann  T. Friedemann  Wilson  Yes.  Bob, yes, Bob and Dad together.  Yes, because he was working at the university then, horticulture. But he  came to see me one time, we were dating, and he had  400 dollars on  him in pecans. He said,    Let   s get married. We   ve got  400 dollars.     (Laughter) I said,    As if his mother would have let him     (Laughter) But  he had to take care of all the money, because he was the last one home  taking care of the farm.  I think I   m fresh out. (Laughs)   Well thank you very much for visiting with me.   -------  -------  
