 Little Thunder  This is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is Sunday, October 28,  2012, and I   m interviewing Clancy Gray as part of the Oklahoma Native  Artists Project, sponsored by the Oklahoma Oral History  Research   Program at Oklahoma State University. We   re at Clancy   s home in  Broken Arrow. Clancy, you   re known for your jewelry, but you   re also a  painter and sculptor who has won numerous awards in all media.  You   re an art teacher at East Central High School, and you   ve poured  your passion into that job, as well. Thank you for taking the time to talk  to me.  I   m glad to be here.  Where were you born, and where did you grow up?  I was born in Muskogee, but I don   t remember any of that. I remember  growing up in Bartlesville on the south end of town. That   s basically  where I grew up and just loved to hunt and fish.  Outside of town or in town?  It was right there at the end   our house was a dead end, so on one side,  it was the houses. On the other side, it was just open fields, Sand Creek,  Caney River, Circle Mountain.  Wonderful growing-up place. What did your folks do for a living?  My mom was a homemaker, but later on she became a chiropractor   s  assistant. My dad was a police officer, and then he moved to Phillips  Research Lab and worked in the plastics division out west of town of  Bartlesville.  How many brothers and sisters do you have?  5  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  I have two brothers, one sister, and all of them have some artistic ability.  Probably my youngest brother is known for his work all over the world,  really. My older brother was a really talented silversmith, and then my  sister did a lot of watercolor and pottery.  What was your relationship with your grandparents on either side?  Well, on my dad   s side I didn   t know them. They passed away before  my dad was even grown up. His mother died when he was born, and his  dad died when he was about seven. Now, on my mom   s side, they had  lived in Coweta, Oklahoma, and they owned a small ranch out there. It  used to be one of the largest ranches, but when the Great Depression hit,  they lost everything. I always remember my grandparents and their  home, and I loved going down there.  What did you like about it?  Well, I liked working outdoors and helping my grandfather hay and feed  and working with the livestock. I also loved to hunt and fish, so they had  plenty of places for me to go, and I   d just go to play. (Laughter)  You have some other extended family members who are artists, too,  correct?  Yes, yes. Probably my sons, both my sons are very artistic. My middle  son, Brett, is teaching school with me at East Central. Our kids are real  competitive, and they do well all over the state. Then my younger son is  teaching in Broken Arrow at Mid High and also coaching cross country  and soccer. He   s also in the military, so that keeps him pretty occupied  as well.  What is your first memory of seeing Native art?  Probably I would say I knew it was there a long time ago, but I didn   t  really even get started into art until I don   t know how many years ago. I  took a sculpture class under Norma Miller, changed majors. All I lacked  was my student teaching and about five hours to get my degree in  physical education, and changed majors. Then I took two more years of  art, just nothing but art classes. (Laughter) I really didn   t start getting  that interested in the Native American art until I started going to some  powwows with my dad. We   d set up our little displays and stuff like  that, and that   s basically how I got going.  Was your dad putting some work in, as well?  6  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Yes, I taught him how to do silversmithing.  What is your first memory of doing any kind of art?  It was really in college. I mean, I just thought I was going to be playing  baseball forever, but that notion went out the window. Then I found a  real love for it, and I had a real passion for it, and I have a real passion  for teaching art. So that   s basically     So you didn   t do any sketching when you were young?  Well, you know, nothing   I was too busy being outside, so the art part  of it didn   t really hit me until I was in college.  Were there any art teachers at the elementary school level or high  school level that ever made an impact on you? Did you take any art  classes that you remember?  I took some art classes in high school, and I took some private lessons (I  can   t even remember his name   Jack Grace) when I was real little.  Private lessons in     In art when I was growing up. Really, my most influential teachers came  from  University of  Central Oklahoma. They   re the ones that kind of  opened the doors. I could name them all.  What kind of a background did you get   well, first of all, I guess, let   s  go back to that decision. You were almost ready to graduate, basically,  and you   re going to do your student teaching, but then you decide you   re  going to take two more years of art. Do you remember the things you  were thinking when you made that decision?  No. I wasn   t married, I wasn   t playing baseball anymore, and so I  decided,    Well, why not?    Probably the best idea I had because I really  enjoyed it. I really enjoyed all of the art.  Did you get fundamentals in each of the media that you currently work  in, or what kind of base did you get?  Pretty much. We had so many different art teachers at Central State that  I learned from them to take all the knowledge I could from all of them,  and whether I use it or not ever again, you have that knowledge. That   s  basically the same thing I tell my kids. Like my kids at East Central,  they   ll go,    We want to stay in here,    and I say,    Well, you need to get  every art teacher you can, soak up all the knowledge you can, and  7  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  develop your own style.     So you got a background in painting and sculpture and ceramics, as  well?  Yes, and jewelry.  And jewelry, silversmithing.  Just a little bit of everything, and drawing. I really liked the 3D when I  was in college. I liked the sculpture, liked the pottery, and really enjoyed  those two medias, the jewelry and the sculpture and pottery more than  anything else.  When did you sell your first piece of art?  I did a buffalo in class, and I was really proud of it. During the firing, it  had a big split in the side. I remember going home to Bartlesville, and  there   s a little shop there, and they asked if they could set it in there.  This was, gosh darn, forty years ago. A person (I think they were from  California) bought my first piece.  Was it in a show, per se?  No, it wasn   t a show. It was just on display.  Just on display, wow. This was at college?  Yes, but I wasn   t at college at the time. I was home for the summer, and  then they had just put the display up. Also, the Bartlesville Indian  Women   s Club, they helped me out with supplies and scholarship  money, as well as all the other things. They were a real part of helping  me get supplies.  That   s wonderful. What was your first art award?  I   d have to say it was in jewelry.  Do you remember the show?  No, don   t remember the show, don   t remember, but I remember that I  was really into jewelry at the time. I know I got an award in jewelry, but  I couldn   t even tell you the piece.  Were you conscious of admiring some other jewelers or any particular  styles of jewelry that sort of     8  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Well, I really liked the Navajo style because what you do, you take the  stone and build your design around the stone. I enjoyed that more than,  let   s say, the Zuni, where they put all the little stones. I also enjoyed     oh gosh, my brain cells are fried   where they do their jewelry but it   s  more like a picture.  Okay. So there was never a point at which you thought you might want  to do art commercially because you had this love. You knew you wanted  to be a teacher, as well, when you graduated.  Correct. I didn   t want to go into the commercial end of it. I truly enjoyed  the fine arts.  Where did you get your first teaching job?  Here in Tulsa at McLain High School, and I was there for seventeen  years, I think. My students won numerous awards throughout the state  and set up lots of exhibitions. My kids, at that time, were going to East  Central High School, and I just wanted to move over there and be closer  to them.  How did you balance your teaching, your artwork in those early years?  It was a lot easier. I had a lot more energy. (Laughter) I mean, you could  pull an all-nighter and work all night and be ready to go, and then, like,  now, boy, ten o   clock comes, and that   s it. (Laughter) One thing I will  say, (I call it a zone) when an artist gets in a zone, you don   t want     because it doesn   t happen that often, but when it hits there, take full  advantage of it, and you can just go.  How many shows were you going to in that early period when you first     About the same number as I am now because my high school took up so  much of my time. My high school shows, we enter anywhere from nine  to fifteen art competitions and exhibitions a year, plus my shows. I  figure when I retire from teaching I will travel further out, but as of right  now I still enjoy teaching, so I stay closer to home.  I remember first seeing your work in terms of jewelry, first seeing  jewelry. Were you from the beginning always painting and sculpting, as  well, or did that become more important as you got started?  Well, no, I always enjoyed sculpture, number one. I enjoyed the  sculpture more than any other media. Painting, what I would wind up  doing is maybe painting one or two pictures a year, and they   d always  9  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  sell. I just wasn   t that much into painting until about the last, I don   t  know, ten years or so, twelve years, and I said,    Well, this is really a lot  of fun.    The style that I developed   I like JoAnne Bird   s work, and I  also like Earl Biss    work. I was going,    What? I can do that     but have  my own style. So, I   d say those two people influenced me on   the type  of my artwork was due to them.  Once you taught your dad how to do some jewelry making and you two  set up at that one show, did you continue to show together a little bit?  Oh, yes.  What was that like?  I also taught my little brother to do silversmithing.  Is this Greg?  Greg.  Okay.  He became quite an accomplished silversmith, as well.  What was that like, doing shows with your dad?  Well, it was really funny because whenever we   d go to a show, we   d be  miles apart and we couldn   t wait to go to the show to show the other  person what we had done. (Laughter) It was almost the same stuff, I  mean, same ideas, so that was kind of unusual.  That   s very unusual, thinking along parallel lines. What about stones?  What kinds of stones were you working with early on?  When I first started, I usually used the mussel shell, and I used a lot of  onyx, and I used a lot of turquoise.  What   s the best piece of business advice that you got from another artist  or gallery owner at the time?  You know, I don   t know. Like I said, that   s many years ago. I would say  that when I go to these shows and stuff, my dad always told me, he said,     Clance, always enjoy the show and the people and the surroundings.  You   re not going to make a hundred bucks every time you go to a show,  but enjoy it. When you have that kind of attitude, even if you don   t sell  anything, you come away a winner.    So I   ve always kind of kept that  10  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  philosophy.  That   s a great one. How would you describe the changes in the Indian  art scene from the    70s to the    80s?  I think going from the    70s to the    80s, there was such a surge of  appreciation of the Native American culture, Native American art, and  the Native American artists who produced the work benefitted from that  because they got to expose their culture and their knowledge and their  sense of being.  Were you involved with a couple of galleries here in state?  You know what, going back to teaching, I just didn   t have time. That   s  the reason why I went to shows because I just didn   t have time. If I did  this full-time, I could probably make more money than I do teaching,  except then it becomes a job and then something I have to do. I keep it  as something that is my release, and I enjoy it, and I have fun doing it.  Do you remember how things kind of changed from the    80s to the    90s?  I think I was more involved, myself, with learning and watching other  artists than I was in the    70s and    80s. From the    80s and    90s, I became  more aware of all the different types of Native American artwork, and I  tried to gear myself to the Southwest style. When I   m teaching, I   ve got  to teach everything.  Right. You were looking, also, for example, at sculpture. You were kind  of absorbing and talking with other sculptors.  Yes, I try to just absorb everything you can. When I take my kids to art  shows, my high school kids, I tell them,    Go talk to the artists. Ask them  how they did it.    I say,    Most of them are going to be really excited that  you   re talking to them. Then look at the styles. Look at the different  techniques that they use and then come back and try it out.    Usually  when I go to a show or even with my kids in the classroom, I teach them  a lesson or something, and I see one of them do something a little  different. I   ll go,    Whoa, this is neat     and I   ll go back and do it.  (Laughter) Whenever you think you know it all, that   s when you might  as well check it in. I mean, it   s an ongoing learning process.  In 1990 the Indian Arts and Crafts Act was passed, requiring artists to  show proof of Indian identity or have a letter from the tribe certifying  them as an artist who could represent that tribe. Do you remember how  that impacted individuals in galleries? I guess you weren   t too involved  with the gallery scene, but shows     11  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Well, I know that there are a lot of artists out there that could not prove  that they were Native American, but they looked Native American and  their work was unbelievable, great. So I think, therefore, they took a hit  on that.  The way I look at it, competing with other artists, it   s when you can go  out and compete with those guys and you know you   re at their caliber. It  doesn   t make any difference who goes, you know? That   s my own  personal opinion. I   m real competitive that way. I think it hurt, but in a  way it didn   t hurt because then that way people who bought the Native  American artwork could actually say,    This is authentic Native  American work.     I know they have a lot of Native American artisans now, and I   m glad  they got that in there so some of them can show. Even cowboy artists  have   you kind of flip-flopped back and forth. Like I said, it didn   t  affect me that much, but I know a lot of artists that it did affect.  Art is at least a two-person business a lot of times. I remember seeing,  for example, I think, your older son at some of the shows, and maybe all  of your children over the years have helped out. Can you talk about the  role your family plays in your work?  As far as my artwork?  Or maybe at shows. Just any aspect of the art business.  Well, I tell my two boys   they   re both very talented, and they both won  numerous awards throughout their high school career. Brett, he has  branched off, and he is doing commissioned work. He   s very talented.  Dax, I think Dax can do the work, but that   s not what he   s into right  now. When it   s time for them to,    I want to get back in this,    they will. I  just don   t push them, like,    You need to do this, and you need to do  that.    God   s going to tell you when it   s time, so that   s the way I look at  it.  Are commissions an important part of your work?  Commissions? You know what? I really don   t enjoy the commission  work as much as I do when I just go out in my garage and have fun.  When I do commission work, that means I sit there and I just got to do  it. It   s not as challenging, not as much fun, but I do it because it brings in  the extra money.  A good example, a lady ordered a bracelet from me. It took me a year to  12  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  get it done. After I did it, I liked it, so I went and did another bracelet in  two days. So there you go  (Laughter) I like to do things on my own.  Commission work is fine, but I really enjoy just being able to sit there  and create and do the things that I want to do. I   ve been really fortunate  and really blessed that people buy my artwork.  Have you competed for any kind of public artwork? I know generally  your sculptures are not large-scale pieces, usually, but have you...  No, because I   m too busy at school. I mean, school just takes up an  unbelievable amount of time. Especially in the busy part of our year, I   m  usually at school way before school until way after dark. We just keep  after it.  You   ve talked about some of the things you try to share with your  students. What are some other things that you really want them to get  from your art classes?  A really better understanding of what art   s all about. Art   s everywhere.  It   s on cans; it   s on billboards. It   s in the home; it   s the architect. It   s just  not a canvas or a piece of clay. Art is everywhere, and if the kids can  grasp that and take hold, then they   re that much better for it.  Teaching at McLain and also at East Central, to a degree, sometimes  you   ve worked quite a bit with minority children and lower-income  children. What have been some of the rewards and challenges of that?  Probably my best story: I had a mother come up to me and say,    I don   t  know if you remember me, but my daughter went to school, and she  took a class under you.    I said,    I remember.    She said,    I want you to  know that she is going to graduate from college this spring. She   s going  to get married. Since then, I   ve gone back, got my GED. I   m now in  college and taking classes. Her brothers never finished high school, have  gone back, and got their GED, and they are taking tech classes. All her  cousins are seeing the benefits of what education can do for you and are  going back to school.     Now, that, to me, wraps it up. When you know   I don   t know how to  put it. You never know how you   re going to influence someone down  the road, so I try to live every day to the fullest. I try to be positive all  the time. It   s kind of hard sometimes with that many kids in the  classroom, but the whole idea is, hopefully, you   ll make a positive  impact on their life.  That   s a wonderful story. Thank you for sharing that. Some of the tribes  are really working harder these days to get behind their artists, whether  13  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  it   s in terms of scheduling shows or trying to give them some more  visibility or buying pieces from their artists. Any thoughts on that  situation?  I think that it   s really a great idea. I think that the more exposure that  you can give your tribe and your ideas and your art talent and stuff like  that, and they help promote you, that   s a no-loss situation. It   s going to  benefit both you and the tribe. I know a lot of the shows that I go to,  there are so many different tribes and so many really talented artists that  it really makes it fun.  Friendships are a big part of it, aren   t they, friendships that you develop  with other artists?  Just like I told you before, when my dad said,    Enjoy the people. Enjoy  the situation, and even if you don   t sell, you learn from that.    I have  grown to where I have several really good friends that are in the Native  American art field.  Has that happened a bit with collectors, too, repeat collectors that you     I think on repeat collectors, if you   re fortunate to have people who really  love your work, it   s going to sell itself. They   re going to come back and  buy more, or they   re going to tell their friends. It   s like that type of  situation.  I   d like to talk just a little bit more now about your techniques and  philosophies, starting with your jewelry. You mentioned some of the  stones you worked with initially, and I think one of them was shell,  right?  Yes.  There are some challenges to that, aren   t there?  Well, whenever you   re cutting your own shell and stuff, it   s real toxic.  What you want to do is use a lot of ventilation, a lot of water. I have  made myself kind of sick a few times where I didn   t have it set up just  right, but yes.  What stones now are you using mostly? It   s still mostly silver that you   re  working with?  Right. I usually just use the sterling silver. I use lots of different types of  turquoise. I think the turquoise is the eyes in the beholder, so I try to get  real picky with my turquoise. Then a lot of times I will sit there and  14  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  think a long time before I decide what to do with it. Same way with my  paintings. I might paint seven or eight backgrounds, and I might sit on  them for six, eight months before it comes to me what I want to do with  it. Now, the sculptures, that   s a little different. I have an idea in my head,  pretty much what I want to do, but then the research goes in to make  sure everything is in the right perspective, and I   m going to reach my  goal that way.  Going back to your jewelry, what kinds of design qualities do you want  it to evoke? What are you thinking about when you come up with those  initial designs?  Well, like I said, I take the stone, and then I build the design around the  stone. I want the stone to be the main attraction, and I want the other  silver work to enhance it, so they have to work together. You   re not  going to have one without the other, so therefore they kind of build on  each other. The silver works more as an accent to the stone, and I guess  that   s the reason why I   m particular on the stones.  Yes, and for me, like your jewelry, what I love about it is it   s not quiet  jewelry. You know what I mean? It   s not super flashy, either. When you  put it on, it wears well. It always hangs right.  Well, thank you. I just   I don   t know. I always tell people who look at  artwork and if they   re interested in buying or whatever, I say,    Does it  talk to you?    If it   s talking to you, then you know that   s something you  should look into. I mean, paintings, sculptures, jewelry, you can say,     Oh, that   s real pretty,    but if it really talks to you, you ought to think  about it.  That   s how I tell a lot of people when they   re looking at artwork. Just  don   t buy it because it   s there or an investment thing because it   ll  probably sit in a box. It   ll never be worn or sit in a closet. What you  want to do is you really like the piece, it really talks to you, really love  it, then that   s what makes you happy. That   s what makes me happy,  when my art pieces talk to people.  When you buy your stones, is there a particular   do you have some  favorite stores? Do you order online?  I had a really good friend, his name was Will Doty. He passed away last  spring. I think over twenty-five years, I bought lots of stones from him,  lots, from sugilite to azurite to malachite to turquoise, agates.  Was he located here in Oklahoma?  15  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Yes, he was. His son is a dealer in stones, but I don   t know where he   s  stationed. I remember going to Will   s house and spent hours looking at  stones. Then also, out west, my brother, when he was in silversmithing,  he would say,    Well, found some good stones.       Okay.    (Laughter)  We   d buy them and split them up and go from there.  Talking about your paintings a little bit, you have developed   as you  say, you   ve been influenced by some of these Native impressionistic  styles, and you like to use a palette knife, I guess, quite a bit?  Palette knife. I like to show a lot of movement, lots of colors, and  sometimes you really can   t even tell what it is. If everything is moving  right, then I   ve accomplished my goal.  It   s almost like a kind of action painting, isn   t it, for you, if you   re really  working that palette knife?  It just starts flowing.  Quickly?  Yes, I mean, we talked about the zone earlier. Whenever I hit this zone,  you don   t want to put it down. It just kind of flows.  And most of your paintings are on canvas. Is that right?  I do watercolor, as well. I do some pencil, but I enjoy the   well, I don   t  know. I just haven   t done that many watercolors, but I enjoy the  watercolors as well as I do the canvas paintings.  In terms of sketching, do you do any preliminary sketching for your  jewelry or your painting?  It depends on the subject matter, like, let   s say on my sculptures. Gosh   Even as many buffalos as I   ve done or horny toads or anything that I   ve  done, I have pictures and books and more pictures and books and bone  structures. I   ve got it all. The best example is to go out and find  something that   s real and go from there.  In terms of your sculpture, I think texture seems to be really important to  you there. You mainly work in bronzes. Is that right?  Yes, clay and bronze.  Clay and bronze.  16  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Yes. On the texture that I use, really, again, it depends on the piece,  itself. When I teach my kids at school, I just tell them I don   t want  something that   s real stoic. I want to show movement. I want to be able  to tell a story without you telling me what the title is, and then therefore,  you   ve accomplished your goal. Whether the viewer sees it or not,  you   ve accomplished your goal. That   s what I try to do with mine. I try  to tell a story, and there usually is a story behind each piece.  So, with the clay, are you saying some of the sculpture is fired ceramic?  Yes, it   s fired, and then I usually airbrush it. I enjoy the raku, and I enjoy  stoneware. There   s so many things I   d like to do, but there   s just not  enough time.  Have you explored masks at all with the ceramic?  Not personally, but that   s infiltrated in my curriculum for my clay kids.  Interesting. What was the most challenging piece of sculpture that you  did?  Well, the most challenging piece that I ever did, it was a hand coming  up, and it had a woman coming up through the hand. It had the buffalo  robe and had the shield. I was just about ready to have it all done, and it  fell and broke. I mean, I   d already hauled it out and everything, and I  just said,    It wasn   t meant to be. I   m not even going to attempt it again  until I think I   m ready.    That was probably my most challenging piece,  but I lost it. I still remember it, so it   s still back in my head.  Right. Another try. What size do you typically work in when you   re  working in sculpture, or is there a     No particular. I don   t want it real big because there   s not that many  people that can have big pieces of sculpture in their home. I try to make  more vertical than horizontal because more people have vertical space in  their home. Subconsciously I think of it like that, but most of my pieces  are horizontal.  Do you have a foundry here in-state?  I take my artwork to the Bronze Horse in Pawhuska.  Oh, nice.  I think that there   s two artists involved: the person who creates it and the  person who duplicates it. I have found that they have done my pieces  17  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  justice, and I just keep going back there.  How long have they been around?  Oh, way before I even started artwork.  We   ve talked about the fact that your brothers are also gifted artists, and  I think Shan is the one that   s     He   s doing The American.  Right. Have you guys ever sort of swapped ideas or thought about  collaborating on a piece?  I don   t think so much collaborating as I think that we   I probably ask  more questions for Shan to help me out than he does me, but he has  asked me questions.  And he   s working in a way bigger scale.  Right, he   s done, like, three Miss Americas at Oklahoma City  University, Billy Vessels, Maverick  James Garner , Warren Spahn,  Shannon Miller, Dr. Suji Ameng. He has done some unbelievable  sculptures.  When you   re doing a bronze, the foundry process is kind of expensive.  Do you do any pre-selling?  I think, once again, it just depends on the piece. Like, if I could sell my  horny toad, then that would give me enough to make a bronze piece out  of it. I plan to do another horny toad, but on a smaller version. I have  found several horny toads with different poses that are actually almost  vertical, and that   s what my first bronze of a horny toad will be. It   s not  going to be flat on the ground like my clay pieces, but it will be actually  protruding up, looking up.  So these are, like, photographs that you   ve seen?  Yes, anytime I look in the National Geographic or any magazines and I  see pictures that like of certain animals. Most of my wildlife is from  North America, usually North American wildlife. I go with it like that.  And I think horned toads are just   especially now when they   re sort of  disappearing, you don   t find them as readily as you used to.  No, it   s been a long time since I   ve seen a horny toad out in the wild. I  18  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  think the last time I saw one, my kids were still in school and I was  coming home from McLain High School. Saw one run out across the  highway by the airport, stopped my vehicle, waited for the cars to pass,  went out and caught it. I brought it home so they could see it because  they   ve never seen one. Then we went out to Coweta, out at my aunt   s  place, and found a red-ant hill and turned it loose there. I figured it had a  better shot there than the airport.  Right, right. What is your creative process from the time that you get an  idea? Just kind of walk us through it.  Well, like I said, most the time I want to definitely tell a story without  looking at the title. I want to show movement. I take those in  consideration when I start forming my piece. Like I said, I don   t want it  to be standing still. Even if it   s laying down and stuff, I can still show  movement.  How can you show movement if it   s just laying down?  Oh, let   s say I   m wanting to do a sculpture of a baby buffalo. Instead of  having both legs underneath him and the ones underneath him in the  back, I can have him kind of sprawled out and his head laying down,  kind of across one arm, and there   s your movement.  In terms of patinas, what are some of your favorites?  I don   t really know the name of them, but John and Matt  Free  help me.  I tell them what I want, and they usually get the patinas     In Pawhuska.     at the Bronze Horse. They usually get the patinas like I like. If I tell  them I want more red in it, they get more red. If I want more copper in  it, they get more copper. It   s a whole neat process the way that they do  it.  How do you handle your signature, because sometimes that   s kind of an  art decision in itself.  It   s pretty simple.  Okay.  The more simple, the better. It   s just four little letters, and that   s it.  (Laughter)  19  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  How important is humor in your work?  I think that   well, just take example of my buffalo that   s sitting there.  He   s so fat, and he   s trying to turn around and scratch his head. I call it  Too Fat to Scratch. So it plays a part, but everything   s got to fall into  place for it to work.  Do your titles come pretty readily most of the time after the piece is  finished?  A lot of times they come before I even start the piece. A lot of times I   m  done with the piece, and then it comes to me, what I   m trying to present.  That   s with the paintings, as well.  Do you keep track of your ideas in a notebook at all?  Nope. Like I said, I do this because I enjoy it. I guess when I quit  teaching, it   ll have to be where I have to keep more of a notebook, but  no, I don   t.  What is your creative routine? Do you try to get a certain amount of  hours in per day or on the weekends?  As far as my jewelry work, I might cut stones, twenty, thirty stones, and  then I   ll sit on them. When it hits me, then I   ll work. Artwork, my  paintings, same thing. I might paint the backgrounds and then sit on  those for a long time before I feel like,    Yes, that   s what I want to do.     Sculptures, a lot of times I know that I worked on an eye for two or three  hours and then just said  scoffs , then take it off and start over.  Whenever I hit that zone, I want to take advantage of it.  Right. So what   s been one of the most important art awards you   ve won  up to this point?  That   s a tough question because I think any time that you win an art  award, whether it   s a big show, little show, it   s a precious moment  because you have shown what you   re capable, your ideas, like I say,  whether it   s a big show or little show. If people recognize your artwork  as being good, then so be it.  Looking back on your career so far, what has been kind of a fork-in-the-road  moment when you might   ve taken one path but you decided to go  this other way?  Well, probably the best example would   ve been when I was playing  baseball. I thought I was going to be a baseball player, and I chose art  20  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  instead. Best thing I ever did.  What   s been one of the high points of your career?  I get a lot of those. I mean, anytime I go to a show, anybody that sees  my work and goes,    Wow, look at this     I mean, some stand out a little  bit more than others. Like an example, I was telling a lady about The  Last Emperor. It   s my buffalo that   s going down, and I told her that it  got shot going down, but it still looks pretty majestic as it   s going down.  I turned around, and she had tears coming out of her eyes. Anytime,  anything like that, any people who take the time to want to know about  the artist, know about their work and,    What made you do this?    It   s  always fun.  What   s been one of the low points?  I haven   t had any real low points. Like I said, I enjoy it. I could live and  breathe and eat it every day. I do not really have a low point.  Speaking of your buffalo, I   m just wondering if you   ve been to   do you  go to the Tallgrass Preserve sometimes and take pictures, Tallgrass  Prairie Preserve?  No, I have not been able to go yet. I need to go, but, like I said, teaching  and then go to the shows and then   there   s just not enough hours in the  day. You   d think I   d take off. In fact, when I quit coaching, I said,     Gosh, this is going to be great. I   m going to get to go to more shows, do  more things.    I   m more busy now than I was when I was coaching. I  wonder how I even accomplished what I did when I did, but I really  enjoy the kids at school and whenever they   re working, producing, and  enjoying it and winning awards. It   s pretty exciting.  What   s either a personal project or a project you   ve embarked on with  your students that you   re particularly excited about right now?  Well, in my advanced AP class we started doing more sketching.  Besides them working on their breadth and concentration, we   re doing  more sketching, and I   ve found I think that kind of energizes their base.  They should   ve been doing the sketching all along, but this way it   s  required. Now they have to do it, and a lot of them just do it on their  own, anyway.  A lot of my kids work probably on four and five projects at a time,  which is really great. That way, there   s no slack time. Then on my form  design class, which is my sculpture class, which is my favorite class,  (Laughter) they   re trying to finish up their big projects for the fall now.  21  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  By the middle of next month, they should be pretty well done and  getting ready to go to shows and compete.  Of course, my Art I kids, they become a real challenge. They   re at this  level, and I want them at this level. (Gestures) I want them up here, to be  able to compete with the Booker Ts and the Jenks and Edmond Norths   High Schools  and Norman High School. I want them to be able to  compete with the Holland Halls and Skiatook and all these schools that  are really up and coming in the fine arts.  Did you introduce any art programming that they haven   t had  previously at Central?  East Central?  Yes.  We   re probably   I   m going to say we   re one of the very few high  schools that does raku firings. We   re the only high school I know of that  get to do pewter castings. We   re one of a handful of schools that get to  do jewelry. I   m hoping within the next year or two before I retire that we  implement stone cutting. That would be my big project is stone cutting  and have the facilities and the tools and all that to pursue it.  You   ve got some lucky students. Is there anything we   ve forgotten or that  you   d like to add before we look at your artwork?  I think we   ve pretty well covered it.  All right. Well, we   re going to get ready to look at some pieces. We   re  looking at one of your buffalos.  This is called Too Fat to Scratch, and we talked about the humor part of  it before. How I got this idea, when I was a young boy on my  grandfather   s farm, they had this big ol    Black Angus bull in the barn. I  was watching him. He was sitting there trying to scratch his head behind  his ear, and he couldn   t reach it. (Laughter) So I said I would always  love to do a piece like that.  That is great. How many in this series?  The series was nine and with the artist   s proof. I   m down to   this is  number seven. I have three left. The artist   s proof goes to my kids.  Oh, that   s really neat. All right. We   re looking at a couple pieces of your  jewelry now.  22  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  I enjoy the turtle. In our culture, the turtle is a sign of good luck, so I  happened to call this piece Good Luck. It   s more surrealistic. It   s not a  real sculpture of a turtle, but you can tell it   s a turtle. Then my bolo here,  I call it Tranquility, and it just has a soothing effect. I feel like it does. It  gives off that kind of a vibe.  What are the different stones or different turquoise from different  places? I know it   s a turquoise.  The one on the right is Tranquility. It   s China Mountain Turquoise. The  one on   well, in fact, both of them are China Mountain Turquoise.  What happened was when they tried to break into the market, the deal  was, when they broke into the market they were selling their good stones  for  350 a pound. The good stuff from like the Kingman Mine, the  Sleeping Beauty Mine, Fox Mine, all these, they were selling theirs for   800 to  1,000 a pound. I bought all I could because I knew it was good  stuff.  Right, right. It   s just gorgeous, the colors. You give titles to your  jewelry, as well, huh?  Only the big pieces.  Okay, okay.  I couldn   t do it to all mine.  Right. (Laughs) You were going to tell us about your painting, here.  This particular painting, I wanted to depict that as early morning mist.  The war ponies, they   re all excited because they know they   re going to  go on a hunt, and they   re really pumped up. That   s what I wanted to  show on this piece.  You can see the hill in the background and the texture, the relief on the  paint. That   s really nice. Okay, this one   s called The Three Wise Men.  Yes. This painting is called The Three Wise Men, and basically they   re  the tribe   s elders, and they have all the wisdom. That   s who they go to  when they have problems and stuff like that.  Lots of nice movement and, again, lots of texture. That   s great. Well, I  thank you very much for your time today, Clancy.  23  Gray  Well, thank you.  -------  -------  
