 Little Thunder My name is Julie Pearson Little-Thunder. Today is September 6, 2014,  and I   m interviewing Sharron Ahtone Harjo as part of the Oklahoma  Native Artists Project sponsored by the Oklahoma Oral History  Research Program at Oklahoma State University. We   re in Oklahoma  City where Sharron is packed for a move to Santa Fe, temporary move.  Sharron, you   re a Kiowa tribal member with numerous  accomplishments, including being the twelfth Miss Indian America,  earning a degree in higher education, and working as an educator in  the public schools for many years. You started painting professionally  in the    70s when Native art was male-dominated, and you were an early  experimenter with ledger art. I think you helped open the door for other  Native women painters. Thank you for taking the time to talk with me  today.  Harjo Thank you.  Little Thunder Where were you born, and where did you grow up?  Harjo I was born in Carnegie, Oklahoma, back in 1945, January 6, to be exact.  My father worked for the Bureau of Indian Affairs, and so we would  move, moving around quite a bit. I started school in Washington DC. I  started school in Fort Duchesne, Utah. Then I started school in  Anadarko, so all these moves   . I was very young when I went to  Washington DC. They didn   t have room for me in the public schools in  the classes I was supposed to be in, so I started school when I was four.  Little Thunder Wow.  Harjo They ended up in Billings, Montana, when my dad was transferred there  when I was in the sixth grade, and that   s where I graduated from high  school.  5  Little Thunder What did your folks do for a living?  Harjo My father worked for the Bureau of Indian Affairs. When he first  started in his career, he was a soil conservationist. You   ll be happy to  hear this: he was an OSU graduate. They were Aggies back then, I  think. He was an agronomist. When he started his career he was in soil  conservation. Then he went to training. I guess the big, bad word in  those days was    relocation.    He was a relocation specialist working  with Indian people across the country. When we moved to Billings, he  became a tribal operations officer and worked with all the reservations  in Montana and then the two in Wyoming. He was their tribal  operations officer. When he finished from there, they came back to  Oklahoma. Then he retired out of Muskogee, but before that, he also  worked with the Creek Nation and the Cherokees. I think it was the  Five Tribes that he was working with in the Muskogee area office. My  mom was a homemaker all her time with us, but she was an excellent  craftsperson, a seamstress, and had to do a lot of things. A wonderful  cook. Too bad it didn   t catch on to me. It did my brothers and sisters,  but not me. (Laughs)  Little Thunder How about your brothers and sisters?  Harjo I have two sisters, and I have two brothers. Two of them have passed  away. My older sister lived in Billings, Montana. She was the line  officer in education for the Bureau of Indian Affairs for a number of  years. She was in education, as well. I have a younger sister, Deborah,  who lives in Mountain View, Oklahoma. She was the editor for the  tribal paper for a number of years, and she   s no longer doing that. She  does her artwork. She   s a beadwork specialist, as well as a pretty good  painter and drawing person. Then I had a younger brother, the oldest of  the two brothers. He passed away. He was a computer specialist,  technician. Then I have a brother, Hardy, who worked for Southwestern  Bell for a number of years. Now he   s also living in Mountain View, and  he does artwork, as well.  Little Thunder What was your first exposure to Native art?  Harjo I don   t know. I guess you can tell by looking around here. (Laughs) It  was just stuff hung on the wall and on the shelf, just grew up with it. I  didn   t know it was Indian art. I didn   t know it was an art at that point,  but it was always there. We always had it in the house. I remember  drawing when I was little. We   d always have tablets, and Dad and Mom  would say,    Okay, here   s some paper. Draw.    Color crayons are my  favorite.  6  Little Thunder That   s what I was going to ask, what your first memory of making art,  yourself, was.  Harjo I   ve tried to learn things, sometimes teach myself some things that I  maybe wanted to know, and then I had a lot of good teachers, as well.  It   s always been there.  Little Thunder You mentioned all your different moves around the country. What kinds  of exposure did you have to art that stand out for you in elementary  school? I know you were in several places.  Harjo Yeah, I was in Anadarko, and, like I said, I didn   t know there was  anything different. (Laughs) I was always exposed to that. The murals  on the wall in the post office, I was always intrigued by those. When I  was with my family in Washington DC, of course, we went to the  Smithsonian. Remember all that. Mom and Dad always made sure we  got to the museums, had that experience of looking at artwork, being  part of something that was going on, a festival, an event. That   s what I  remember growing up with my brothers and sisters. It was always there.  Little Thunder How about middle school or high school? Any outstanding art  experiences that you remember?  Harjo I won my first contest when I was in seventh grade. We had to do an  illustration for the Nutcracker Suite, and my drawing won. That was  exciting because I had never entered a contest, and the first one, I won.  Little Thunder Very exciting. What school were you at?  Harjo I went to Lewis and Clark Junior High. Can you believe that? Our  friend, Jackie Sevier, (I don   t know if you remember her)     Little Thunder Yes, yes.  Harjo    she went to the same school, but she was years behind me because  she was quite young still. Anyway, we went to the same school. That   s  just really kind of fun to know that there   s some people whose paths  cross and we   re still crossing.  Little Thunder Right.  Harjo That, and then high school, I had an excellent art teacher. All through  my high school years I had the same art teacher. He was a commercial  artist before he became a regular school teacher, art teacher. He was an  expert in oil painting and so forth, so I had that kind of experience with  7  him. Did a lot of artwork for some of the organizations I belonged to in  high school, so had that experience, as well.  Little Thunder When did you sell your first painting?  Harjo Oh, gosh, not until I was old  (Laughs) I didn   t sell anything until   you  know, I went to Bacone  College  after high school. I didn   t sell  anything until about 1970 when I started. I really hadn   t sold anything  up to that point. I don   t know. I just never even thought about selling it,  I guess. It   s 1970, and I can even tell you who I sold it to. It was to the  dean of the law school at OU. He was my first collector. This is the time  when they used to have mall shows. Shepherd Mall when it was a big  shopping mall, they had those shows, and then the different places in  Tulsa and here in Oklahoma City. That   s where I started.  Little Thunder How did you decide to go to Bacone? Was your idea you were going to  get into the art program?  Harjo That pretty much was it, but one thing, too, my father and mother had a  connection to Bacone early on in their family, too, as well as some other  people from western Oklahoma and even Montana, the people that we  knew. I wanted to go there, first of all, because there were Indian  students there. It wasn   t totally Indian, but there were Indian students, a  high population in enrollment. Then the other thing was Dr. Richard  West was the teacher there, and I wanted to take classes from him. All  of my siblings and myself were all graduates of Bacone. My dad was on  the board for Bacone and also for Murrow  Indian  Children   s Home.  He was on that board down there, so it was quite an involvement. I got a  very good education. People always say,    Oh, it was just a junior  college back then,    but it had a legacy of wonderful art connections. It   s  helped me over the years in my career.  Little Thunder What kind of a base do you think you got artistically from Bacone?  Harjo As far as academically, they expected a lot of us, (Laughs) not just in  the arts but in all our classes, in Botany, and in the chemistry classes,  and the math classes, and so forth. Being the kind of student I was, I  thought it was difficult, but I made it. It was all right. I know some of  the other kids who were there that had some difficult times, too, but as  far as art classes, they were just excellent. I had a good background, like  I said, from high school, coming in there with oil painting. To this day I  don   t like to oil paint, (Laughs) not because I don   t like to paint. It   s  because of the mess that it makes. I don   t like to fool with all that kind  of stuff, so I was very thankful when the acrylics came in. Wash it out  and put it away. (Laughter)  8  As far as my teacher, Dr. Richard West, I couldn   t ever thank him  enough for taking the time to teach me what he knew. Sometimes you  would get down on yourself, or you didn   t think you were doing good  enough. He   d always come back and encourage you to do what you  needed to do. He was just a good person, and he knew my folks. One of  the things that he gave me one time was a picture. He said,    I   ve got  something to give you. I want to take you over here and show you this.     He brought out this picture of these Indian men who are the deacons at  the Rainy Mountain Church. He said,    I found this. This is your  grandfather right here.    I said,    Yes, it is     He said,    Well, I want you  to have this picture,    and it was a photograph from early on. I took that  to my dad, and my dad then put it in the Rainy Mountain Church. It   s  there now.  Little Thunder Oh, wow.  Harjo That was a nice gift. Then when I got ready to leave   I guess I need to  tell you this story about when I got ready to leave. Graduated in 1965  from Bacone. It was a junior college, so I have an associate   s from  Bacone. I got ready to leave, and we were closing up shop and so forth  to get things to go. Dr. West called me aside, and he said   and there  was really not anyone else around, a couple of other people. He said,    I  need to give you a gift, a parting gift. I want to give you a set of  brushes. Some of them are used, but most of them are brand new. You  have a career waiting for you. You need to paint. You   ve got it. You   ll  make it. You   ll be all right.    I said,    Well, I appreciate what you   ve   .     I still have those brushes, and I still use them today. I didn   t set them  aside on a   . I still have the brushes, and I still use them.  Little Thunder That   s wonderful.  Harjo He said that when the kids come in, he knows that there are students  who are very dedicated to learning as much as they can about what they  need from the art. He watches you grow. He watched us grow, and he  would encourage you to do this. There   s a lot of people have come out  of Bacone, but I think there were a lot of people who excelled and met  his expectations, so sometimes say,    It   s not just me, but there   s other  people.     Little Thunder I was wondering if there were a few of your classmates at Bacone we  would know from that time, whose names would be familiar.  Harjo I don   t know if you know Sandra Peters, Sandra Turner Peters. She   s a  Creek, Muscogee Creek. She was a year ahead of me. There was a  Nevaquaya young man. He was a cousin to Doc Tate, and he   s no  longer here. Trying to think of who else   . Some of my friends who  9  were excellent artists, they were in the Vietnam War, so they never  came back. It   s just so sad. The legacy before that, there   s Ruthe  Blalock Jones and Fred Beaver and Al Momaday. There   s a lot of  people, names that you can reel off. Then my adopted sister, Virginia  Stroud, who went just a semester at Bacone. There was also Joan Hill.  Little Thunder You got a bachelor of arts, I guess, in arts education at NSU   Northeastern State University . What drew you to that degree, and  how much time elapsed between the two?  Harjo Amos  husband . (Laughter)  Little Thunder Did you meet him at Bacone?  Harjo I met him at Bacone, right, and he went to Northeastern. After I finished  at Bacone, I went to Colorado Women   s College, which I find a very  interesting little story you told me about you attending the same school.  I went to Colorado Women   s College.  Little Thunder How did you land there?  Harjo I landed there   they gave me a full scholarship, but the opening door to  go out from there was I was Miss Indian America that year so my  contract only allowed me to for a semester. I just went one semester at  Colorado Women   s College. Then when I finished my year with Miss  Indian America, then I went to Northeastern. I decided to go there and  finish my degree. When I went to Colorado Women   s College I was  majoring in art, so that   s how I got into the art scene, with that.  Little Thunder Did you learn anything there artistically?  Harjo It   s not nice for me to say this, but I had this one art teacher. She was an  older teacher, and she   d knew everything about Southwest art, which I  did learn a lot. I could name all the pueblos back then. I can   t name  them now. (Laughs) She was really interested in Southwest art, and so  that   s why I wanted to learn what I could from her, but I guess it didn   t  stick. That   s about it. Then I went to Northeastern, took my classes of  drawing rocks and sticks and stones in the creek bed there that runs  across Tahlequah campus. Finished there.  Little Thunder And also knew at that point, I guess, that you wanted sort of a teaching  degree?  Harjo I did. I went ahead and took the classes to get a degree to teach art, but I  also got heavy into the history, world history, and so forth. I had some  excellent teachers. I had to take Oklahoma History, which a lot of the  10  kids didn   t have to, but I had to take it. I was an out of state student. I  had one teacher, he was just excellent, the stories that he would tell, and  talk about how Indian people made Oklahoma. He was really good.  That   s how I became more interested in the history, world history and  United States history. I also was able to get   I could teach the history  classes, too, which I have done. I taught social studies for a number of  years.  Little Thunder Mary Jo Watson has a nice chapter on you in her book about women  painters. I was struck by a comment that you made, that because you  were university trained and because you were going to teach, you got a  lot of support, not just from your family but also from the tribe in terms  of encouragement. I wondered if you would have had the same support  if you hadn   t become a teacher, if you had just said,    I   m going to be a  professional painter. That   s it.    There wasn   t that sense that you were  going to pass on these skills because there weren   t a lot of Kiowa  women out there painting when you graduated.  Harjo I think the encouragement I got from the tribal people was something  that   I know it came easily from them because if you did something,  they were always willing to say,    You   re doing a good job. Your mom  and dad would be proud of you. Your grandpa would be proud of you.     It was a family obligation that you want to continue that. As far as  university training and so forth, I think that kind of helped, but I don   t  think it would have deterred me because they would make you feel  good anyway that you were going to be doing that. It was a difficult  time to get into the art as a painter. That   s why I do still paint under  Ahtone Harjo because it was a time when you just really couldn   t walk  into a gallery and say,    I would like 30 percent,    or you would like 40  percent, or 80 percent, or 50 percent. Whatever they wanted to give  you, they were going to give you, whether who you were. You even got  less sometimes when you were a woman. Sometimes they wouldn   t  handle your work because you were a woman.  Little Thunder Was the discrimination coming more from gallery owners than your  fellow artists?  Harjo Right, because the fellow artists were very inclusive, which I am so  thankful because they were just there to   . Did I finish that  statement   .  Little Thunder Yes, we were talking about actually the discrimination came mainly  from gallery owners. So the Philbrook Indian Annual was going on. It  was in full swing when you were painting. Can you talk about one of  your experiences with it?  11  Harjo Yes, one in particular. It was a juried show, so sometimes you got in,  sometimes you didn   t. I think the last time when I entered, I entered a  piece. It was one of our stories about the tornadoes among the Kiowa  people, and it got rejected. (Laughs) I don   t know why it did   .  Rennard Strickland was part of the jury, I guess, or was the jury at that  time, and he bought the piece out of the reject room, so he has it in his  collection. There was another piece that I have, that I made. It was a  panel, but it had clay faces on it. They were pointing with their lips, you  know,    Over there, mmm-mmm.    (Laughter) Anyway, I did that piece,  and that was one of my pieces that   . It did get in that show, I  remember. It was on one of the calendars, Indian calendars that they  have.  Little Thunder So even though he had juried the show (I want to get this clear) and you  hadn   t made it into the competitive aspect, he   d bought it in the reject  room?  Harjo Right, right.  Little Thunder That   s interesting. (Laughter)  Harjo I don   t know where the painting is now. He could very well still have it  or maybe sold it on the market or whatever. Who knows.  Little Thunder Right, right. You had a one-woman show really pretty quickly at  Southern Plains Indian Museum in    75. How did that show impact your  career?  Harjo I always thought, you know, if you were in that museum in particular  then you made it somehow. I always thought,    Oh, gosh, it was good to  be invited to be a part of that.    The person who bought my first painting  at one of these mall shows back in the early    70s was pretty much  instrumental in getting me started from there because he was there when  it opened. He was standing at the door when they opened that morning.  I don   t know what he was looking, but he came in and looked and, of  course, purchased some things. I always thought,    If you make it at  Southern Plains Museum, then you got it.    (Laughs)  Little Thunder Right, and it is     Harjo Yeah, it   s a good place.  Little Thunder    it   s a watermark. Indian Fair, American Indian Exposition, in  Anadarko was thriving, too. Can you talk about that a little bit and why  it was important?  12  Harjo As far back as I can remember, I always went to the Indian Fair. I guess  that   s what they call it. That   s what I call it, the Indian Exposition. I  always wanted to enter in the show when I started to paint.  Little Thunder So even as a young girl     Harjo As a young   they didn   t have children   s art or anything, so you had to  be an adult to be in it. I remember all the nice paintings and so forth that  came through there. When I became eligible to do it, it was like in the     70s, though, too, someplace around    71,    72 that I entered into the  show. I was able to get a nice prize out of that, and I liked that it was  kind of a goal in my life and it was met, so that was good.  Little Thunder So you won First Place in painting?  Harjo I won Best of Show.  Little Thunder Best of Show, that   s wonderful  What   s another award that you   re  particularly proud of that you   ve won for painting over the years?  Harjo I wouldn   t say painting. (Laughs)  Little Thunder Or in any medium.  Harjo Well, okay, any medium. You remember Mavis Doering, our dear  friend.  Little Thunder Yes.  Harjo She asked me if I would like to learn how to make baskets because her  son Scott knew how to make baskets and she didn   t have a daughter.  She said,    I want you to learn so that you can teach this in your schools  in Edmond.    I said,    Okay, I would like that.    Anyway, I made a basket  for a show that was at Aspen, Colorado, which was sponsored by the  Smithsonian. I won basket category. (Laughs)  Little Thunder Yes, I remember being amazed to read that and saw that you had  painted   is that right?  Harjo Yes, I painted on the side of the basket.  Little Thunder You painted the sides of your basket, so you were able to combine both  interests.  Harjo Well, they   re over here because I   m still trying to put them away     13  Little Thunder We may look at one later.  Harjo    the baskets that I have.  Little Thunder Great. Who are some other artists you admired at that time in the    70s  who were painting?  Harjo I think that probably the most important person to me back in those  days was someone who encouraged me to be a part of the art scene, and  that was Doc Tate Nevaquaya.      Little Thunder Okay, so you were talking about that fact that Doc Tate was an artist  you admired.  Harjo Right, and it was because he always made sure   you know, if there was  a show coming up, or if he was going to be in a show and he knew there  was a space, he would say,    I gave them your name, and they should be  calling you. Would you like to do that?    I was,    Yes, that would be  good.    He was always including my name somewhere along the way.  He helped me, and he encouraged me to do it because he knew that  there weren   t a lot of women and I guess because he   s Comanche and  I   m Kiowa.  Little Thunder Right.  Harjo We   re neighbors, (Laughter) so he was really good to help that way.  Some of the artists from the Bacone School of Art, Fred Beaver, Terry  Saul, Solomon McCombs, Ruthe Jones, they were also people I admired  an awful lot. And Joan Hill, I really like her. She was always  encouraging.  Little Thunder You were in the Daughters of the Earth show, and I didn   t realize that  you also moderated the documentary that OETA made.  Harjo I didn   t remember that  (Laughs) That   s good to know.  Little Thunder I read that.  Harjo Well, good. I probably did and just didn   t   . It was an interesting show.  Little Thunder Can you discuss it little?  Harjo Yeah, it was a good show, and Virginia Stroud, we can give her credit  for coming up with the whole show and getting it where it was. She  lived in Colorado at the time, so she had a lot of friends who were in the  galleries and so forth, and the museums. She got our show together. It  14  was Oklahoma women artists, and we went to several of the shows. I  don   t even remember how many. You probably don   t know this. There  were nine or ten   .  Little Thunder Yeah, and they showed several places around the country, I think.  Harjo Yeah, it was in Colorado, Georgia, Nebraska, different places. We got  to go to some of the places. We had to pay our own way on some of  them. Some of the others, they sponsored us. It was good. It was a good  show because it did focus on the Oklahoma Indian women, not just  Kiowas or Cherokees. It was quite a mixture of people.  Little Thunder The business aspect of art is sometimes the hardest to get, for an artist  to get a hold of, and I   m wondering how you knew how to price your  work in the beginning.  Harjo Even to this day I like to do my artwork so it   s affordable. I don   t know  if people tend to think that success is how much money you pay for  something or how much you can get for it. I just want it to be affordable  and enjoyable, and sometimes it   s free, depending on where it   s going  and who it   s going to or anything like that. I just want it to be  affordable. Of course, I   m not opposed to anyone commissioning a  piece or saying,    I like that. I would like to use that. Can I pay you to  make a print of it so we put it in a book?    Whatever. I think that art is  affordable.  Little Thunder What role has your husband played when you   ve gone to shows?  Harjo Well, you can see how it is around here. (Laughs) It   s just that he does  his share of what he thinks is important. He really likes the OU football  team, and he   s a runner. Our lives are, I guess, parallel rather than  intermixed so much. He   s such a good person as far as taking care of  things around the house. Cuts the grass, trims the hedges, runs the  vacuum, does the laundry, folds it, puts it away. There   s nothing for me  here. (Laughs)  Little Thunder That   s a help, too, yes (Laughter).  Harjo Then he   s a really good father to our child.  Little Thunder Oklahoma   s gallery scene developed quite a bit during the    70s, and I  was wondering what galleries you might have showed with during that  time.  Harjo Okay, gosh, can I even remember the names? Of course, Doris Littrell,  the Oklahoma   what   s it called?  15  Little Thunder Oklahoma Indian Art Gallery.  Harjo That   s right. Imogene Mugg was probably   she and Doris   .  Little Thunder Imogene   s shows, okay.  Harjo Doris and Imogene worked together at the fairgrounds at the big round  building there. What   s it called?  Little Thunder Oklahoma Art Center.  Harjo Right, okay, when they had that gallery. Then there was kind of an  annual show that we did, so I did that one and then got with Doris.  Linda Greever in Tulsa with the Art Market. I don   t remember the name  of the gallery in Norman, the one     Little Thunder Might   ve been Reba Olson   s.  Harjo Reba Olsen   s, yes, yes. What   s the name of that one?  Little Thunder That was an early one, too.  Harjo I don   t remember the name of it. Then of course OIO  Oklahomans for  Indian Opportunity  occasionally would have a show, and so I was  doing calendars with them and so forth back in the day.  Little Thunder How important has the Red Earth Arts Festival been for you?  Harjo That goes way, way back before they even started the actual festival  itself. I remember there was talk of who was going to do, what kind of  ideas we wanted to come together. I remember the very first formal  meeting they had at the Omniplex. I think Mary Jo Watson or maybe  Hickory Starr was the director at that time. We had this large room. It  was like a brainstorming session, so everybody had their little input,  who wanted this and that. Some of us stood up. I, of course, with my  big mouth got up and said,    I think that this is something Oklahoma  needs, and whatever we can do to help you, let us help you make it go.     Then, also, other aspects like the dance and the runs that they have and  just every kind of educational thing that could go with the symposiums  and so forth.  To me, it   s been really a good time for me. I enjoy it because I   m  hometown. I want to do it. Doesn   t cost me to go anywhere. I just stay  here, and of course I have a houseful at that time. Then with our child  being a dancer, she enjoyed it, too. She also grew up doing the Red  16  Earth Show. When it started she was, like, maybe eight or nine years  old. She did all the little shows all the way across, too. Now she does  the Red Earth show with me. I   ve been involved with every one except  one. I just happened to be out of town with one, but I   ve done every  show since then. Probably until they drag me out of there, I guess I   ll do  it. (Laughs) I   m a firm supporter of the arts here in Oklahoma City. I  really want Red Earth to keep going, and it will with the people wanting  to do it. It   s been a good show for me.  Little Thunder How did the Indian art landscape change from the    70s to the    80s, do  you think?  Harjo I think there   s still that discussion of what   s traditional, what   s  contemporary. I think that   s something that people are still wrestling in  their minds. To me, traditional is very contemporary, but it   s ever-changing.  You can make the subject matter change with you, or you can  still be traditional with what maybe has happened historically in your  tribe or with your own people. I think that Indian connection with  someone like myself who   s older and who   s a full-blood, (I   m four-fourths  Kiowa, and there   s not too many of us anymore) that   s what I  see. Your work can still be traditional, but it still can have a  contemporary feel to it as far as the use, the technical skill, and so forth  of what you   re trying to show in your work. That debate   s going to go  on forever, I think. My favorite one is,    Oh, I don   t want to be called an  Indian artist.    Well, I don   t know any other thing. (Laughs) It   s hard for  me to say that I   m an artist. It really is.  Little Thunder That sort of brought up for me, remembering your ledger art, and I  think the fact that you were actually into it fairly early. I mean, it   s very  popular right now. It   s had a comeback, but I was wondering when you  first started doing ledger art if you encountered any resistance and/or  what you tried to do differently when you took it up?  Harjo There was some resistance, but I think it   s from people who don   t know  the importance of it historically and what it meant to some of our  grandparents. My grandparent Sam Ahtone who kept a ledger book, he  was a deacon in the Rainy Mountain Church and lived through some of  those times when there was some transitional things that were going on.  That   s how I became involved because I had an interest in my  grandfather   s ledger book, and I always thought these are really kind of  neat drawings and what they mean. They showed the winter count, the  summer count, and so forth. Just to see what was going on was kind of  interesting to me.  When I first started doing this, my dad   I did this one picture, and he  said,    My goodness, that looks like something I know.    I said,    Well,  17  yes. It comes from a ledger book.    (Laughter) It was actually telling the  story of my grandmother. Then I have a piece I want to show you in a  few minutes here. There was some resistance, and it has to do with  people who are not familiar with the ledger art. There is a lot of it now.  Like I said, it can and has turned contemporary with cars involved and  dogs and throw pillows or whatever in the picture, but it   s kind of fun.  It   s not as easy as it looks. People say,    Well that   s so na  ve. Anybody  can do that.    I think if you have the cultural and the historical  connection to it, I think it   s going to come about. You just can   t   I  guess you can, but it   s just something that I   .  Little Thunder There   s a different feeling if you have that connection.  Harjo Right. Even within the tribes, I see some people who are not really quite  as much degree Indian as someone else, what the difference is, what  they do as to someone more involved tribally than others.  Little Thunder Were more than one or two of your ledger art pieces kind of inspired by  your grandfather   s book?  Harjo Yes, I have just maybe looked at something and taken maybe a portion  of it and put it on paper. I do most of my ledgers   I do drawings,  actually, and occasionally I   ll do a painting. The ones that are in  painting are more contemporary I think than the paper ones and the  pencil and ink and the paint   .  Little Thunder Right. Did you have the opportunity to travel overseas at all?  Harjo I have had the opportunity, but I have never gone. (Laughs) I am one  person who   because I had the experience of being Miss Indian  America, I traveled a lot by plane. I never have particularly liked to fly.  My daughter says,    Well, you   re just keeping yourself contained.    I  said,    I don   t enjoy it.    Nowadays it   s like a task to get on an airplane,  so I don   t go out of the country. I probably would if someone would  take my whole family, but in this day in age I don   t think I   d be going.  (Laughter) It   s kind of dangerous, thinking about it and thinking about  what   s going on in the world. No matter where you   re going, if it   s  Paris or if it   s in Istanbul or whatever, to me it   s dangerous. Scaredy  cat, I guess. (Laughs)  Little Thunder You did Indian Market for a while and then stopped in    91. Is that  right? Wait, when did you stop?  Harjo It was    92. I stopped because I was still teaching school. When I started  doing Indian Market, we didn   t start school until after Labor Day,  which was excellent. I didn   t have to miss any school. I just stopped  18  doing it because we started going to school earlier. I think the earliest  time that I remember going back to school was like the eighth of  August. There   s just no way in the world I could miss the first week. I  couldn   t even miss the first day because your contract   if you miss the  first day, then your fringe benefits don   t kick in. It was just a mess.  Then it became more difficult for me to do because my daughter was  quite young. In    92 she would   ve been fourteen or so, and it was hard to  leave her home. She was having to go to school. I just stopped. I wasn   t  making any more money there than I was just staying home. (Laughs) I  mean, it was an experience, and it   s good on paper. I just couldn   t do it  because I was still bringing income in from my teaching position. I  didn   t want to give that up just yet because I had so many years into it  and I didn   t want to stop.  Little Thunder We should talk about your teaching a little bit. You taught in the  Edmond middle schools. Is that right?  Harjo Yes, I was in Indian education before I went back into the classroom,  but prior to that I taught in Illinois at Jack Benny Junior High. I don   t  know; you   re probably too young to know who Jack Benny is. (Laughs)  He was a comedian, and he was from Waukegan, Illinois. That was my  first teaching position. I taught art in middle school. I had sixth,  seventh, and eighth graders.  Little Thunder That must   ve been a kind of different culture, experience.  Harjo Well, in a sense, though, because I was trained to teach K through  twelve, so it wasn   t too bad, teaching. I just didn   t like the Chicago  area. I didn   t like living there. It was too cold. It was dingy. The school  was excellent, the pay was excellent, but I just didn   t like living in the  Chicago area. Culturally, it was kind of fun because there were things to  do there in Chicago, museums and so forth, but as far as teaching  middle school, that was my choice of age group. I did that all my career.  Little Thunder And taught one year at Concho  Oklahoma    .  Harjo I taught several years at Concho.  Little Thunder Can you talk about     Harjo That one? That was kind of fun. When we moved back from Illinois, we  had to move back from Illinois in, I think it was 1970 when we moved  back here because Amos had to have a cornea transplant. They were  pretty new at that time. He was losing his sight, and so he had two  cornea transplants. Actually, he had three. The first one was, I think, in  1971. I needed to find a job, and he needed to find a job until his cornea  19  became available. He found a job at Concho, and that   s just about the  time right when, I think, Vietnam was just now ending or kind of in the  middle of it or something. There was a position open for him, so he  took that position. Along in April I got this phone call from the  superintendent of the schools, and they said,    We need you to come  because we understand you teach sixth graders. We have a bunch of  wild kids here, and they   re driving their teacher crazy.    (Laughs) I said,     Well, tell me how many?    He said,    There   s twenty-five of them, and  they   re sixth graders.     I said,    Okay, I   ll come and see what I can do. It   s just a month, isn   t it,  and that   s all?    I went, and, yes, they were wild. They were the kind  jumping across the desks, putting things in the teacher   s desk and in her  chair, putting gum in her hair. I   m not exaggerating. They were just  wild. She was elderly. They were taking advantage of her. I went, and  we got along fine. I didn   t get a contract. I didn   t get to stay there over  the summer or anything. I was just temporary. They said,    Can you  come back in the fall?    I   m like,    Oh, I don   t know.    So I went back,  and I did end up staying there, like, four years before I stopped  teaching. It was quite interesting. Would you believe the kids that I had  in the sixth grade that were so wild, they   re in their middle forties now.  They   re counselors, teachers, policemen. I have a artist. I have a welder.  Little Thunder That   s terrific.  Harjo In fact, something real interesting, I went to a grocery store in Montana  about three weeks ago, right before Crow Fair. I get in this line, and I  thought,    That girl looks familiar. That woman looks familiar.    I  looked, and she had a little tag, and it says    Martha.    That   s her  It was  one of my sixth-grade   .  Little Thunder One of your students.  Harjo She said,    Would you like your senior discount?    (Laughter) She  started smiling. I said,    Martha, is that you?    She said,    Yes.    She  started crying.    I can   t believe you   re coming through my line at the  IGA.    I said,    What are you doing here?    She   s from Anadarko, but she  went to Concho. She was one of my cheerleaders and one of my sixth-grade  students. She lives in Crow Agency, Montana. My kids, they   re  everywhere. (Laughs) I get so excited.  Little Thunder That   s a great story. How did you balance teaching and painting at the  same time?  Harjo Well, we didn   t have Tahnee at the time; she wasn   t here yet. Like I  said, Amos did his thing, and I did my thing. I   m a very early person. I  20  like to get up in the morning and putter around and do this while  everybody   s asleep. It   s kind of quiet. I would get up, like, four in the  morning, and I would paint until the sun came up or until it was time to  go to work and just go on and do. I would never accept any show unless  I knew I was going to be able to do it. That   s why I never have really  done a lot of the shows like some people. They go here, and they go  there.  Little Thunder Wanted to be sure you had inventory.  Harjo Yes, yes, and I don   t always have a big inventory. I do, like, maybe, six  paintings a year, if I do six painting a year anymore. I just didn   t take  the time to do it. I didn   t want to stress myself out any more than I  needed to.  Little Thunder As you   ve mentioned, you are a basket maker, and you   re also an  accomplished sewer and beadworker. I was wondering how these might  have influenced your painting at all or vice versa, how your painting  might have factored into     Harjo I think if anyone   s familiar with my artwork they know that there   s a  connection to the women   s lifestyle, daily lifestyle. As far as the  beadwork goes, I don   t do that anymore. I did when Tahnee was little  because I wanted her to have Kiowa clothes, so I did that. All my  female members of the family, they   re all excellent beadworkers. It  came from my dad   s side, my mom   s side, just excellent. I taught  myself some of the stuff, and then, of course, my dad taught me some  things too, how to beadwork. I use that pretty much in the detail of my  work. As far as the clothing and so forth, that   s what I use. The basket, I  did that because Mavis asked me to do, and I did teach that to kids in  my class. That was just one of the curriculum things that I wrote into  the school curriculum for what I was teaching.  Little Thunder You mentioned why that was particularly effective, I think.  Harjo It is. It   s something that everyone can accomplish, no matter if they   re a  little guy or a big guy, and they all have a sense of accomplishment,  making the basket and then knowing the historical part of it. Mavis  wanting the basketry to continue, that was my favor to her, to make sure  that it was taught the way that she wanted it to be taught, and I used her  methods. I used what she had taught me.  Little Thunder The Indian Arts and Crafts Act was passed in 1991, requiring that  artists show proof of enrollment with their tribe or be certified in some  way that they can represent the tribe in their artwork. What is your view  of the act and its impact?  21  Harjo I   ll probably step on toes here, but I   m going to say it anyway. Back in  the    70s when there was money to be had here and there, grants and so  forth, and there were trips, and there were show sponsorships, there was  money that people could.... Just by saying yes to someone, they would  be part of it. That kind of set in the sour point with me sometimes  because who was always first in line? It wasn   t the tribally enrolled  people. Consequently, they began to be left out of this, so when this act  came into being, I thought,    Well, that   s a good thing.    Again it wasn   t  just because you were an Indian. It was because it was a marketing  thing. That was important because when you buy something from Japan  or you buy something from Mexico or something, it says on there. Why  not with this American art? If it   s Indian made, should it not continue to  be sold as Indian made?  Now people to this day, they still get around the door for whatever  purposes they might have. To me, it   s just kind of a selfish thing if they  are not   . Julie, you being around Indian people as long as you have  been, you know the difference. You really probably do. You see it. I  don   t like to really address that, but I think it   s still an important task  that we probably need to follow through on some things. My daughter,  who   s in museum studies, going to be graduating in May. She finishes  up in December. She is doing her thesis, her senior thesis, on something  related to this but from the standpoint of a dancer and an artisan who  makes clothes for other people, in particular, people who do the  featherwork because you   re not even supposed to have that position  unless it   s yours, I guess, as the law reads.  There   s a split there somewhere along the way that the Indian Arts and  Crafts board   they are knowledgeable of that, and they know it, but  they don   t want to address it. The wildlife people, they have an issue,  too. I   d like to see them come together so it can work for everybody  because there were some people who worked with feathers and so forth  who want to do the right thing. That   s why this is an important task still  being addressed at this day because our Indian people, to keep some of  their cultural ways, they need these things whether it   s in their church or  whether it   s in their traditional upbringing. Those things still need to be  addressed. I think it   s an important act for us to understand more. It   s  not just to say,    Oh, I don   t want you in the art show because you   re not  Indian.    It   s not that. It   s an inherent right, actually, to do and discuss  certain things.  Little Thunder You served on Oklahoma Indian Arts Council. I think this might   ve been  in the    70s or    80s. I hadn   t heard of it, and I wondered if it still exists.  Was it an artists    association?  22  Harjo It was an artists    association, and it was developed because of the Indian  Arts and Crafts Act. You had to be a resident of Oklahoma, you had to  be a tribal enrollee, and it was an ongoing thing, pretty much like a  group who would do shows together. Even to this day, like I think the  Cherokees have one called the  Southeastern Indian Artists Association   or something like that. They still function, and so they have some   .  Little Thunder But this one was Oklahoma City based?  Harjo It was Oklahoma City based because   we had people from all over. It   s  been disbanded because the people have passed who were involved in  it.  Little Thunder I   d like to talk a little bit about your creative process and techniques in  a little more detail. I read one time that gouache was your favorite  medium. I wondered if that had remained true over the course of your  career.  Harjo As far as the painting, I like to do the gouache. I like to do canvases,  too, but because of limited space with the little ones here, it   s just real  difficult to do the acrylic. I have become accustomed to using  prismacolors and inks and some watercolor with my ledger drawings  because it gives a nice color with prismacolor and you can mix just like  you can with paints. I   ve grown accustomed to that, and I like that a lot,  too. Maybe, I don   t know, they   re kind of equal now.  Little Thunder What is your favorite subject to paint or put in ledger work?  Harjo I like to do the stories from our tribe, our legends and our myths and so  forth, just to display it as a story, maybe a record-keeping thing, going  back to the original type of artwork. That   s what I like to do.  Little Thunder Do you cut your own mats at all?  Harjo No, (Laughs) I   m so bad. I know how to cut them, but I don   t do it. I  don   t cut them. I have someone else cut them for me, or if I see a nice  price on something that are standard size, I will get those. I do like  beveled mats, though.  Little Thunder You had a nice little story you shared about a gift that you gave to Dick  West.  Harjo When he gave me my brushes and I knew that he was going to retire,  (he never really formally retired, but he just didn   t go around very much  because he became ill and was getting elderly) he came to Oklahoma. I  wanted to give him something for being my teacher, so I gave him a  23  paintbrush, but I gave him a beaded paintbrush. He was thankful, I  guess, because  I  couldn   t stop saying thank you enough. I was the one  saying thank you because of what he did for me. Because he had given  me   I thought,    Well, you deserve one, too.    He only got one.  (Laughter)  Little Thunder Only got one, not a whole set.  Harjo Yeah.  Little Thunder How do you think your painting style has changed over the years?  Harjo I think when I first started painting, like going from high school into  college, I had to learn how to get away from the modeling part of it  where you   re shading and so forth. Was taught pretty good the mixing  of colors, so I think I   ve always had a good color sense. I know I don   t  have as good a color sense as my daughter, but it   s there. When I went  to Bacone, I wanted to learn the traditional style, the flat painting, and  that   s where it took what I would change for me to go from the shading  and using paints to the flat gouache and the poster board and the acrylic.  I still do the acrylic; I still do flat. I don   t like to use it to shade. For one  thing it takes a lot of time. (Laughs) I like to just use a flat color on that.  I think I   ve pretty much   I think you can tell my work from anyone  else   s. It has its own way of telling you     Little Thunder Its own voice.  Harjo    who it is, yeah.  Little Thunder How has your use of color changed, do you think, over the years?  Harjo You know, (Laughs) it   s a funny thing because Tahnee and I had this  discussion not too long ago. When I first started painting, I used a lot a  red and blue, kind of traditional colors with us. Then when the    70s  came into being, when all the big turquoise jewelry and the pinks and  light blues, salmon color were pretty popular, then I went through that  phase. Then I went back to the more bright colors like yellows and  oranges and so forth, just real intense color in the    80s. Now back to the  drawings and with the ink, I   m just using black and pencil and  prismacolors but with the mixture of yellows and blues and reds.  Little Thunder Interesting.  Harjo It kind of went there to there, to there, to there.  24  Little Thunder So you   re still doing sketching first, or sketching is a very important  part of     Harjo On some things I do. Sometimes I start out, I just go for it, and let it  happen. I know with my canvases, I pretty much have an idea of what I  want to do, but I will sketch it on the canvas and go from there. As far  as the gouache painting, I do a drawing, what I think I want it to be,  detail as I go, and then I transfer that to my tracing paper. Then I  transfer the tracing paper, using graphite paper, which is a hard thing to  find these days. Back in the day, it used to be carbon paper, you know,  like on a typewriter. (Laughter) That, and then I go to the paint from  there. Then I put the detail in with the paint. It   s quite the process for  me.  Little Thunder Yes. What is your creative process from the time you get an idea?  Harjo Nowadays, usually I think I want to do something that I have seen that   s  kind of unusual or maybe in particular to a tribe. I think it might be kind  of fun. I   ve had actually three paintings. I did one, and the other two I  haven   t done yet. The one that I finished   and the reason I   m saying  this is there   s a man in Kansas City who bought this painting at an  auction. He said,    I bought this picture of these cowboys, and they   re  holding some kind of money up in the air.    I said,    Oh, my Gallup  picture, Going to the Navajo Fair picture.    Yeah  What are they  doing?    I said,    When you go to the Navajo fair,    which, by the way, is  this weekend,    you see all these people dressed up,    like new cowboy  clothes or their new velvet skirts. They   re standing on the side of the  road because they don   t have a car, and they   ll be holding five-dollar  bills up to catch a ride to the Navajo fair. You   ll see thirty, forty people  down this highway from Gallup to the Window Rock  Arizona . I said I  always wanted to do a painting of itm, so I did that one.  The other one is my 1970s picture about being at an art show. David  Bradley kind of got in on this one already. (Laughter) I still have it out  in the garage, that I did the sketch of. It   s being in a Oklahoma Indian  Art Show where all these   . This is an Oklahoma Indian Art Show  where all the women, Indian women, are by their paintings, trying to  sell their artwork. Of course, the Indian men, Oklahoma Indian men,  Indian artists, got all these blondes hanging around them, standing with  the pipes in their hands. The guy   s, smoking or having the pipe, not  smoking, but having a pipe in his hand. Anyway, it   s a whole scene. I  think David Bradley did something like that with the Lone Ranger and  all kinds of famous people in it. I have that somewhere, and it   s going  to get done one day.  Little Thunder Oh, that sounds cute. That   d be great.  25  Harjo Yeah, and then I was trying to think what was the other one I was going  to tell you about. I can   t remember. Isn   t that terrible? (Laughter)  Anyway, it   s usually from experiences that I   ve had that I wanted to do.  Little Thunder And you don   t necessarily keep a notebook or anything like that?  Harjo No, I do have   I   m like any other Indian artist, probably, in this state. I  have sketchbooks, but there might be one page in each one. (Laughter)  Whenever and whoever gets my papers, they   re going to find these  stacks, a bunch of books about this tall, maybe one drawing in it. I have  saved my transfer papers. I have them in a box. I told Tahnee, I said,     Those might be of some interest to someone someday.     Little Thunder Oh, yeah.  Harjo Yeah, but that   s what I   .  Little Thunder When you were painting, what was your creative routine? You kind of  mentioned you were a morning person, but do you have a little     Harjo A routine?  Little Thunder Yes.  Harjo I know people always find this kind of hard to believe of me, but I do  pray for guidance. (Laughs) That   s part of the routine no matter where I  start. It   s going to make sure it comes the way it needs to come. I leave  my stuff when I   m painting. I do dump my water because Tahnee was  such an inquisitive child, she would turn things over sometimes or come  in and try to use the paints. She never damaged anything that I had, but  she still talks about to this day that she would stand at the door. She   d  knock, and the door might be ajar or something. She   d,    Are you  through yet? Are you coming out? Can I get up?    (Laughter) I would  think this is probably a process that all the children of the Indian artists  have.  Little Thunder The women artists.  Harjo Yeah,    Mama, mama, mama,    you know. She would do that to me, but  I would just leave things. When she did come in there sometimes, she  got into a jam, in more ways than one. (Laughter) That was part of the  routine. I would just leave it in there. As we began to grow as a family  in here, I had to kind of put things away. I would always try to have, if I  had any kind of paperwork, I would have it close by. If I needed a book,  I   d try to have it close by. Some artists, they really work well with  26  music. I didn   t. (Laughs) I wanted quiet. I just want it to be quiet, my  overhead light that I use and so forth. Nowadays, magnifying glasses  and big ol   thick lenses. (Laughter) I   m always amazed at your husband   Merlin Little Thunder , how wonderful his work is.  Little Thunder You mentioned you do have something you   re looking forward to. It   s  not necessarily an art project, but something coming up here that  you   .  Harjo Right. On occasion, I have worked as a adjunct professor. I   m in Santa  Fe. Tahnee, she   s,    I don   t think these people know who you are.    I  said,    Well, so much the better.    (Laughs) I said,    I   m not anybody  special.    She says,    You   re my mama, and I know what you do.    I said,     Well, yeah.    Linda Lomahaftewa teaches classes out at IAIA  Institute  of American Indian Arts  and she said,    Sharron, would you come and  teach my class? I barely touch on ledger art, and I think it   s real  important.    I said,    Yes, I will do that.    She says,    Is it going to cost  me?    I said,    Hmm, maybe lunch or something.    (Laughter) I   m kind of  looking forward to having one of her classes to talk a little bit about  ledger art because I know they are probably familiar with it, but they  don   t really know, maybe, someone that does it.  Little Thunder Yeah.  Harjo I have been so thankful. About two years ago a book came out called  Four Contemporary Native  American  Artists, and I was included in  that. Richard Pearce from Wheaton College wrote the book, and that   s  something that we worked on a long time. We started in 2008 and  worked over the years. Two years ago it came out. I think last year we  had a book signing scheduled for Santa Fe at one of the museums.  That   s been out, so that   s been a good experience for me to be in the  book, included with Linda Haukaas and two other artists.  Little Thunder That   s really exciting. We   re going to look at your work here in a  minute, but looking back so far, what   s been one of the pivotal moments  of your art career?  Harjo I don   t know. There   s been so many things that have just made me  really happy and proud to be   but I think being recognized by my own  tribe as an artist. Even today when I go to Carnegie or      Oh, you   re the  artist,    if I tell them who I am.    Oh, you   re the artist.       Yes.    I   m  getting pretty close to seventy years old, and being in the situation  sometimes, knowing that there was a period of time when, let   s say,  Lois Smokey was recognized as a producing artist, then there was a  span of nothing. No one was painting anything. I come along in 1970.  27  Was that forty-some years ago? Now there are   I would like to see  other Indian women painters.  Little Thunder Still not a lot of Plains women who are painting.  Harjo No, no, not at all. There   s one young lady that   s coming up. I think  she   s going to be fine. She   s a good   technically skilled. She   s got a  good background. It   s Barry Belindo and Arlene Poolaw   s daughter,  Antonia. It   s just knowing that you are a part of that history that   s real  important to me. When I   m out of here, hopefully someone will  remember me for whatever reason.  Little Thunder They will. What was one of the high points?  Harjo I think one of the high points that is involved was knowing that my  grandparents, both sides of my family, had instrumental part in rearing  their children, and it became my parents and the expectations that we  had as family members of what to do and how to get where we were  going and if we met those goals, then that was   . One of the high points  in my life was being Miss Indian America. Going back to my art, most  of these competitions have some kind of talent presentation that you  have to do. We didn   t really have to do it publically, but if we chose to,  we could somehow work it in there. I took my artwork. That was why     I thought that was real important in my life because it helped me  become part of something that I enjoyed: doing my artwork, yet I was  still representing the Native people at that time. That was in 1960. Let   s  see     Little Thunder Sixty-eight, I believe. Sixty-five   Harjo Sixty-five, right, 1965. At that particular pageant, there were five  judges, and two of them were artists. One was an artist from Montana, a  lady who wrote some books about Western art and Native art, a rancher.  There was a businessman, and then Father Peter Powell.  Little Thunder Oh   Harjo Are you familiar with Peter Powell?  Little Thunder Yes.  Harjo He   s still alive today, thank goodness. Anyway, all those people were  so instrumental in my achieving that one goal that I had set in my life.  Just last year I went back to Wyoming. We had a reunion of the Miss  Indian Americas. There were thirteen of us. There were some of them  had passed on, but it was a very enjoyable time, getting to see some of  28  the people who were part of our lives back then. These women have  gone out to become lawyers and doctors and so forth. It   s a good  sisterhood, but it   s still involved with the arts. While I was there, I had  created this one ledger drawing of some women dancing. I gave that to  the committee who comes from the library that   s named after the  rancher that was my judge, so it   s all connected together.  Anyway, they created a book of  the  Miss Indian America reunion, and  so my picture is on the cover of it. That   s been kind of fun to have one  of my paintings on the cover of a book. Then the cradleboard book that  we did back in, I think it was 2008, 2009, the lady that wrote the book  was the daughter-in-law of one of the judges. She   s really instrumental  in the Native American arts, Barbara Hale from Haffenreffer Museum   of Anthropology  at Brown University. She   s retired now. She   s been a  lifelong friend, and she has helped me extremely with as much as she  could do for me with my career, going back East and being part adjunct  professor at Brown. I   s all connected, but that   s the highlight. My Miss  Indian America year was a result of my folks and my tribal people  saying,    You probably need to do this for yourself.     Little Thunder What has been a low point in your career?  Harjo Oh, gosh, I think saying that the loss of some of the people that are  important to me   trying not to cry. Knowing that you   re an elder now  and that you   ve lived a good life. I   ve had a good life so far. I have  these two beautiful grandchildren that are my life today, but they   re not  my low point. (Laughter) It   s just the loss of all these people who   .  They are what sustain me these days, and my daughter, our daughter.  Little Thunder Is there anything we forgot to talk about or that you   d like to add before  we take a quick look at your artwork?  Harjo Let   s see. I am so thankful for people like you because you   re there  recording this and you   re asking the right questions, and that   s real  important. Working with Barbara Hale with this cradleboard book that  we did, she   s an anthropologist. She says,    That   s kind of a dirty word  these days.    I said,    Well, with Tahnee being a museum person, she   s  kind of in that same category.    She   s not an anthropologist; she   s a  museum studies person. Barbara always knew the right questions to ask,  and so do you. You   re willing to listen to us, to let us verbalize in what  we need to say to you and understand. You have an insight into kind of  the way we think, and I appreciate that and what you appreciate of us.  That   s good. Thank you for doing that for us.  Little Thunder Well, and now we   re going to look at some of your pieces.  29  Harjo Okay. (Laughter)  Little Thunder Yeah, and Tahnee owes you. I   m sure you were a big influence in the  path that she took. It sounds like she   s very artistic now, too.  Harjo She is. She just amazes me. Not only she can paint, she can draw, she  can make baskets, and she can dance   Little Thunder Yeah, yeah.  Harjo Most of all, she   s really verbal about her   she   s very passionate about  what she   s doing.  Little Thunder I think that   s just great, and it   s a great degree to be coming out with.  Harjo I wanted to show you the one on the wall that earthquake moved, the  one with the stars and the   . That   s one that I   ve chosen to keep.  Little Thunder Oh, wow.  Harjo It   s a gouache, and it   s totally on gouache. It   s probably going to be  dusty, so don   t sneeze on yourself. (Laughter)  Little Thunder Okay, Sharron, would you like to talk a little bit about this piece?  Harjo Yes, this was a commission piece by the Oklahoma Zoological Society.  They wanted to do the story   they actually did a story of bears, and  they wanted to include a story about a bear from the Kiowa Nation.  This is my painting that I put together because when I was growing up  we used to have this babysitter who would tell us stories. She was  Kiowa, and she   d talk Kiowa to us, and she would tell us a story. This is  one of our stories about how the Devils Tower became as it is and how  the Dipper became the Big Dipper. The children playing, the sisters  playing on the rock and the bear   s scratching the rock to get at the girls.  Little Thunder Right, and it   s done in gouache, you mentioned.  Harjo It   s done in gouache; it   s totally in gouache. It   s on a mat board, but the  mat board is painted. I normally don   t paint on mat board, but I did on  this one. I don   t know why, but I did it on a mat board. This is one that  I   ve chosen to keep because I think it was real important. It has an  attachment to my growing up, but then also when our babies were very  small, we went to the Devils Tower. I think it   s been the last, a year and  half ago, maybe, last year. We took them there. The youngest one that  we have, her name is Georgie Anne, and they always call her Bear Cub  because she lays on the floor and she rolls around like a little bear. She  30  still surprises them because she does some strange things. When we  went there, she goes like this,  Demonstrates  up, and she pulls her arms  down like she was praying or something, and then bringing her hands  down like she was doing   . When she sees anything with a bear, she   ll  do the same thing. She   ll raise her   and honors it in a way.  Little Thunder Wow.  Harjo It   s a strange connection. (Laughs)  Little Thunder It   s a connection.  Harjo Yeah, but I kept this one because it   s such an important story in our  ethnology and legends and so forth. I wanted to keep that.  Little Thunder How about this piece?  Harjo Okay, this is done on a muslin piece of material. When I bought it,  when I bought the muslin, I wasn   t particularly fond of the lines. I don   t  know if you can see the faint lines in the back.  Little Thunder I love the muslin effect.  Harjo I just happened to buy it. I think TG Y was still in existence back in  those days. I bought this muslin piece of material, and it had lines. I  thought,    What am I going to do with this,    because I didn   t even know  it was on  there  until I unfolded the fabric.    Well, I   ll just do a  painting, a drawing on it.    What I did for this was I put my great-grandmother   s  story   my great-grandmother was non-Indian. She was  captured in Young County, Texas, in 1864 and brought to live with the  Kiowas through a family who had no children, so she was raised as an  only child. She was brought up into the Mountain View area where she  settled. You can see that on the left side there   s some pictures of some  people, some ladies, and you see a little black face.  There was a slave that was part of the family. Actually, he was a freed  slave at that time, and he worked for my great-grandmother   s family.  What   s kind of interesting about their family is she had a trading  company in Texas, supply trading company, close to where Newcastle,  Texas, is. Their ranch was invaded by the Kiowas, and the little girl was  taken captive. She was eighteen months when they brought  her  to the  Oklahoma Territory to be raised by a family. She was lost for a long,  long time. No one really knew who she was because they kept her dark.  Sometimes if somebody   d try to find her, they would darken her skin so  she would blend in with the rest of the people, (Laughs) but she had  gray eyes and real light hair.  31  Anyway, she lived until 1934 in Mountain View, Oklahoma, at the old  family home which is here. There was a arbor outside, which is  something that was pretty common among the Kiowa people. She lived  there. My grandma and grandpa lived in that same house until my mom  and dad had it torn down  to build a new house on the home site .  There   s a historical marker outside Mountain View that shows that this  is the home place where she was raised, where she lived. She married.  Her name was Millie Durgan, and she married an Indian man named  Goombi. That   s where my maternal part of the family comes from. It  has all the story in here. I wanted it floating on there, on this  particular   . This is one piece that I   ve chosen to keep for my  collection, too, because it does tell our story, and I used the ledger style.  Little Thunder Right.  Harjo The drawing   s with ink, and it   s done with a ballpoint pen and  prismacolor. There   s no paint on it.  Little Thunder It   s got a wonderful feeling.  Harjo I don   t even remember what year it was, but I think it was in the    80s. I  have a friend who called it my dishtowel drawing. I said,    Gee, thanks.     (Laughter) At least you can say you knew me.  Little Thunder Right. (Laughter)  Harjo But that   s my family picture. I have one more I want to show you.  Little Thunder All right, you mentioned this was a piece that you entered in Red Earth,  and a collaboration?  Harjo A collaboration piece, which kind of goes back to the Indian Arts and  Crafts Act because there are some people, artists, who sometimes don   t  do their own work. I think Red Earth has made an attempt to figure this  out. (Laughs) If you   re going to be in the show and then you  collaborate, then you both have to be in the show and be joined in.  Little Thunder And you mentioned it was a battle dress, which not all tribes have a  version of.  Harjo The reason she wanted to do one is   I don   t know if you know Denny  Medicine Bird. He stayed with us a while before he went to the Army.  When he was gone she said,    I need to do something.    I said,    What do  you want to do?    Anyway, she says,    I want to make a battle dress, but  I don   t want to put any Army things on it. I want it to be more  32  traditional for his safety return.    I said,    Okay, we   ll do it,    so we did  that. He came back, and they had some kind of deal.  Little Thunder Can you explain the significance of the battle dress for the Kiowas?  Harjo Usually the Kiowas, it was to show the war deeds of the warrior. I don   t  know. Does this one have a flag on it? This one doesn   t have a flag on  it, does it?  Little Thunder I didn   t see one. Well, thank you so much for your time today, Sharron.  Harjo Yeah, well, I want to thank you, Julie, for being here. Glad we could  share.  -------  -------   
